Received February 22, 2019, accepted March 21, 2019, date of publication April 1, 2019, date of current version April 16, 2019.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2908225

Deep-Full-Range: A Deep Learning
Based Network Encrypted Traffic
Classification and Intrusion
Detection Framework
YI ZENG1,2 , HUAXI GU 1 , WENTING WEI 1 , AND YANTAO GUO2
1 State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2 Science and Technology on Communication Networks Laboratory, Shijiazhuang 050081, China

Corresponding author: Huaxi Gu (hxgu@xidian.edu.cn)
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant 61634004 and Grant 61472300, in part by the
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant JB180309 and Grant JB170107, in part by the Key Research and
Development Plan of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2017ZDCXL-GY-05-01, in part by the Open Fund Project of the Science and
Technology on Communication Networks Laboratory under Grant HHS19641X001, and in part by the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation under Grant 2018M633465.

 ABSTRACT With the rapid evolution of network traffic diversity, the understanding of network traffic
 has become more pivotal and more formidable. Previously, traffic classification and intrusion detection
 require a burdensome analyzing of various traffic features and attack-related characteristics by experts, and
 even, private information might be required. However, due to the outdated features labeling and privacy
 protocols, the existing approaches may not fit with the characteristics of the changing network environment
 anymore. In this paper, we present a light-weight framework with the aid of deep learning for encrypted
 traffic classification and intrusion detection, termed as deep-full-range (DFR). Thanks to deep learning,
 DFR is able to learn from raw traffic without manual intervention and private information. In such a
 framework, our proposed algorithms are compared with other state-of-the-art methods using two public
 datasets. The experimental results show that our framework not only can outperform the state-of-the-art
 methods by averaging 13.49% on encrypted traffic classification’s F1 score and by averaging 12.15% on
 intrusion detection’s F1 score but also require much lesser storage resource requirement.

 INDEX TERMS Encrypted traffic classification, network intrusion detection, deep learning, end-to-end.

I. INTRODUCTION protocols and laws. In a nutshell, how to achieve a high-
An accurate traffic classification has been the prerequisite quality traffic identification without private information has
for network basic tasks, say providing appropriate Quality- drawn significant attention in the concerning of cyber security
of-Service (QoS), Network Intrusion Detection (NID), etc. and QoS.
Yet traffic classification has been becoming more and more Previous methods of traffic classification, like the Port
challenging due to the following fact. The first one is the Number Based method and the Data Packet Inspection (DPI)
great boom in traffic diversity and variety. Apart from that, Based method [1], are not competent enough for modern trafmore and more applications have started to apply security fic environment due to their disability toward encrypted trafprotocols, such as HTTPS, SSH, SSL, to encrypt internet fic. The newest generation of traffic classification method is
traffic for the sake of user’s privacy; The third fact is that based on flow-statistics and Machine Learning (ML), which
some of the basic information, like flow volume or flow can cope with both encrypted and normal traffic, like the
duration, is not easy to be acquired nowadays due to privacy K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) and the Decision Tree (DT) that
 used in Atli’s work [2].
 The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and However, ML-Based approaches’ performance highly
approving it for publication was Irene Amerini. depends on the human-engineered features and some private

 2169-3536 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
45182 Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. VOLUME 7, 2019
 See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

traffic information, hence dramatically limits their accu- Section III. Finally, Section IV gives the concluding remark
racy and generalizability. Moreover, ML-Based classifica- of this paper.
tion methods usually require high storage and computational
resource, which limited the implementation of it in resources II. THE DFR FRAMEWORK
constrained nodes, like vehicles [3], home gateways, and In this section, we will illustrate the details of our proposed
mobile phones. A real-time accurate network traffic classifier network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detecis the foundation of network management tasks and NID tion framework. DFR framework can be divided into two
systems, therefore, a novel classification method is of urgent functional modules, as shown in Fig.1: Preprocessing Proneed. cedure, DFR Procedure.
 Methods based on Deep Learning (DL) obviate the burdensome work of selecting features and acquiring private features information since it automatically extracts and selects
features through training [4]. This characteristic has made
DL-based methods a highly desirable approach for traffic
classification. Another characteristic of DL-based methods
is that DL has a higher learning capability in comparison
with traditional ML methods like Random Forest, Support
Vector Machine, and KNN [2]. Thus, they are expected to
learn highly complicated patterns in order to gain a higher FIGURE 1. Overview of the DFR framework.

accuracy than previous methods with more functionality, like
NID, critical link analysis, traffic classification, and so on, The notations and definitions of some of the parameters
within just one framework. Take those two characteristics used in the DFR model are listed in Table 1.
into mind, as an end-to-end approach, DL-based methods
 TABLE 1. Notations & parameters used in the DFR.
are capable of effectively learning relationships between raw
traffic and corresponding output without the need of requiring
heavy labor and private information.
 In this paper, we present a novel network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection framework, named
Deep-Full-Range (DFR), where three deep learning algorithms — Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [5], Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [6], and Stacked Auto-Encoder
(SAE) [7]— are employed. We intend to use CNN to learn
features of the raw traffic from spatial range. LSTM is used
to learn features from the time-related aspect. SAE is adopted
to extract features from coding characteristics. All those
three aspects are combined to gain a deep and full ranged
understanding of the raw input. With a full-range concerned
structure, DFR is capable of classifying encrypted traffic and
malware traffic within one framework without human’s help
and private details. Since our framework will only save the A. PREPROCESSING PROCEDURE
model that most effective with the current traffic environ- In this process, our presented framework will convert raw
ment, compared with previous methods, a dramatic drop in network traffic data into IDX format, which is the forthe storage resource requirement is met. mat that we used as the input of the following procedure.
 This paper’s contributions can be summarized as fol- The reason why we preprocess the raw data has 3 followlows: 1) A light-weight classification and intrusion detec- ing reasons. 1) The raw data from the network is of diftion framework, named DFR, is proposed. The effectiveness ferent length, which is not an ideal input format for DL
of completing those two tasks is evaluated on two public models. 2) The raw data contains some information that
datasets, significant improvement of effectiveness is met. might interfere with the result, say the port number or the
2) DFR is based on three DL models which can acquire a deep MAC address. 3) An unified format can pave the way for
and full-ranged understanding of the raw traffic. 3) DFR is an following works like adding more network applications,
end-to-end framework, does not require too much human’s the maintenance of the procedure, and etc. Fig.2 illustrates
help and private information of the data. the overview of the preprocessing procedure, which consists
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The of 5 steps.
details of DFR and the methodology of each part is illus- Package Generation is the step to split continues raw
trated in Section II. We evaluate the framework by comparing traffic data and save as PCAP files by a package-capture
with other state-of-art methods on two public datasets in tool — Wireshark — [8]. The method that we proposed will

VOLUME 7, 2019 45183
 Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

 The reason why we adopted L1 regularization [11] in all the
 models is that L1 regularization is capable of punishing some
 weights to 0 that L2 cannot, which is helpful for the machine
 to learn which feature is irrelevant to the classification, hence
 a better result can be attained. We will explain more about
 selecting L1 regularization based on the experimental result
 in the following section.

 1) 1D CNN-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER
FIGURE 2. Overview of the preprocessing procedure.
 We develop the first encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection identifier based on one dimensional CNN.
capture the Bi-directional flow of all layers, which is the most So far, CNN has been mainly applied in the computer vision
ideal traffic representation for DL-Based traffic classification respect, say image classification, object detection. CNN has
as evaluated in Wang’s paper [9]. a strong ability to learn the spatial properties of a graph pixel
 Traffic Purification is the step to eliminate the interfer- by pixel. We intended to use CNN to find features that help
ential data in traffic packages. This includes TCP or UDP machine to classify traffic from spatial range. We picked
headers and some Ethernet related data in the data link 1D CNN over the popular 2D version because of the original
layer, for example, the MAC address, since they are no traffic format is a sequential form organized by hierarchical
use for the following procedure and might even harm the structure rather an image. As shown in a relevant work based
result. on CNN to classify traffic [9], it is proved that 1D CNN can
 Traffic Refiner will remove duplicated files and empty attain a higher accuracy than 2D CNN.
files, as those files will only harm the learning ability of our The 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier is illustrated in Fig.3.
framework. It consists of two convolutional layers, 2 Maxpooling lay-
 Length Unification will trim files that longer than ers, 2 Local Response Normalization (LRN) [5] layers,
900 bytes to 900 bytes, and add 0x00s at the end of files that and a densely connected layer with Softmax classifier.
shorter than 900 bytes to complement it to 900 bytes. In the first stage, we will reshape the input data as 1 ×
 IDX Fill Generation is when we will convert those length- 900 shape, then we will discard height and focus on prounified PCAP files into 30 bytes × 30bytes two-dimensional cessing the 1D data. The classification process is defined as
format IDX files. IDX format is a common file format in DL follows:
field [10], which is as well ideal for our framework. Those The first convolutional layer processes the input data with
files are regarded as gray-scale images if mapped to [0,1]. 32 filters, where each filter has a size of [25, 1]. Each filter
In Fig.2, we can see the preprocessing result as gray-scale moves 1 step after one convolution operation. The results of
images. the convolutional layer are inputted to an activation function.
 Further details of the Preprocessing Procedure is presented We adopted ReLU [12] activation function in our 1D CNNin Alg. 1. After this procedure, a dataset full of traffic-graph Based DFR Classifier. Then, the results are processed through
is generated for future use. max pooling. In each step, the max pooling processes a [3, 1]
 input as follows:
Algorithm 1 Preprocessing Algorithm
 maxpooling [x1, x2, x3] = max(x1, x2, x3) (1)
Input:
 RT 1 , RT 2 , ..., RT t , ..., RT T And the stride of the maxpooling process is 3. At the end
Output:
 of the first convolutional layer, an LRN layer is added to
 Preprocessed Dataset G(1, 2, ...j, ...J )
 punish those abnormal responses or out layers in order to
 1: for each t in (1, T ) do
 2: Split the RT t into PT1t , PT2t , ...PTit , ... attain a better generalization. Then the output will go through
 3: for each i do a second convolutional layer which is similar to the first one.
 4: Purify PTit following ‘Traffic Purification’ The only difference between those two convolutional layers
 5: end for is that the second convolutional layer has 64 filers. Finally,
 6: remove duplicated packet from PT1t , PT2t , ...PTit , ...
 the data will go through a densely connected layer. This layer
 7: for each i do
 8: Cut the length of PTit to 900 bytes is gained by applying dropout on a fully connected layer.
 9: Generate traffic-graph G Then the output label is attained by the softmax classifier
10: end for at the end of 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier. The softmax
11: end for classifier is defined as follows:
 exp(Out j )
 ŷ = P (2)
B. DFR PROCEDURE exp(Out i )
As shown in Fig.1, the DFR procedure is based on three where Out j is the output of jth neuron in the densely connected layer. Ŷ = ŷ1 , ŷ2 , ŷ3 , ..., ŷN is the complete set of
 
DL models, which are CNN, LSTM, and SAE respectively.

45184 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

 FIGURE 3. Overview of the 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier.

classes, and N denotes the total number of classes. The output package, which is time-related, traffic from similar classes
with the highest probability indicates the class of the input must share some similarity in the time-related charactervalue. To be notified that we used Adam [13] optimizer in istics. We apply LSTM in DFR to help the machine to
this DFR. learn the time-related characteristics on its own. Previously,
 For the training process, hyperparameters are set as only a few works mentioned using RNN to classify network
{Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}, where the defi- traffic. Torres et al. [14] transformed the traffic byte-data
nition of those parameters are descripted in Table 1. Fur- into character-data then LSTM is applied to learn the conther details of training a 1D CNN-Based DFR is explained nections between characters. Yet, in our proposed LSTMin Alg. 2. Based DFR Classifier, the input will be a graph. Fig.4
 illustrates the overview of our proposed LSTM-Based DFR
Algorithm 2 1D CNN-Based DFR Training Algorithm Classifier.
Input:
 GTrain ,
 {Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}
Output:
 1D CNN-Based DFR
 1: for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
 2: for each batch of Minbatch data do
 3: for each G in batch do
 4: Reshape G to 1 × 900 form
 5: Compute convolution with 32 filters
 6: Compute the result through ReLU
 7: Max pooling referring Eq. 1
 FIGURE 4. Overview of the LSTM-Based DFR classifier.
 8: Punish the result through the LRN layer
 9: Compute convolution with 64 filters
10: Compute the result through ReLU As shown in Fig.4, the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier is
11: Max pooling referring Eq. 1 actually based on a three-layered LSTM model. For each
12: Punish the result through the LRN layer layer, LSTM-Based DFR Classifier havs 256 LSTM cells.
13: Run through a densely connected layer
14: Output the result according to Eq. 2 And we also applied dropout in every layer of the LSTM
15: Update the weight & bias model in order to gain a better generalization. After the
16: end for LSTM model learned the time-related characteristics, the data
17: end for will go through a softmax classifier which is described
18: end for
 in Equation (2). Finally, the result label can be checked
 at the end of the DFR. It is worth to mention that we
2) LSTM-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER used Adam optimizer in this DFR as well. Training a
The second DFR is developed based on LSTM [6], a kind LSTM-Based DFR Classifier can use the same hyperparamof network which is designed to deal with sequential-form- eters that defined in 1D CNN-Based DFR Classifier, which
data. LSTM is one kind of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) are set as {Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}. The
that can utilize the time-related information. Taken that a training of the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier is explained
segment of traffic is built up byte by byte and package by in Alg. 3.

VOLUME 7, 2019 45185
 Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

Algorithm 3 LSTM-Based DFR Training Algorithm
Input:
 GTrain ,
 {Epoch, Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N , Lambda}
Output:
 LSTM-Based DFR
 1: for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
 2: for each batch of Minbatch data do
 3: for each G in batch do
 4: Compute G through the 3-layered LSTM
 5: Dropout according to KeepP
 6: Output the result according to Eq. 2
 7: Update the weight & bias
 8: end for
 9: end for FIGURE 6. The training process of the two encoders.
10: end for

 Since the two training processes of SAEs are separated,
3) SAE-BASED DFR CLASSIFIER
 some of the hyperparameters are different from the pre-
The last DFR’s core is two SAEs. In general, autoencoder vious two DFRs. All the hyperparameters will be set as
is a kind of semi-supervised learning method that used for {Epoch, EpochFin, Lambda, LambdaFin} and Setsame =
automatic features extraction. SAE is one of the variations {Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N }, where Setsame share the same
of autoencoder, which has the ability to scan through the definition with the previous two DFRs. Epoch is the number
data byte by byte to find the coding characteristics. Fig.5 of epochs of the two-SAEs training process, which cannot
demonstrates the overview of our SAE-Based DFR Classifier. be set as a very large number. A large Epoch in the two-
 SAEs training process can misguide the model to overfit with
 the training data. EpochFin is the number of epochs in the
 fine tune process, this number does not have the limitation
 as Epoch. Lambda is the lambda parameter of the L1 regularization in the two-SAEs training process, which need to
 be set as a number much bigger than the lambda parameter
 of the L1 regularization in the fine tune process, namely
 LambdaFin. The reason is that a small Lambda is not effective
 with the two SAEs training process. The training of a SAE-
 Based DFR is summarized in Alg. 4.

FIGURE 5. Overview of the SAE-Based DFR classifier. Algorithm 4 SAE-Based DFR Training Algorithm
 Input:
 The first step is reshaping the graph to have a form of GTrain ,
1 × 900, hence we can fully connect our input with the Setsame = {Minbatch, LR, KeepP, N },
first encoder. Fig.6 shows the process of training those two {Epoch, EpochFin, Lambda, LambdaFin}
SAEs. We can tell from Fig.6 that those two SAEs are trained Output:
 SAE-Based DFR
separately. The first encoder has 1000 neurons which are
 1: for each one of the two encoders do
densely connected with the 900 inputs and 900 outputs. The 2: for each epoch in (1, Epoch) do
goal of training Encoder 1 is to gain an encoder which can 3: for each batch of Minbatch data do
generate 900 outputs that have the minimum variance with 4: for each G in batch do
the 900 inputs. After the Encoder 1 is trained, we will stack 5: Compute the output of Autoencoder
it in the DFR and apply a sigmoid [15] activation function. 6: Process Sigmoid
 7: Dropout according to KeepP
Encoder 2 have 1500 neurons, which will be densely con- 8: Compute the cost between output and input
nected with the outputs from Encoder 1. Then we will train 9: Update the weight & bias
the Encoder 2 by reducing the variance between input 2 and 10: end for
output 2, which is similar to the training of Encoder 1. We will 11: end for
stack it in the DFR with a sigmoid activation function applied 12: end for
 13: Current Encoder connects with the successive layer
as well. Finally, the data will go through the softmax classifier 14: end for
which defined in Equation (2) and output the results. To be 15: for each epoch in (1, EpochFin) do
noticed that after those two SAEs stacked into the DFR, a fine 16: Output the result according to Eq. 2
tune training procedure will start in order to attain the final 17: Update the weight & bias
 18: end for
model.

45186 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

4) SELECT AND SAVE public datasets, ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [16] and
After those three DFRs are trained with training data, we will ISCX 2012 IDS dataset [17] respectively.
exam those DFRs with testing data. The DFR that holds the The first selected dataset is regenerated from ISCX
highest accuracy is believed to be the model that best fits with VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [16] in order to evaluate the
the current traffic environment. Where accuracy is defined as effectiveness of DFR on encrypted traffic classification.
follows: ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset originally has 7 types of regular encrypted traffic and 7 types of protocol encapsulated
 TP+TN
 Accuracy = TP+FP+FN +TN (3) traffic. Since we mainly focus on evaluating the efficiency
 on encrypted traffic classification, we will select and label
where TP is True Positive, namely the number of correctly
 data from those 7 types of regular encrypted traffic, which are
classified cases as a specific class; FP is False Positive,
 Web Browsing, Email, Chat, Streaming, File Transfer, VoIP,
namely the number of misclassified cases that classified as
 and P2P. To be noticed that all other six types of encrypted
that class; FN, False Negative, which is the number of cases
 traffic are related to Web Browsing, hence we abandoned
that are supposed to be classified as that class, yet misclassithis class of encrypted traffic referring to Wang’s work [9].
fied as other classes; TN, True Negative, which is the number
 Moreover, some of the classes in the original dataset have
of cases that correctly classified as not that specific class.
 much more instances than others, which might misguide the
 Hence, this model will be the model that we saved and
 model in the training process. Hence we cut them short to
conduct the following classification and identification tasks
 gain a balanced dataset. The structure of our selected dataset
for this time units. DFR will be trained in an online fashion,
 is shown in Table 2. After normalization applied, each class
which means DFR has the ability to update itself in order to
 of traffic have a quantity around 10000 cases. This dataset
fit with the traffic environment automatically. Alg. 5 explains
 will be automatically divided into the training dataset and
other details in the processes of the online-fashioned DFR
 the testing dataset according to 9:1. As a result, the training
framework.
 dataset will have 52916 cases, and the testing dataset will
Algorithm 5 Online-Fashioned DFR Algorithm have 5880 cases.
Input:
 TABLE 2. Structure of the selected dataset 1.
 RT 1 , RT 2 , ..., RT t , ..., RT T
Output:
 The DFR model that best fits with the current traffic environment
 1: for each t in (1, T ) do
 2: Apply Alg. 1 to gain G(1, 2, ...j, ...J )
 3: Randomly separate G(1, 2, ...j, ...J ) according to 9:1;
 4: Use GTrain to train the three DFRs;
 5: Use GTest to select the highest-accuracy DFR;
 6: Run the current-using DFR on the same GTest ;
 7: if the current-using DFR’s accuracy is smaller then
 8: Save the new DFR;
 9: Transmit the new DFR to other units TABLE 3. Structure of the selected dataset 2.
10: end if
11: end for

III. EVALUATION
In this section, we will evaluate the DFR framework from
three aspects, which are the efficiency of encrypted traffic
classification, the efficiency of intrusion detection, and the The second dataset is regenerated from ISCX 2012 IDS
storage resource requirement. dataset [17] in order to evaluate the effectiveness of DFR
 on intrusion detection. This dataset contains the network
A. EXPERIMENTAL SETTINGS traffic of seven days, which can be divided into 5 classes,
We will first describe the two selected datasets that we used. Normal, Brute Force SSH, DDoS, HttpDoS, and Infiltrating
Then, the setup of the experiment is revealed with details respectively. We select the data that only from days that
of hyperparameters in the training process. Finally, we will have malware traffic for simplification. Since malware traffic
explain the metrics that we used. is expected to have a relatively smaller scale compared to
 normal traffic in real life, no normalization approach on the
1) DATASETS FOR EVALUATION dataset is applied. Table 3 demonstrates the structure of the
Currently, we have not yet found an available public dataset selected dataset. Finally, this selected dataset is divided into
that has both encrypted traffic and malware traffic, hence we the training dataset and the testing dataset according to 9:1 for
decide to evaluate the DFR framework using two selected each class.

VOLUME 7, 2019 45187
 Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

2) EXPERIMENT SETUP As we can tell from Table 5, DL models can attain an aver-
Tensorflow is used as the experiment ML software frame- aging 3.37 percents higher accuracy after replacing L2 reguwork. We run the evaluation on Ubuntu 18.04 64 bit OS. The larization with L1 regularization. This has proved our analysis
processor is an 8 cores Intel I7-7700K CPU with 32 GB of of L1 and L2 regularization in section II-B, hence we will
memory. Two chips of Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti is used only apply L1 regularization in our DFR framework. The 1D
as the GPU accelerator. The hyperparameters for the DFR CDD-Based, attained the highest accuracy, 99.85%, therefore
training process is shown in Table 4. we will save this model as the optimum DFR classifier for the
 current network traffic environment.
TABLE 4. Settings of hyperparameters.
 We also compare the performance of our DFR framework with two state-of-art methods on the same dataset.
 The first method is from the work [16], C4.5 DT. This
 is a ML-Based classification method that requires humanengineered features. The second method is the 1D-CNN classification method that proposed in the work [9], which is
 a similar model as we used in DFR, yet no regularization
 approach and LRN applied in their 1D-CNN.

3) EVALUATION METRICS
We use the Accuracy that defined in Equation (3) to select the
optimum DFR. We evaluate and compare the performance
of the selected DFR with state-of-art methods using three
metrics. Namely, Precision, Recall, and F1 score, which are
defined as follows:
 TP
 Precision = (4)
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall = (5)
 TP + FN
 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1_score = (6)
 Precision + Recall
where the definition of TP, FP, and FN can be viewed at the
section II-B.4.

B. EXPERIMENT RESULT
 FIGURE 7. Comparison of the classification efficiency.
We will first present the evaluation of the encrypted traffic
classification efficiency. The reason why L1 regularization
is adopted is explained with experimental results. Then, As shown in Fig.7, we can tell the DFR framework can
the intrusion detection efficiency is evaluated. Finally, a com- attain a much accurate and robust classification result than
parison of storage resource requirement is presented. ML-Based C4.5 method and DL-Based 1D-CNN method.
 The averaging F1 score of the DFR framework is 0.9987,
1) ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION EFFICIENCY which is kind of impressive comparing to the averaging
The accuracy of three trained DFR on the testing dataset of F1 score of the C4.5 DT and 1D-CNN. The averaging
dataset 1 is shown in Table 5. We also evaluate the effective- improvement of precision compared to C4.5 is 11.6 percents,
ness of applying L1 regularization in this experiment. to 1D-CNN is 14.9 percents. All these data are supporting
 the fact that the DFR framework is capable of classifying
TABLE 5. Accuracy of DFRs on encrypted traffic.
 encrypted traffic accurately.

 2) INTRUSION DETECTION EFFICIENCY
 As for the dataset 2, the LSTM-Based DFR Classifier attained
 an accuracy of 99.41 %, which is the highest of the three
 DFR classifiers. We then compared the DFR framework
 with two state-of-art ML-Based methods that demonstrated
 in Atli’s work [2], namely DT, and KNN respectively.

45188 VOLUME 7, 2019
Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

 REFERENCES
 [1] S. Kumar, S. Dharmapurikar, F. Yu, P. Crowley, and J. Turner, ‘‘Algorithms to accelerate multiple regular expressions matching for deep packet
 inspection,’’ ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 4,
 pp. 339–350, 2006.
 [2] B. G. Atli, Y. Miche, A. Kalliola, I. Oliver, S. Holtmanns, and A. Lendasse,
 ‘‘Anomaly-based intrusion detection using extreme learning machine and
 aggregation of network traffic statistics in probability space,’’ Cogn. Comput., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 848–863, 2018.
 [3] Y. Zeng, M. Qiu, Z. Ming, and M. Liu, ‘‘Senior2Local: A machine learning
 based intrusion detection method for vanets,’’ in Proc. Int. Conf. Smart
 Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 417–426.
 [4] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, ‘‘Datanet: Deep learning based
 encrypted network traffic classification in sdn home gateway,’’ IEEE
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
 [5] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, ‘‘ImageNet classification
 with deep convolutional neural networks,’’ in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
 [6] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, ‘‘Long short-term memory,’’ Neural
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 [7] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P.-A. Manzagol,
 ‘‘Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a
 deep network with a local denoising criterion,’’ J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
 vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 3371–3408, Dec. 2010.
 [8] A. Orebaugh, G. Ramirez, and J. Beale, Wireshark & Ethereal Network
 Protocol Analyzer Toolkit. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2006.
FIGURE 8. Comparison of the intrusion detection efficiency. [9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, ‘‘End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 networks,’’ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform. (ISI), Jul. 2017,
Those are two kinds of ML-Based methods for intrusion pp. 43–48.
 [10] M. Fatahi, ‘‘Mnist handwritten digits,’’ Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Availdetection. able: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273124795_MNIST_
 As shown in Fig.8, DFR is able to maintain a robust handwritten_digits_Description_and_using
and high detection performance on real-life malware traffic. [11] M. Y. Park and T. Hastie, ‘‘L1 -regularization path algorithm for generalized
 linear models,’’ J. Roy. Stat. Soc., B (Stat. Methodol.), vol. 69, no. 4,
The averaging improvement on the F1 score is 0.137 and pp. 659–677, 2007.
0.106 comparing to those two methods. It is worth to men- [12] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, ‘‘Rectified linear units improve restricted boltztion that, the proposed framework is able to identify the mann machines,’’ in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2010,
 pp. 807–814.
HttpDoS malware traffic at a 1 out of 1 F1 score, which [13] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. (2014). ‘‘Adam: A method for stochastic
has major improvement compared with DT and KNN. All optimization.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.
these data demonstrate the capability of an accurate intrusion 6980
 [14] P. Torres, C. Catania, S. Garcia, and C. G. Garino, ‘‘An analydetection. sis of recurrent neural networks for botnet detection behavior,’’ in
 Proc. IEEE Biennial Congr. Argentina (ARGENCON), Jun. 2016,
 pp. 1–6.
3) STORAGE REQUIREMENT COMPARISON [15] X. Yin, J. Goudriaan, E. A. Lantinga, J. Vos, and H. J. Spiertz, ‘‘A flexible
Finally, we compare the storage resource requirement of the sigmoid function of determinate growth,’’ Ann. Botany, vol. 91, no. 3,
aforementioned methods. An 1D CDD-Based DFR Classi- pp. 361–371, 2003.
 [16] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorfier’s trained file is 1534KB, LSTM-Based DFR Classifier bani, ‘‘Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,’’
requires 186KB to store, and the SAE-Based DFR Classifier’s in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
trained file is 12732KB. Comparing to the averaging file pp. 407–414.
 [17] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, ‘‘Toward
size of KNN model and DT model, which are 67548KB developing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for
and 34247KB, a dramatic drop in the storage requirement is intrusion detection,’’ Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374,
met. 2012.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel DL-Based framework
which is capable of classifying encrypted traffic and detecting
malware traffic. Compared to state-of-art ML-Based meth- YI ZENG is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
 degree, majoring in electronic and information
ods, our DFR framework does not require the heavy work engineering, with Xidian University. He has been
of selecting features and private featured details. Moreover, with The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Serbased on the results over two public datasets, it is proved that vice Networks (ISN), Xidian University, since
DFR can attain a much more robust and accurate performance 2017. His main research interests include machine
 learning, cyber systems’ security issues, network
on both encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detec- traffic recognition, and network virtualization.
tion than state-of-art methods with a less storage resource
requirement.

VOLUME 7, 2019 45189
 Y. Zeng et al.: Deep Learning Based Network Encrypted Traffic Classification and Intrusion Detection Framework

 HUAXI GU received the B.E. degree and the M.E. YANTAO GUO received the M.S. degree in elecand Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engi- trical engineering from Hebei Technology Univerneering and telecommunication and information sity, Tianjin, China, in 1990, and the Ph.D. degree
 systems from Xidian University, Xidian, China, in system and network from Xi’an University,
 in 2000, 2003, and 2005, respectively, where he Xi’an, China, in 2008. He is currently the Deputy
 is currently a Full Professor with The State Key Director of the National Key Laboratory on Com-
 Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN), munication Networks, The 54th Research Insti-
 Telecommunication Department. He has authored tute, CETC. His current research interests include
 or coauthored more than 100 publications in networks and communication system designing.
 refereed journals and conferences. His current
interests include interconnection networks, networks-on-chip, and optical
inter-chip communication. He is a Reviewer for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
COMPUTER, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING,
the IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL, IEEE COMMUNICATION LETTERS, Information Sciences, the Journal of Supercomputing, the Journal of System Architecture,
the Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, and Microprocessors and
Microsystems.

 WENTING WEI received the M.E. degree from
 the School of Telecommunications Engineering,
 Xidian University, in 2014. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication and
 information systems with The State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks (ISN), Xidian
 University. Her main research interests include
 data center networks, optical interconnected networks, and network virtualization.

45190 VOLUME 7, 2019