M IRAGE:
 Mobile-app Trafﬁc Capture and Ground-truth Creation
 Giuseppe Aceto1,2 , Domenico Ciuonzo1 , Antonio Montieri1 , Valerio Persico1 , Antonio Pescapé1,2
 1
 University of Napoli “Federico II” (Italy) and 2 NM2 s.r.l. (Italy)
 {giuseppe.aceto, domenico.ciuonzo, antonio.montieri, valerio.persico, pescape}@unina.it

 Abstract—Network trafﬁc analysis, i.e. the umbrella of proce- Even worse, in recent years new challenges have arisen.
 dures for distilling information from network trafﬁc, represents Smartphones have become the main medium of communithe enabler for highly-valuable proﬁling information, other than cation, providing means for connecting groups of users as
 being the workhorse for several key network management tasks.
 While it is currently being revolutionized in its nature by the well as users to services. According to Ericsson mobility
 rising share of trafﬁc generated by mobile and hand-held devices, report [4], the number of smartphone subscriptions is expected
 existing design solutions are mainly evaluated on private trafﬁc to reach 7.2 billions by 2024, with a corresponding +30%
 traces, and only a few public datasets are available, thus clearly predicted compound annual growth rate of trafﬁc generated
 limiting repeatability and further advances on the topic. To this by mobile networks. Due to the users massive shift toward
 end, this paper introduces and describes M IRAGE, a reproducible
 architecture for mobile-app trafﬁc capture and ground-truth mobile devices and the mobile applications (in short, apps)
 creation. The outcome of this system is M IRAGE -2019, a human- running on them, overall network trafﬁc reached huge volumes
 generated dataset for mobile trafﬁc analysis (with associated and started evolving at an unprecedented pace. Such rate of
 ground-truth) having the goal of advancing the state-of-the-art change is further increased for mobile apps due to the software
 in mobile app trafﬁc analysis. A ﬁrst statistical characterization distribution systems (the apps marketplaces), that have fosof the mobile-app trafﬁc in the dataset is provided in this paper.
 Still, M IRAGE is expected to be capitalized by the networking tered one-click installation and quick-paced automatic updates.
 community for different tasks related to mobile trafﬁc analysis. The encryption mechanisms being increasingly adopted further
 Index Terms—Android apps; encrypted trafﬁc; mobile apps; impair the analysis, while unprecedented privacy concerns
 mobile trafﬁc; reproducible research; open dataset; trafﬁc clas- limit the collection and publishing of raw mobile trafﬁc traces.
 siﬁcation; These challenges call even more for the availability of mobiletrafﬁc datasets, considering that even when they are made
 I. I NTRODUCTION available to the community, the presence of bot-generated
 As in almost all experimental-research ﬁelds, replicability trafﬁc or experiments run in controlled environments limit the
 and reproducibility are critical concerns in achieving signif- validity of the proposed analysis or design solutions.
 icant and grounded progress [1]. Accordingly, a strong push The contribution of this paper is fourfold: (i) we survey the
 for them is currently observed, with research artefacts being encrypted-trafﬁc datasets publicly available, highlighting their
 also evaluated in the standard peer-review process [2]. In main characteristics as well as main shortcomings and limitafact, provisioning datasets as well as carefully documenting tions; (ii) we present and describe our reproducible M IRAGE
 workﬂows for obtaining them, are critical to foster repli- architecture for generating new mobile-app trafﬁc datasets and
 cability and reproducibility, respectively, with both fueling automatically creating the related high accurate ground-truth.
 research dissemination. Indeed, by leveraging wisely sourced The focus is on apps running on Android, currently retaining
 and constructed datasets that are available to the research the 76% of the whole market share1 ; (iii) we release the
 community, research outcomes become (i) easier to reproduce, M IRAGE -2019 dataset2 , thus fostering the replicability of the
 (ii) comparable against other studies, and (iii) generalizable analysis and its extension to multiple use cases; (iv) we provide
 to other data/systems not studied yet. a characterization for M IRAGE -2019, according to metrics
 These possibilities have been sorely missing for a long of interest at three different granularities (ﬂows, packets, and
 time [3] in the ﬁeld of network trafﬁc analysis (i.e., distilling metadata), thus proving its suitability for a wide range of tasks.
 information to perform key management and proﬁling tasks, The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. II
 such as trafﬁc classiﬁcation, modeling, and prediction). In spite reviews current publicly-available datasets for encrypted (and
 of this huge interest, the availability of data for performing possibly mobile) trafﬁc analysis; Sec. III describes the whole
 research within this ﬁeld has remained quite limited. Many M IRAGE architecture involved (including capture and groundappealing research solutions have been (and are) mostly val- truth building phases), with Sec. IV describing the release
 idated on private datasets, thus precluding repeatability and format of the M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Then, Sec. V presents
 safe advances on the topic. Still, it is shared opinion that this example tasks enabled by M IRAGE -2019, by means of mobile
 aspect contributes to slow down and limit the understanding
 of the tackled problems, since it constitutes a severe drawback 1 http://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-share/mobile/worldwide

 in both design and experimental validation phases. 2 M IRAGE -2019 is publicly released at http://trafﬁc.comics.unina.it/mirage.

 978-1-7281-0875-9/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Table I: Summary of previous datasets on encrypted trafﬁc analysis.

 TO stats

 Meta
 Raw

 Pkt
 Ref Dataset Capture Span  ♂ TO Task Diversity R
 [5] ISCXVPN2016 Mar. ’15 - Jun. ’15   B   TI&TC 7 TTs 
 
 [6] ISCXTor2016 Lug. ’15 - Feb. ’16   B   TI&TC 8 TTs / 18 apps 
 
 [7] Anon17 ’14 - ’17   F    TI&TC 3 ATs / 8 TTs / 21 apps 
 
 [8] QUIC Mar. ’18   B  TI&TC 5 QUIC services 
 
 [9] MTD Oct. ’16 - Mar. ’17   B   TI&TC 12 Apps / 10 DEVs / 10 EXPs 
 
 [10] UNSWIoT Oct. ’16 - Apr. ’17 
   B  DevID 28 DEVs 
 [11] NTD Reddit Apr. ’18 - May ’18   W  WebAN 5 BWs 
 
 [12] Video Streams Aug. ’15 - May ’16   F  VidID 2.1k VTLs 
 [13] Youtube Video Sep. ’17 - Feb. ’18   P   VT-QoE 3 VTLs / 374 h 
 [14] Netﬂix UE Oct. ’18 - Feb. ’19   F  VT-QoE 10 LOCs / 2.6k VTLs 
 
 Ours M IRAGE -2019 May ’17 - May ’19   B    TI&TC 40 apps / 3 DEVs / 280+ EXPs 

 Trafﬁc Nature:  = Mobile, ♂ = Human-generated. Trafﬁc Object (TO): BF = Biﬂow, F = Flow, P = Packet, W = Webpage. Released Data: Raw = PCAP
 ﬁles, Pkt = Packet-level data, TO stats = TO statistics, Meta = Metadata. Task: DevID = Device Identiﬁcation, TI&TC = Trafﬁc Identiﬁcation and
 Classiﬁcation, VidID = Video Identiﬁcation, VT-QoE = Quality-of-Experience in Video Trafﬁc, WebAN = Website Analysis. Diversity: AT = Anonymity
 Tool, BW = Browser, DEV = Device, EXP = Experimenter, LOC = Location, TT = Trafﬁc Type, VTL = Video Title. Reproducibility (R).

 trafﬁc characterization & modeling attempts, whereas Sec. VI to M IRAGE -2019, collected in the last two years and expected
 discusses the ethical considerations concerning the acquisition to reﬂect better the current nature of mobile trafﬁc.
 phase. Finally, Sec. VII provides concluding remarks. Differently, focusing on network trafﬁc generated exclusively by mobile (handheld) devices, it is apparent that only
 II. R ELATED W ORK the datasets MTD [9] and M IRAGE -2019 (ours) have captured
 this type of trafﬁc. The only exceptions are represented by
 This section reviews the most related public trafﬁc datasets UNSWIoT [10] (in which some background trafﬁc is generand categorizes them according to the taxonomy deﬁned in ated from mobile devices) and Youtube Video [13] (where
 Tab. I. Only datasets collecting encrypted network trafﬁc streaming video was analyzed on smartphones).
 have been considered. Other datasets e.g., related to network- As anticipated, not all the considered datasets have been
 anomaly detection or attack classiﬁcation have not been taken generated by human users. Indeed, we point out that the
 into account, due to their peculiar focus on network security. above feature may be crucial when analyzing trafﬁc generated
 In detail, we categorize each dataset based on whether (a) by complex interaction patterns from the users, as in the case
 it focuses on the mobile scenario, (b) it is generated by real of anonymity tools [5, 7] and mobile applications (object of
 human experimenters (as opposed to bots or scripts) and (c) this work) [9] with automated tools non reﬂecting completely
 the description of the capture system employed for generating the above complex behaviour. For example, [8, 11, 12, 14]
 the trafﬁc makes it partially/completely reproducible. As a have employed Selenium3 for automating web browsing.
 complementary information, we also provide the capture span Referring to trafﬁc object segmentation, most of the works
 for each dataset, either explicitly speciﬁed in the corresponding consider either ﬂows [7] or biﬂows as the relevant trafﬁc
 paper or obtained by direct inspection of the artifacts. Addi- analysis unit, with the sole exception of [11] using webpages
 tionally, we surface (i) the trafﬁc object considered (i.e. the as the relevant object of analysis.
 trafﬁc segmentation criterion used), (ii) the type(s) of released Referring to the main task approached, most of the datasets
 data, and (iii) the diversity of the collection space. Speciﬁcally, have been collected with the aim of performing and evaluating
 with respect to point (ii), we classify the form of released trafﬁc identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation, with speciﬁc focus on
 data in Raw (PCAP ﬁles are available), Pkt (ﬁelds from each anonymity tools (to assess their degree of anonymity) [6, 7],
 packet are available), TO stats (i.e. summarizing statistics for speciﬁc trafﬁc services (e.g. Google QUIC protocol) [8],
 each trafﬁc object are available) and meta (complementary Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) [5] or mobile apps classiﬁcametadata are available). Differently, referring to point (iii), tion [9]. Differently, other datasets are speciﬁcally focusing on
 we provide the number of different services/applications or (encrypted) video trafﬁc analysis, with either considering title
 types of objects considered. Finally, an explicit mention to the ﬁngerprinting [12] or Quality-of-Experience (QoE) prediction
 main intended task approached is provided. [13, 14]. Finally, some works focus on identifying speciﬁc
 First, referring to the capture span, we observe that all the devices generating trafﬁc, e.g. IoT devices [10], and other
 datasets considered have been collected in the last ﬁve years delve into website analysis [11].
 (2014–19), reﬂecting the only recent trend toward the growing Referring to diversity, datasets provide information with
 adoption of encrypted protocols (e.g., TLS) [15]. Further, we different degrees of variety, also according to the goal and
 observe that the experimental campaigns last from months the scope of the work they are proposed with. Overall,
 to years, with longer ones typically associated with human
 interaction (see later discussion). A similar rationale applies 3 https://www.seleniumhq.org

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 different applications/services/contents are considered, as well a bottleneck in terms of bandwidth, thus not impacting the
 as multiple experimenters (in case of human-generated trafﬁc), properties of the trafﬁc stream ﬂowing through the access
 capture devices, and locations. For instance, ISCXTor2016 [6] WLAN. Each mobile device is also physically attached to the
 contains 8 different trafﬁc trafﬁc types (browsing, audio, etc.) capture server through the USB hub; this allows leveraging the
 corresponding to 18 applications which are run under two Android Debug Bridge (ADB) to send commands from the
 different scenarios (one to detect Tor trafﬁc ﬂows and the capture server to the attached devices and receive responses
 other to detect the application type). Differently, Anon17 [7] on an off-band channel. Such procedure requires the devices
 contains info about the trafﬁc types and applications running to be rooted in order to successfully run the trafﬁc capture.
 on Tor, I2P and JonDonym is provided in the form of 3- Notably, our architecture is able to handle trafﬁc capture of
 level labels for each ﬂow. However, each dataset focuses on multiple devices simultaneously. The captured trafﬁc is then
 a limited set of the mentioned aspects in line with the nature processed by the Analysis System (in our prototype, hosted
 of the problem to investigate. In fact, none of those surveyed on the capture server itself) to produce M IRAGE -2019.
 covers all these aspects at best. At most, 21 applications [7], In detail, the M IRAGE architecture builds the dataset in three
 28 devices [10], and 10 experimenters [9] are considered. phases as shown in Fig. 1(b): (1) Capture phase: trafﬁc traces
 M IRAGE -2019 takes into consideration trafﬁc generated by are collected in PCAP format together with strace log–
 280+ experimenters using 40 applications via 3 devices. ﬁles keeping track of network system-calls. (2) GT building
 Finally, referring to reproducibility, it is apparent that not phase: PCAP traces are segmented and log-ﬁles are ﬁltered.
 in all the cases the details, the setup and the procedures this information is then combined to produce labeled trafﬁc
 required to reproduce the same experimental setup for the objects. (3) Dataset extraction phase: labeled trafﬁc objects
 capture have been reported. Nonetheless, in some cases, a are processed to extract the information of interest (including
 detailed description of the whole experimental setup has been statistical features) to be used as input data for exploratory
 provided, see e.g. [10, 12, 13]. analysis or machine learning tasks. The next subsections
 provide details about these three phases.
 III. T HE M IRAGE A RCHITECTURE
 At a high level, the M IRAGE system architecture consists of A. Capture phase
 two main components: the Capture System and the Analysis A capture session begins when an experimenter connects a
 System. Figure 1(a) shows the architecture of the Capture mobile device to the USB hub: this procedure automatically
 System. The capture server is a workstation equipped with kicks off the capture of the network trafﬁc as well as the logan IEEE 802.11g access point, which provides connectivity ging of the system calls. In detail, the trafﬁc is captured on the
 to the mobile devices that generate the trafﬁc when human wired interface of the capture server by means of tcpdump4
 experimenters operate the apps. A wired connection brings Leveraging trafﬁc ﬁlters based on the MAC address of the
 the access of the capture server to the public Internet, per- connected devices allows to collect the trafﬁc generated by
 forming Network Address Translation (NAT). Notably, the multiple devices at the same time, without any ambiguity. On
 upstream connections to the public Internet do not constitute the other hand, the system-call tracing is enabled on the mobile
 device itself by using the strace utility via ADB5 strace
 Capture System
 is set to log network-related and process-management system
 Capture server
 Rooted Android device
 calls (e.g., connect, bind, getsockname, fork, wait,
 exec, etc.), also logging the related <IP:port> pairs and
 Experimenter WiFi access point
 Internet associating each socket descriptor to the name of the Android
 package which originates the call.6 As a result, this phase
 provides an strace log-ﬁle with ground-truth information
 for each PCAP trace collected (see Fig. 1b). This kernel-based
 Analysis System
 mechanism for gathering information being given, the ﬁnest
 USB hub granularity we can achieve is the (bi)ﬂow level.
 The described capturing system allows the capture of
 (a) M IRAGE architecture.
 mobile-app trafﬁc when accessing the Internet through a Wi-
 Capture phase
 PCAP
 GT building phase Dataset extraction phase Fi channel. In principle, the behavior of the apps could be
 Experimenter trace different from the one shown when connecting through 3G/4G
 Trafﬁc MIRAGE-2019
 segmentation dataset channel. Indeed, Android applications may detect the type
 Trafﬁc
 generation
 Trafﬁc
 capture
 Labeling
 Dataset
 extraction
 of network that is used to transport their data, telling apart
 System-call Wi-Fi, Mobile, and VPN connections and potentially acting
 ﬁltering
 strace
 log-ﬁle 4 http://www.tcpdump.org/.
 (b) M IRAGE -2019 dataset building. 5 https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb.html
 6 To this aim, we monitor the Android zygote process that handles the
 Figure 1: The M IRAGE architecture: (a) diagram of main components forking of each new application process. Then we extract the Android package
 and (b) workﬂow of dataset building. names from the PIDs returned by the fork system calls.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 in different ways according to that.7 Other mobile-app trafﬁc 1

 capture approaches leverage an encrypted connection (VPN) 0.8
 that tunnels the trafﬁc over 3G/4G to a gateway/capture server
 0.6

 CDF
 [9]. Compared to our method, the VPN-based ones not only
 0.4
 suffer from the identical issue (apps are able to know if the
 transport network is a VPN the same way), but possibly add 0.2
 uncontrolled changes to the statistical properties of captured 0
 trafﬁc due to the underlying tunneling protocol mechanics 10 100 1000 10000
 PCAP-trace duration [s]
 and the network between the mobile device and the capture
 gateway, resulting in a trafﬁc timing less accurate and possibly Figure 2: Cumulative distribution of the duration (s in log-scale) of
 traces less representative of plain 3G/4G setups. the PCAP traces collected. The diamond marker reports the average,
 whereas the shaded box highlights the (5, 95)th percentile region.
 B. GT building phase
 speciﬁc tasks). The output of this phase constitutes the ﬁnal
 In the GT building phase, ﬁrst the PCAP traces are seg- M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Since the trafﬁc objects here considmented to obtain trafﬁc objects. Then, each of these objects ered correspond to biﬂows, information can be drawn in the
 is labeled taking advantage of the information extracted from form of summarizing statistics from the whole trafﬁc object, of
 the associated strace log-ﬁle. from a subset of the constituting packets. The speciﬁc types
 PCAP traces are segmented into biﬂows, that is we group of information provided for M IRAGE -2019 and the related
 together all the packets having the same 5-tuple (source IP and context are described in full details in the following section.
 port, destination IP and port, and transport-level protocol),
 with source and destination addresses and ports that can
 be swapped. As opposed to common heuristics leveraged to IV. DATASET D ESCRIPTION
 deﬁne the 5-tuple that identiﬁes each biﬂow (i.e. ﬁrst packet
 captured, TCP SYN, etc.) [3], we are able to order the items We have collected the M IRAGE -2019 dataset in the ARconsituting the 5-tuple based on the knowledge of IP addresses CLAB laboratory at the University of Napoli “Federico II”.
 of the Android devices used for the captures. Therefore, in the The capture sessions (cf. Sec. III-A) span from May 2017 to
 dataset the addresses in biﬂows are ordered in the upstream May 2019. We employed three devices to generate the mobile
 direction (i.e. local-to-remote, with reference to the mobile trafﬁc, namely: (i) Xiaomi Mi5, (ii) Google Nexus 7, and
 terminal). Note that biﬂow segmentation is a common choice (iii) Samsung Galaxy A5. In detail, we installed the custom
 for trafﬁc objects [3, 16] and perfectly ﬁts the metadata ﬁrmware CyanogenMod v13.0 (corresponding to the Android
 extracted from the network (viz. socket) system-calls. version 6.0.1) on all the devices and enabled the root mode.
 Then, each biﬂow is labeled with the Android package- More than 280 experimenters took part to the dataset
 name that exactly matches the 5-tuple in the strace log- construction on a voluntary basis, by performing one or two
 ﬁle, considering getsockname and connect system calls. experimental sessions each. The experimenters involved in this
 In the case a perfect match cannot be found in the log-ﬁle activity were students of three different courses9 held at the
 for some biﬂows8 , the procedure assigns labels according to University of Napoli “Federico II”, aged 19 ÷ 25 years, with a
 a heuristic, i.e. labeling these biﬂows with the most-common 85/15% share between males and females. Each experimental
 label (i.e. package name) in the PCAP trace. As this approach session lasted two hours, at most. Altogether, during each
 can potentially cause mislabeling, the case of heuristic labeling experimental session, each experimenter performed 12 capture
 is explicitly marked as such in the dataset, allowing the ﬁnal sessions of 5 ÷ 10 minutes (each resulting in one PCAP trafﬁc
 user to decide between considering in the GT all trafﬁc objects trace and one strace log-ﬁle, cf. Sec. III). In each capture
 (possibly noisy) or keep only strict matching ones. session the experimenter was asked to perform activities
 mimicking common uses of a single app with the intent to
 C. Dataset extraction phase explore its functionalities in addition to ﬁrst-time install, login,
 This phase is in charge of taking each labeled trafﬁc object registration. We report the ethical considerations underlying
 and extract the relevant information to feed any potential the aforementioned trafﬁc-capture procedure in Sec. VI.
 application of the collected data (e.g., exploratory mobile- Overall, the M IRAGE -2019 dataset gathers the trafﬁc genapp trafﬁc analysis or machine learning algorithms to solve erated by 40 Android apps belonging to 16 different categories
 according to Google Play apps distribution portal [17]. Before
 7 The ConnectivityManager method getType() returns, among
 each experimental session, the exercised app is updated to
 the others, TYPE_WIFI, TYPE_MOBILE, TYPE_VPN according to the the latest version available on the Italian Play Store. The
 active connection type (see https://developer.android.com/reference/android/
 net/ConnectivityManager for API level before 21, or https://developer.android. M IRAGE website (http://trafﬁc.comics.unina.it/mirage) reports
 com/reference/android/net/NetworkCapabilities for the analogous constants the detailed app metadata together with the links to their pages
 preﬁxed with TRANSPORT_ in API level 21 and following).
 8 This could be caused by either the pre-existence of these biﬂows before the
 capture started or by a failure of the strace in following the corresponding 9 Namely: Computer Architectures, Computer Networks, and Internet Analchild-processes forked by zygote. ysis and Performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Table II: The M IRAGE -2019 dataset. Di , Fi , and Mi report the
 biow
 [Table III] dict-keys in the released JSON ﬁles.
 upstream
 ow
 (a) Per-packet data extracted from the ﬁrst 32 packets of each biﬂow.
 packet [Table III]
 packet
 data
 [Table II]
 length
 downstream
 Di Description
 ow

 5-tuple
 ow
 [Table III] src_port Source transport-layer port
 features
 biow
 dst_port Destination transport-layer port
 ow
 [Table III] packet_dir Packet direction (0 upstream, 1 downstream)
 metadata iat
 [Table IV] upstream
 L4_payload_bytes Number of bytes in L4 payload
 ow iat Inter-arrival time
 [Table III]
 TCP_win_size TCP window size (0 for UDP packets)
 downstream
 ow L4_raw_payload Byte-wise raw L4 payload (integer ∈ [0, 255])
 [Table III]

 Figure 3: Structure of the JSON ﬁles constituting M IRAGE -2019. (b) Per-ﬂow features extracted from the sets of upstream, downstream,
 and complete IP packet lengths and inter-arrival times.

 on Google Play. As a whole, a total of 4606 PCAP traces were Fi Description
 collected within M IRAGE -201910 . min Minimum
 max Maximum
 Figure 2 shows the cumulative distribution of the duration mean Arithmetic mean
 of the traces collected, having an average duration of 370 s. std Standard deviation
 It can be noted that the majority of traces has a duration var Variance
 mad Mean absolute deviation
 corresponding to that prescribed for capture sessions (i.e. skew Unbiased sample skewness
 5 ÷ 10 min.), being the median equal to 329 s and the kurtosis Unbiased Fisher kurtosis
 5- and 95-percentile equal to 213 s and 674 s, respectively. q_percentile q th percentile (q ∈ [10 : 10 : 90])
 Differently, outliers are due to unintended disconnections from
 the trafﬁc capture system, erroneous procedures carried out (c) Per-ﬂow metadata Mi related to the complete biﬂow (BF) and
 upstream (UF) and downstream (DF) ﬂows.
 by the experimenters, but also speciﬁc experimental scenarios
 (e.g., prolonged video-playing, calls, etc.). Mi Description
 We release the M IRAGE -2019 dataset in JSON format to BF_label Android-package name
 BF_labeling_type Exact or most-common labeling
 foster its compatibility and increase its usability: one JSON ﬁle {BF,UF,DF}_num_packets Number of packets
 corresponds to one PCAP trace captured (i.e. a self-contained {BF,UF,DF}_IP_packet_bytes Total bytes in IP packets
 capture session). In detail, for each biﬂow—identiﬁed by its {BF,UF,DF}_L4_payload_bytes Total bytes in L4 payloads
 {BF,UF,DF}_duration (Bi)ﬂow duration in seconds
 5-tuple—we have extracted: (i) per-packet data, (ii) per-ﬂow
 features, and (iii) per-ﬂow metadata. Figure 3 shows the
 structure of each JSON ﬁle. The successive paragraphs provide
 details about released data and their format. biﬂow-label extracted) granularity (i.e. exact or most-common)
 refers to the GT-building procedures described in Sec. III-B.
 Per-packet data: We extract 6 informative header ﬁelds and
 the L4 payload of the ﬁrst 32 packets of each biﬂow. Table IIa V. E XAMPLE TASKS E NABLED BY M IRAGE -2019
 describes the data Di extracted. In detail, each Di identiﬁes
 a list of up to 32 elements. Researchers performing trafﬁc The dataset we release can suit different kinds of tasks,
 classiﬁcation [18, 19] and website ﬁngerprinting [20] via ranging from app trafﬁc modeling and prediction, to biﬂowmachine and deep learning used these inputs in their works. based trafﬁc classiﬁcation. Herein, we present an app trafﬁc
 Per-ﬂow features: To provide information on the whole biﬂow characterization that can be directly derived from the dataset,
 and corresponding upstream and downstream ﬂows, we select concerning per-packet data (Sec. V-A), per-ﬂow features
 17 statistical features computed on the sets of upstream, (Sec. V-B), and per-ﬂow metadata (Sec. V-C). While providing
 downstream, and complete (i.e. both of them) IP packet lengths a detailed characterization of M IRAGE -2019, our analyses
 and inter-arrival times, for a total of 102 per-ﬂow features. also point at tasks enabled by the released dataset.
 Table IIb reports the per-ﬂow features Fi extracted. Previous
 works in the ﬁeld of trafﬁc classiﬁcation via machine learning A. Per-app modeling based on per-packet data
 successfully leveraged these features to feed the classiﬁcation Modeling network trafﬁc represents a key task in the study
 algorithms they devised [16, 21–23]. and design of Internet architectures, as realistic (yet manage-
 Per-ﬂow metadata: Table IIc describes per-ﬂow metadata able) trafﬁc models are needed to predict, interpret, and solve
 complementing per-ﬂow features, being also related to com- performance-related issues of current and future networks.
 plete biﬂow and upstream/downstream ﬂows. GT (viz. the To prove the suitability of M IRAGE -2019 to support this
 class of tasks, we provide a preliminary study aimed at
 10 We have ﬁltered out the PCAP traces having an strace log-ﬁle less
 devising per-app trafﬁc models by means of Markov Models,
 than 200 kB or a duration less than 10 seconds. We plan to continue the similarly as done in [24]. In detail, for each app we consider
 experimental activities and update the M IRAGE -2019 dataset over time. the sequence of the L4_payload_bytes of each biﬂow (i.e.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 payload inspection). In fact, approaches based on statistical
 properties of network trafﬁc provide viable alternatives [3, 22].
 Leveraging the information directly provided by M IRAGE -
 2019, the mobile-app trafﬁc can be modeled at different granularities, considering both the apps and the related categories.
 As an interesting example, Fig. 5 reports the joint scatter
 plot (per biﬂow) of the mean packet lengths and inter-arrival
 times for three different app categories: Productivity
 (Fig. 5a), Sports (Fig. 5b), and Games (Fig. 5c). Each ﬁgure
 reports the apps with different colors, while the kernel density
 estimation of the marginal distributions is shown in the side
 plots. Several considerations can be drawn from this analysis.
 (a) com.dropbox.android. (b) air.com.hypah.io.slither.
 First, given the different spatial concentration of the points
 Figure 4: Transition matrices of payload lengths. Axes are divided in over the plane, different categories result in different joint
 two different linear scales. The color-bar is in log-scale.
 scatter plots. For instance, while points in Games mostly lie
 within [50, 400] B (x-axis) and [10 ms, 100 s] (y-axis), the same
 focusing on the ﬁrst 32 packets, see Sec. IV) and derive the so- does not apply for the other two categories.
 called transition matrix, whose (X, Y )th entry represents the Secondly, apps within the same category often show their
 probability that next packet comes with Y bytes of payload own peculiar statistical proﬁle. For example, in Fig. 5b,
 if the last observed packet has a payload of X bytes (save OneFootball (de.motain.iliga) updates generate points
 from rounding errors due to binning). Notably: (i) packets mostly concentrated at 100 B and 100 ms, as opposed to
 with null payload are ﬁltered out (i.e. only packets transferring Diretta (eu.livesport.Diretta_it). Differently, for
 contents generated by the application layer are retained [22], Games (Fig. 5c), while inter-arrival time does not hold great
 while signaling such as TCP SYNs, RSTs, and pure ACKs discriminating power, the packet length allows to separate
 are discarded, as not of interest for this analysis); (ii) the biﬂows associated to the two considered games easily enough.
 payload-size interval between 1 B and 1500 B is divided in 33 Finally, this rationale is not as much evident for apps
 non-uniform bins, namely: bins from 1 to 20 (resp. from 21 to within Productivity (see Fig. 5a, except for Dropbox).
 33) are 10 B (resp. 100 B) wide. This scheme allows to better Indeed, the presence of trafﬁc generated by several (similar)
 appreciate the model dynamics by mitigating the impact of the apps is one of the main challenges of mobile-app trafﬁc
 high presence of packets with null or very-small payload. analysis. This results in very-complex patterns of current trafﬁc
 As an example, Fig. 4 reports the transition matrices for which cannot be appropriately captured by common statistical
 Dropbox (Fig. 4a) and Slither.io (Fig. 4b). By looking at features. Accordingly, the application of novel machine- and
 the two matrices, the following observations can be derived: deep-learning based techniques is foreseen to be the effective
 (i) the presence of high values (darker colors) along the workhorse to cope with this challenge [16].
 diagonal witnesses the tendency to remain in the same state,
 i.e. sending/receiving consecutive packets of similar sizes. This C. Per-ﬂow volume distribution
 observation holds for both apps, and becomes evident for very- The info in M IRAGE -2019 also enables a characterization
 small values (top-left corner) as well as for very-large values of the trafﬁc based on the transferred volumes. Figure 6a shows
 (bottom-right corner). (ii) Vertical patterns highlight the trend the volume of the biﬂows in M IRAGE -2019, reporting the
 in entering to a speciﬁc state, whichever the current payload histogram of their sizes (bin width: 2 MB) which range from
 length. This is particularly evident for Fig. 4a (next expected few bytes to several megabytes. In general terms, voluminous
 payload length is within 30–40 B when current payload length ﬂows are less frequent than (possibly short-lived) biﬂows
 lies within 300–1400 B) and in both apps when the current transferring a limited amount of bytes (e.g., due to requestpayload belongs to 1400–1500 B. (iii) Finally, scattered darker response interactions). As more than 88% of the biﬂows have
 points highlight app-speciﬁc patterns. volumes ≤ 100 kB, Fig. 6b reports the histogram (bin width:
 1 kB) for such dataset portion, revealing that biﬂows with
 B. Per-ﬂow statistic characterization volumes within [5, 10] kB are the most common.
 To deepen the nature of the exchange, Fig. 6c reports (in
 Characterizing mobile-app trafﬁc based on its statistical the form of cumulative distributions) the share ρd of the
 features is a capability of the utmost importance that mitigates downstream bytes for each biﬂow (i.e. ρd  BdB+B d
 u
 , where
 a number of issues and beneﬁts different tasks in network Bd and Bu are the number of downstream and upstream
 administration. For instance, trends in network applications bytes of the biﬂow, respectively) for the whole M IRAGE -2019
 and protocol design (e.g., protocol encapsulation, encrypted (≈ 270k biﬂows). On average, downstream trafﬁc accounts for
 transmission, use of non-standard ports, concerns about users’ ≈ 65% of the volume of the whole biﬂow trafﬁc. However,
 privacy) heavily challenge trafﬁc classiﬁcation when exploit- a clear pattern can be noticed when considering biﬂows with
 ing some of the developed techniques (e.g., port-numbers and different volumes: the smaller the biﬂow volume, the smaller

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1000 s 1000 s
 1000 s
 100 s 100 s
 100 s
 10 s 10 s
 10 s
 Mean Inter-Arrival Time

 Mean Inter-Arrival Time

 Mean Inter-Arrival Time
 1s 1s
 1s

 100 ms 100 ms 100 ms

 10 ms 10 ms 10 ms

 1 ms 1 ms 1 ms
 com.dropbox.android
 100 μs com.trello 100 μs 100 μs
 com.microsoft.skydrive eu.livesport.Diretta it air.com.hypah.io.slither
 10 μs 10 μs 10 μs
 com.google.android.apps.docs de.motain.iliga com.miniclip.eightballpool
 1 μs 1 μs 1 μs
 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400
 Mean IP Packet Length [B] Mean IP Packet Length [B] Mean IP Packet Length [B]

 (a) Productivity. (b) Sports. (c) Games.
 Figure 5: Joint scatter-plot of mean (payload length, inter-arrival time) of each biﬂow for three different app categories. The packet length
 is reported in linear scale (x-axis), whereas the inter-arrival time is shown using a log-scale (10 log10 (x)).

 100000

 10000
 #Biﬂows

 1000
 1 1
 100 Total (276871)
 < 1k (42914)
 10
 < 10k (170178)
 1 0.8 0.8
 ≥ 10k (106693)
 0 25M 50M 75M 100M 125M 150M 175M
 ≥ 100k (32680)
 Biﬂow Volume [B]
 0.6 0.6
 (a) Volume histogram of all biﬂows (bin width: 2

 CCDF
 CDF

 MB).
 0.4 0.4 Comics News&Magazines
 100000 Communication Productivity
 Education Shopping
 Games Social
 0.2 0.2 Google Play Store Sports
 #Biﬂows

 10000
 Lifestyle Travel&Local
 Maps&Navigation Video Players
 1000 Music&Audio Weather
 0 0
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 100
 ρd ρd
 0 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k
 Biﬂow Volume [B]

 (b) Volume histogram of biﬂows with volume ≤ (c) Cumulative distribution of ρd . Diamonds (d) Complementary cumulative distribution of
 100 kB (bin width: 1 kB). mark the average. ρd for each app category (biﬂows with volume
 ≥ 10 kB). Diamonds mark the average.
 Figure 6: Per-ﬂow characterization of M IRAGE -2019 biﬂows in terms of byte volume (a-b) and downstream volume share ρd (c-d).

 the share of downstream trafﬁc (ρd ≤ 0.5). Indeed, for biﬂows two categories (Comics and Maps&Navigation) show a
 very small in volume (i.e. ≤ 1 kB) ρd = 0.35 on average. distinct distribution of ρd from the other ones (a higher mean
 Notably, for around 5% of the biﬂows no downstream packets value and only ≈ 5% of the biﬂows with ρd ≤ 0.5).
 were captured. As expected, all these communications are
 very small in volume (i.e. ≤ 10 kB) and are the results of VI. E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS
 anomalous conditions, with the mobile app asking for services Based on both the presented design choices and the experto external servers and no reply returned due to failures imental setup, the capture process and the collected dataset
 possibly at the communication endpoint or along the path. do not imply any ethical concern [1]. We remark that ex-
 Differently, when only ﬂows with larger sizes are retained perimenters involved in the acquisition phase have been be-
 (≥ 10 kB and ≥ 100 kB), the downstream trafﬁc accounts forehand informed and warned about the objectives of their
 for most of the volume (mean ρd equals to 0.77 and 0.89). activities (e.g. network trafﬁc analysis) and the possible public
 The analysis of the exchanged trafﬁc volumes and of the release of the corresponding traces for research purposes, even
 downstream-upstream (un)balance has an impact on access in a complete form. Additionally, each experimenter received
 link dimensioning (for the operator) and per-app trafﬁc volume a thirty-minutes training phase (with the help of a written
 costs, and transmission power consumed (for the user). Indeed, document listing all the instructions) regarding the capture
 breaking the above results down by different app categories technologies employed and the related working principles.
 (see Fig. 6d), it is possible to quantify the expected difference Moreover, the employed mobile devices were provided and
 of transmission resources required. According to this analysis, used within the ARCLAB. The logged source IP addresses

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 belong to the private IPv4 space, with no privacy implications. [9] R. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Tang, J. Yang, and Z. Yang.
 Equally important, purposedly-created app accounts were em- Benchmark data for mobile app trafﬁc research. In ACM
 ployed for the capture sessions. The GT building phase is au- MobiQuitous’18.
 tomated and does not contribute any additional experimenter- [10] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, F. Loi, A. Radford,
 related information. Hence, no personal information of the C. Wijenayake, A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman. Clasexperimenters was involved at any time from the capture phase sifying IoT devices in smart environments using network
 to the dataset creation. Collected traces were made available trafﬁc characteristics. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
 to experimenters that captured them for educational purposes 2018.
 as well as to verify the non-sensitive nature of their contents. [11] M. Lescisin and Q. H. Mahmoud. Dataset for web trafﬁc
 security analysis. In IEEE IECON’18.
 VII. C ONCLUSIONS
 [12] R. Dubin, A. Dvir, O. Pele, and O. Hadar. I know what
 This paper introduces and details the reproducible M IRAGE you saw last minute-encrypted HTTP adaptive video
 architecture for capturing mobile-app trafﬁc and building the streaming title classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 related ground-truth. Leveraging the implemented architecture, Security, 12(12), 2017.
 we collected mobile-app trafﬁc for two years and release the [13] T. Karagkioules, D. Tsilimantos, S. Valentin, F. Wamser,
 M IRAGE -2019 dataset, supporting and fostering replicable B. Zeidler, M. Seufert, F. Loh, and P. Tran-Gia. A
 trafﬁc analysis. Example tasks enabled by the released dataset public dataset for YouTube’s mobile streaming client. In
 with focus on trafﬁc characterization and modeling are also IEEE/IFIP MNM Workshop’18.
 shown in this paper. We expect that the proposed dataset will [14] S. C. Madanapalli, H. H. Gharakhieli, and V. Sivaraman.
 be used as a benchmark for future studies concerning mobile Inferring netﬂix user experience from broadband network
 trafﬁc analysis. Our intention is to periodically release updated measurement. In IEEE/ACM TMA’19.
 (and enriched) versions of the dataset. [15] Sandvine. Global Internet Phenomena Spotlight: En-
 VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS crypted Internet Trafﬁc., 2016.
 We are grateful to the students of ’17/’18 and ’18/’19 [16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè. Moclasses of “Internet Analysis and Performance”, “Computer bile encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning:
 Architectures” and “Computer Networks” held at University of Experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and challenges.
 Napoli “Federico II” for willingly participating to the capture IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., 16(2), jun 2019.
 campaign needed to generate M IRAGE -2019. [17] 42matters. Google play categories. https:
 //42matters.com/docs/app-market-data/android/apps/
 R EFERENCES google-play-categories, 2019.
 [1] V. Bajpai, A. Brunstrom, A. Feldmann, W. Kellerer, [18] Z. Wang. The applications of Deep Learning on trafﬁc
 A. Pras, H. Schulzrinne, G. Smaragdakis, M. Wählisch, identiﬁcation. BlackHat USA, 2015.
 and K. Wehrle. The Dagstuhl beginners guide to repro- [19] A. Dainotti, F. Gargiulo, L. I. Kuncheva, A. Pescapé, and
 ducibility for experimental networking research. ACM C. Sansone. Identiﬁcation of trafﬁc ﬂows hiding behind
 SIGCOMM CCR, 49(1), 2019. tcp port 80. In 2010 IEEE International Conference on
 [2] A. Dainotti, R. Holz, M. Kühlewind, A. Lutu, J. Som- Communications, May 2010.
 mers, and B. Trammell. Open collaborative hyperpapers: [20] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. V. Goethem,
 a call to action. ACM SIGCOMM CCR, 49(1), 2019. and W. Joosen. Automated feature extraction for website
 [3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapè, and K. C. Claffy. Issues and ﬁngerprinting through deep learning. In NDSS’18.
 future directions in trafﬁc classiﬁcation. IEEE Network, [21] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic. Ro-
 26(1), 2012. bust smartphone app identiﬁcation via encrypted network
 [4] F. Jejdling et al. Ericsson mobility report. Ericsson AB, trafﬁc analysis. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, 13
 Business Area Networks, Stockholm, Sweden, Tech. Rep. (1), 2018.
 EAB-19, 3442, 2019. [22] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè.
 [5] G. D. Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. A. Multi-classiﬁcation approaches for classifying mobile
 Ghorbani. Characterization of encrypted and VPN trafﬁc app trafﬁc. Journal of Network and Computer Appliusing time-related features. In SciTePress ICISSP’16. cations, 103, 2018.
 [6] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. Mamun, I. Saiful, and [23] V. Carela-Español, P. Barlet-Ros, M. Solé-Simó, A. Dain-
 A. A. Ghorbani. Characterization of Tor trafﬁc using time otti, W. de Donato, and A. Pescapé. K-dimensional trees
 based features. In SciTePress ICISSP’17. for continuous trafﬁc classiﬁcation. In Trafﬁc Monitoring
 [7] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood. Packet momen- and Analysis, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
 tum for identiﬁcation of anonymity networks. Journal of [24] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapé, P. Salvo Rossi, F. Palmieri, and
 Cyber Security and Mobility, 6(1), 2017. G. Ventre. Internet trafﬁc modeling by means of hidden
 [8] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk. A novel Markov models. Computer Networks, 52(14), 2008.
 QUIC trafﬁc classiﬁer based on convolutional neural
 networks. In IEEE GlobeCom’18.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:09:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.