1988 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 Towards the Deployment of Machine Learning
 Solutions in Network Traffic Classification: A
 Systematic Survey
 Fannia Pacheco , Ernesto Exposito, Mathieu Gineste, Cedric Baudoin, and Jose Aguilar

 Abstract—Traffic analysis is a compound of strategies intended involve: a) Troubleshooting tasks: the main objective is to
 to find relationships, patterns, anomalies, and misconfigurations, locate faulty network devices, device/software misconfiguraamong others things, in Internet traffic. In particular, traffic tions, locate the point of packet losses, network errors, etc.
 classification is a subgroup of strategies in this field that aims
 at identifying the application’s name or type of Internet traffic. b) Security: avoid malware or prevent intrusion to private
 Nowadays, traffic classification has become a challenging task due information. c) Quality of Service (QoS) management to guarto the rise of new technologies, such as traffic encryption and antee the overall acceptability of an application or service
 encapsulation, which decrease the performance of classical traf- perceived by end-users. In this field, identifying or classifying
 fic classification strategies. Machine learning (ML) gains interest the name or type of application in the network helps to treat
 as a new direction in this field, showing signs of future success,
 such as knowledge extraction from encrypted traffic, and more some of the beforehand aspects. For instance, identifying difaccurate Quality of Service management. ML is fast becoming ferent applications from traffic is critical to manage bandwidth
 a key tool to build traffic classification solutions in real network resources and to ensure QoS requirements.
 traffic scenarios; in this sense, the purpose of this investigation is In the past, traffic classification relied on the port-based
 to explore the elements that allow this technique to work in the approach where each application was identified by its regtraffic classification field. Therefore, a systematic review is introduced based on the steps to achieve traffic classification by using istered and known port, defined by the Internet Assigned
 ML techniques. The main aim is to understand and to identify Numbers Authority (IANA) [1]. This approach became unrethe procedures followed by the existing works to achieve their liable and inaccurate due to, among other factors, the progoals. As a result, this survey paper finds a set of trends derived liferation of new applications with unregistered or random
 from the analysis performed on this domain; in this manner, the generated ports. Another approach that gained a lot of popauthors expect to outline future directions for ML-based traffic
 classification. ularity in this field is called Deep Packet Inspection (DPI).
 DPI performs a matching between the packet payload and a
 Index Terms—Internet traffic, traffic classification, machine set of stored signatures to classify network traffic. However,
 learning, traffic monitoring.
 DPI fails when privacy policies and laws prevent accessing to
 I. I NTRODUCTION the packet content, as well as the case of protocol obfuscation or encapsulation. In order to overcome the former issues,
 RAFFIC analysis is the complete process that starts
 T from intercepting traffic data to finding relationships, patterns, anomalies, and misconfigurations, among others things,
 Machine Learning (ML) emerged as a suitable solution, not
 only for the traffic classification task, but also for prediction
 and new knowledge discovery, among other things. In this conin the Internet network. Particularly, traffic classification is
 text, statistical features of IP flows are commonly extracted
 a subgroup of strategies in this field that aims at classifyfrom network traces, and they are stored to generate historical
 ing the Internet traffic into predefined categories, such as
 data. In this way, different ML models can be trained with this
 normal or abnormal traffic, the type of application (streamhistorical data, and new incoming flows can be analyzed with
 ing, Web browsing, VoIP, etc) or the name of the applisuch models.
 cation (YouTube, Netflix, Facebook, etc). Network traffic
 classification is important because of several reasons that A. Related Works
 Manuscript received February 27, 2018; revised July 11, 2018 and In this section, several review papers are studied in order
 October 12, 2018; accepted November 21, 2018. Date of publication to find trends, challenges and general steps to perform traffic
 November 23, 2018; date of current version May 31, 2019. (Corresponding analysis, and in particular, traffic classification. Traffic analauthor: Fannia Pacheco.)
 F. Pacheco and E. Exposito are with the Universite de Pau et des Pays de ysis with ML started being used in 2005, however, several
 l’Adour, E2S UPPA, LIUPPA, 64600 Anglet, France (e-mail: f.pacheco@univ- problems persist due to the traffic evolution and scalability,
 pau.fr; ernesto.exposito-garcia@univ-pau.fr). among others. The work in [2] presents a review of the traf-
 M. Gineste and C. Baudoin are with the D’epartement: Business
 Line Telecommunication, Research and Development Department, fic classification advances using ML in its early years. Even
 Thales Alenia Space, 31100 Toulouse, France (e-mail: math- though, most of the presented works were deployed in an
 ieu.gineste@thalesaleniaspace.com; cedric.baudoin@thalesaleniaspace.com). offline manner, the authors also addressed to online deploy-
 J. Aguilar is with CEMISID, Dpto. de Computacion, Facultad de Ingenieria,
 Universidad de Los Andes, Merida 5101, Venezuela (e-mail: aguilar@ula.ve). ments, establishing some critical operational requirements for
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/COMST.2018.2883147 the ML models. A more recent review, presented in [3],
 1553-877X  c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1989

 identifies several of these problems and presents some future analysis procedures. Conversely, more efforts are required by
 directions in this field. On one hand, this work studies some the research community in order to propose ML solutions that
 of the main traffic classification problems, which can be sum- can deal with the drawbacks beforehand discussed.
 marized as follows: i) the data available with their ground
 truth is limited, ii) the scalability of traffic classification solu- B. Contributions
 tions is a challenge, iii) adaptive solutions are required due to The present survey paper tries to gather together different
 the dynamism and evolution of the network, and iv) the solu- approaches, strategies and procedures about how and when to
 tions require a correct validation. On the other hand, these use ML techniques for traffic classification. It will study the
 future directions encourage to the execution of more rigor- process from the monitoring stage to the implementation of
 ous evaluations and comparisons of the ML approaches, to ML solutions. The main aim is to offer a comprehensive guide
 the development of tools for the ground truth definition, and to practitioners in the field that intend to use ML techniques for
 to the use of multiclassifier systems, among other things. traffic classification. In this sense, this paper is focused on the
 Moreover, the ML approaches require to fulfill different chal- steps to achieve traffic classification based on the experience
 lenges, such as a provided performance, the management of found by the scientific community. It is important to mention
 the increasing amount of traffic and transmission rates, and that the study is focused on the traffic classification at the
 the reconfiguration capabilities, as it is exposed in [4], and IP level. For instance, this research will offer an overview of
 similarly in [5]. approaches that can be used to improve the QoS at the operator
 Recent advances in this field are presented by [6], focused network level. In brief, the main contributions are summarized
 on supervised and unsupervised techniques for traffic clas- as follows.
 sification. The authors studied several works using Bayes • It provides a comprehensive workflow to understand how
 based classifiers, Neural Networks (NNs), and Decision Trees to achieve traffic classification with ML techniques over
 (DT). Additionally, clustering techniques, such as DBSCAN, IP flows.
 Expectation Maximization (EM) based approach and K-means, • It studies each step of the workflow correlated with the
 were studied for traffic classification. Some advantages and efforts found in the literature.
 disadvantages are identified, in order to outline the necessary • It provides a set of paths that current approaches follow
 improvements for each approach. based on the workflow defined.
 Encrypted traffic has become a new way to prevent intru- • As a final result, it provides a general overview of the trafsion into transmitted information in the Internet network. ML fic classification problem, and future directions according
 is highly suitable for analyzing these type of communications with the previous results.
 due to it does not intrude into the packet content; for instance, To conclude this section, it is worth remarking the main
 in some cases the statistical behavior of the connection might difference of this systematic review to other related works is
 be sufficient. In this context, [7] reports a comprehensive the approach proposed to present the papers. The reviewed
 review of several studies focused on encrypted traffic. The papers are organized following the general procedures to apply
 survey studies some of the encryption protocols, their packet ML techniques in the Internet traffic classification domain.
 structure and standard behavior in the network, as well as, the
 observable features that can be extracted for traffic analysis. C. Organization
 In addition, [8] surveys the most common methodologies for
 traffic classification. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
 Nowadays, abnormal traffic detection in the network has Section II briefly presents the problem of traffic classification.
 become one of the most important topics in traffic analysis. This section presents at first some basis of the ML tech-
 The purpose is to discover or to characterize anomalies that niques and network traffic, to finally conclude with some of
 might come from malicious or unintentional sources affecting the most common approaches. Section III presents the methodthe network infrastructure, business or personal privacy, and ology deployed by the authors for reviewing the papers, which
 digital economy, among others. Traffic analysis is necessary is based on the ML procedures for knowledge extraction.
 for this particular domain. Reference [9] presents a compre- Following the guidelines in the former section, Section IV
 hensive study where the ML techniques represent more than reports common approaches to perform data collection in the
 30% of the solutions found in this review. More works in this Internet network. Section V reports strategies to extract feafield are found in [10]–[12]. tures from the observed traffic. Section VI presents some
 In general, traffic classification can be achieved by a vari- methods used to reduce or to select the extracted features.
 ety of ML techniques, in different domains, and with different In Section VII, it is studied how the works select the ML
 objectives. However, one of the main concerns, in all the algorithms for traffic classification. Section VIII is intended
 survey papers, is the lack of public data, which can be con- to know the efforts found in the literature for implementing
 sidered as a core resource for applying ML approaches. The the ML solutions. Section IX analyses the results of the review,
 difficulty of defining the ground truth values of the data col- and Section X outlines the conclusions of the survey paper.
 lected, and the implementation of the ML solutions, represent
 some challenges and limitations. Additionally, another impor- II. BACKGROUND
 tant aspect is the evolution of the Internet network that requires In Section II-A, a synthesis of the ML basis, general
 adaptive or self-configuring solutions to assure reliable traffic steps and classical algorithms, are presented. Following,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1990 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 in Section II-B, an overview of the traffic classification the features are combined into a single feature that would be
 approaches is given. more meaningful to the problem.
 At this stage, one could start with an initial study to comprehend the data. For instance, with labeled data, the table
 A. Machine Learning Introduction can be treated to find class-imbalance, which is the scenario
 Machine Learning (ML) techniques are very popular where there are one or more classes with a considerable higher
 approaches to identify and to classify patterns in different amount of samples than another class(es). Class-imbalance
 domains. Its main objective is to give to the computers auto- data can bias some ML models to learn more from a class than
 matic learning capabilities, where the machines are able to another. One way to treat the class-imbalance data is reducing
 extract knowledge from a process under certain conditions. the number of irrelevant samples from a class, if possible, as
 ML tries to extract knowledge from a set of features or it is exposed in [14].
 attributes, which represents the measurable properties of a pro- Finally, it is important to mention that the FE process can be
 cess or observed phenomena. In this way, the learning process embedded in the ML algorithm; moreover, an historical dataset
 is performed by training different models, i.e., classification, might not be available, and the ML model should learn from
 prediction or clustering model; and their use depends on the scratch. These particularities will be extended in Section II-A4.
 problem characteristics. The knowledge extraction is handled 3) Feature Reduction (FR) and Selection (FS): This is an
 by a ML model, which is built with historical experiences optional step that allows selecting or reducing the number
 recorded from case studies. of extracted features. FR is to create new attributes using
 Different methodologies can be found in the literature to the original ones, while FS is to find a low set of attributes
 apply ML; for instance, [13] presents a set of iterative steps that better describes a process. These steps aim at decreasing
 to discover knowledge in big databases. The work reports problems such as time consumption and curse of dimenthe traditional method of turning data into knowledge, called sionality, among others. Surveys about the performance and
 Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). The main steps of comprehension of the FR and FS processes are presented
 the KDD comprise data selection, processing, transformation, by [15] and [16]. FR and FS are commonly divided into
 mining and interpretation/evaluation. The data mining compo- Filter, Wrapper and Embedded approaches, which in turn
 nent refers to the application of data mining methods, which can be developed by supervised and unsupervised stratedetermine patterns from the data. The majority of the data gies. In the supervised strategy, the objective is to find
 mining methods are based on the ML techniques. We present the features that most contribute to define the classificaas follows, the general steps to achieve knowledge discovery tion decision. In the unsupervised strategy, the main aim
 with ML techniques. is to determine the features that allow the grouping of the
 1) Data Collection: This step aims at gathering information data.
 regarding a case study. Measuring procedures are estab- In the filter approach, a score is given to each feature using
 lished, in order to capture data either from physical or a metric that measure their relevance. The features are ranked
 digital sensors. Such data describes the current or histori- and the most relevant are those ones that meet an accepted
 cal status, which is used to define the experimental testbed. threshold. Correlation analysis is a simple filter approach
 A testbed is composed of all the software, hardware, and where relationships between pair of features are found by comnetworking components, among others held by the process puting a correlation coefficient. Other techniques categorized
 of interest. This testbed is necessary for building the model as filter are the Gini Index [17], the Information Gain [18],
 (learning and testing) with the ML techniques. Samples are the Laplacian Score and the Sparsity Scores [19], [20], among
 captured and gathered from multiple scenarios set in the others. Unsupervised learning can be used by filter algorithms
 testbed. in order to find the best basis features [21]–[24], or to select
 2) Feature Extraction (FE): It is one of the most impor- the features through structured sparsity regularization models,
 tant steps due to it allows measuring or computing features that which preserve the cluster structure of the instances composing
 might give information about the state of the process. In brief, the dataset [25]–[27]. On the other hand, supervised learning
 a FE procedure computes different metrics that reflect specific is commonly used by wrapper approaches where an objective
 properties in the data collected. The main aim is to obtain function is defined in order to determine the effect of different
 descriptors that better characterize the problem. The result feature sets over a classifier’s accuracy. The features that proof the FE process is a structured table formed by columns vide the best classification performance are selected. Genetic
 of attributes where each row is a sample, with an additional algorithms and sequential search strategies have been widely
 optional column with the current status of each sample (com- used as wrapper methods [28], [29].
 monly called label or class). In case that the status is unknown, Moreover, some ML algorithms include the FS process
 the samples are unlabeled. embedded into their model design, such as regularized regres-
 Data processing procedures can be performed in order to sion models and decision trees based models [30], [31].
 delete unwanted missing values and to clean the data, among Finally, other techniques are focused on generating more repreother things. This last one is related to outliers detection that sentative features based on the original ones [32], [33]. These
 might disrupt into the ML solution performance. Also, the data techniques can be found in a procedure, commonly denomican be transformed through normalization or aggregation oper- nated as Feature Generation, explicitly separated from the FR
 ations over the attributes values. In the aggregation procedures, and FS processes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1991

 4) Algorithm Selection and Model Construction: The 5) Validation of Classification Models: This segment
 results of the previous phases lead to a dataset that con- overviews the most common validation approaches for the
 tains historical information about the case study. The historical classification solutions. Supervised learning requires the
 dataset is a key resource for building ML models. Different beforehand knowledge of the sample labels, which are key
 ML algorithms have been developed and tested for solving information to validate the ML models. The usual approach
 tasks, such as classification, clustering and regression. The is to divide the dataset into a training and a test set. The
 selection of the ML algorithm is related to the problem to ML models are built with the training set, while the resultsolve or the type of knowledge, that the practitioners want to ing models are assessed by the test set in order to evaluate
 discover. their prediction capabilities. Given the model predictions and
 In ML, there are two classical types of learning, supervised the ground truth labels of the test set, several performance
 and unsupervised learning. Most of the supervised learning metrics can be deployed to quantify the classification capabilalgorithms adjust their model parameters minimizing the error ity of a ML solution. For instance, [41] presents a study of
 between the model output and the real expected output of an the classification performance metrics divided into the type of
 input. This means that the historical data has to be labeled. classification to achieve: binary, multi-class, multi-labeled and
 On the other hand, unsupervised algorithms try to find rela- hierarchical. Binary classification occurs when an input samtionships between the inputs without beforehand knowledge of ple can be classified into only one of two distinct classes. On
 the outputs. These relationships can be similarities, proximi- the contrary, multi-class classification implies that the input
 ties, and statistical relationships, among others. As a derived can be classified into only one class within a pool of classes.
 consequence of the learning process, the supervised algorithms Multi-labeled classification allows the classification of an input
 are commonly used to perform classification tasks, while the sample into more than one class in the pool of classes. Finally,
 unsupervised ones are rather used to cluster inputs in order to hierarchical classification is similar to the multi-class classififind anomalous or similar behaviors between themselves. In cation but with more granularity, in the sense that the principal
 general, the ML model and the type of learning is associated classes are divided into lower levels of subclasses.
 with the type of problem to solve. In order to validate ML models, one of the most common
 Different categorizations of the ML algorithms can be approaches is to measure their performance in terms of the
 found [34]–[36]. For instance, a general classification groups classification capabilities. Several relationships can be found
 the classical supervised algorithms based on statistical model, among the model predictions and the ground truth labels, such
 trees, rules, and neural networks (NNs), among others. In as the number of samples correctly and incorrectly assigned
 addition, several approaches do not necessarily belong to the to a class, among others. These counts allow computing metgroups mentioned above, and can be grouped into paramet- rics, such as Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F-score, Receiver
 ric and non parametric. For instance, in a parametric model Operating Characteristic (ROC), etc. For instance, for binary
 the aim is to determine the parameters that minimize a cost classification with a positive and a negative class, the counts
 function, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM). A non- of true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), true negatives
 parametric algorithm is the K Nearest Neighbors (KNN), (TN), and false positives (FP) can be used to compute the
 which gather together similar samples through measuring performance of the classifier through the sensitivity and the
 their distance. In the unsupervised approach, one categoriza- specificity metrics. A combination of these metrics, such as
 tion divides the techniques into clustering based on proto- the F-score and the ROC, offers more precise information
 types, hierarchical methods and density based methods, among about the performance of the classifiers for both classes.
 others. Particularly, the ROC curve is obtained by computing the sen-
 Nowadays, there is a big variety of ML algorithms not only sitivity and specificity varying the classifier’s discrimination
 based on supervised and unsupervised learning. For instance, threshold [42]. In the ROC curve, the ideal value represents
 semi-supervised algorithms take advantage of unlabeled data a lot of sensitivity and specificity (a very good diagnostic
 to train classifiers, either training a classifier with the labeled method). The result is an interpretable figure that illustrates the
 samples and then evaluating the unlabeled ones in the clas- performance of the classifier in different operating points; in
 sifier, or using unsupervised approaches for the unlabeled addition, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) can be computed to
 samples. Hybrid approaches are also found through the com- obtain a compact measure from the ROC. The analysis above
 bination between supervised and unsupervised learning, due to can be mapped to multiclass-problems by computing overall
 the presence of labeled and unlabeled samples in datasets [37]. performance measures with micro or macro averages of the
 Moreover, ensemble techniques use a variety of ML models binary performances. Each of these metrics exposes different
 (commonly classifiers) and combine their results through a aspects of the model performance [43], [44].
 combination strategy. Strategies such as Bagging and Boosting The traditional model evaluation approach is to use a trainare widely used to build ensemble models [38]. There are ing and test set in order to train a model and to compute the
 more advanced techniques such as, incremental learning that performance metrics, respectively. Moreover, cross-validation
 aims at updating in an online manner the ML models with is an alternative approach for model validation that divides
 new incoming inputs [39]. Finally, reinforcement learning the data in k subsets. One subset is used as the test set, and
 is focused on the on-line performance (commonly cumula- the rest for training the model. The same procedure is pertive reward) that is maximized any time that an action is formed for the k folds, and the global performance is given
 taken [40]. by the combination (average) of the evaluation score of each

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1992 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 test set. Different variations of the cross-validation approach 1) IP Flow Definition: In traffic classification, it is comare available such as the leave-p-out and the leave-one-out. monly used the term “flow” to describe a set of packets that
 In closing, there are more advanced approaches that measure are transmitted from a source to a destination. An IP flow,
 the statistical significance of the classifier performance given according to [47], is a set of packets or frames in the network
 different test scenarios, such as the Friedman test, Wilcoxon that can be intercepted at a point in the network during a time
 test, among others. These scenarios propose different partitions interval. The packets belonging to the same flow share sevof the dataset, different initial conditions on the classifier’s eral common properties, such as: a) one or more packets, with
 setting, or embedded random initializations in the training pro- transport or application header fields (e.g., source and desticess. These approaches are mainly used to compare a set of nation IP address, port number and type, among others), b)
 classifiers, and to select the one with the highest performance characteristics of the packets as the number of MPLS labels,
 under different conditions, as it is exposed in [45]. and c) additional fields, such as next-hop IP address, etc.
 Therefore, it can be outlined the following classical definition
 of an unicast flow Fi :
 B. Traffic Classification Definition 1: An IP flow Fi is described by the set,
 In traffic classification, several trends can be found to
 classify, comprehend, diagnose or observe the status of the Fi = {Hi , Pi } (1)
 network. A complete taxonomy of traffic classification can be
 where Hi is the header of the flow i, and Pi = {pi1 , . . . , pin }
 found in [46]. Nonetheless, a modification of this taxonomy is
 is a set of packets belonging to the flow i.
 proposed in Fig. 1, which in turn is focused on the branch of
 Definition 2: A flow header Hi is described by the tuple,
 interest, Machine learning. This figure counts with five main
 divisions: Data, Techniques, Feature engineering, Algorithm Hi = (IPsrc , IPdest , portsrc , portdest , proto) (2)
 selection and Output. A brief description of each component
 is given as follows. where IPsrc and IPdest are the IP source and destination
 • Data: it refers to the type of input data used to create addresses; portsrc and portdest are the source and destinathe traffic classification solution. It is noticeable that the tion transport ports, respectively; and proto is the transport
 traffic data can be encrypted or unencrypted. The traffic protocol.
 can be labeled either by DPI tools or real time captures. Additionally, it is defined Pi as in expression (3). P is the
 More details about this component will be provided in complete set of packets passing through a monitoring point.
 Section IV. hk is the header of the packet pk , and Hi the header of the
 • Techniques: four main branches are detected, such as flow studied.
 Machine learning, Statistical based, Behavioral based and
 Payload inspection. In this section, these four approaches Pi = {pk ∈ P |hk == Hi } (3)
 are briefly described in order to have a general idea of
 For an unicast bidirectional flow (assuming that a is the
 how they work. However, the ML branch will be extended
 client and b is the server), the definition above is extended in
 throughout the survey paper.
 the sense that,
 • Feature engineering: this component concerns only to
 Definition 3: An IP flow Fab is bidirectional when,
 the ML branch, and presents the potential and existing trends of the feature analysis techniques applied Fab = Fa ∪ Fb (4)
 over IP flows, according to the strategies presented
 in Sections II-A2 and II-A3. This section will be extended where the union of the unidirectional flows is achieved through
 in Section V, while a formal definition of an IP flow is the matching of some elements in their tuples.
 given in Section II-B1. In Definition 2, some port numbers can be reserved for type
 • Algorithm selection: This component depicts the available of applications as it is established by IANA, however, the ranapproaches for building ML solutions, according to the dom generation of the ports is often deployed for most of
 learning process used (supervised, unsupervised, hybrids, the applications. In addition, several ports can be opened for a
 etc), and the task to accomplish (classification, clustering, communication session (denoted as a multicast session), which
 etc). in turn may affect the definition above. In the past, the dimen-
 • Output: Finally, the output principally depends on the sion of the Internet traffic allowed using a matching between
 objective to achieve, such as classifying the flows into an opened port and registered ports (using IANA) to obtain
 categories or application names, system status, etc. the name of the application. However, the proliferation of new
 Following the items above, it is introduced this section as applications with random ports, and the growth of the Internet
 follows. Section II-B1 formally defines an IP flow; which network, provoked inaccuracies over the port-based approach.
 is the most common representation of communication ses- They became obsolete, and new means of traffic classification
 sions in the Internet network. Following, the classical traffic appeared.
 classification techniques are described: Payload inspection in 2) Payload Inspection: Also called Deep Packet Inspection
 Section II-B2, Statistical based techniques in Section II-B3, (DPI), this technique analyzes the content of the Internet
 Behavioral techniques in Section II-B4 and ML techniques in packets, i.e., the IP header and payload. DPI compares the
 Section II-B5. information extracted from the packets with a set of signatures

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1993

 Fig. 1. General view of the traffic classification approaches focused on the ML branch.

 (previously defined and known) to identify different applica- and adopted for extracting signatures in binary sequences.
 tion protocols. Some of the DPI tools are nDPI, Libprotoident, These new strategies can help to support traffic classification
 PACE, L7-filter, and NBAR, among others. with DPI.
 Recently, DPI tools have suffered several drawbacks due 3) Statistical Based Techniques: The main aim is to
 to the growing number of new applications and protocols. find statistical differences between flows, communicating end
 Particularly, when a new protocol is created, then the DPI tools systems and network configurations, among others. Such difmust be updated; otherwise, they will fail in their prediction ferences can be the result of two or more different applications
 getting as result an unknown or an erroneous signature. As a or behaviors, characterized by the statistical properties. In
 consequence, the list of the tools’ signatures has to be con- some contexts, statistical distributions can be used to model
 stantly updated. On the other hand, DPI is not adequate when the network traffic patterns. The construction of probabilistic
 a) packet encryption is used to protect the content in com- models has been applied by several works to know different
 munication sessions, b) HTTP2 is deployed for multiplexing status of the network. The work in [54] introduces a monthe packet content, c) NAT networks are utilized because they itoring scenario with public and private IP addresses, and
 unable to differentiate between communication sessions, and measures statistics for each profile, such as the number of TCP
 d) Virtual private networks (VPNs) are deployed for data and UDP packets, as well as the number of failed flows. The
 privacy and integrity, among others. objective is to construct different statistical distributions, such
 Even though, it is clear that DPI tools have particular defi- as negative exponential or Gaussian, to detect the reachability
 ciencies, they are still widely used for traffic classification. in P2P communications. In a similar manner, the work in [55]
 Several studies report their accuracy and popularity for traf- proposes the categorization of the flows using statistical disfic classification [48], [49]. Some works have tried to solve tributions. On the other hand, the work in [51] introduces text
 the manual setting of signatures when new protocols are classification over the packet headers, the result is evaluated
 detected by the DPI tools [50], [51]. The work in [52] pro- by a statistical binary model that will determinate if it is a new
 poses the automatic generation of traffic signatures based on signature. The main deficiency of this approach is the static
 a fixed bit offset mechanism. The work proposes to randomly construction of statistical models that do not integrate learning
 select packets from flows, and to compare from pair to pair processes. As the previous approach, this disadvantage affects
 every bit of the packets in the same bit offset. The signa- its performance in the presence of dynamic growing and evotures are taken from a fixed length, recorded and counted, to lution of the Internet traffic patterns. In addition, some of the
 generate the final signatures. The same authors, in [53], pro- statistical based approaches are adapted and improved by the
 pose another approach using a clustering technique to gather ML techniques.
 together similar flow behaviors. From the resulting clusters, 4) Behavioral Techniques: This approach commonly tries
 a set of flows is taken in order to apply a token-based algo- to find patterns among end-to-end communications in a
 rithm (Hamsa) and MSA (t-coffee algorithm); both algorithms network. It also studies community patterns where the comhave been used to extract regular expressions in biology, munities are conformed of hosts at different points.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1994 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 The most common representation of behavioral patterns in improving the QoS is one of main objectives in network
 the network is through graph modeling, in which graph the- resource management.
 ory is used to find highly connected nodes (hosts), number It is important to mention that the ML approach is able
 of connections, and opened ports, among others [56]. As an to handle encrypted communication thanks to the FE proexample, [57] analyzes traffic behavior to identify P2P traffic. cess deployed. Normally, the features extracted from IP flows
 The first step is to cluster together similar flows through a do not intrude in the packet content, which allows crek-means model. Following, the clusters are represented by a ating classification models for encrypted communications.
 Traffic Dispersion Graph (TDG), where the nodes are repre- However, this approach can encounter problems with the use
 sented by the IP addresses and the link between the nodes are of HTTP2, VPNs and NAT networks, due to the separation of
 the registered flows. Finally, a set of rules is applied over the communication sessions is not explicit.
 graphs to detect the name of the application. These rules take To conclude this section, in Fig. 1 is noticeable that most of
 into account features, such as the percentage of nodes and the the traffic classification works are focused on and grouped into
 average node degree of the graph. The work in [58] proposes different objectives, such as detecting the application protocol,
 an approach to identify P2P communities, where the inter- category or anomalies. In order to achieve traffic classification,
 actions in the network are represented by graphs. The nodes the techniques beforehand discussed can be used; however, this
 are formed by the tuple (IP, port), and the connections are survey paper will only extend the ML branch. In this branch,
 given by the number of packets interchanged between nodes. we will study several works that try to achieve different traffic
 P2P networks are identified by using the port distribution of classification objectives.
 known remote peers, in order to do so, a multinomial classifier
 is built to decide whether a graph represents one of the known
 networks. III. M ETHODOLOGY
 A different target that is normally studied by these tech- This survey paper differs from the survey papers reviewed,
 niques is identifying the traffic activity patterns, such as the in the way that the works are presented. They are mainly orgaworks in [59] and [60]. For instance, [59] presents the Traffic nized following the general procedures defined in Section II-A,
 Analysis Graphs (TAGs) for visually unveiling the behavior which are mapped to the traffic classification problem. In this
 of different type of applications. In a TAG, the nodes are the section, the methodology to survey the papers is detailed,
 IP addresses and the edges are the flows of interest; the flows which follows the workflow proposed in Fig. 2. In this figof interest are defined according to the purpose of the study, ure, a distinction between the blocks that can be performed in
 in order to build TAGs that capture relevant traffic activities an offline (green arrows) and online (yellow arrows) manner
 among hosts. Reference [60] builds bipartite graphs and com- is made.
 pute their similarity matrix. This matrix will serve as input Generally speaking, the offline procedures treat historical
 to a clustering algorithm (k-means) that will gather together datasets stored by the Data collection block at one or more
 similar nodes. monitoring points in the network. The Data Collection step
 This approach has also been reported for detecting anoma- allows measuring different scenarios in Internet. This block
 lies. The work in [61] present a general overview of the state mainly collects IP flows within a time window. Additionally,
 of the art in this area. this block carries several steps, such as packet management,
 5) Machine Learning: For this particular domain, one of flow reconstruction and storage. In Section IV, the works
 the main goals is to classify traffic based on the status of related to this step are reviewed. In the offline run, a historical
 the Internet network. For such case, IP flows are reported as dataset must be collected; on the contrary, in the online run,
 the most common representation of Internet communications, streams of packets are continuously treated.
 where representative features can be extracted and used for Once the data that characterizes the problem is recorded,
 traffic classification. As it is denoted in Fig. 1, some of the FE relevant features are extracted following the approaches in
 approaches used can be divided into statistical flow features, Section V. Likewise, in online and offline phases, the features
 time-series, and graph based, among others. The FR or FS are computed from the historical dataset and the streams of
 processes are optional. They are normally applied along ML, packets, respectively. At this point, the resulting features can
 and it has been demonstrated the benefits added to the ML be treated by either FS or FR approaches, to obtain a reduced
 models in terms of performance [16]. space or a set of new features. The most common procedures
 The ML algorithms can be supervised, unsupervised, semi- and works are reported in Section VI. The FR or FS procedure
 supervised or hybrids, and it will depend on the ML task also has a connection with the Algorithm Selection and Model
 to perform and the data available. The ML task is directly deployment blocks, due to some approaches select the most
 linked to the objective of the study. One of the most popu- relevant features based on the performance given by the ML
 lar objectives is anomaly detection to prevent network attacks models.
 that may cause severe damage among service providers and Now, from the original dataset, a new dataset is obtained
 final users. Moreover, anomaly detection can also be used to based on the selected features. In the offline run, the new
 identify failure or misconfiguration in the network [9]. On the dataset is used to build models that will allow performother hand, application protocol detection also attracts interest ing classification and regression tasks, among other things.
 in this field, in particular to service providers that want to The Algorithm Selection block refers to the procedures and
 improve the service offered to their costumers. For instance, methods intended to select the most adequate ML algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1995

 Fig. 2. Workflow for surveying the papers for traffic classification with ML.

 Several works deploy different means of comparison to justify or validate their selection, as it will be pointed out in
 Section VII. Finally, the Model Construction block is focused
 on the efforts found in the literature for implementing such
 models on the Internet network. These two last blocks can also
 be evaluated in an online manner, mainly to offer evolving or Fig. 3. Workflow of the most important characteristics that will be reviewed
 upgraded ML solutions. It is also important to mention that in each section.
 this workflow represents a guide that comprises the general
 steps to use ML for traffic classification. However, the order
 of these steps may vary, and can be also found combined. The paper search was performed over the most important
 More concisely stated, particular characteristics are taken academic databases. The documents selected have either on
 from each block in Fig. 2. These characteristics are detailed their title, abstract or the keywords, terms such as “traffic
 in Fig. 3, likewise they represent some paths that the reviewed monitoring”, “traffic analysis”, “Internet classification”, and
 papers commonly follow for traffic classification. In this fig- “encrypted traffic classification”, among others. The papers
 ure, it can be noticed that for the Data collection block, it considered were published between 2010 and 2017, and they
 will be studied if the Internet traffic is: real or emulated, pub- were located in academic databases, such as ScienceDirect,
 licly available, encrypted and labeled (ground truth). These ACM, IEEE Xplore and Scopus. It is important to notice that
 aspects will become very important for characterizing the works from conference proceedings and journals were equally
 problem. The Feature Engineering block comprises the FE taken into account.
 and FS approaches used by the reviewed papers. In this sense,
 four FE approaches were found as the most common ones,
 such as statistical based (STATsB), graph based (GRAPH), IV. DATA C OLLECTION
 time series based and hybrids approaches. In the FS block, it Traditionally, historical data is a very important source
 will be denoted if the reviewed papers performed or not this of knowledge for building ML solutions. A rich and comprocedure. Following, for the Algorithm selection block, the plete set of observations regarding a problem can improve the
 ML approach used and the objective to achieve are defined. performance and generalization of the ML models. However,
 The trends studied are classical classification (CClass), Multi- in the traffic classification domain, this aspect is critical due
 classification and ensemble approach (MClass&E), clustering to: complexity and scalability of the Internet network, constant
 for classification and anomaly detection (Clust), and hybrids evolution of the traffic, and privacy policies that do not allow
 and advances techniques (H&A). Among the classification data collection, among others. In consequence, real Internet
 objectives studied were found application name (AppN), appli- traffic data is hardly available for analysis and knowledge
 cation category (AppC) and anomaly detection (AD). Also, extraction. Several tools and strategies have been developed
 other objectives are considered, such as user behavior detection to cope with this gap, some of these will be studied in this
 and community search, among others. Finally, in the Model section.
 deployment block, it is differentiated the papers that imple- The overall structure of the data collection procedure takes
 mented the ML solution (YES), and the ones that do not do the form of Figure 4. In this figure, an abstraction of three
 it or do not specify it (NNS). The reconfiguration of the solu- levels is given in the following order : i) the network environtion will be a key aspect to study, in this sense, it is verified ment that is defined by the conditions in which the traffic is
 if the reviewed papers offer either a retraining (RTraining), a triggered, such as real, generated or emulated, ii) the Internet
 self-learning or evolving (SLE), or other/non-specified (ONS) network itself, and iii) the data measurement procedure, which
 process. refers to how network packets can be collected. The main

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1996 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 technical tests. Some of the flow-based generation tools are
 BRUTE [62], iPerf [63], and Ostinato [64], among others. For
 instance, BRUTE is designed to generate Ethernet traffic either
 IPv4 or IPv6. Ipref measures the maximum achievable bandwidth on IP networks by tuning parameters such as timing,
 protocols, and buffers. In the same manner, the Ostinato tool
 can generate traffic with different protocols at different rates.
 In contrast, model-based approaches for traffic generation try
 to reproduce the statistical properties of realistic traffic and to
 represent them into a model, which will later generate traffic
 for experimental tests. For instance, [65] generates client workload by training a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). The model
 is built with real human interactions in a network testbed, the
 main objective is to send a sequence of events to each application via the operating system in order to create synthetic
 data. The training data is conformed of the event ID, a process IP and the arrival time between events. Finally, the model
 can inject realistic client-server interactions to create synthetic
 Fig. 4. Main data collection components for traffic classification. traffic data. Moreover, the model based generation can be performed at the packet level instead of the application level; as
 an example, [66] proposes a HMM for synthetic series generissues addressed in this section concern to the components ation of both packet time and packet size. The work in [67]
 that help finding good traffic classification results. First at all, reviews some of the most popular tools for traffic generation,
 in Section IV-A, a distinction between the network environ- and proposes a synthetic workload generator that can be used
 ments to monitor traffic is made. Following, in Section IV-B, as a platform to place both flow and model based generation
 the data measurement procedure will be reviewed. This proce- approaches. One limitation about these tools is that they are
 dure is indifferent to the environment adopted, and takes into not commonly able to generate encrypted traffic. Encrypted
 account steps such as packet extraction, flow reconstruction traffic covers a big volume of the current Internet traffic, and
 and storage, among others. Finally, Section IV-C will outline it is important to consider its collection for its analysis.
 the importance of labeling traffic flows with their ground truth Another approach, to model the communication behaviors,
 values. is based on network emulation systems. An emulated network
 environment involves the construction of a communication
 A. Network Environment configuration between two or more end-points. The general
 In particular, three main trends were found in the reviewed architecture is to set several clients at different virtual or
 papers: real traffic acquisition, traffic generation and emu- physical machines, to configure monitoring points for each
 lation. Real traffic is normally collected from the network, client, and to set data storage components. Traffic can be
 obfuscating private information among communication enti- induced in order to record backward and upward IP flows.
 ties (e.g., clients-servers). Traffic generation tries to simulate The works in [68]–[71] present frameworks for traffic emulasimilar real traffic conditions by copying or modeling real tion, such tools are publicly available, and require adaptation
 interactions through scripts. Finally, traffic emulation aims at into the traffic classification interests. The platform in [68]
 setting scenarios as close as real ones, where one or more presents a framework based on automatic user behavior emuactors can intentionally emulate common interactions in the lation for emulating the network traffic. Several scenarios, that
 network. represent series of user’s actions for interacting with appli-
 The optimal solution is to capture real traffic from the cations, are mimicked; this is achieved through a tool that
 network in order to have a reliable source of realistic data; creates automation scripts or macros for Microsoft Windows
 however, this solution is hard to conduct, mainly due to privacy programs. Similarly, the works in [69] and [70] emulate user
 matters. Even though some works manage to obtain realis- behavior recording the graphical user interface, for the gentic conditions for monitoring traffic, the data is hardly ever eration of Internet traffic. In contrast to the traffic generation
 publicly available for the research community. Some of the approach, emulation of traffic can cover applications that use
 publicly available data are listed in Appendix A. encryption or traffic encapsulation; this feature is desirable for
 Traffic generation solutions are mainly destined to eval- traffic classification with ML.
 uate network device performance, communication security,
 resource management, etc. In the literature can be found
 several works to generate traffic, where their strategies are B. Data Measurement
 mainly divided into: flow-based generation and model-based In this section, it will be presented the common approaches
 generation. Flow-based generation is to reproduce the con- for performing data measurement over the Internet network.
 tent and arrival times of flows captured in real scenarios, the Moreover, how the traffic observation is done at monitoring
 packet content is given by dummy or random payload for points. These two aspects are considered in order to easily

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1997

 understand how the labeling assignment can be performed, data, classically batch-based methods are deployed; however,
 and how the ML solution can be implemented in real network these methods do not offer fast responses in critical environenvironments. Normally, one of the most common strategies ments, such as multimedia monitoring [81] or network threats.
 for network traffic monitoring is extracting a set of packets Classically, the batch-based method is deployed after the Flow
 within a time window; this approach is the most used for the metering & exportation block. Its main purpose is to manreviewed papers, and it will be studied in this section. age and store the exported flows, usually in interval of time
 Once a network traffic environment is adopted, the follow- batches into binary files (e.g., pcap files). The batch-based
 ing issue to address is how to export the packets, construct IP method must fulfill certain requirements such as data processflows, and assign the application name (if needed) of such ing speed and fault tolerance. In the case of the stream-based
 flows, in order to finally store or use this data. The work approach, the former requirements must be accomplished with
 in [72] presents a comprehensive procedure for flow extrac- more exigent demands, in particular, the data processing speed.
 tion using NetFlow and IPFIX. That work defines the steps for For instance, the work in [82] analyzes the traffic observation
 data measurement as: i) packet capturing, ii) flow metering and process in a streaming way to reduce delays for traffic classiexportation, and iii) data collection. The packet capturing step fication. The authors propose a workflow that distributes the
 refers to the procedure of extracting the binary data from mon- exported flows by using a messaging system. The IP flows are
 itoring points, in this step each packet is considered as a single transformed into a data serialization format. The selected data
 independent entity. The key aspects to be considered at this serialization format was the Binary JavaScript Object Notation
 stage are the size of the sample and the sampling time [73]. (BSON). The final aim is to offer a distributed data system
 Following, the flow metering process aims at aggregating the that is more efficient that a batch-based method. The work
 packets into flows as defined in Section II-B1. The exportation in [83] evaluated the performance of one of the most used disprocess occurs when it is considered that a flow is culminated, tributed stream processing systems for traffic monitoring. The
 meaning that a communication was finished. The metering and authors propose an architectural benchmark, which is publicly
 exportation processes are related and can be united. Finally, available for such as task. The same authors extended this
 the data collection is to store the flows exported. Having as a work to compare three stream processing systems, in order
 reference the same schema described by work in [72], only one to find the suitability of each one for real time network flow
 additional component might be necessary for traffic classifica- processing [83].
 tion with ML, which is the Label assignment. This additional
 component is normally placed within the traffic classification
 step, and aims at defining the application name per flow, or C. Label Assignment
 any other identifier needed to enrich the knowledge base, in The label assignment procedure refers to set an identifier
 particular for supervised ML techniques. The label assignment for each flow; this identifier is related to particular patterns
 importance will be discussed in Section IV-C. in a communication session, e.g., name or type of applica-
 Regarding the data measurement steps, several works tion. Associate ground truth information with traffic traces
 try to improve separately each of their deficiencies. For can be a tedious task due to the complexity of tracking the
 instance, [73] presents a taxonomy to categorize the packet flows belonging to specific applications; moreover, this prosampling techniques, this work aims at giving guidelines to cedure is a key task for validating traffic classifiers. For the
 select the most adequate method according to the objectives best of our knowledge, few works implement a reliable ground
 to achieve. The work in [74] presents packet capture engines truth assignment, due to the most common approach is to use
 running on commodity hardware, which are useful for reduc- DPI tools for such task. For instance, the work in [84] proing the time response in traffic classification. Using commodity poses a tool that is able to establish the label for each flow
 hardware, the works in [75] and [76] show implementations by using a socketing process. However, this solution is also
 for packet capture. complemented with a DPI tool.
 Traffic observation at a monitoring point starts with the Given the network environment and the data measurement
 packet capture. In this component, sampling and filtering pro- process, the label assignment can be established by the emucedures are involved. These packets are aggregated into flows lation or generation systems. The emulation and generation
 through a metering process, to later be exported for their systems are controlled environments; in this sense, it is known
 use. The flows collected can be stored for further analysis or the type of traffic that is triggered and it can be recorded
 directly used by the system analyzer. Some implementations to be matched with the flows collected. Therefore, the labelof traffic monitoring are found in the literature. The work ing process can be performed while the monitoring process
 in [77] shows an implementation over industrial networks, is running, or in the traffic classification system by itself.
 while [78], [79] apply it over home networks. The work For real traffic monitoring, DPI or port-based tools are still
 in [80] reports the most common implementations of popular used for this task. However, it is been demonstrated that these
 network monitoring approaches for packet capture (Tcpdumb, techniques add incertitude and error to further analysis, in par-
 Wireshark, etc), flow metering (nProbe, YAF, QoF, etc), and ticular to ML. Reference [85] quantifies the error obtained
 data collecting (nProbe, flowd, nfdumb, etc). when using port analysis and DPI tools to associate proto-
 One of the main challenges regarding traffic observation col labels with flows. The study reveals that port analysis is
 relies on capturing packets in real time. Large volume of data accurate only for a set of protocols; while, DPI tools provide
 at high speed is involved. In order to deal with streaming better results. The authors demonstrated experimentally that

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1998 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 DPI tools dramatically fails for more than 14% for P2P traf- measurements from observation points. Depending on the
 fic, and for almost 100% for Skype on TCP and Streaming objectives to achieve or the FE process selected, the data
 applications. Nonetheless, it can be found different opinions to be measured can be a set of packets, only their headon this topic. For instance, the study made by [86] shows a ers, or only events related to them, among others (refer
 performance comparison between several DPI tools, where the to Section V).
 error between the ground truth labels and the DPI label results • It is important to establish the labeling mechanism for the
 is low for the majority of the cases. It is important to consider collected data. In specific, this is a very important procethat for all these comparisons, the data used plays a major dure not only for supervised ML techniques, but also for
 impact on the results; as well as, the version of the DPI tools validating unsupervised models. A reliable strategy has
 and the years in which the studies were performed. In general, to be outlined, considering its goodness and deficiencies.
 the traffic traces show an important increase in communication
 patterns urging traffic classifiers (such as DPI) to constantly V. F EATURE E XTRACTION
 upgrade their engines. Additionally, DPI tools are inaccurate
 This section will define some FE approaches in traffic clasin presence of encrypted traffic, this scenario makes them very
 sification with ML. Four main groups of FE procedures were
 inadequate for the labeling task.
 established, along with some works that studied them. This
 Several works try to propose strategies or architectures to
 study will allow us to outline discussions about each approach,
 correctly define the ground truth labels. The work in [87] evalas well as to guide the reader to chose the most convenient one.
 uates the most common approaches for measuring traffic data
 Three main groups were found in the reviewed papers: statistifocused on malicious detection, and proposes a semi-manual
 cal based features, graph based features and time-series based
 practice to define the ground truth. Additionally, different tools
 features, which will be presented in the next sections; addihave emerged to support traffic monitoring and labeling, such
 tionally, Section V-D covers some miscellaneous and hybrid
 as Tsat [88] and Volunteer based system [89], among others.
 approaches. For a more detailed study refer to the work in [92],
 Moreover, [90] proposes a framework to large-scale network
 which specifies the procedures of data construction, FE and
 monitoring and analysis, called DBStream, which is a data
 FR from protocol, packet and flow levels. Additionally, the
 repository of network monitoring data capable of processing
 work in [93] proposes an automatic process to perform feadata streams coming from a wide variety of sources. Finally,
 ture engineering. Despite of the work presented in [93] is
 EventFlow is proposed as a new strategy to label flows, in
 mainly focused on detecting tunneled connections, it provides
 order to retain semantic relations based on user’s actions [91].
 a logic work-flow for extracting and processing flows to obtain
 features, which can be used by ML techniques.
 D. Discussion
 In view of the most important aspects to fulfill in this sec- A. Statistical Based Features
 tion, one can remark some recommendations and highlight The features extracted from packet flows are mainly statisfuture works as follows. tical based features, which are defined under the assumption
 • Real world measurements and tests on the network that traffic at the network layer has statistical properties (such
 are difficult to achieve due to the reasons previously as the distribution of the flow duration, flow idle time, packet
 discussed in Section IV-A. Therefore, it is recommend- inter-arrival time and packet lengths) that are unique for certain
 able instead to set an emulated network, which may type of applications, and enable different source applications
 help to reproduce current application and user behavior. to be distinguished from each other. Under this assumption,
 Additionally, it would help to serve as a testbed to set the work in [94] proposes 249 statistical features, which can
 the traffic classification solutions. be extracted from flow network traffic.
 • Traffic generation solutions might help creating synthetic Properties such as inter-arrival time (IAT) and packets length
 data and reducing the amount of experimental tests for seem to be the most important characteristics considered, with
 data collection. Therefore, a combination between traces their metrics such as maximum, minimum, mean and standard
 captured from an emulated network, and traces from traf- deviation, among others. Additionally, the amount of packets
 fic generator tools might offer a great deal of network sent from a to b and vice versa, control packets, and some
 traffic data. other properties in the packet header as the transport protocol,
 • The emulated network or traffic generation solutions also can be used to model communication networks.
 have to move at the same rate as the evolution of the The majority of the reviewed papers show a preference for
 network. Upgrading strategies need to be established statistical based features, as it will be noticed in Section IX.
 for achieving this task. For instance, semi-supervised or In practice, statistical features from IP flows are largely used
 incremental learning techniques could feed information due to its simplicity. Traffic characterization based on statistiregarding new patterns or anomalies to the data collection cal features has been largely reported and demonstrated. For
 step. instance, for anomaly detection, the work in [92] lists all the
 • In order to set a traffic monitoring strategy, it is neces- classical statistical features for unidirectional and bidirectional
 sary to study which is the information needed from the flows, as well as content type. Reference [10] presents a siminetwork. The resources and time consuming will be key lar work, remarking the FE approaches from the flow and the
 factors to minimize, in order to get fast and reliable data packet level.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 1999

 The work in [95] presents a complete study about statis- the orthogonal nonnegative matrix tri-factorization (tNMF)
 tical features. The authors tested ten classifiers to get into aims at extracting the dominant substructures and characterthe conclusion that these features allow the classifier to get izing their structural properties, in order to analyze network
 a good performance. On the other hand, [96] shows that with applications. K-means is applied to find distinct application
 only the counts of packets and byte exchange in a session behaviors using these structural properties [60].
 is enough to identify some applications, specifically the P2P In summary, the main aim of this approach is to model
 applications. application behaviors through graph representations, and to try
 The work in [97] studies the abnormality caused by packet to find similarities between Internet network graphs. These
 retransmission in TCP connections. Packet retransmission can similarities will allow grouping graphs into pools of applichange the packet sequence, and in consequence, unable cations. Such similarities can be based on different features;
 statistical based approaches to perform an accurate classifica- the most common features extracted are graph structural
 tion. The authors proposed a system to discard retransmitted properties, graph connectivity metrics, and community based
 packets, detecting and using the original packets. features, such as density or similarities between well connected
 In general, statistical based features are commonly preferred graphs [99], [100].
 in this field because of their computational simplicity, which is
 very important when dealing with high speed communications.
 Additionally, this approach does not intrude into the packet C. Time-Series Based Features
 content, enabling its use for both non-encrypted and encrypted Generally speaking, a time-series data can be viewed as a
 traffic while respecting privacy. sequence of events indexed in time order. In this sense, the
 FE process is normally performed over a discrete-time data.
 The network traffic problem has suitable characteristics
 B. Graph Based Features to be treated as an event-driven problem. The interaction
 The intrinsic composition of the Internet network between a pair (e.g., client-server) is strongly dependent on
 allows modeling or representing its interactions into big events ordered in time, such as to open or close communiinterconnected graphs. In consequence, this approach uses cation sessions, initiate or finish transmission of data, among
 graph theory to find valuable information from the network. other things. Such scenarios motivate to use time-series fea-
 A network can be viewed as a set of interconnected nodes tures or data-driven approaches to discover patterns in the
 based on the assumption that the nodes are the hosts, and network.
 the edges represent the interaction between the hosts. These Most of the time-based approaches in this field try to find
 interactions can be viewed as communication sessions where relationships between the inter arrival times (IATs) and packets
 packets are exchanged. The common procedure is to set a sizes belonging to a flow, in order to characterize application
 monitoring point, for instance a router. Groups of packets patterns through time-series representations. As an example,
 passing through the monitoring point can be aggregated into the work in [101] proposes a time activity vector for unidirecflows. The work in [98] presents the Traffic Dispersion Graph tional flows, which takes into account characteristics such as,
 (TDG), how to build it, and how to find quantitative metrics to active time of a flow, maximum and minimum amount of conextract information. In a TDG, the metrics used are normally secutive seconds that the flow does and does not show activity,
 the cardinality of the graph, counting the nodes that only have among others. Also, it can be found different approaches
 incoming and outgoing edges, symmetry and connectivity of that intent to use the temporal behavior of the network, such
 the graph, and the average degree of a node, among others. as [102].
 These metrics are used to train a classifier that groups the Particularly, signal processing approaches can be used to
 applications into collaborative or not. On the other hand, in transform the inputs in time domain to frequency domain. The
 order to compare two or more TDGs, the authors proposed main aim is to obtain the equivalent magnitude and phase of
 to compute the relative inclusion, edge similarities and edge the signal data to unveil new features that can be used for
 volatility of a graph regarding one another. These metrics are traffic classification. For instance, the work in [103] presents
 used to detect applications, such as games and DNS. a method to detect anomalies with a Fourier-based method,
 From a different point of view, the graphs can be used to for such case the packets sent and received in a period of time
 represent traffic activities in the network. For instance, the are analyzed as time series inputs. Similarly, [104] addresses
 work in [59] presents the Traffic Activity Graphs (TAGs) to the FE process based on the Wavelet Leaders (WL) techunveil behaviors between hosts. As the previous cases, the nique. Bidirectional flows are transformed into time series of
 nodes can be viewed as the hosts, and the edges the flows in transferred byte numbers in time windows, to later obtain mulopened sessions. Different variations can be found to create tifractal features with WL. Multifractal representation refers to
 the links between the edges; for example, the work in [58] a spacial or time-domain statistical scaling, where its main aim
 proposes the edges as the pair IP and port, motivated by the is to describe the irregular or fragmented shape of features,
 application behaviors that can open more than one port for as well as other complex objects that traditional Euclidean
 P2P communications. geometry fails to analyze.
 Statistical graph decomposition techniques are widely used Usually, this FE approach is not conventionally applied for
 by these approaches to extract the most dominant subgraphs. traffic classification; however, these features are widely use to
 For instance, the nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) or identify anomalies, as it is explored in [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2000 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 D. Miscellaneous and Hybrids it also has to consider the computational and response
 The categorization below mentioned some of the approaches time.
 founded, however, there are other interesting methods to • One might consider to compute better descriptors that
 perform FE. Such approaches try to combine or to propose prevent misclassifications and class imbalance behaviors.
 new features that better suit the classification problem. For For instance, in the statistical based approach, additional
 instance, Bag of Flows (BoFs) derives from the statistical metrics –such as a variation of the mean and variance
 based approach, and it only differs in the way that the bidi- computation– can be taken into account (e.g., moving
 rectional flows are built. A BoFs comprises a set of traffic average [150]).
 flows that are injected by the same application. A BoF can be • Hybrids FE approaches can be proposed to better chardefined as a group of flows that shares the same destination acterize the process. For instance, the statistical features
 and source IP, and that presents variations in the opened ports comprise time based behaviors with the IATs statistics.
 of a connection. This behavior is commonly seen in commu- Moreover, studying the time and event based behavior
 nication sessions. The statistical features are computed for all seems to be a logical approach to exploit in this field.
 the flows in the BoFs. A ML model is trained with all the
 flows, and each bag has a label defined through some criteria; for example, the higher occurrence of a label in the
 VI. F EATURE R EDUCTION AND S ELECTION
 bag. For a new incoming flow, the class label is obtained
 with the ML model; following the flow can be associated to ML models might face problems when a large number of
 a BoFs. Several works already tested the advantages of using features is given. The models are pruned to increasing com-
 BoFs to improve the performance using ML classification and putational burden, decreasing accuracy, increasing overfitting,
 clustering approaches [105]–[107]. among others. These problems are typically related to the curse
 On the other hand, statistical based features can be com- of dimensionality. In general, FS is widely applied in this field
 bined with graph based features to find better classification to select the most relevant features and to improve the accuracy
 performance as it is proposed in a framework for traf- of the ML models.
 fic classification in [57]; and similarly in [54] for anomaly ML processes might or might not count with a FR or FS
 detection. process. Several studies state that a low amount of features is
 Studying the order, sequence and time in which packets needed to wholly obtain patterns that differentiate an appliare sent from a source to a destination, may help to charac- cation to another. The works in [151]–[153] study the most
 terize applications with correlated behaviors in time and event relevant statistical features for traffic classification. In [152],
 based approaches. As an example, the work in [108] uses only several FS techniques are used to obtain the most important
 the sequence inter-packets times and payload size, to build features, while a new proposed method select the smallest set.
 sequences of the flows as input features of a classification The results were crossed validated with three datasets meamodel. On the other hand, [109] presents time series com- suring the goodness, similarity and stability of each feature;
 bined with statistical based features for their work. The time giving as a result a small set, between 6 and 14 statistical feaseries features are obtained through the syntactic structure of tures, that offers the best performance measured through the
 the applications. The syntactic structures are represented by accuracy.
 finite state machines. The main aim is to model the packet The work in [152] studies the importance of FS and FR
 sequence of flows along with the packet length and packet for traffic classification using ML. Ten network traffic datasets
 orientation (forward and backward) by the machine states. were used to show the advantages and disadvantages of different well-known FS techniques, such as Information Gain, Gain
 radio, Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and Correlation-
 E. Discussion based Feature Selection, among others. The authors proposed
 This section presents in essence a synthesis of the reviewed three new metrics to measure the performance of the resulting
 FE approaches with a qualitative description and comparison, features. These metrics are based on the classifier accuracy,
 and with a brief discussion of future directions. the stability of the results every time that a test is performed
 1) Comparison: Table I summarizes the FE trends studied under different conditions, and the similarity between the set
 in this section. In addition, their advantages and disadvan- of features given by the FS and FR techniques. The results
 tages are remarked, as well as several works that applied shows that none of the techniques provide a good performance
 these approaches for traffic classification. From the table, it with the new metrics; therefore, a new method that combines
 is noticeable that statistical based features are the most used the FS and FR solutions is proposed. The former study is
 in traffic classification. Moreover, they are suitable to deal with extended in [153] with an optimization process, called the
 encrypted and unencrypted traffic. Global Optimization Approach (GOA), to estimate the optimal
 2) Guidelines and Future Trends: To summarize, it is pos- and stable features. GOA combines multiple well-known FS
 sible to find different categorizations for FE processes, and techniques that yield to a possible optimal feature subsets
 this will mainly depend on the objective to achieve. In this across different traffic datasets; then the optimum entropy
 sense, we outline some comments regarding the FE process. threshold will select the stable features.
 • The FE process has to be defined in accordance to the Multi-class imbalance behavior in data is normally found in
 objective to achieve and the ML approach to select, and traffic classification. In this sense, the work in [143] remarks

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2001

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS FOR THE F EATURE E XTRACTION P ROCESS

 this problem when using traffic data for training ML mod- VII. A LGORITHM S ELECTION
 els. The authors proposed to select a set of features for each It is common to find in this field different solutions using a
 class by using a metric based on the entropy measure. The variety of ML algorithms. Given the wide number of ML algomost relevant features for class are the ones with values upper rithms, finding the most adequate is very important in traffic
 than a predefined threshold, the subset of features are sent classification. Particularly, most of the works have based their
 to an ensemble classifier. Similarly, [154] proposes a new selection on building and testing several models until finding
 FS method that aims at obtaining the most relevant features, the one with the highest performance. In this section, selected
 and at the same time at decreasing the multi-class imbal- works are detailed to outline the challenges in the moment to
 ance. Reference [155] proposed a model that can discriminate select a ML algorithm.
 among the most relevant and irrelevant features. Such model Along the review, it will be noticed that the studies are
 is based on the representative deep architecture Deep Belief focused on particular objectives to achieve: either to identify
 Networks (DBNs). One of the main characteristics of the DBN the type of application, the protocol application, anomalies or
 design is that from the first layer high-level features represen- tunneled connections. The reader will notice that the majortations can be obtained, while to the latest low-level feature ity of the papers aim at performing the classification task
 representations. This characteristic makes them suitable for (see Section VII-A). Additionally, specific works that uses
 feature generation as it was reported by this work. multi-classification and ensemble approaches are presented in
 Section VII-B. Moreover, some of the papers treat the classification problem in a unsupervised manner in Section VII-C.
 A. Discussion
 Finally, hybrids and advanced approaches will be studied in
 Due to the dynamism of the network, the traffic data can Section VII-D.
 influence the results of ML from one dataset to another, affect- It is important to mention that the works that treat unening several aspects, among which the performance is one of crypted and encrypted traces are commonly described sepathe most important. Therefore, we can state the following rately. This distinction is normally set due to the behavior of
 discussion: unencrypted traffic may differ from the encrypted one; this is
 • Using the most significant features in ML impacts the motivated for the use of different communication protocols.
 run time response, improves the classifier performance However, in this section, the aim is to mainly study the traffic
 and complexity for training and retraining procedures, classification problem from the ML point of view. In conseand discards redundancy in the data. In this sense, it is quence, an emphasis on the ML algorithm selected is given,
 recommended to always perform a previous study of the and works that studied encrypted and unencrypted traffic will
 extracted features with FS or FR approaches. This process be explicitly separated in Section VII-E.
 can also help treating class imbalance and discarding non
 significant features.
 • One interesting approach to exploit is the dynamic selec- A. Classical Classification
 tion of the features. In such a case, the FS process should Labeled datasets are used to train supervised algorithms
 adapt to the current condition in which the process is. in order to select the best model, which in turn is obtained
 Therefore, the most adequate features can be selected measuring the classification performance. For instance, for
 following a set of guidelines; for instance, the features unencrypted traffic, the works in [95] and [117] present a comthat provide the higher entropy or information gain to parison between several classifiers using statistical features.
 the classes. The comparison was performed using the classifier accuracy
 • Additionally, determining in an unsupervised manner, the and computational cost. The best performance was given by
 features that provide with more information to the ML different classifiers given a variety of datasets; in general, it is
 problem is a challenging task. This approach will lead to possible to find classifiers that behave better than others, given
 find a more adaptive algorithm for the dynamic selection certain characteristics of the dataset. This case is common
 of the features according to the current state. among the ML algorithms due to their model structures and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2002 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 learning procedures are more suitable for one type of problem computed over these traces. A binary ML classifier was trained
 than another. for detecting malicious domains.
 The work in [123] groups flows into application categories The proliferation of encrypted traffic over the network
 (video streaming, VoIP, etc) to improve the QoS. Several is clearly growing exponentially. Unveiling encrypted traffic
 experiments were carried on varying the condition in which attracts attention to different actors in the network, in the same
 the data is collected (e.g., packet loss and high or low latency). manner as the non-encrypted case. Also, supervised learning is
 Several performance metrics were computed getting as a result the most popular approach for encrypted traffic. In this sense,
 that the classifiers were good depending on the class (category) the work in [7] presents a theoretical comparison between
 that is evaluated. One of the main reasons stated in the work several works that created ML models for encrypted traffic
 was the class-imbalance presence; in addition, the drop outs of classification. In the comparison, it is noticed the difficulty of
 Internet communications that generate noise to the classifiers. comparing the approaches due to each of them uses differ-
 In relation with the class-imbalance behavior normally found ent and private datasets, in which the labeling process is not
 in the Internet traffic, Yuan et al. [126] proposed to compare clearly identified for most of the datasets.
 the results of SVM classifiers trained with biased and unbi- One can imagine that all the approaches deployed for
 ased data. Biased data contains a large number of samples unencrypted traffic should be valid for the encrypted case,
 belonging to only one class(es) than the rest of classes; on the particularly the works that do not intrude in the packet concontrary, in the unbiased data all the classes have a similar tent during the FE process (such as the statistical based).
 number of samples. The results showed that the classes with However, it is possible to find that the new encryption methlower amount of samples provided more than 10% of false ods or protocols also differ in behavior from one application
 negative, while the global accuracy did not vary significantly to another. For instance, the work in [159] demonstrated
 in the biased case. On the other hand, [156] proposes to use that two encrypted applications can be classified using supercost-sensitive learning for solving the multi-class imbalance vised learning. Secure Sell (SSH) and Skype traces were
 problem. The idea is to compute the cost of misclassifying selected to evaluate several classifiers using statistical feaa flow in a class. The result lead to a confusion matrix like tures (such as IAT and packets size), without considering
 structure that contains the prior weighted probabilities of each the payload information, IP addresses and port numbers, due
 class. The weight is defined as an heuristic function depend- to the nature of the encrypted traffic. In the same context,
 ing on the geometry mean of the flow rates. The cost function Alshammari and Zincir-Heywood [111] tested different ML
 helps to obtain better performance when training a tree based approaches to classify VoIP encrypted traffic. They proposed
 classifier with imbalance data. a FE process using only the statistical based features. Other
 In [109], statistical features are combined with time-series approaches follow the same process, keeping the statistical
 features in order to construct a Hidden Markov model for features as a common point, and varying the classifier or the
 traffic classification. They illustrate the syntactic structure dataset, such as in [115] with Naive Bayes and in [114] with
 of the chosen applications, such as Bit torrent, Skype and Decision trees.
 Emule, among others. The results showed that the proposal One of the particularities found in the reviewed papers
 had higher classification accuracy than some statistic-based is that they are normally focused on detecting a type of
 methods; however, the construction of the model requires encryption at certain level. For instance, the work in [129]
 labeled data and re-training when new applications appear in proposes a two phase method that: 1) Identify the flows
 the network. under Secure Socket Layer protocol (SSL) or Transport Layer
 For anomalous or malicious traffic detection, supervised Security protocol (TLS) by using signature matching methods,
 approaches and statistical based features are widely deployed, and 2) Compute statistical features to classify the application
 such as [116] that exposes common threats in the Web to be within these flows. One of the deficiencies is that the signature
 identified, and [157] that compares several ML models for matching method is based on standard protocol specifications
 intrusion detection. Lalitha and Josna [158] implemented a and documentations, or on manual observation and analysis.
 wireless sensor network scenario to capture traffic for spe- VoIP communications have risen in popularity and their
 cific environmental conditions. Following, a Gaussian Mixture identification is a key factor in the telecommunication field
 Model is trained to detect normal and abnormal behavior either to prioritize or unable them. In consequence, sevin the network. On the other hand, several works try to eral approaches have been proposed, such as the works
 deploy classification solutions in mobile/cellular networks. in [114], [118], [128], [160], and [161]. Some of these works
 For instance, [130] collected IP traffic extracted from mobile tries to characterize and identify Skype, one of the most comnetworks in a fixed time windows. Statistical based fea- plex VoIP applications in the network due to its intricate
 tures from normal and abnormal traffic are computed, and a communication protocol.
 Bayesian classifier is trained for the analysis of the massive Classifying applications within HTTP2 or IPsec connections
 network users’ traffic behaviors. The work in [136] collected is highly complex. For instance, the works in [162]–[164] train
 network traces from Wi-Fi controllers at a large university ML classifiers with encrypted traffic data. Several applications
 campus. These controllers connected access points to the cam- are launched and without a VPN and statistical based features
 pus backbone network, allowing the wireless devices to access are captured. Following, several ML models are trained and
 Internet. The traces come from network traffic to/from mali- tested getting satisfactory results. On the other hand, for tuncious and benign domains, and statistical based features were neled connections, reviewing the characteristics of a flow in

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2003

 Definition 2, the classical FE process cannot be applied. The One of the most common methods, to classify network
 tunneled connection may be identified as only one flow, when traffic using unsupervised learning, is K-means, which builds
 in reality there are more flows embedded. This scenario has not K clusters based on the similarity between the samples and
 been largely studied, however, some works aim at identifying the centroids of the cluster. The work in [106] uses K-means
 just a tunneled connection at first, such as in [93] and [110]. and several properties of the flows for network classification.
 An interesting method, based on ML techniques aims at In [140], the classic random initialization of the clusters when
 detecting Denial of Service (DoS) attack in HTTP2 connec- using K-means is improved. The initial clusters are defined by
 tions [112]. The authors prepared a network environment with the variance between the flow attributes. After the clusters are
 normal traffic and attacked traffic. The dataset obtained is built, a mapping process cluster-application is performed with
 passed through a FE process where statistical features are a probabilistic assignment. The maximum likelihood estimates
 computed, following a FS process to reduce the character- the membership of labeled samples to the K clusters. One of
 istic space. Finally, several classifiers were tested to detect the the main deficiencies of this approach is that the number of
 attacks in a binary classification manner. clusters K must be defined beforehand, tying the solution to
 a fixed number of labels. Moreover, noisy samples and new
 B. Multi-Classification and Ensemble Approaches label appearance are not considered.
 For encrypted traffic, the work in [145] uses K-means
 The combination of several classifiers might solve the genmodel to identify encrypted video streaming in HTTPS coneralization problem encountered by the classical classifiers in
 nections, obtaining a good average accuracy. The dataset was
 the traffic classification field. These types of solutions aim
 extracted with different bit rates, in order to prove the clasat creating more specialized classifiers. For instance, [149]
 sifier performance under different scenarios (change of the
 presents a combination of several ML models to get a bet-
 IATs). Similarly, the work in [166] uses K-means for P2P trafter performance. Several classifiers (two tree based, one rule
 fic identification. Several comparisons between unsupervised
 based, two statistical based and SVM) are trained with the
 techniques are presented in [167] and [168], which in turn
 same data; in addition, a DPI tool is included as classifier. A
 could give insights of the approach to use when facing unlanew incoming input is evaluated by all the classifiers, and
 beled encrypted traffic. Finally, due to the ground truth class is
 following the results are merged by means of a combinaunknown, an adequate guidance must be deployed for using
 tion method, such as Maximum likelihood, DempsterShafer,
 clustering techniques. For instance, [169] proposes a frame-
 Enhanced DempsterShafer and perfect combination, among
 work that allows the unsupervised approach to work for traffic
 others. For example, in the maximum likelihood combination,
 classification considering the ground truth class.
 all the classifiers vote on one class, and the most voted class
 is the output. The work in [165] compares the performance of
 seven ensemble algorithms based on decision trees. The study D. Hybrids and Advanced Techniques
 demonstrated that most of the ensemble algorithms overcome
 In this section, it will be presented some of the works that
 the classical single classifier approach in terms of performance.
 use hybrid, semi-supervised, and novel approaches for traffic
 The main deficiency found in the experiments is the time cost
 classification.
 for the training of the models and the online classification.
 To start, there are approaches that apply a two-phase process
 The work in [121] proposes to compute the FE process and
 to classify network traffic, combining supervised and unsuto divide them into subsets; this procedure is applied over
 pervised learning. The first phase is in charge of clustering
 three different case studies. These cases vary from the origitraffic classes with the same type (e.g., Video streaming, P2P
 nal dataset, such as with and without the zero-payload packets.
 torrent, etc), and the second phase uses supervised models
 Statistical features are computed for each case, and a dedicated
 to classify the applications (Youtube, Neflix, etc). The work
 classifier is trained. On the other hand, the work in [143]
 in [137] proposes a two-phase clustering, one using the statisdefines multiple feature subsets through a FS process; each
 tical flow features and the other one using the packet payload
 subset of features is defined regarding a specific application
 features. A third phase integrates both clustering results to creprotocol class. A classifier is trained for each subset, and the
 ate a classifier. A bag-of-words (BoWs) model is constructed
 output is given by a voting process. In this work, it is conto represent the content of the clusters obtained with the flow
 sidered that relevant features might vary from class to class,
 statistical features, and then a latent semantic analysis (LSA)
 and how it can affect the classifier performance in presence
 is applied to aggregate similar traffic clusters based on their
 of class-imbalance data.
 payload content. The work in [122] groups the traffic classes
 using K-means, and a decision tree classifies the applications
 C. Clustering for Classification and Anomaly Detection in order to provide more granularity to the results. Similarly, a
 Unsupervised approaches are normally associated with hybrid algorithm that combines K-means and KNN for online
 anomalous detection, due to its capabilities to detect patterns classification of encrypted traffic is proposed by [113]. The
 that are not similar to normal or nominal conditions; but, combination is given as a two phase process, where K-means
 also to perform classification tasks. In this sense, clustering clusters the traffic in a real time embedded environment. The
 techniques are widely used for network traffic classification. performance was evaluated through a cache-based mechanism
 This section is dedicated to the works that apply unsupervised that combines elements of port-based and statistical based
 learning for Internet traffic classification. classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2004 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 Also, more specialized algorithms are used to obtain • More flexible solutions given by ensemble classifiers
 more fine grained performance. As an example, [120] pro- might provide more accurate results with class-imbalance
 poses a classification system based on the Online Sequential data. Additionally, the variability of the features for the
 Extreme Learning Machine (OS-ELM) for intrusion detec- ensemble classifiers can reinforce the solution.
 tion. Irrelevant features are discarded using an ensemble of FS • The unsupervised approaches are mainly exploited for
 techniques. The work in [144] presents a traffic classification performing anomaly detection. However, an evident chalapproach using Wavelet Kernel Extreme Machine Learning lenge is the discovery of novel classes that might be
 (WK-EML) and Genetic Algorithm (GA) combined to clas- represented by new clusters constructions.
 sify flows using statistical based features. GA allows optimally • Finally, one interesting approach that might support all
 finding the parameters needed to use WK-EML, and in conse- the deficiencies –related to imbalanced-class data, new
 quence, to train the model instead of using a classical random application discovery and generalization– is proposing
 setting approach. meta-learning processes for the selection and construction
 A novel approach to identify encrypted applications is given of the ML solutions.
 by [170], which presents the traffic classification problem
 without an explicit FE process. Instead of using the classical VIII. M ODEL D EPLOYMENT
 statistical features, the authors build a deep learning architec-
 The main objective of this section is to inspect the impleture that will learn from the packet content. The approach do
 mentation and reconfiguration attempts of the ML solutions
 not inspect the packet content for keywords as DPI techniques,
 in real network scenarios. This study was done only taking as
 instead, it aims at learning new features for each application
 reference the papers reviewed.
 with the deep learning architecture. The FE process is embed-
 Along the papers, several FE, FS and ML approaches were
 ded and these new features have not a real meaning, instead
 studied, which in turn all together comprise the necessary steps
 they are binary data with relationships found by the deep
 to classify traffic. The main question that arise is how the
 neural network. This last characteristic makes it suitable for
 ML solutions can be deployed into real scenarios. In most
 encrypted traffic, and presents an alternative approach to staof the paper reviewed, the implementation of ML solution
 tistical based features. However, it has not been quantified its
 is not performed and they normally show a proof of conboundaries against classical FE and classification approaches.
 cept. However, some of the works above give some hints
 about how the ML approach can be deployed. In addition,
 it is analyzed the importance of the ML solution reconfigura-
 E. Discussion tion; which plays an important role in the traffic classification
 A summary of this section is presented with a short descrip- task.
 tion of the results obtained in the papers. In addition, a brief
 discussion of future directions is given. A. On-Line Implementation
 1) Comparison: The tables II and III summarizes the clas- One of the most important features, that the Internet network
 sification approaches trends for unencrypted and encrypted has, is that transmission rates are normally very high and the
 traffic, respectively. Their advantages and disadvantages are dimension of the network is big. These main characteristics
 remarked, as well as several works that applied these make the classifier implementation efforts challenging. The
 approaches for traffic classification. most common approach is to deploy the ML solutions over
 2) Guidelines and Future Trends: Some approaches select the traffic monitoring tools (see Section IV-B); hence, each
 the algorithm based on either: i) the experience of former time that a packet flow is observed, it is possible to perform
 works, ii) performance comparison with different datasets, the classification. For instance, [180] uses a NetFlow enabled
 or iii) qualitative advantages and disadvantages between the router for monitoring the traces, which are forwarded in an
 algorithms. Some specific conclusions are: online manner to a ML classifier. NetFlow is a Cisco proto-
 • Selecting the most adequate algorithm is highly related col that aims at exporting IP flow information from routers
 to the available data. Hence, it is necessary to make a and switches. Similarly, DBSstream [90] integrates the traffic
 preliminary study of the conditions in which the ML classification solutions into its monitoring platform. Another
 model works optimally, and the type of data that is able approach is to implement the ML solution in a stand-alone
 to receive. It was noticed that one or several classifiers classification module; for example, the work in [133] implemight not generalize all the classes, and this might be ments the ML solution into a Field-Programmable Gate Array
 caused by the class-imbalance presence in the historical (FPGA) based embedded system. The FPGA device uses
 data. information at the network layer, such as the packet sizes and
 • One of the most common approaches found to select IATs.
 the ML approach is by comparing their classification However, the monitoring module may or may not contain
 performance. This comparison is normally based on the the classification model directly; the captured information can
 accuracy metric. However, a more accurate approach is be sent to a server or traffic controller where the operations
 to perform a multiple or pairwise comparison with para- needed to classify the traffic are performed [139], [158]. The
 metric and nonparametric tests that measure the statistical work in [110] proposes an implementation using a simple
 significance of the classifier’s performance [45]. proxy server. Several hosts are connected to this server, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2005

 TABLE II
 S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS U SING U NENCRYPTED T RAFFIC FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION T RENDS

 TABLE III
 S UMMARY TABLE AND R ELATED PAPERS U SING E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION T RENDS

 VoIP and other traffic are injected into it. Particularly, a VoIP this point is not considered then the model performance is in
 detection algorithm is placed at the proxy in order to give risk.
 priority to this traffic. The work in [113] implemented their On this subject, [181] presents a Self-Learning Traffic
 ML solution into a Service Control Engine (SCE), which is a Classifier (SLTC) for P2P identification. The authors pro-
 Cisco platform designed for session-based classification and pose an architecture where passive monitoring components
 control of all network traffic. Reference [127] presented a observe the network at specific links. The distributed mon-
 QoS-aware traffic classification framework implemented in a itoring components have embedded the classifier (based on
 network controller. This controller is placed in a Software- payload inspection). If this component can correctly classify
 Define Networking (SDN) technology that allows performing the flow, then this will be marked as known, otherwise, the
 monitoring and traffic classification. flows are sent to a logic server. The logic server is in charge of
 more fine operations to identify the traffic when the monitoring
 component fails. Additionally, the logic server forward policies
 B. Reconfiguration rules to feed the monitoring component with new behaviors.
 One of the main issues, founded in most of the ML solu- It is important to mention that the operations performed in the
 tions studied so far, is that when new patterns are appearing in logic server are based on a statistical based approach, payload
 the network, the ML models must be updated. The ML based inspection and application analysis; however, this proposal
 classification is pruned to rapidly be out-of-date due to the can be modified replacing their solution by a ML solution,
 dynamism of the network. Therefore, self-learning, evolving or defining retraining or updating policies for online ML based
 retraining strategies must be taken into account. In general, for classifiers. Comparably, the work in [107] proposes a Selfmost of the ML techniques an update implies a model retrain- Learning Intelligent Classifier (SLIC) for traffic classification.
 ing with a new historical dataset (commonly labeled). This SLIC requires only a small number of labeled flows for its
 means that the model has to be constantly retrained any time learning process, the system is able to evolve to a new conthat a new application or behavior appears on the network. The figuration with unlabeled data. SLIC uses BoFs structure to
 cost of performing this step can be significant; nonetheless, if classify a set of flows into the same group using KNN. First

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2006 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 at all, a KNN model is trained with the labeled samples. After windows. Statistical based features from normal and abnormal
 the training is performed, unlabeled samples can be marked traffic are computed, and a Bayesian classifier is trained for
 by the system as possible new training samples, and they are the analysis of the massive network users’ traffic behaviors.
 saved in a batch. When the batch reaches a defined thresh- The work in [184] presents an approach to correctly collect
 old, a retraining process is activated inducing the new training and label mobile IP network traces, while in [24] a taxonsamples to the KNN model. The decision to induce new train- omy to define the labels is proposed in the same domain. The
 ing samples or not resides in the prediction step, where two work in [185] presents a fine grain process to correctly extract
 conditions, based on the distance between the samples and the IP flows from mobile networks in view of the ML solutheir two nearest classes, will allow taking the final decision. tion implementation. More on this subject, it can be found
 Although, the system presents a good performance in term of in [186] and [187], where dedicated surveys are presented. For
 traffic classification with two dataset, it might present prob- instance, the work in [186] exposed a generic architecture of
 lems with imbalance or high dimensional data where distance a cellular network, and the possible positions where passive
 based methods tend to fail. Additionally, the computational monitoring can be deployed, such as in a Packet Switched
 cost of this approach should be quantified. (PS) Core. To this end, IP-based data in passive monitor-
 In the ML field, semi-supervised learning may help to ing points can be analyzed by ML classifiers following the
 deal with the evolving feature of the network, and with the complete process exposed along this survey paper.
 lack of labeled data. A semi-supervised work-flow may deal In a similar manner, in WiFi networks, IP-data can be
 with the updating of the ML models in a online manner. extracted in order to apply ML approaches for the traffic clas-
 For instance, [141] proposed a semi-supervised approach for sification. For instance, the work in [136] collected network
 traffic clustering. As a first step, a Gaussian Mixture Model traces from Wi-Fi controllers at a large university campus.
 (GMM) with set-based equivalence constraint is used, and These controllers connected access points to the campus backfollowing the clustering algorithm based on the Expectation bone network, allowing the wireless devices to access Internet.
 Maximization (EM) method. The semi-supervised process is The traces come from network traffic to/from malicious and
 handled with side information, which aims at building a set of benign domains, and statistical based features were computed
 flows given some constraints with a Gaussian model. The side over these traces. A binary ML classifier was trained for
 information principle is based on the BoFs definition. Finally, detecting malicious domains. Similar approaches can be found
 classical statistical features of the flows in the sets are used in [158], [187], and [188]. The difference with cellular/mobile
 to cluster the application protocol with EM. Reference [135] networks and WiFi network resides in the technology used for
 also addressed the traffic classification problem using a semi- the data exchange that might affect the speed, cost and security.
 supervised approach. Support vectors machines (SVMs) are Finally, in satellite networks, the traffic management is a
 built using the co-training approach, in which multiple clas- key task due to it allows improving the QoS. Commonly, trafsifiers are trained on different sets of features. This approach fic data is captured form satellite Internet Service Providers
 is used when the historical dataset counts with both labeled (ISPs). The works in this area aim to classify and to analyze
 and unlabeled data; where taking into account the unlabeled Internet traffic in large networks [189]–[192]. The princidata can also provide more knowledge to the model. The work ple is the same as the previous cases, passive monitoring
 in [131] presents a similar approach. The work in [146] analy- is deployed in order to perform traffic classification. These
 ses time based and host based features for intrusion detection monitoring points can be at routers [189], [190] or point of
 in the network. The proposal is based on a semi-supervised presence (PoP) [191] of large ISP networks. Another emergapproach that trains a classifier with labeled samples. A mem- ing approach is the use of Software-defined networks(SDNs)
 bership vector is obtained for the unlabeled data with the in satellite-terrestrial networks. In SDNs, traffic classification
 classifier. The membership vector is used to obtain fuzzy can be easily deployed in the SDN’ master controllers as it is
 groups that are further incorporated into the training set for a exposed in [193] and [194].
 re-training of the classifier. To conclude, this section presented possible applications of
 ML-based traffic classification in three related Internet network
 infrastructures, where the methodological steps presented by
 C. Traffic Classification in Cellular, WiFi and this survey paper can be used.
 Satellite Networks
 In this section, we make an overview of the application/implementation of traffic classification in three important
 network infrastructures. In this sense, we perform a short D. Discussion
 analysis about the IP traffic classification with ML in these To conclude, it is presented as follows some important
 domains. challenges and comments regarding the content of this section.
 In cellular networks, the mobile IP traffic classification can • A fast response of the ML models and the monitoring
 be performed at different levels either using the port, the packet process are required for traffic classification solutions.
 payload [182], [183] or the flow statistical distribution. On this Measuring the effective time that the complete classificasubject, ML learning is applied when statistical attributes are tion process will take, is critical in this field. Normally,
 available from cellular network traces. For instance, [130] col- the Internet communications take place in milliseconds to
 lected IP traffic extracted from mobile networks in a fixed time open and close sessions, and to transfer data. The traffic

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2007

 identification has to be faster, in order to take actions and architectures to emulate traffic. Most the traffic is unencrypted
 to validate results. and the ground truth of the flows is not commonly available.
 • Commonly, the ML solutions are validated when the
 training of the model is executed, and it is based on B. Feature Engineering Phase
 the validation techniques reviewed in Section II-A5. In
 In this block, Sections V and VI are comprised. The first
 order to measure the performance of the ML solution in
 aspect considered is the type of FE performed, while the secan online context, it is necessary to establish a frameond one reports if the FS process is performed or not. It is
 work that provides the ground truth applications. In this
 noticeable from the Fig. 5 that the most common trend is the
 sense, metrics such as the accuracy and the F-score can
 FE process by using statistical based (STATsB) features. This
 be computed for ensuring the reliability of the traffic
 result is expected due to these features can be interchangeclassification.
 able between encrypted and non-encrypted traffic analysis,
 • An important challenge, when using and implementing
 besides they do not intrude into the packet content, and their
 ML in the networking field, is the scalability of the
 computation is lightweight.
 solution due the size of the Internet network.
 • Finally, ML solutions that allow considering the
 dynamism of the network must be deployed. The devel- C. Algorithm Selection
 opment of autonomic architectures [195]–[197], allowing In algorithm selection, the classical classification (CClass)
 context adaptation (behavioral or structural adaptation), is dominant, which is an expected outcome because this study
 can be applied by using ML models. is focused on traffic classification. However, some approaches
 have made some efforts in the multi-classification and ensemble approaches (MClass&E). This last one motivated from the
 IX. A NALYSIS class-imbalance and generalization problems. Also, it can be
 This study has organized its structure in a manner that found some efforts to use clustering (Clust) and hybrid or
 remarks some important procedures and challenges for achiev- advances (H&A) techniques for traffic classification. In terms
 ing knowledge extraction with ML techniques. The proposed of the objective to achieve, the application category (ApPC)
 procedures involve data collection, feature engineering (FE, and protocol (AppN) are commonly searched, but anomaly
 FR and FS), algorithm selection and model deployment. The detection (AD) is also an interest. Others objectives are to
 question that arises is: which is the best path to take or how to detect the behavior of the users, find communities, and create
 start looking for related references? 49 papers were selected user profiles, among others.
 as they present the complete procedure in Appendix A using
 a variety of strategies for traffic classification, compelling to D. Model Deployment
 show the challenges remarked in the previous sections. The Finally, in the model deployment block, the interest is to
 results of the present review are summarized in Figure 2. A show the amount of papers that implements the solution. In
 path is drawn in order to know the procedural trends com- addition, it is important to know the reconfiguration strategies
 monly taken. The most important remarks concerning Figure 5 proposed by the papers selected. This last one is important due
 are listed as follows. to the constant dynamism of the network that causes problems
 to some ML approaches.
 A. Data Collection Phase From Fig. 5, it is noticeable that more than 65% do not
 specified (NNS) the implementation of the solution. In the
 This block in Fig. 5 is related to the characteristics observed
 same manner, most of the solutions do not offer reconfiguin Section IV. First at all, the papers are divided into two:
 ration methods (ONS); although, some of the works propose
 the papers that used Real and Emulated scenarios for traffic
 scheduled retraining processes to upgrade their solution. Selfobservation. Traffic generation is not considered due to is not
 learning or evolving (SLE) is not found in the reviewed papers;
 a common method used for traffic classification with ML. It
 however, this is a challenging topic for the ML techniques in
 is noticeable that the amount of papers in both cases is simigeneral.
 lar. Following, it is studied if the data is publicly available or
 not. The patterns remain the same as the previous case; however, most of the papers with real traffic have used well-known E. Future Trends
 datasets, some listed in Appendix A. Finally, to conclude the analysis, it is remarked in red the
 Regarding encryption, it was found that most of the approaches less taken by the reviewed papers. It is noticeapproaches start with a non-encrypted study before propos- able from Fig. 5, that most of the works studied did not
 ing a mapping to the encrypted case. The review is mainly use encrypted data, and the ground truth establishment was
 conformed of 60% papers with non-encrypted data, and the not commonly performed. In the feature engineering process,
 remaining for encrypted studies. Continuing, the ground truth few works applied FS for their solution. In terms of the
 is normally defined by DPI tools, where few papers defined ML approach used, the less explored are the unsupervised
 a strict process for labeling the flows. The general conclusion techniques, the multi-classification and ensemble approaches.
 of this block is that the tendency is to use real traffic mea- Finally, for the model deployment phase, there are few
 surement for well-known public data, but also to set network works that implemented the solution in real world scenarios.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2008 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 Fig. 5. Trends of the selected papers for classifying traffic with ML.

 Moreover, the reconfiguration processes do not handle evolv- • In terms of the Model reconfiguration, an alternative
 ing or autonomic reconfigurations. Given these scenarios and solution will be to deploy the concept of incremental
 the discussions of the previous section, the following future learning, in order to deal with the dynamism of the
 trends are concluded. Internet network.
 • The proposition of emulated traffic architectures, oriented to create ML solutions, can allow the generation of
 encrypted and unencrypted traffic, as well as a reliable X. C ONCLUSION
 flow labeling process. This survey paper presented the general procedure to
 • Given the efficiency of the statistical based approach, achieve traffic classification through ML techniques. Each step
 an exploration to improve its computation will provide of the procedure has some relevant works that follow different
 robust classification solutions. In the case of the FS, an paths to achieve the results. In this way, the reviewed papers
 efficient dynamic selection of the features might offer a were organized, where each step defines the category to which
 higher classification performance. each paper belongs. These categories were displayed into a
 • In the algorithm selection block, the future trends to graphic that illustrates the most common trends in the field.
 exploit are the deployment of multi-classification and Discussions were settled in each section, in order to identify
 ensemble approaches, which are very promising path its most common trends and challenges.
 given the characteristics of the Internet data. This study tried to unveil several challenges in the traf-
 • For the ML solutions, more experimental tests are needed fic classification field. For instance, working with encrypted
 to measure the performance in term of response time and traffic is challenging, where the type of features should lead
 complexity. In this particular case, it is necessary to pro- to correct classifications in absence of the packet content.
 pose distributed and scalable ML solutions that can deal The current publicly labeled data is scarce, which make it
 with the dimension of the Internet network. hard for comparing ML solutions. Following, for knowledge

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2009

 TABLE IV
 M OST C OMMON P UBLICLY AVAILABLE DATASETS F OUND IN THE PAPERS R EVIEWED

 TABLE V
 T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE DATA C OLLECTION P HASE

 TABLE VI
 T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE F EATURE E NGINEERING P HASE

 extraction with ML, the classification task was found as Moreover, it analyses the challenges at each stage of the
 the most popular. However, multi-classification and ensemble process and outlines future directions. To summarize, some
 approaches present some advantages that make them com- of the most important directions that this works want to
 pelling for dealing with some problems in traffic classification, emphasize are:
 such as class-imbalance and generalization. The clustering • Reliable label assignment, this procedure will play a key
 approach can help to find new or anomalous behavior in role for the construction and validation of the ML models
 the Internet traffic; therefore, its study in this field should • Dynamic feature selection, this will try to create adapbe extended. Finally, the implementation of such solutions tive models that use the most suitable features given the
 remains as an important task to achieve, due to different fac- context and the objective to achieve
 tors, mostly related to performance and adaptability of the • Integration of meta-learning processes for dealing with
 solutions. the imbalance and the dynamism of the Internet network
 The difference of the present review, regarding most of the data
 surveys found in the literature, is that it shows the whole • Strategies for the online reconfiguration of the ML
 picture of the steps needed for network traffic classification. solutions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2010 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 TABLE VII
 T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE A LGORITHM S ELECTION P HASE

 TABLE VIII
 T RENDS OF THE S ELECTED PAPERS FOR THE M ODEL D EPLOYMENT T REND

 A PPENDIX A [7] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
 for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag.,
 This section lists in Table IV the most common public vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
 available datasets found for traffic analysis. [8] H. Alizadeh and A. Zúquete, “Traffic classification for managing applications’ networking profiles,” Security Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 14,
 pp. 2557–2575, 2016.
 A PPENDIX B [9] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Network
 anomaly detection: Methods, systems and tools,” IEEE Commun.
 Table V depicts the trends for the observation process. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 303–336, 1st Quart., 2014.
 Table VI depicts the trends for the feature engineering process. [10] A. Marnerides, A. Schaeffer-Filho, and A. Mauthe, “Traffic anomaly
 Table VII depicts the trends for the algorithm selection pro- diagnosis in Internet backbone networks: A survey,” Comput. Netw.,
 vol. 73, pp. 224–243, Nov. 2014.
 cess. Table VIII depicts the trends for the model construction [11] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and
 process. machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2nd Quart.,
 2016.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [12] M. F. Umer, M. Sher, and Y. Bi, “Flow-based intrusion detection:
 Techniques and challenges,” Comput. Security, vol. 70, pp. 238–254,
 This work is sponsored by Thales Alenia Space, Toulouse, Sep. 2017.
 France. The authors would like to thank the Département: [13] U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “Advances in
 Business Line Telecommunication, R&D Department, for their knowledge discovery and data mining,” in From Data Mining to
 Knowledge Discovery: An Overview, U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetskyassistance. Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy, Eds. Menlo Park, CA, USA:
 Amer. Assoc. Artif. Intell., 1996, pp. 1–34.
 R EFERENCES [14] G. Haixiang et al., “Learning from class-imbalanced data: Review of
 methods and applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 73, pp. 220–239,
 [1] Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. May 2017.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.iana.org/ [15] H. Liu and H. Motoda, Computational Methods of Feature Selection.
 [2] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for Internet Boca Raton, FL, USA: Chapman and Hall, 2008.
 traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys [16] G. Chandrashekar and F. Sahin, “A survey on feature selection
 Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart., 2008. methods,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 16–28, 2014.
 [3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future direc- [17] W. Shang et al., “A novel feature selection algorithm for text categotions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, rization,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–5, 2007.
 Jan./Feb. 2012. [18] L. E. Raileanu and K. Stoffel, “Theoretical comparison between the
 [4] N. A. Khater and R. E. Overill, “Network traffic classification tech- Gini index and information gain criteria,” Ann. Math. Artif. Intell.,
 niques and challenges,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Digit. Inf. Manag. vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 77–93, 2004.
 (ICDIM), 2015, pp. 43–48. [19] X. He, D. Cai, and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian score for feature selection,”
 [5] P. Foremski, “On different ways to classify Internet traffic: A short in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2005, pp. 507–514.
 review of selected publications,” Theor. Appl. Informat., vol. 25, no. 2, [20] M. Liu and D. Zhang, “Feature selection with effective distance,”
 pp. 1–19, 2013. Neurocomputing, vol. 215, pp. 100–109, Nov. 2016.
 [6] N. Namdev, S. Agrawal, and S. Silkari, “Recent advancement [21] S. Wang, W. Pedrycz, Q. Zhu, and W. Zhu, “Unsupervised feature
 in machine learning based Internet traffic classification,” Procedia selection via maximum projection and minimum redundancy,” Knowl.
 Comput. Sci., vol. 60, pp. 784–791, 2015. Based Syst., vol. 75, pp. 19–29, Feb. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2011

 [22] N. Zhou, H. Cheng, W. Pedrycz, Y. Zhang, and H. Liu, “Discriminative [49] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent comsparse subspace learning and its application to unsupervised feature parison of popular DPI tools for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw.,
 selection,” ISA Trans., vol. 61, pp. 104–118, Mar. 2016. vol. 76, pp. 75–89, Jan. 2015.
 [23] D. Wang, H. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Liu, and J. Wang, “Unsupervised [50] C. Xu, S. Chen, J. Su, S. M. Yiu, and L. C. K. Hui, “A survey on
 feature selection through Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization—A word regular expression matching for deep packet inspection: Applications,
 co-occurrence perspective,” Neurocomputing, vol. 173, pp. 845–854, algorithms, and hardware platforms,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 Jan. 2016. vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2991–3029, 4th Quart., 2016.
 [24] Y. Liu, K. Liu, C. Zhang, J. Wang, and X. Wang, “Unsupervised feature [51] A. Tongaonkar, R. Torres, M. Iliofotou, R. Keralapura, and A. Nucci,
 selection via diversity-induced self-representation,” Neurocomputing, “Towards self adaptive network traffic classification,” Comput.
 vol. 219, pp. 350–363, Jan. 2016. Commun., vol. 56, pp. 35–46, Feb. 2015.
 [25] C.-H. Chen, “Feature selection for clustering using instance-based [52] C. Mu, X. H. Huang, X. Tian, Y. Ma, and J.-L. Qi, “Automatic traffic
 learning by exploring the nearest and farthest neighbors,” Inf. Sci., signature extraction based on fixed bit offset algorithm for traffic classivol. 318, pp. 14–27, Oct. 2015. fication,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 79–85,
 [26] S. Maldonado, E. Carrizosa, and R. Weber, “Kernel penalized K-means: 2011.
 A feature selection method based on kernel K-means,” Inf. Sci., [53] C. Mu, X. Tian, X. H. Huang, and Y. Ma, “FlowAntEater: Network trafvol. 322, pp. 150–160, Nov. 2015. fic automatic signature generator,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun.,
 [27] Y. Wu, C. Wang, J. Bu, and C. Chen, “Group sparse feature selec- vol. 20, pp. 69–74, Aug. 2013.
 tion on local learning based clustering,” Neurocomputing, vol. 171, [54] E. Bocchi et al., “MAGMA network behavior classifier for malware
 pp. 1118–1130, Jan. 2016. traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 109, pp. 142–156, Nov. 2016.
 [28] W. Siedlecki and J. Sklansky, “A note on genetic algorithms for [55] D. Muelas, M. Gordo, J. L. García-Dorado, and J. E. L. de Vergara,
 large-scale feature selection,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 10, no. 5, “Dictyogram: A statistical approach for the definition and visualization
 pp. 335–347, 1989. of network flow categories,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service
 [29] A. Klepaczko and A. Materka, “Combining evolutionary and sequential Manag. (CNSM), 2015, pp. 219–227.
 search strategies for unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc. 10th Int. [56] G. Levchuk, “Function and activity classification in network traffic
 Conf. Artif. Intell. Soft Comput. (ICAISC), 2010, pp. 149–156. data: Existing methods, their weaknesses, and a path forward,” in Proc.
 [30] A. Y. Ng, “Feature selection, L1 vs. L2 regularization, and rotational SPIE, vol. 9850, 2016, p. 9850.
 invariance,” in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2004, p. 78. [57] M. Iliofotou et al., “Graption: A graph-based P2P traffic classification
 [31] R. Genuer, J.-M. Poggi, and C. Tuleau-Malot, “Variable selection framework for the Internet backbone,” Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 8,
 using random forests,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 31, no. 14, pp. 1909–1920, 2011.
 pp. 2225–2236, 2010. [58] J. Jusko and M. Rehak, “Identifying peer-to-peer communities in the
 [32] G. Katz, E. C. R. Shin, and D. Song, “ExploreKit: Automatic feature network by connection graph analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag., vol. 24,
 generation and selection,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Min. no. 4, pp. 235–252, 2014.
 (ICDM), Dec. 2016, pp. 979–984.
 [59] Y. Jin, E. Sharafuddin, and Z.-L. Zhang, “Unveiling core network-
 [33] Y. Kim, H. Lee, and E. M. Provost, “Deep learning for robust feawide communication patterns through application traffic activity graph
 ture generation in audiovisual emotion recognition,” in Proc. IEEE
 decomposition,” SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 37, no. 1,
 Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., Vancouver, BC, Canada,
 pp. 49–60, Jun. 2009.
 May 2013, pp. 3687–3691.
 [60] K. Xu, F. Wang, and L. Gu, “Behavior analysis of Internet traffic via
 [34] M. H. Dunham, Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics.
 bipartite graphs and one-mode projections,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 931–942, Jun. 2014.
 [35] I. H. Witten and E. Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning,
 [61] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection
 Tools and Techniques. Boston, MA, USA: Morgan Kaufman, 2005.
 and description: A survey,” Data Min. Knowl. Disc., vol. 29, no. 3,
 [36] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
 pp. 626–688, May 2015.
 Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (Springer Series in
 Statistics), 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2009. [62] N. Secchi, R. Bonelli, S. Giordano, and G. Procissi, “BRUTE: A high
 performance and extensible traffic generator,” in Proc. SPECTS, 2005,
 [37] M. A. F. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, “A
 pp. 839–845.
 review of novelty detection,” Signal Process., vol. 99, pp. 215–249,
 Jun. 2014. [63] iPerf—The Ultimate Speed Test Tool for TCP, UDP and SCTP.
 [38] R. Polikar, “Ensemble based systems in decision making,” IEEE Accessed: Jul. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://iperf.fr/
 Circuits Syst. Mag., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 21–45, 3rd Quart., 2006. [64] OSTINATO Network Traffic Generator and Analizer. Accessed: Jul. 18,
 [39] V. Losing, B. Hammer, and H. Wersing, “Incremental on-line learn- 2017. [Online]. Available: http://ostinato.org/
 ing: A review and comparison of state of the art algorithms,” [65] C. V. Wright et al., “Generating client workloads and high-fidelity
 Neurocomputing, vol. 275, pp. 1261–1274, Jan. 2018. network traffic for controllable, repeatable experiments in com-
 [40] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Introduction to Reinforcement Learning, puter security,” in Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, S. Jha,
 1st ed. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1998. R. Sommer, and C. Kreibich, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010,
 [41] M. Sokolova and G. Lapalme, “A systematic analysis of performance pp. 218–237.
 measures for classification tasks,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 45, no. 4, [66] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapé, P. S. Rossi, F. Palmieri, and G. Ventre,
 pp. 427–437, 2009. “Internet traffic modeling by means of hidden Markov models,”
 [42] T. Fawcett, “An introduction to ROC analysis,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., Comput. Netw., vol. 52, no. 14, pp. 2645–2662, 2008.
 vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 861–874, 2006. [67] A. Botta, A. Dainotti, and A. Pescapé, “A tool for the generation of real-
 [43] D. M. W. Powers, “Evaluation: From precision, recall and F-measure istic network workload for emerging networking scenarios,” Comput.
 to ROC,” J. Mach. Learn. Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 37–63, 2006. Netw., vol. 56, no. 15, pp. 3531–3547, 2012.
 [44] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. [68] P. Megyesi, G. Szabó, and S. Molnár, “User behavior based traffic
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284, Sep. 2009. emulator: A framework for generating test data for DPI tools,” Comput.
 [45] F. Pacheco et al., “A statistical comparison of neuroclassifiers and Netw., vol. 92, pp. 41–54, Dec. 2015.
 feature selection methods for gearbox fault diagnosis under realistic [69] S. Molnar, P. Megyesi, and G. Szabo, “Multi-functional traffic generconditions,” Neurocomputing, vol. 194, pp. 192–206, Jun. 2016. ation framework based on accurate user behavior emulation,” in Proc.
 [46] J. Khalife, A. Hajjar, and J. Diaz-Verdejo, “A multilevel taxonomy and IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
 requirements for an optimal traffic-classification model,” Int. J. Netw. 2013, pp. 13–14.
 Manag., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 101–120, 2014. [70] L. Vassio, I. Drago, and M. Mellia, “Detecting user actions from HTTP
 [47] B. Claise, B. Trammell, and P. Aitken, “Specification of the IP traces: Toward an automatic approach,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun.
 flow information export (IPFIX) protocol for the exchange of flow Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Sep. 2016, pp. 50–55.
 information,” Internet Eng. Task Force, Fremont, CA, USA, Rep. 7011, [71] Openbach. Accessed: Dec. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 2013. https://www.openbach.org/
 [48] R. Antonello et al., “Deep packet inspection tools and techniques in [72] R. Hofstede et al., “Flow monitoring explained: From packet capture
 commodity platforms: Challenges and trends,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., to data analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1863–1878, 2012. Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037–2064, 4th Quart., 2014.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2012 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 [73] S. M. C. Silva, P. Carvalho, and S. R. Lima, “Inside packet sampling [97] H.-M. An, S.-K. Lee, J.-H. Ham, and M.-S. Kim, “Traffic identification
 techniques: Exploring modularity to enhance network measurements,” based on applications using statistical signature free from abnormal
 Int. J. Commun. Syst., vol. 30, no. 6, 2017, Art. no. e3135. TCP behavior,” J. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1669–1692, 2015.
 [74] V. Moreno et al., “Commodity packet capture engines: Tutorial, cook- [98] M. Iliofotou, M. Faloutsos, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Exploiting dynambook and applicability,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 3, icity in graph-based traffic analysis: Techniques and applications,” in
 pp. 1364–1390, 3rd Quart., 2015. Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol. (CoNEXT), 2009,
 [75] P. Velan and V. Puš, “High-density network flow monitoring,” in pp. 241–252.
 Proc. IFIP/IEEE Int. Symp. Integr. Netw. Manag. (IM), May 2015, [99] M. Berlingerio, D. Koutra, T. Eliassi-Rad, and C. Faloutsos,
 pp. 996–1001. “NetSimile: A scalable approach to size-independent network
 [76] T. Wellem, Y.-K. Lai, C.-Y. Huang, and W.-Y. Chung, “A hardware- similarity,” CoRR, vol. abs/1209.2684, 2012. [Online]. Available:
 accelerated infrastructure for flexible sketch-based network traffic http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.2684
 monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Conf. High Perform. Switching [100] A. Jakalan, J. Gong, Q. Su, X. Hu, and A. M. S. Abdelgder, “Social
 Routing (HPSR), Jun. 2016, pp. 162–167. relationship discovery of IP addresses in the managed IP networks
 [77] A. Neumann, M. Ehrlich, L. Wisniewski, and J. Jasperneite, “Towards by observing traffic at network boundary,” Comput. Netw., vol. 100,
 monitoring of hybrid industrial networks,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. pp. 12–27, May 2016.
 Workshop Factory Commun. Syst. (WFCS), May 2017, pp. 1–4. [101] F. Iglesias and T. Zseby, “Time-activity footprints in IP traffic,”
 [78] Z. Aouini, A. Kortebi, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Traffic monitoring Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 64–75, Oct. 2016.
 in home networks: Enhancing diagnosis and performance tracking,” [102] A. Hajjar, J. Khalife, and J. Díaz-Verdejo, “Network traffic application
 in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), identification based on message size analysis,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
 Aug. 2015, pp. 545–550. vol. 58, pp. 130–143, Dec. 2015.
 [79] A. Kortebi, Z. Aouini, M. Juren, and J. Pazdera, “Home networks [103] V. Bandara, A. Pezeshki, and P. J. Anura, “Modeling spatial and tempotraffic monitoring case study: Anomaly detection,” in Proc. Glob. Inf. ral behavior of Internet traffic anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE Local Comput.
 Infrastruct. Netw. Symp. (GIIS), Oct. 2016, pp. 1–6. Netw. Conf., 2010, pp. 384–391.
 [80] I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, J. Svoboda, and M. Hammoudeh, “A survey on [104] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and W. Wu, “Efficient and robust
 network security monitoring systems,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. feature extraction and selection for traffic classification,” Comput.
 Future Internet Things Cloud Workshops (FiCloudW), Aug. 2016, Netw., vol. 119, pp. 1–16, Jun. 2017.
 pp. 77–82. [105] J. Zhang et al., “Network traffic classification using correlation
 [81] W. Robitza et al., “Challenges of future multimedia QoE monitoring information,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1,
 for Internet service providers,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 76, no. 21, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2013.
 pp. 22243–22266, 2017. [106] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, and S. Yu, “A novel semi-supervised
 [82] T. Jirsik, M. Cermak, D. Tovarnak, and P. Celeda, “Toward stream- approach for network traffic clustering,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Netw.
 based IP flow analysis,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 7, Syst. Security, 2011, pp. 169–175.
 pp. 70–76, Jul. 2017. [107] D. M. Divakaran, L. Su, Y. S. Liau, and V. L. L. Thing, “SLIC:
 [83] M. Cermák, T. Jirsík, and M. Laštovička, “Real-time analysis of Self-learning intelligent classifier for network traffic,” Comput. Netw.,
 NetFlow data for generating network traffic statistics using Apache vol. 91, pp. 283–297, Nov. 2015.
 Spark,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp. (NOMS), [108] A. Dainotti, W. de Donato, A. Pescape, and P. S. Rossi, “Classification
 Apr. 2016, pp. 1019–1020. of network traffic via packet-level hidden Markov models,” in Proc.
 [84] F. Gringoli et al., “GT: Picking up the truth from the ground for Internet IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2008, pp. 1–5.
 traffic,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 12–18, [109] C. Yin, S. Li, and Q. Li, “Network traffic classification via HMM
 Oct. 2009. under the guidance of syntactic structure,” Comput. Netw., vol. 56,
 [85] M. Dusi, F. Gringoli, and L. Salgarelli, “Quantifying the accuracy of no. 6, pp. 1814–1825, 2012.
 the ground truth associated with Internet traffic traces,” Comput. Netw., [110] T. Yildirim and P. J. Radcliffe, “VoIP traffic classification in IPSec
 vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1158–1167, 2011. tunnels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Eng., vol. 1, Aug. 2010,
 [86] V. Carela-Español, T. Bujlow, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Is our ground-truth pp. 151–157.
 for traffic classification reliable?” in Passive and Active Measurement, [111] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Identification of VoIP
 M. Faloutsos and A. Kuzmanovic, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer encrypted traffic using a machine learning approach,” J. King Saud
 Int., 2014, pp. 98–108. Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 77–92, 2015.
 [87] M. Stevanovic, J. M. Pedersen, A. D’Alconzo, S. Ruehrup, and [112] E. Adi, Z. Baig, and P. Hingston, “Stealthy denial of service (DoS)
 A. Berger, “On the ground truth problem of malicious DNS traffic attack modelling and detection for HTTP/2 services,” J. Netw. Comput.
 analysis,” Comput. Security, vol. 55, pp. 142–158, Nov. 2015. Appl., vol. 91, pp. 1–13, Aug. 2017.
 [88] A. Finamore et al., “Experiences of Internet traffic monitoring with [113] R. Bar Yanai, M. Langberg, D. Peleg, and L. Roditty, “Realtime
 tstat,” IEEE Netw., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 8–14, May/Jun. 2011. classification for encrypted traffic,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Exp.
 [89] T. Bujlow, K. Balachandran, T. Riaz, and J. M. Pedersen, “Volunteer- Algorithms (SEA), 2010, pp. 373–385.
 based system for classification of traffic in computer networks,” in [114] P. Branch and J. But, “Rapid and generalized identification of pack-
 Proc. 19th Telecommun. Forum (TELFOR), Nov. 2011, pp. 210–213. etized voice traffic flows,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE Conf. Local
 [90] A. Baer et al., “DBStream: A holistic approach to large-scale network Comput. Netw., 2012, pp. 85–92.
 traffic monitoring and analysis,” Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 5–19, [115] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Application
 Oct. 2016. identification from encrypted traffic based on characteristic changes by
 [91] P. Velan, “EventFlow: Network flow aggregation based on user actions,” encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Tech. Committee Commun.
 in Proc. NOMS IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Apr. 2016, Qual. Rel. (CQR), May 2011, pp. 1–6.
 pp. 767–771. [116] K. Goseva-Popstojanova, G. Anastasovski, A. Dimitrijevikj, R. Pantev,
 [92] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based and B. Miller, “Characterization and classification of malicious Web
 network intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Security, vol. 30, traffic,” Comput. Security, vol. 42, pp. 92–115, May 2014.
 nos. 6–7, pp. 353–375, 2011. [117] M. Soysal and E. G. Schmidt, “Machine learning algorithms for
 [93] J. J. Davis and E. Foo, “Automated feature engineering for HTTP tunnel accurate flow-based network traffic classification: Evaluation and comdetection,” Comput. Security, vol. 59, pp. 166–185, Jun. 2016. parison,” Perform. Eval., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 451–467, 2010.
 [94] A. Moore et al., “Discriminators for use in flow-based classification,” [118] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Classifying service flows in the
 Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. London, London, U.K., Rep. RR-05-13, encrypted Skype traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC),
 2005. Jun. 2012, pp. 1064–1068.
 [95] L. Peng, B. Yang, Y. Chen, and Z. Chen, “Effectiveness of statistical [119] Y.-N. Dong, J.-J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and clasfeatures for early stage Internet traffic identification,” Int. J. Parallel sification of Internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,”
 Program., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 181–197, 2016. Comput. Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, Jul. 2017.
 [96] P. Bermolen, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, and S. Valenti, “Abacus: [120] R. Singh, H. Kumar, and R. Singla, “An intrusion detection system
 Accurate behavioral classification of P2P-TV traffic,” Comput. Netw., using network traffic profiling and online sequential extreme learning
 vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1394–1411, 2011. machine,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 42, no. 22, pp. 8609–8624, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 PACHECO et al.: TOWARDS DEPLOYMENT OF ML SOLUTIONS IN NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION: SYSTEMATIC SURVEY 2013

 [121] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Multi- [146] R. A. R. Ashfaq, X.-Z. Wang, J. Z. Huang, H. Abbas, and Y.-L. He,
 classification approaches for classifying mobile app traffic,” J. Netw. “Fuzziness based semi-supervised learning approach for intrusion
 Comput. Appl., vol. 103, pp. 131–145, Feb. 2017. detection system,” Inf. Sci., vol. 378, pp. 484–497, Feb. 2017.
 [122] T. Bakhshi and B. Ghita, “On Internet traffic classification: A two- [147] A. Juvonen, T. Sipola, and T. Hämäläinen, “Online anomaly detecphased machine learning approach,” J. Comput. Netw. Commun., tion using dimensionality reduction techniques for HTTP log analysis,”
 vol. 2016, May 2016, Art. no. 2048302. Comput. Netw., vol. 91, pp. 46–56, Nov. 2015.
 [123] S. E. Middleton and S. Modafferi, “Scalable classification of QoS [148] N.-F. Huang, G.-Y. Jai, H.-C. Chao, Y.-J. Tzang, and H.-Y. Chang,
 for real-time interactive applications from IP traffic measurements,” “Application traffic classification at the early stage by characterizing
 Comput. Netw., vol. 107, pp. 121–132, Oct. 2016. application rounds,” Inf. Sci., vol. 232, pp. 130–142, May 2013.
 [124] M. Mohammadi, B. Raahemi, A. Akbari, H. Moeinzadeh, and [149] A. Callado, J. Kelner, D. Sadok, C. A. Kamienski, and S. Fernandes,
 B. Nasersharif, “Genetic-based minimum classification error mapping “Better network traffic identification through the independent combinafor accurate identifying peer-to-peer applications in the Internet traffic,” tion of techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 433–446,
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 6417–6423, 2011. 2010.
 [125] S. M.-Feng and C. J.-Tao, “Research of the traffic characteristics [150] L. Wang, Data Mining With Computational Intelligence. Berlin,
 for the real time online traffic classification,” J. China Univ. Posts Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2009.
 Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 92–98, 2011. [151] H. Zhang, G. Lu, M. T. Qassrawi, Y. Zhang, and X. Yu, “Feature selec-
 [126] R. Yuan, Z. Li, X. Guan, and L. Xu, “An SVM-based machine learn- tion for optimizing traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 35,
 ing method for accurate Internet traffic classification,” Inf. Syst. Front., no. 12, pp. 1457–1471, 2012.
 vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 149–156, 2010. [152] A. Fahad, Z. Tari, I. Khalil, I. Habib, and H. Alnuweiri, “Toward
 [127] P. Wang, S.-C. Lin, and M. Luo, “A framework for QoS-aware traf- an efficient and scalable feature selection approach for Internet traffic
 fic classification using semi-supervised machine learning in SDNs,” in classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 2040–2057, 2013.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Services Comput. (SCC), 2016, pp. 760–765. [153] A. Fahad, Z. Tari, I. Khalil, A. Almalawi, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An
 [128] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “How robust can a machine optimal and stable feature selection approach for traffic classification
 learning approach be for classifying encrypted VoIP?” J. Netw. Syst. based on multi-criterion fusion,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 36,
 Manag., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 830–869, Oct. 2015. pp. 156–169, Jul. 2014.
 [129] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, and C. Li, “A novel hybrid [154] L. Zhen and L. Qiong, “A new feature selection method for
 method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Internet traffic classification using ML,” Phys. Procedia, vol. 33,
 Glob. Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2010, pp. 1–5. pp. 1338–1345, 2012.
 [130] Y. Lai, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, and X. Li, “On monitoring and [155] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
 predicting mobile network traffic abnormality,” Simulat. Model. Pract. generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection tech-
 Theory, vol. 50, pp. 176–188, Jan. 2015. niques for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 132, pp. 81–98,
 [131] R. Lin, O. Li, Q. Li, and Y. Liu, “Unknown network protocol classifi- Feb. 2018.
 cation method based on semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 [156] Z. Liu and Q. Liu, “Studying cost-sensitive learning for multi-class
 Conf. Comput. Commun. (ICCC), 2015, pp. 300–308.
 imbalance in Internet traffic classification,” J. China Univ. Posts
 [132] L. Peng, B. Yang, and Y. Chen, “Effective packet number for early stage
 Telecommun., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 63–72, 2012.
 Internet traffic identification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 156, pp. 252–267,
 [157] M. C. Belavagi and B. Muniyal, “Performance evaluation of supervised
 May 2015.
 machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection,” Procedia Comput.
 [133] A. Rizzi, A. Iacovazzi, A. Baiocchi, and S. Colabrese, “A low com-
 Sci., vol. 89, pp. 117–123, Aug. 2016.
 plexity real-time Internet traffic flows neuro-fuzzy classifier,” Comput.
 [158] K. V. Lalitha and V. R. Josna, “Traffic verification for network
 Netw., vol. 91, pp. 752–771, Nov. 2015.
 anomaly detection in sensor networks,” Procedia Technol., vol. 24,
 [134] M. H. Bhuyan, D. Bhattacharyya, and J. Kalita, “A multi-step outlierpp. 1400–1405, Jul. 2016.
 based anomaly detection approach to network-wide traffic,” Inf. Sci.,
 vol. 348, pp. 243–271, Jun. 2016. [159] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
 [135] X. Li, F. Qi, D. Xu, and X. S. Qiu, “An Internet traffic classification identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
 method based on semi-supervised support vector machine,” in Proc. Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2011, pp. 1–5. [160] M. M. U. Rathore, “Threshold-based generic scheme for encrypted and
 [136] A. Raghuramu et al., “Uncovering the footprints of malicious traffic tunneled voice flows detection over IP networks,” J. King Saud Univ.
 in wireless/mobile networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 95, pp. 95–107, Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 305–314, 2015.
 Dec. 2016. [161] D. Zhang, C. Zheng, H. Zhang, and H. Yu, “Identification and analysis
 [137] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Unsupervised traffic clas- of Skype peer-to-peer traffic,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Internet Web Appl.
 sification using flow statistical properties and IP packet payload,” J. Services, 2010, pp. 200–206.
 Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 79, no. 5, pp. 573–585, Aug. 2013. [162] J. A. Caicedo-Muñoz, A. L. Espino, J. C. Corrales, and A. Rendón,
 [138] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Xiang, “Internet traffic “QoS-classifier for VPN and non-VPN traffic based on timeclassification by aggregating correlated naive Bayes predictions,” IEEE related features,” Comput. Netw., vol. 144, pp. 271–279, Oct. 2018.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 5–15, Jan. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 [139] J. Yang, L. Yuan, Y. He, and L. Y. Chen, “Timely traffic identification S1389128618307321
 on P2P streaming media,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 19, [163] S. Miller, K. Curran, and T. Lunney, “Multilayer perceptron neural
 no. 2, pp. 67–73, 2012. network for detection of encrypted VPN network traffic,” in Proc.
 [140] G.-Z. Lin, Y. Xin, X.-X. Niu, and H.-B. Jiang, “Network traffic clas- CiberSA, 2018, doi: 10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551395.
 sification based on semi-supervised clustering,” J. China Univ. Posts [164] G. Draper-Gil, A. Habibi, M. Saiful, and A. Ghorbani,
 Telecommun., vol. 17, pp. 84–88, Dec. 2010. “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 [141] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, and B. Xie, “Internet traffic features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISS),
 clustering with side information,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 80, no. 5, 2016, pp. 407–414.
 pp. 1021–1036, 2014. [165] S. E. Gómez, B. C. Martínez, A. J. Sánchez-Esguevillas, and
 [142] R. Raveendran and R. Menon, “An efficient method for Internet traffic L. H. Callejo, “Ensemble network traffic classification: Algorithm comclassification and identification using statistical features,” Int. J. Eng. parison and novel ensemble scheme proposal,” Comput. Netw., vol. 127,
 Res. Technol., vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 297–303, 2015. pp. 68–80, Nov. 2017.
 [143] Z. Liu, R. Wang, M. Tao, and X. Cai, “A class-oriented feature [166] Y. Du and R. Zhang, “Design of a method for encrypted P2P traffic
 selection approach for multi-class imbalanced network traffic datasets identification using K-means algorithm,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 53,
 based on local and global metrics fusion,” Neurocomputing, vol. 168, no. 1, pp. 163–168, 2013.
 pp. 365–381, Nov. 2015. [167] D. J. Arndt and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “A comparison of three
 [144] F. Ertam and E. Avcı, “A new approach for Internet traffic classification: machine learning techniques for encrypted network traffic analysis,”
 GA-WK-ELM,” Measurement, vol. 95, pp. 135–142, Jan. 2017. in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Security Defense Appl. (CISDA),
 [145] R. Dubin et al., “Real time video quality representation classi- Apr. 2011, pp. 107–114.
 fication of encrypted HTTP adaptive video streaming—The case [168] H. Singh, “Performance analysis of unsupervised machine learning
 of Safari,” CoRR, vol. abs/1602.00489, 2016. [Online]. Available: techniques for network traffic classification,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.00489 Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol., 2015, pp. 401–404.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2014 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 21, NO. 2, SECOND QUARTER 2019

 [169] P. V. Amoli and T. Hämäläinen, “A real time unsupervised NIDS [188] J. Riihijarvi and P. Mahonen, “Machine learning for performance
 for detecting unknown and encrypted network attacks in high speed prediction in mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag.,
 network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Meas. Netw. (M&N), Oct. 2013, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 51–60, Feb. 2018.
 pp. 149–154. [189] Y. Jin et al., “A modular machine learning system for flow-level traffic
 [170] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian, “Deep classification in large networks,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data,
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–4, Mar. 2012.
 deep learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1709.02656, 2017. [Online]. Available: [190] I. Trestian, S. Ranjan, A. Kuzmanovic, and A. Nucci, “Googling
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.02656 the Internet: Profiling Internet endpoints via the World Wide Web,”
 [171] T. Bujlow, T. Riaz, and J. M. Pedersen, “A method for classification IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 666–679, Apr. 2010.
 of network traffic based on C5.0 machine learning algorithm,” in Proc. [191] M. Pietrzyk, J.-L. Costeux, G. Urvoy-Keller, and T. En-Najjary,
 Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan. 2012, pp. 237–241. “Challenging statistical classification for operational usage: The ADSL
 [172] B. Huifeng, Z. Xianlong, Z. Hongfeng, and Z. Likun, “Traffic-load case,” in Proc. 9th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas. (IMC), 2009,
 prediction based on echo state network improved by Bayesian the- pp. 122–135.
 ory in 10G-EPON,” J. China Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 22, no. 2, [192] L. Grimaudo, M. Mellia, E. Baralis, and R. Keralapura, “SeLeCT:
 pp. 69–73, 2015. Self-learning classifier for Internet traffic,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 [173] G. Münz, H. Dai, L. Braun, and G. Carle, TCP Traffic Classification Manag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 144–157, Jun. 2014.
 Using Markov Models. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2010, [193] B. Ng, M. Hayes, and W. K. G. Seah, “Developing a traffic classificapp. 127–140. tion platform for enterprise networks with SDN: Experiences & lessons
 [174] E. M. R. Oliveira, A. C. Viana, K. P. Naveen, and C. Sarraute, learned,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (IFIP Netw.), May 2015, pp. 1–9.
 “Mobile data traffic modeling: Revealing temporal facets,” Comput. [194] L. Bertaux et al., “Software defined networking and virtualization for
 Netw., vol. 112, pp. 176–193, Jan. 2017. broadband satellite networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 3,
 [175] K.-W. Lim, S. Secci, L. Tabourier, and B. Tebbani, “Characterizing pp. 54–60, Mar. 2015.
 and predicting mobile application usage,” Comput. Commun., vol. 95, [195] E. Exposito, Advanced Transport Protocols: Designing the Next
 pp. 82–94, Dec. 2016. Generation. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2013.
 [176] M.-Y. Su, “Using clustering to improve the KNN-based classifiers for [196] E. Exposito and C. Diop, Smart SOA Platforms in Cloud Computing
 online anomaly network traffic identification,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., Architectures. London, U.K.: Wiley, 2014.
 vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 722–730, 2011. [197] J. Aguilar, J. Torres, and K. Aguilar, “Autonomic communication
 [177] N. Kheir, “Behavioral classification and detection of malware through system based on cognitive techniques,” KES J., vol. 22, no. 2,
 HTTP user agent anomalies,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 17–37, 2018.
 pp. 2–13, 2013. [198] ULAKNET Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 [178] B. Schmidt, A. Al-Fuqaha, A. Gupta, and D. Kountanis, “Optimizing http://ulakbim.tubitak.gov.tr/en/hizmetlerimiz/data-warehouse
 an artificial immune system algorithm in support of flow-based Internet [199] K. Cho, K. Mitsuya, and A. Kato, “Traffic data repository at the wide
 traffic classification,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 54, pp. 1–22, May 2017. project,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (ATEC),
 [179] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end Berkeley, CA, USA, 2000, p. 51.
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neu- [200] MWG of the WIDE Project. MAWI Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017.
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI), [Online]. Available: http://mawi.wide.ad.jp/mawi/
 Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48. [201] CAIDA. CAIDA Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 [180] V. Carela-Español, P. Barlet-Ros, A. Cabellos-Aparicio, and http://www.caida.org/data/
 J. Solé-Pareta, “Analysis of the impact of sampling on NetFlow [202] The University of Waikato. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
 traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1083–1099, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://wand.net.nz/wits/waikato/1/20040507-
 2011. 233830-64.php
 [181] R. Keralapura, A. Nucci, and C.-N. Chuah, “A novel self-learning archi- [203] The University of Auckland. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
 tecture for P2P traffic classification in high speed networks,” Comput. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://wand.net.nz/wits/auck/8/20031202-
 Netw., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1055–1068, 2010. 090000.php
 [182] Z. Xu, L. Ma, and J. Sun, “Efficient tri-ary search tree based packet [204] RIPE Network Coordination Centre. Traffic Traces. Accessed: Sep. 27,
 classification algorithm,” in Proc. IET Conf., Jan. 2007, pp. 833–836. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://labs.ripe.net/datarepository/data-
 [183] W. Pak and Y.-J. Choi, “High performance and high scalable packet sets/nlanr-pma-data
 classification algorithm for network security systems,” IEEE Trans. [205] TSTAT Telecommunication Networks Group—Politecnico Di Torino.
 Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 37–49, Jan. 2017. Accessed: Jul. 18, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://ostinato.org/
 [184] Z. Liu, R. Wang, and D. Tang, “Extending labeled mobile network [206] DATCAT Internet Measurement Data Catalog. Accessed: Mar. 10,
 traffic data by three levels traffic identification fusion,” Future Gener. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://imdc.datcat.org/collection/1-070W-
 Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 453–466, Nov. 2018. [Online]. Available: 6=tcrsg-collection
 http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X17309937 [207] The Telecommunication Networks Group UNIBS. Accessed: Jul. 18,
 [185] A. Satoh et al., “Traffic classification in mobile IP network,” in 2017. [Online]. Available: http://netweb.ing.unibs.it/ntw/
 Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Inf. Technol. Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6. [208] LBNL/ICSI Enterprise Tracing Project. Accessed: Jul. 18,
 [186] D. Naboulsi, M. Fiore, S. Ribot, and R. Stanica, “Large-scale mobile 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.icir.org/enterprisetraffic analysis: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 1, tracing/Overview.html
 pp. 124–161, 1st Quart., 2016. [209] KDD Cup 1999 Data. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017. [Online]. Available:
 [187] C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and http://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html
 wireless networking: A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1803.04311, 2018. [210] DARPA Intrusion Detection Data Sets. Accessed: Sep. 27, 2017.
 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.04311 [Online]. Available: https://ll.mit.edu/ideval/data/

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 08:54:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.