662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

 Anonymity Services Tor, I2P, JonDonym:
 Classifying in the Dark (Web)
 Antonio Montieri , Domenico Ciuonzo , Senior Member, IEEE,
  , Senior Member, IEEE
 Giuseppe Aceto , and Antonio Pescape

 Abstract—Traffic Classification (TC) is an important tool for several tasks, applied in different fields (security, management, traffic
 engineering, R&D). This process is impaired or prevented by privacy-preserving protocols and tools, that encrypt the communication
 content, and (in case of anonymity tools) additionally hide the source, the destination, and the nature of the communication. In this
 paper, leveraging a public dataset released in 2017, we provide classification results with the aim of investigating to which degree the
 specific anonymity tool (and the traffic it hides) can be identified, when compared to the traffic of other considered anonymity tools,
 using five machine learning classifiers. Initially, flow-based TC is considered, and the effects of feature importance and
 temporal-related features to the network are investigated. Additionally, the role of finer-grained features, such as the (joint) histogram of
 packet lengths (and inter-arrival times), is determined. Successively, “early” TC of anonymous networks is analyzed. Results show that
 the considered anonymity networks (Tor, I2P, JonDonym) can be easily distinguished (with an accuracy of 99.87% and 99.80%, in
 case of flow-based and early-TC, respectively), telling even the specific application generating the traffic (with an accuracy of 73.99%
 and 66.76%, in case of flow-based and early-TC, respectively).

 Index Terms—Dark web, dark net, Tor, I2P, JonDonym, traffic classification, anonymity, privacy, security

 Ç

1 INTRODUCTION

T HE increasing amount of people’s online activities over
 last years has lead to a growing concern on their privacy and anonymity. As a consequence, Anonymity Tools
 (Tor) [1], the Invisible Internet Project (I2P) [2] and JonDonym (formerly known as Java Anon Proxy, JAP, or Web-
 Mix) [3] are the most popular. In recent years, ATs have
(ATs) have been increasingly employed by Internet users been investigated in several studies from disparate perto achieve privacy in varying degrees, i.e., to hide the spectives, collectively covering a wide spectrum of topics.
source, the destination, and the nature of the communica- These included very narrow aspects of anonymity
tion, besides encrypting the content itself. Additionally, in “realm”, such as the design improvement of a specific AT,
many cases they are even capable of hiding the users’ its performance and delay analysis, development of effecidentity to the final destination (i.e., the web-server). These tive attacks to be performed on it, users’ behavior analysis
services provide anonymity to the users by forwarding and identity disclosure risk, censoring policies for ATs [4],
their traffic through multiple stations, encrypting and so to name a few.
decrypting it multiple times, until the users’ data reach Although many important aspects of ATs equally
their destination. By doing so, users’ data preserve their deserve attention, a key issue is to understand whether their
anonymity since each station being part of the path knows (encrypted) traffic data can be classified and, if so, to which depth.
only part of the information. Hence, tracing of users’ data More specifically, it is interesting to ascertain to which
within these networks is extremely difficult. Indeed, from degree an external observer can recognize an AT and how
users’ perspective, these tools allow browsing the web cir- fine would be the fingerprinting granularity achievable,
cumventing provider-enforced restrictions or running that is, whether traffic types and/or services hidden into
applications without revealing users’ identity and location them could be inferred. This investigation is equally useful
to any intermediary observing the traffic. Among the sev- to designers of anonymity networks, as it suggests how prieral ATs developed in recent years, The Onion Router vacy of anonymity networks could be further robustified.
 Indeed, Traffic Classification (TC) is an important part of
 Internet traffic engineering and has applications in several
 A. Montieri is with the University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, NA fields such as network monitoring, security, application
 80138, Italy. E-mail: antonio.montieri@unina.it. identification, anomaly detection, accounting, advertising,
 D. Ciuonzo is with the NM2 s.r.l., Napoli, NA 80143, Italy. and service differentiation [5], [6]. From an operational
 E-mail: ciuonzo@nm-2.com.
 G. Aceto and A. Pescape are with the University of Napoli Federico II, standpoint, TC mechanisms consist in associating (labeling)
 Napoli, NA 80138, Italy and with the NM2 s.r.l., Napoli, NA 80143, Italy. traffic flows with specific application types. TC has gained
 E-mail: {giuseppe.aceto, pescape}@unina.it. on importance in recent years due to growing incentives to
Manuscript received 6 Oct. 2017; accepted 27 Jan. 2018. Date of publication disguise certain applications [7], comprising those generat-
9 Feb. 2018; date of current version 13 May 2020. ing anonymous traffic. Therefore, TC of ATs traffic is an
(Corresponding author: Antonio Pescape.)
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TDSC.2018.2804394 appealing (and open) research field.

 1545-5971 ß 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 663

 TC methods range from (earlier) port-based methods, to pertaining to a short (early) sequence of packets. To the best
those based on payload inspection (termed Deep Packet of our knowledge, there is no similar classification-based
Inspection techniques, DPI [8], [9]) and, more recently, to analysis of ATs in the literature, both in terms of a similar
those based on Machine Learning (ML) classifiers (either viewpoint and detail of the analysis. The obtained results
supervised and unsupervised). The latter class of TC show that anonymity networks can be easily discerned, and
approaches provides decisions based on the sole observa- the traffic type and the service running within it can be reation of traffic-flow [10] or packet-based features [11], [12]. sonably inferred as well (by a judicious use of the appropri-
Thus, ML-based techniques uniquely suit to anonymous ate classifier and optimized set of features).
(encrypted) traffic analysis. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
 Exacerbating the lack of data for experimenting with TC Section 2 discusses related works, whereas Section 3 desapproaches, it is worth mentioning that one of the main cribes the considered TC framework of ATs; experimental
issues of research efforts in anonymity field is given by the results are reported in Section 4; finally, Section 5 provides
fact that real data are hardly publicly available, which prevents conclusions and future directions.
experiments repeatability and, as a matter of fact, precludes
unanimous and shared conclusions. Indeed, previous works 2 RELATED WORK
on ATs have been based on: (i) data collected within a simu- Up to authors’ knowledge, there are no studies focused on
lated environment [13]; (ii) data generated from private the classification and identification of different anonymity
anonymous networks [14]; (iii) data generated from real traf- services at various levels of granularity, that is discerning in
fic on anonymous networks by researchers1 themselves [15], the ET they generate: the specific Anonymous Network
[16], [17], [18]. Unfortunately, in the latter case, researchers (L1), the Traffic Type (L2), and the Application (L3). The
have been reluctant to making the collected data publicly principal reason is the lack of suitable and available dataavailable for reasons of users’ privacy. sets. As a consequence, henceforth, we provide a wider dis-
 A fundamental opportunity in this direction, allowing to cussion on the state-of-the-art of anonymous (encrypted)
answer the question constituting the basis of the present traffic investigation, being subject of many works in last
study (i.e., whether identifiability of anonymous networks years. Then, in the ending part of the section, we specifically
is possible), is represented by the recently released Anon17 focus on works dealing with anonymous TC to underline
dataset [19]. Indeed, this public dataset consists of a collec- their difference with respect to the present study.
tion of traces gathered by different anonymity networks, as First attempts of analyzing anonymity networks are made
well as related services and applications running inside by means of emulation tools [13] or in private networks [14],
them. To the best of authors’ knowledge, no similar datasets focusing on Tor case. In detail, Tor network requires all its
have been made available online up to date. Hence, Anon17 traffic to be relayed at least through three nodes before reachrepresents an important (shared) workbench for research ing its destination. The entry point of Tor network is usually
studies on the topic. denoted as entry node, whereas the last relay before reaching
 In view of these reasons, the main contribution of this the destination (i.e., the exit node) “lends” its IP address,
paper is a detailed study on whether anonymity networks which is interpreted as the source of the traffic by the destina-
(such as Tor, JonDonym, and I2P) can be discerned.2 Our tion. On the other hand, middle nodes add to the speed and
analysis is carried out at different levels of granularity, as robustness of the Tor network without making the owner of
we try to infer whether the Anonymity Network being the relay look like the source of the traffic. When using Tor in
observed (referred to as L1 in what follows) can be classified its standard setting, Tor utilization can be inferred by moniand, in affirmative case, whether the Traffic Type (L2) and toring connections to (known) entry nodes. To this end, Tor
Application (L3) transported hidden within them could be bridges are alternative entry points to the Tor network that
inferred. To this end, we consider five ML classifiers: three are not all listed publicly. Nonetheless, since Tor communiof them are based on the Bayesian approach (i.e., Na€ıve Bayes, cations operate on a cell-basis of a fixed length, they can be
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, and Bayesian Networks), still identified even in the presence of bridges. For this reawhereas the other two on the well-known decision trees (i.e., son, Tor Pluggable Transports (PTs) have been recently devel-
C4.5 and Random Forest). The adoption of a pool of classi- oped to disguise identification of traffic generated by the
fiers (as opposed to a single one) is not only motivated by users connected to a certain Tor bridge, making it look like
an obvious need for comparison, but also to investigate random (or something different from Tor traffic).
minutely the (number and nature of) relevant features Specifically, in [13] a network emulator (called Experineeded for an accurate classification, as well as the need to menTor) is presented, representing a test environment which
reach conclusions not coupled to a specific classifier. The allows modeling of relevant “actors” (i.e. Tor routers, bandpresent analysis is devoted both to the development and width, users, and applications). On the other hand, a private
analysis of classifiers based on flow-originated features or network environment is set up in [14], with the intent of discriminating between (encrypted) HTTPS and Tor traffic.
 The reported comparison is based on the collection of the
 1. As mentioned earlier, the traffic on anonymity networks relies on
passing the users’ data through multiple nodes on the network. Since following traffic types: (i) regular HTTPS traffic; (ii) HTTP
these nodes relay traffic for multiple users, collecting the data from over a private Tor network; (iii) HTTPS over a private Tor
these nodes will include traffic from several other users. This means network. Three ML classifiers (i.e., Random Forest, J48/
that data are collected running a node and filtering its data so as to C4.5 and AdaBoost) are there adopted, and shows that
include only the “desired” traffic.
 2. Preliminary results in the same framework of this study have HTTP/HTTPS traffic over Tor can be detected with a score
been published as a conference publication [20].  93% (when a 3.7% false-positive rate is ensured).
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

 More recently, Rao et al. [21] propose an unsupervised of 775 sites (and over 300,000 real-world traffic dumps
approach, based on gravitational clustering, to detect flows recorded over a two-month period) in single-hop systems,
of Tor network from mixed anonymous/non-anonymous while performs poorly with multi-hop systems. Nonetheless,
traffic data. The experimental analysis is based on a dataset this study highlights that the latter networks are not capable
obtained by mixing (real-traffic) flows generated from differ- of providing perfect protection against the proposed techent services (e.g., DNS, HTTP, HTTPS and SSH) and Tor- nique (3% and 20% of average accuracy in Tor and JonDoemulated flows obtained via ExperimenToR. Results provided nym networks, respectively). The above finding is further
report an average accuracy of 88% for gravitational cluster- explored in [25], where a Support Vector Classifier is
ing, outperforming other unsupervised techniques, such as employed for the same problem over Tor and JonDonym
K-means, expectation-maximization, and DBSCAN. (separately), underlining their incomplete anonymity. The
 We mention that several other works have analyzed Tor, traffic features comprise those based on volume, time, and
JonDonym, and I2P based on real data [15], [16], [18], [22], direction, such as the number of packets/transmitted bytes
[23], focusing however on some other (equally-important in both directions and the percentage of incoming packets.
though) aspects, such as evaluating the volume of traffic run The training set consists of 15500 instances related to 775
within [15], designing the attack type [16], [23], discovering websites (20 instances each) on either Tor or JonDonym. The
“anonymous” routers [18] or providing guidelines for eval- results show that (over a known set of websites) the detection
uating privacy level of a generic AT [22]. For example, Ling rate improves over [24] from 3% to 55% (resp. from 20% to
et al. [23] propose a combination of an active attack and a 80%) in Tor (resp. JonDonym) network. On the other
detection mechanism to break Tor users’ privacy, based on hand, in the open-world (unknown websites) scenario,
the size of transmitted packet from the web server to the the training set includes 4000 URLs chosen from the 1
user, through the router. Since Tor has a fixed cell size million most popular websites in Alexa ranking and other
(512 bytes) but accommodates varying packet sizes, the 1000 URLs (not included in the training set) are added to
modulation of buffer size at the sender (and hence of pay- the test data. In this case, the detection rate is 73% (with
load size) will reflect on a different (known) number of Tor 0.05% false-positive rate).
cells: using big and small buffer sizes, a binary signal is thus More recently, in [26] an improved (repeatable) website
encoded with the connection (in the form of controlled fingerprinting approach is proposed, and showed to be
number of cells) so as to recover it back at the receiver (web superior both in terms of detection accuracy and computaclient) side, effectively identifying the client involved in the tional efficiency to existing alternatives. To provide a closer
connection. Equally important, a delay is added in between analysis to a realistic case, a huge representative dataset is
buffered packets before transmission to ensure correct collected, with the intent of avoiding simplified assumpdetection of the encoded bit at the receiver. Indeed, this step tions made in the previous works, allowing for the first time
obviates effects due to packets congestion, retransmission the evaluation of the website fingerprinting attack against
or any normal traffic behavior during the server-client path. Tor using realistic background noise. Using this data, the
Reported results show that this method requires only practical limits of website fingerprinting at Internet scale
10 packets to reach a 90% detection rate (when a 4% false- are explored (in an open-world setup), showing that webpositive rate is ensured). Differently, the authors in [22] page fingerprinting effectiveness does not scale for any condefine five different key factors for determining the ano- sidered page in the considered datasets and any state-ofnymity level of any generic AT (taking however Tor, I2P, the-art classifier. Specifically, this is underlined by a
and JonDonym as specific case studies) from the user’s decrease of recall/precision pair with the size of the backperspective. Then, a synthetic measure is proposed as a ground sites to distinguish the monitored pages from.
weighted combination of these factors, with weights arising Almubayed et al. [27] also use supervised classifiers (e.g.,
from a pairwise comparison technique. The analysis high- Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Network, C4.5, Random Forest, and
lights that although these ATs aim to provide total users Support Vector Machine), to develop an identification
anonymity, some users info contained in these ATs is avail- method for discovering Tor-encrypted web-pages (belongable to the operators of the services. ing to the top 5 from Alexa web-site) from HTTPS (back-
 More recently, a few works have analyzed real traffic ground) traffic, represented by top 100 sites from Alexa.
from anonymity networks, focusing on TC aspect; we now Results (pertaining to identification of each single web page
discuss them in detail. from those considered as HTTPS background) report very
 First, there is a corpus of literature pertaining to a specific high (resp. low) TP (resp. FP) rates for all the identification
application of TC, known as website fingerprinting, whose problems analyzed and all the classifiers there employed
aim is to identify a specific web-page accessed by a client of ( 99% and  1% for TP and FP rates, respectively).
encrypted and anonymized connections by observing pat- Differently, Springall et al. [28] present two novel methterns of data flows such as packet size and direction. ods (pertaining to HTTP and SSH traffic) to identify, at a
Herrmann et al. [24] tackle the problem of website finger- Tor exit node, network connections originated behind the
printing in the context of different privacy-enhancing tech- Tor network from those that have not, so as to allow a connologies based on both single-hop (OpenSSL, OpenVPN) tent provider filtering on a per-connection basis rather than
and multi-hop (Tor, JonDonym) systems, by proposing a per-IP basis. The proposed methods identify Tor inbound
multinomial Na€ıve Bayes classifier (along with a few addi- connections through the use of delay and round-trip time
tional variants), that relies on the normalized frequency dis- features, respectively. In order to evaluate performance,
tribution of IP packet sizes. The proposed classifier correctly results are presented for two small-scale experiments (testidentifies (in closed world) up to 97% of requests on a sample ing performance with HTTP and SSH traffic, respectively),
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 665

showing very high identification rates (100% and 98.99% client tunnels for all applications seems to boost applications
respectively) when partitioning network connections into profiling.
Tor and non-Tor originating connections. More recently, Anon17 dataset is presented in [19]. As
 Similarly, Bai et al. [29] propose a fingerprinting method anticipated in Section 1, the dataset is composed by directo identify Tor and Web-Mix (viz. JonDonym) networks. tional traffic-flows obtained by gathering data from three
Their method uses specific strings, packet length, and fre- different ATs, namely Tor, I2P, and JonDonym. Furtherquency of the packets. The proposed approach is tested on more, it provides information at increasing detail (i.e., traffic
simulated networks and achieves  95% of accuracy in identi- type and application levels), by providing labels for traffic
fying both systems (Tor and Web-Mix). In [30] the authors flows pertaining to applications running on Tor and I2P (in
propose a method based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) different flavors), such as “Browsing” and “EEpsites”,
to classify encrypted Tor traffic in four categories: P2P, FTP, respectively, as well as the PTs employed on the Tor net-
IM, and Web. The features employed are based on burst vol- work. Up to authors’ knowledge, no similar datasets are
umes and directions, extracted from Tor flows. Then, HMMs available publicly up to date. The sole exception is repreare employed to build inbound and output models of sented by the dataset described/analyzed in [35], containthe application types considered. The proposed method is ing however only Tor-traffic, belonging to eight different
reported to obtain a maximum accuracy of 92%. applications (Browsing, Audio, CHAT, Mail, P2P, FT, VOIP,
 AlSabah et al. [17] propose another ML-based approach and Video), and providing only time-related features.
for recognizing applications (browsing, streaming, and Bit-
Torrent) used by Tor’s users based on the adoption of differ- 3 TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION
ent classifiers (Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Network, functional
and logistic model trees), leveraging circuit-level (circuit life- In the following, first terms and concepts regarding traffic
time and the corresponding amount of data transferred) objects are introduced (Section 3.1), together with an overand cell-level info (inter-arrival time of the cells, including view of the classification features available in the Anon17
their statistics). Both online (cell-level info is used to classify dataset (Section 3.2) and how these are capitalized, when
the circuit while it is in use) and offline (cell- and circuit-level automatic feature selection is exploited (Section 3.3); then
info is both capitalized to classify the circuit) approaches are the last part (Section 3.4) describes the classification algoconsidered, with the highest accuracy achieved for online rithms adopted (with corresponding feature sets employed)
(resp. offline) case equal to 97.8% (resp. 91%). Then, a simi- for anonymous traffic analysis.
lar setup is considered in [31], where four classifiers (Na€ıve
Bayes, Bayesian Network, Random Forest, and C4.5) based 3.1 Traffic View
on traffic-flow features are exploited to recognize user activi- According to [19], the anonymous traffic contained in Anon17
ties, and compared with classification based on circuit-level is split into different flows [6], obtained as result of the applicafeatures. The results underline near-ideal accuracy (up to tion of the flow-exporting tool Tranalyzer2 [36]. The direction
100%) with both approaches, flow-based classification being of each flow is then marked as a feature (see details in
nevertheless less demanding.3 Section 3.2), i.e., “A” and “B” for client-to-server and server-
 Similarly, Shahbar and Zincir-Heywood [32] investigate to-client, respectively. According to Tranalyzer2 documentawhether Tor PTs can evade censorship systems based on tion, the termination (segmentation) of an active flow
flow-based (statistical) traffic analysis. Sadly, PTs are de- depends on the activity or the lifetime of a connection [36].
signed to hide the content of Tor connections only; thus, a
flow-based analysis, in principle, can identify Tor traffic even 3.2 Classification Features
when these obfuscation techniques are applied. The authors The traffic features available in Anon17 dataset are obtained
adopt a C4.5 classifier and demonstrate that PT-based obfus- starting from Tranalyzer2 [36]. More specifically, the latter is
cation changes the content shape in a distinct way from Tor, an open source tool that generates flows from a captured
conferring them their own unique fingerprints, hence making traffic dump or directly by working on the network interface,
them recognizable via a statistical-based traffic classifier. The based on the libpcap library. Tranalyzer2 tool is bundled with
aforementioned analysis is then elaborated in [33], where the different basic plugins, being able to extract a plethora of
aim is effective flow-based recognition of Tor PTs in terms of features per flow.4 However, the dataset provides only a subdescribing the proper features, the sufficient amount of data, set of these features, since some of them have been removed
and the effect of data collection. The same authors analyze (such as ICMP and VLAN features) because they do not prothe effects of bandwidth sharing on I2P in [34], investigating vide useful fingerprinting information. Additionally, aiming
both application and user profiling achievable by an attacker. at protecting users’ privacy (and simulate a true ET scenario),
The analysis resorts to a C4.5 classifier fed with flow-based IP addresses and payloads of the packets have also been
features. The experimental results highlight that users and removed from the dataset.
applications on I2P can be profiled. More specifically, a detri- Therefore, Anon17 is provided in the form of a subset of
mental (resp. beneficial) effect of the shared bandwidth 81 fields corresponding to features per flow extracted by the
increase on applications (resp. users) profiling accuracy is aforementioned tool [19]. For our classification problem we
observed. Moreover, it is noticed that the avoidance of shared have removed the fields min_pl, max_pl, and mean_pl,
 as they seem repeated with respect to minPktSz,
 3. Indeed, circuit-level classification uses the data collected at Tor’s
relay, whereas flow-level classification is based on data that could be 4. Tranalyzer2 also enables development of user-defined plugins,
captured anywhere between the user and the Tor’s relay. thus virtually allowing to extract any desired feature.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

maxPktSz, and avePktSize, respectively, considering the 3.3 Feature Selection
specific configuration adopted in Tranalyzer2 for capturing In what follows, we will adopt the classifiers being considthe traffic. Additionally, as opposed to [20], we have dis- ered along with feature selection techniques, allowing to
carded the initial/final timestamps of each flow (time_ extract only the most informative features from a larger set
first and time_last) to avoid biased results, as this pair (in our case, the first set of features considered, being comof features may be influenced by a sequential collection of posed of 74 flow-based statistics). The aim is to (possibly)
the traffic traces belonging to different ATs and/or applica- improve further their performance, while reducing their
tion types. Therefore, we have considered a reduced set of computational complexity. To this end, in this study, we
76 fields, that has been exploited to extract four different types will consider feature selection based on a filtering approach,
of features set, with the aim of providing a comprehensive since wrapper methods may be considerably more complex
analysis of TC of ATs. and coupled to a specific classification algorithm [41]. More
 The first set of features considered comprises 74 summa- specifically, the approach adopted ranks the elements
rizing flow-based statistics, such as: within the set based on the relative importance of each feature, evaluated as the Pearson’s correlation with the class
  Flow direction (A/B) and duration; (random) variable. We remark that other feature selection
  No. of bytes/packets Tx/Rx (including bytes/pack- measures have been also tried (e.g., the normalized/unnorets Tx rate and stream asymmetry measures); malized mutual information or the symmetric uncertainty).
  Packet Length (PL) statistics (mean, min, max, Nonetheless, since we have obtained similar trends (and
 median, quartiles, etc.); slightly worse performance), those are not included in this
  Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) statistics (mean, min, max, study for the sake of brevity.
 median, quartiles, etc.);
  TCP header-related features (window size, sequence 3.4 Classification Algorithms
 number, TCP options, etc.);
 In this section we review five supervised classification algo-
  IP header-related features (type-of-service, time-torithms successfully employed in several works tackling TC
 live, IP flags, etc.);
 of anonymous traffic [17], [31], [32], [34], that are applied to
  No. of connections (i) from source (destination) IP to
 the scenario investigated in this work: (i) Na€ıve Bayes, (ii)
 different hosts and (ii) between source and destina-
 Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, (iii) Bayesian Networks, (iv)
 tion IP during the lifetime of the flow.
 C4.5, and (v) Random Forest.
 As underlined in [19], since I2P network works on both
TCP and UDP, for UDP connections over I2P the TCPrelated features may have zero value. Na€ıve Bayes (NB)
 The second and third sets of features are based on a (finer) The NB is a simple probabilistic classifier that assumes class
histogram representation of PL and joint PL-IAT, respec- conditional independence of the features, being not the case
tively. These sets are obtained through an appropriate for- for real-world problems, but working well in practice and
mat conversion and/or marginalization [37] from the field leading to reduced complexity.
ps_iat_histo. This field, as provided by Tranalyzer2, More specifically, NB evaluates the probability that an
contains precise (non-binned) PL info, whereas applies a unlabeled test instance f T belongs to each class ci , i.e., the
non-uniform binning to the (continuous-valued) IAT infor- posterior probability P ðci jff T Þ, through the Bayes’ theorem
mation.5 Their use will be investigated similarly to [11] to and returns the label corresponding to the maximum Q posteunderstand whether finer-grained features can improve rior among the classes, that is P ðci jff T Þ / P ðci Þ M
 m¼1 P ðfT;m j
classification performance. ci Þ. Here “/” means proportionality and P ðci Þ denotes the
 Finally, the fourth set of features corresponds to the (prior) probability of class ci (estimated from the training
sequence of pairs (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K pack- set). On the other hand, each distribution P ðfm jci Þ is estiets of each flow. This set is extracted from the field mated by resorting to a PMF when the feature is categorical,
nfp_pl_iat,6 containing the info corresponding to the first whereas common alternatives for numerical features include:
K ¼ 20 packets, as set by Tranalyzer2 default options [38]. (i) Moment Matching to a Gaussian PDF (NB), (ii) Super-
This set will be later employed to investigate the design of vised Discretization (NB_SD), and (iii) Kernel-based Density
effective algorithms for early TC [39], [40] of ATs. Estimation (NB_KDE) [42].
 Note that each set of M features adopted by each classi- In this work, each NB classifier will be fed either with the
fier will be generically indicated with f1 ; . . . ; fM (or collec- first set of features (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth
tively as f , ½ f1 . . . fM T ) and the set of classes as V , set of features (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the
fc1 ; . . . ; cL g. Finally, relative importance (based on statistical first K packets).
rankings) of features’ within the first set will be later analyzed in Section 4.3. Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes (MNB)
 The MNB classifier adopts sample histograms as a different
 5. More precisely, the IAT range is divided in 91 bins with the folset of features. Specifically, the MNB classifier treats the fm s
lowing ranges: bins 0  39 covering ½0; 200Þ ms with 5 ms width, bins as frequencies of a certain value of a categorical random
40  59 covering ½200; 400Þ ms with 10 ms width, bins 60  89 covering variable and compares the sample histogram of each test
½400; 1000Þ ms with 20 ms width and bin 90 for IAT values higher than instance with the aggregated histogram of all training
1 s [38].
 6. Only in this case, the pl acronym is referred to the Payload instances per class. Then, the evaluation
 Q of the conditional
Length, in accordance to Tranalyzer2 nomenclature [38]. PMF P ðff T jci Þ is proportional to M ðr
 m¼1 m Þ
 fT;m
 , where rm
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 667

denotes the probability of sampling the mth feature. In par- the majority class in the subset); (iii) there are no examples
ticular, we will employ a variant of MNB classifier, adopt- left.9
ing term frequency transformation with cosine normalization, as In our analysis, C4.5 will be fed either with the first feasuccessfully exploited in Herrmann et al. [24] for website ture set (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of feafingerprinting in anonymous networks.7 tures (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K
 As introduced earlier, since the MNB classifier works on a packets).
set of features in the form of histograms, the second (PL histogram) and third (joint PL-IAT histogram) set of features Random Forest (RF)
described in Section 3.2 will be employed. RF is a classification method based on an ensemble of B
 several decision trees (the number of trees is a free parameter
Bayesian Networks (BNs) tuned by cross-validation or via the “out-of-bag” error), built
BNs are graphical representations which model dependence at training time exploiting the ideas of “bootstrap aggrelationships between features and classes [43], collectively regating” (bagging) and random-feature selection to mitigate
represented as the set of random variables U , ff1 ; . . . ; over-fitting [45]. Specifically, during the training phase, each
fM ; Cg ¼ ½ U1    UMþ1 T . Unlike the NB classifier, they decision tree in the RF classifier is grown based on a bootare not based on the conditional independence assumption strap (i.e., a uniformly random sampling procedure with
for the features. replacement) sample set of the training data available. RF
 Formally, a BN for U is a pair B , hG; Qi, which is learned adds to the above scheme a modified tree learning algorithm
during the training phase. The first component (G) is a named “feature bagging” (to further reduce overfitting) that
Directed Acyclic Graph that encodes a joint probability distribu- selects, at each candidate split in the learning process, only a
tion over U , where each vertex represents a random variable random subset (whose size is another free tunable parameamong U1 ; . . . ; UMþ1 and edges represent their dependencies. ter) of the features. Finally, after training, decision on testing
The second component (Q) represents the set of parameters samples can be made by taking the majority vote or soft commodeling the BN, uniquely determining the local conditional bination of the responses of B trees.
distributions associated to the BN, which allow to encode the In this work, RF will be fed either with the first feature set
joint distribution PB ðf1 ; . . . ; fM ; CÞ. Finally, during the testing (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of features
phase, for each instance f T , the BN classifier returns the label (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K packets).
c^ , arg maxci 2V PB ðci jff T Þ, based on Bayes’ theorem.
 In this study, we will either consider a BN classifier with 4 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
(default) K2 search (BN_K2) for structure learning, or impose This section reports details about the Anon17 dataset and
the network to have a tree-augmented form (BN_TAN) where the pre-processing operations carried out on it (Section 4.1),
the tree is formed by calculating the maximum weight span- introduces the performance metrics employed for evaluaning tree. Each BN classifier will be fed either with the first tion (Section 4.2) and shows the results of the (anonymous)
set of features (flow-based statistics) or with the fourth set of TC investigations performed (Section 4.3).
features (sequence of (Payload Length, IAT) of the first K
packets). 4.1 Dataset Description
 Anon17 was collected at the Network Information Manage-
C4.5 ment and Security Lab [46] between 2014 and 2017 in a real
C4.5 is an algorithm employed to generate a decision tree network environment. The dataset is labeled based on the
used (mainly) for classification purposes [44], based on the information available on the anonymity services themselves
concept of entropy of a distribution [37]. The training algo- (e.g., IP addresses of the Tor nodes) without relying on any
rithm obviates to the NP-hardness of optimal tree search by application classification tool. The data are stored in ARFF formeans of a greedy procedure, based on a top-down recursive mat used in the data mining software tool Weka [42] and report
construction, with all the data of the training set in the root features (discussed in Section 3.2) either on a per-flow basis or
as the init. Then, instances are partitioned recursively based pertaining to the IAT/Payload-Length sequence of the first K
on the chosen feature whose values most effectively split so packets of each flow. Unfortunately, the unavailability of the
as to maximize a purity8 measure in the data, such as the whole sequence of payload lengths and IATs prevents addi-
“gain ratio”, that avoids bias toward features with a larger tional interesting analyses, such as the evaluation of the
support [44]. Thus, the splitting criterion is triggered by the impact of packet sampling on the classification accuracy [47].
feature ensuring the highest gain ratio (i.e., purity). C4.5 We refer to [19] for further details on Anon17 dataset.
recurs on the smaller sublists, until the following termina- Given the available dataset, we tackle classification of
tion criteria are met: (i) all the instances in the list belong to anonymity networks (as well as traffic types and applicathe same class (a leaf node is here created with a label asso- tions) by making the assumption that we are in presence of
ciated to that class); (ii) there are no remaining features for anonymous traffic only, based on a two-fold motivation.
further partitioning (in such case, each leaf is labeled with First, this refers to an application context in which a traffic

 7. It is worth noting that the numerical analysis reported in Section 4 9. Refinements introduced by C4.5 to reduce over-fitting include (a)
has also underlined highest performance of the considered variant with pre-pruning (i.e., stop growing a branch when information becomes
respect to the others analyzed in [24]. unreliable) and (b) post-pruning (i.e., growing a decision tree that cor-
 8. A subset of data is said “pure” if all instances belong to the same rectly classifies all training data and then simplify it later by replacing
class. some nodes with leaves), with the latter preferred in practice.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

 TABLE 1
 Classification Levels: Anonymous Network (L1), Traffic Type (L2) and Application (L3), with Total Number
 of Samples per Class, and Class Label for L3 Granularity

L1 - Anonymous Network L2 - Traffic Type L3 - Application
 Normal Tor Traffic (5283, a) Tor (5283, a)
Tor (358919, a) Tor Apps (252, b) Streaming (84, b), Torrent (84, c), Browsing (84, d)
 Flash proxy (172324, e), FTE (106237, f),
 Tor Pluggable Transports (353384, c) Meek (43152, g), Obfs3 (14718, h), Scramble suit (16953, i)
 I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
 [0% Bandwidth] (195081, d) I2PSnark (127349, j), jIRCii (29357, k), Eepsites (38375, l)

I2P (645708, b) I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
 [80% Bandwidth] (449987, e) I2PSnark (149992, m), jIRCii (149998, n), Eepsites (149997, o)
 I2PSnark (62, p), jIRCii (221, q), Eepsites (145, r),
 I2P Apps (640, f) Exploratory Tunnels (86, s), Participating Tunnels (126, t)
JonDonym (6335, c) JonDonym (6335, g) JonDonym (6335, u)

classifier tool has been able to provide accurate screening of the circuit establishment and the user activities, whereas Tor
clear and standard encrypted traffic, as demonstrated, for Apps refer to flows running three applications on the Tor netexample by Barker et al. [14] and more recently by Rao work (i.e., L3 classes: Browsing, Video streaming, and Torrent
et al. [21] for Tor network. Once the instances of anonymous file sharing). On the other hand, Tor PTs contain flows for five
traffic have been labeled, the aim of the proposed approach different obfuscation techniques (i.e., L3 classes: Flash proxy,
is to assess potential discrimination of different anonymity FTE, Meek, Obfs3, and Scramble suit). Flows belonging to L2
services within such instances. Therefore, the current study I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels are collected by running
represents a further step toward the development of a hier- three applications (L3 classes) on the I2P network: I2Psnark
archical classification framework for traffic analysis of (file sharing), jIRCii (Internet Relay Chat), and Eepsites (webclear/encrypted/anonymous data. Second, the results of sites browsing). The difference between 0% and 80% bandthe present analysis can be intended as an upper bound on width is in the amount of sharing rate of the user bandwidth.
the classification performance of anonymity networks in the I2P Apps contain traffic flows for the same three applications.
case of an open-world assumption. Indeed, a negative answer However, in the latter case, management tunnels belong to
to our question (i.e., an unsatisfactory performance in classi- separate L3 classes (i.e., Exploratory Tunnels and Participatfying anonymous traffic only) would lead to the conclusion ing Tunnels). Lastly, JonDonym dataset contains flows for the
that anonymous traffic, even though perfectly screened whole free mixes on the JonDonym network.
from the remaining traffic bulk, would still remain an unob- Anon17 exhibits a (majority) class imbalance problem, as
servable black-box to an eavesdropping user. Our results shown by the total number of samples in Table 1 (and
will show that this is not the case, and confirm that there is graphically depicted in the top bar of Fig. 1). To cope with
room for classification of ATs in an open-world assumption. it, we have randomly down-sampled10 (without replace-
 As explained in Section 1, our analysis of ATs is conducted ment) by applying a pre-processing filter11 to the instances
at different levels of granularity, that is Anonymous Network of the following highly-populated traffic types (so as to
Level (L1), Traffic Type Level (L2), and Application Level (L3). keep their number comparable with the others): (i) Tor
More specifically, we try to ascertain the granularity of the Pluggable Transports, (ii) I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunidentifiability of these tools by performing classification. The nels [0% BW], and (iii) I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
hierarchical categorization of L1, L2, and L3 is reported in [80% BW]. The considered filter also preserves the propordetail in Table 1. The total number of applications (L3 classes) tions of the contained L3 applications.
identified for each anonymous network (three L1 classes) and In this study, we will consider a configuration corretraffic type (seven L2 classes) is 21 and constitutes the finest sponding to the down-sampling to 5% of the original dataset
level of our TC task. Specifically, (normal) Tor Traffic includes of each traffic type set.12 Fig. 1 shows the percentage of flows
 labeled with different traffic types after performing the
 aforementioned down-sampling (D5 ). We underline that we
 have chosen to down-sample the whole dataset, as opposed
 to the sole training set, since the latter choice would have

 10. Over-sampling methods (e.g., SMOTE, ROSE, etc.) are not considered here as Anon17 dataset does not show a minority class imbalance problem.
 11. Adopted filter is implemented in the Weka environment by
 means of weka.filters.supervised.instance.Resample Java
 class.
 12. We recall that in our previous work [20], we have considered
 two down-sampling configurations (corresponding to 5% and 10%) of
Fig. 1. Down-sampling of Anon17 dataset: Upper barplot (original Full each traffic type set, showing a non-relevant difference in performance
dataset), middle barplot (down-sampling to 5%, D5 ), lower barplot between them. However, aiming at a fairer investigation, here we have
  5 ).
(removal of “all-zero-payload” flows, D opted for the more balanced configuration.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 669

Fig. 2. Accuracy and F-measure of NB (a-b) and BN (c-d) classifiers for different subsets of features (from 5 to 74 with increments of 5) for L3
(Application) level. Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

biased the overall accuracy measure (evaluated from the test under a Gaussian assumption) of each performance measure
set) toward the performance of the majority classes. as a result of the evaluation on the ten different folds.
 Finally, to perform TC of sole informative flows, we have
discarded from D5 all the instances containing only zero- 4.3 Classification Results
payload packets. The latter filtering procedure has been con- In this section, we show results pertaining to several sets of
ducted implicitly by the inspection of the field maxPktSz, as experiments aimed at investigating TC of ATs. More specifi-
Anon17 does not provide the complete sequence of packet cally, the first part of the numerical analysis is focused on
lengths (see [19]). The bottom barplot in Fig. 1 shows the final flow-based TC (even in the case of “finer” histogram-based
resulting dataset (here denoted with D  5 ) considered in the features), while the second part pertains to early TC. In both
following flow-based TC. On the other hand, for the early- cases, feature relevance is also assessed for all the classifiers
TC, a different filtering procedure has been pursued, as considered. The section ends with a finer-grained analysis
explained in detail later in Section 4.3. of the pattern errors of the two classification “philosophies”.

4.2 Performance Measures
 Flow-Based Classification
Our comparison will be based on the following performance
measures [41]: overall accuracy, precision, and recall. Since these First, we investigate flow-based TC based on the first feature
last two metrics are defined on a per-class basis, their aver- set (i.e., comprising summarizing flow-based statistics)
aged (macro) versions (denoted with “prec” and “rec”, respec- described in Section 3.2. However, before proceeding with a
tively) will be employed as synthetic measures and, to rigorous comparison of the classifiers here considered, we
account for the effects of both in a concise fashion, we will first focus on relative performance evaluation of different varconsider the F-measure (F , ð2  prec  recÞ=ðprec þ recÞ). More- iants of NB and BN considered in this paper (cf. Section 3.4).
over, to provide a complete performance “picture” of each To this end, Fig. 2 shows the accuracy and F-measure of
classifier, we will also show their confusion matrices so as to NB, NB_SD, and NB_KDE (resp. BN_K2 and BN_TAN) in top
identify the most frequent misclassification patterns. Clearly, (resp. bottom) plots. Note that the results pertain to L3,
a higher concentration of the confusion matrix toward the being the hardest classification task, but similar trends have
diagonal (where predicted class equals the actual one) implies been observed also for the other (two) levels. Furthermore,
better performance of the generic classifier. the performance has been evaluated by training/testing the
 Finally, for each considered analysis, our evaluation will be classifiers with a varying subset of features, ranked (in
based on a (stratified) 10-fold cross-validation.13 Indeed, decreasing importance) by resorting to the Pearson’s corre-
K-fold validation represents a stable performance evaluation lation (cf. Section 3.2) so as to draw general conclusions.14
framework as it produces less variance in the results. For com- From inspection of the figure, it is apparent that both
pleteness, we will report both the mean and the variance (in NB_SD and NB_KDE outperform NB over all the range of feathe form of a 3s interval, corresponding to 99.7% confidence ture subsets, with NB_SD achieving higher performance
 even in the case of a smaller set. Similarly, BN_TAN
 13. Although preliminary results in [20] have shown negligible difference in performance with respect to a random training-test set split- 14. Using the Weka filter CorrelationAttributeEval,
ting, the present evaluation is intended to highlight statistically- employed in conjunction with a Ranker utility which allows obtaining
significant trends. the top M? (most informative) features, with M? as input parameter.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

Fig. 3. Accuracy (a-c) and F-measure (d-f) of flow-based classifiers for different subsets of features (from 5 to 74 with increments of 5) for each classification level. Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

significantly outperforms BN_K2. The former result can be granularity of the classification task (i.e., moving from L1 to
explained as density estimation of each feature, either in a L3). This intuitive trend can be attributed to the increasing
discretized (NB_SD) or “kernelized” (NB_KDE) fashion, is difficulty of the classification task being tackled. Indeed, the
beneficial since the Gaussian assumption represents an discrimination of anonymous traffic at L3 is harder than tryoverly simplified assumption, whereas in the latter case it is ing to discern merely the anonymity network. Interestingly,
apparent that constraining BN structure learning to a tree- the degradation level varies with the classifier and it is
augmented form (as opposed to a greedy sub-optimal learn- observed to be milder for C4.5 and RF, whereas it is higher
ing) provides improved generalization capabilities. for NB_SD. This finding can be explained as the conditional
 Thus, in the remainder of this section, only the variants independence assumption of the features for NB_SD is limit-
NB_SD and BN_TAN will be considered in our comparison, ing when tackling harder classification tasks (i.e., L3). Overbeing the best-performing Na€ıve Bayes and Bayesian Net- all, from figures inspection, the performance of all classifiers
works classifiers variants observed, respectively. (approximately) reaches a steady value around the top 30
 Then, with the aim of selecting the best subset (viz. an features (as already observed for NB_SD and BN_TAN).
optimized number) of features and provide a comparison of Collectively, the highest performance (with an optimized
the supervised techniques considered, in Fig. 3 we show the number of features) is obtained by RF and C4.5, correspondperformance of all the classifiers described in Section 3.4 ing to 99.87% (resp. 99.87%), 96.87% (resp. 94.17%) and
(except for MNB, whose performance relies on histogram- 73.99% (resp. 69.05%) at L1, L2, and L3, respectively, in terms
based features and will be thus discussed later) when vary- of accuracy (resp. F-measure), as shown by the summarizing
ing the (ranked) subset of features for both training and test results reported in Table 2.
sets. As apparent from the results, all the classifiers obtain Additionally, to investigate whether the most relevant
excellent results in L1 classification, i.e., all achieving both features are mostly related to packet lengths or are also time-
 > 95% accuracy and F-measure when approximately the related, in Fig. 4 we compare the accuracy (Fig. 4a) and the
top 25 features are employed. On the other hand, perfor- F-measure (Fig. 4b) of the same pool of classifiers when (a)
mance metrics generally degrade with the increasing all the (74) features of the first feature set are employed and

 TABLE 2
  5 Obtained with Different [Optimal Number of Features] Employed
 Best Overall Accuracy and Macro F-Measure for Dataset D

Flow-Based Classifier Metric L1 L2 L3
 Accuracy 97.74% [70] 84.92% [15] 62.97% [35]
NB_SD F-measure 97.28% [70] 77.86% [20] 53.23% [30]
 Accuracy 99.83% [65] 95.18% [20] 71.39% [35]
BN_TAN F-measure 99.81% [65] 91.57% [20] 61.31% [40]
 Accuracy 99.56% [65] 96.87% [70] 73.41% [30]
C4.5 F-measure 99.55% [65] 94.17% [65] 68.60% [74]
 Accuracy 99.87% [74] 96.87% [65] 73.99% [70]
RF F-measure 99.87% [74] 94.06% [20] 69.05% [30]

Highlighted values: maximum accuracy and maximum F-measure for each level.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 671

Fig. 4. Accuracy (a) and F-measure (b) of considered flow-based classifiers fed with the full set of (All) features (74) and Non Time-related (NT)
features only (52). Average on 10-folds and corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

(b) Not Time-related (NT) features (52) are considered. The those removed in the case of flow-based TC (i.e., the resulting
analysis is conducted at the three different levels of classifica- dataset D  5 ), as we are removing also the instances with some
tion granularity allowed by Anon17. From inspection of both payload exchange after the first 20 (zero-payload) packets.
figures, it is apparent that the contribution of time-related The reason for a different filtering procedure is to avoid subfeatures (within first dataset) to classification performance is mitting “non-informative” (referring to the first K ¼ 20
only marginal. This observation applies to all the levels of packets) instances to the considered classifiers.
granularity and to all the classifiers being employed in This allows us training the classifiers considered in this
our investigation, with a maximum improvement of just paper15 with the Payload Lengths & IATs of the first
þ1:21% (resp. þ1:40%) in terms of accuracy (resp. F-mea- N < K (non-zero payload) packets so as to assess the possure) obtained for NB_SD at L2 using NT features. sibility of accurately classifying ATs with a few packets, as
 We now focus on investigating whether (i) finer-grained shown for the Internet traffic scenario [39], [40]. We underfeatures, such as histograms, would improve performance line that, in case of flows having less than N payloadand (ii) whether these finer-grained features would require carrying packets, the remaining packets are treated as misstime-related features. We recall that the appeal of histogram- ing values [41] by the supervised classifiers.
based features has been highlighted by different works on For this reason, Fig. 6 reports the accuracy and F-measure
TC [7], [48]. Based on this reason, in Fig. 5 we report the per- at the three considered levels when the classifiers are
formance (in terms of both accuracy and F-measure) of MNB trained/tested on the Payload Lengths & IATs of the first
in conjunction with the use of the second (PL histogram) and N ¼ 1; . . . ; 16 (non-zero payload) packets, so as to assess to
third (joint Payload Length-IAT histogram) feature sets which degree ATs (and services running within them) can be
described in Section 3.2. Similar to the previous analyses, the identified “on-the-fly”. As apparent from the results shown,
performance is evaluated at the three levels of granularity 5 7 packets are usually sufficient to (approximately) allow
for the sake of a complete comparison. First, it is apparent the classifiers to achieve their highest performance. This conthat considering histogram-based features does not improve sideration applies to each of the three levels of granularity
classification performance, as evident from comparison of considered. Remarkably, the reported results agree qualita-
Figs. 3 and 4. The lack of improved performance may be due tively with those in [39], [40] pertaining to non-anonymous
to a two-fold reason: (i) in MNB case, features pertaining to traffic. Additionally, we remark that a similar analysis (not
IP/TCP headers and number of connections are not taken shown for brevity) has been conducted by feeding the classiinto consideration and (ii) the histogram discretization fiers with Payload Lengths only (without considering IATs).
provided by Anon17 may be not adequate for developing In the latter case, results have shown almost equal perforan accurate fingerprint. Interestingly, time-related fea- mance at the first level, whereas a rough 5% drop has been
tures do not improve appreciably classification perfor- observed for F-measure at L2 and L3.
mance at first two levels. This trend is similar to that In detail, performance at L1 is extremely satisfactory
observed for classifiers fed with the first feature set, see ( 99% with only three payload-carrying packets),
Fig. 4. The only exception is represented by the increase whereas there is a significant degradation with respect to
 flow-based TC (see Fig. 3) in the case of L2 and L3. Specifof F-measure at L3 (þ6:85%) when the PL histogram feaically, as summarized in Table 3, the highest accuracy
ture set. This trend may be attributed to the harder classi-
 (resp. F-measure) achieved at L2 is 85.80% (resp. 78.96%),
fication task to be solved.
 as opposed to 96.87% (resp. 94.17%) in the case of flowbased TC. Similarly, at L3 the highest accuracy (resp. F-
Early Traffic Classification measure) is 66.76% (resp. 50.10%), as opposed to 73.99%
We now investigate the possibility of performing “early” (resp. 69.05%). Interestingly, the highest performance for
classification of anonymous traffic. To this end, we consider early-TC is achieved by Bayesian methods (i.e., NB_SD and
the fourth set of features extracted by Anon17, i.e., the BN_TAN) as opposed to decision tree-based classifiers for
sequence of the first K ¼ 20 Payload Lengths & IATs (as the flow-based approach.
described in Section 3.2).
 For the present analysis, we remove from dataset D5 (see
 15. Similar results to flow-based TC have been observed when com-
Fig. 1) all the instances whose first K ¼ 20 packets have all paring NB and BN variants. Therefore, in what follows, we will again
zero payload. We recall that these correspond to a super-set of report performance of the sole NB_SD and BN_KDE, respectively.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

Fig. 5. Accuracy (a) and F-measure (b) of MNB classifier [24] leveraging PL and PL-IAT histograms as features. Average on 10-folds and
corresponding 3s confidence interval are shown.

 The observed performance loss corresponds to the price classification, it is interesting to note that I2P is never misclaspaid for trying to classify with only a few packets at an sified with JonDonym, as opposed to the corresponding best
extremely thin level of detail. The degradation at L2/L3 under- early classifier. Second, by looking at L2 confusion matrices, it
lines the need for further investigations on early-TC, and the is apparent that the classifiers based on both approaches
need for developing deeper (viz. structured) representations (with different quantitative outcomes) present error patterns
of the sequence of the first few packets. which almost entirely lead to a misclassification of the traffic
 type within the same anonymous network. Nonetheless, it is
 worth noticing that while this applies to I2P traffic types
Fine-Grained Performance (“d”, “e”, and “f”) for both approaches, misclassification of
Since classification at increasing level of granularity reveals Tor traffic types (“a”, “b”, and “c”) is only observed in early
to be a challenging task (but also the most interesting from a classifiers. In the latter case, the error-patterns are mostly due
user’s privacy perspective), henceforth we analyze the con- to misclassification of Tor Apps (“b”) with Normal Tor
fusion matrices of flow-based and “early” classifiers, shown Traffic (“a”).
in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively, so as to highlight interesting Moving to a further detail, we discuss in what follows L3
error patterns. We recall that for these matrices the higher confusion matrices. From inspection of the results at the finthe concentration toward the main diagonal, the better the est level of ATs granularity, it can be concluded that the best
overall performance. More specifically, for each classifica- flow-based classifier has the same high discrimination capation level, we report the confusion matrices of the optimal bility when trying to discern applications running within
(in terms of F-measure) combination of classifier and number Tor. Such result qualitatively agrees with [31], where a high
of employed features (or of the first N packets), based on accuracy is achieved in classifying Tor applications (i.e.,
previous analyses. browsing, streaming, and BitTorrent, corresponding to “b”,
 First, by looking at L1 performance, error patterns look “c”, and “d”, respectively) via flow-based classification based
scattered for both approaches. However, in case of flow-based on Tranalyzer2. The results shown in Fig. 7 are compatible

Fig. 6. Accuracy (a-c) and F-measure (d-f) considering the first N non-zero payload packets in terms of Payload Length & IATs (from 1 to 16) for each
classification level.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 673

 TABLE 3
 Best Overall Accuracy and Macro F-Measure for Early Traffic Classification Obtained
 with Different [Optimal Value of the First N Packets] Employed

 Early Classifier Metric L1 L2 L3
 Accuracy 99.80% [14] 83.50% [06] 66.07% [11]
 NB_SD F-measure 99.78% [12] 73.31% [06] 48.52% [11]
 Accuracy 99.76% [16] 85.80% [16] 66.76% [11]
 BN_TAN F-measure 99.68% [16] 78.96% [13] 50.10% [10]
 Accuracy 99.68% [03] 84.85% [10] 65.16% [10]
 C4.5 F-measure 99.66% [06] 76.58% [04] 46.98% [05]
 Accuracy 99.74% [04] 85.30% [16] 66.22% [13]
 RF F-measure 99.74% [04] 76.05% [06] 47.59% [05]

 Highlighted values: maximum accuracy and maximum F-measure for each level.

with the above work (interestingly, also in our harder classifi- therefore results obtained in the two cases cannot be directly
cation task, tree-based classifiers performed the best) and compared. However, the results in this section confirm the
further show that Tor app can be hardly misclassified with unique fingerprint generated by PTs when trying to obfusapps from other anonymous networks (such as I2P). cate Tor traffic.
 On the other hand, the best early classifier achieves low Finally, it is apparent how performance at L3 of both
discrimination power for applications contained within the approaches are limited superiorly mostly by the error-prone
traffic types Normal Tor Traffic and Tor Apps. An oppo- recognition of applications running within I2P, representing
site trend is instead apparent for the case of Tor Plug- (for the considered dataset), the least discernible AT in terms
gable Transports, which are easily discerned with both of its carried services and applications. Indeed, the best flowflow-based and early classifiers. Differently, in [32] classifi- based classifier (being the approach leading to the highest
cation of Tor PTs was demonstrated successful in compari- performance observed), is not able to discern apps within
son to background traffic, achieving with a C4.5 classifier a I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels [0% Band-
97% accuracy with a 10-fold validation. Here, we assume width] and I2P Apps Tunnels with other Tunnels
that the background traffic has been already screened out, [80% Bandwidth], as apparent from the two clusters

Fig. 7. Confusion matrices (percentage accuracy and log scale) of the best flow-based classifier at L1 (RF with 74 features), L2 (C4.5 with
65 features), and L3 (RF with 30 features).

Fig. 8. Confusion matrices (percentage accuracy and log scale) of the best “early” classifier at L1 (NB_SD with 12 packets), L2 (BN_TAN with
13 packets), and L3 (BN_TAN with 10 packets).
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2020

within the confusion matrix in Fig. 7. More in detail, in [22] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
the effect of bandwidth participation on I2P is investigated,
 This work is partially funded by art. 11 DM 593/2000 for
showing higher application profiling with less bandwidth
 NM2 s.r.l. (Italy). The authors would like to thank the Facsharing. This trend qualitatively agrees with the discussed
 ulty of Computer Science of Dalhousie University, Halifax,
results, where the best performing flow-based classifier is
 Canada, for publicly releasing Anon17 dataset.
shown to be most prone to misclassification of I2P Apps
Tunnels with other Tunnels [80% bandwidth] (i.e.,
 REFERENCES
“m”, “n”, and “o”). Therefore, the results of the present
study agree with the literature. In addition, we observe that [1] P. Syverson, R. Dingledine, and N. Mathewson, “Tor: The second
 generation onion router,” in Proc. USENIX 13th Secur. Symp., 2004,
another (although less problematic) error-cluster for the pp. 21–21.
flow-based classifier is also apparent for all the applications [2] The Invisible Internet Project (I2P). Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available:
belonging to the traffic type I2P Apps. https://geti2p.net/en/
 [3] Project: AN.ON - Anonymity. Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available:
 Finally, we recall that the present work provides a more http://anon.inf.tu-dresden.de/index_en.html
comprehensive study of traffic classification and identifica- [4] G. Aceto and A. Pescape, “Internet censorship detection: A
tion of different ATs at a varying degree of granularity, survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 83, pp. 381–421, 2015.
underlining the narrowness of the above studies (i.e., focus- [5] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and G. Ventre, “Worm traffic analysis and
 characterization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2007, pp. 1435–
ing on a particular AT or a specific aspect of it). 1442.
 [6] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
5 CONCLUSIONS Jan./Feb. 2012.
 [7] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and C. Sansone, “Early classification of
This paper tackled TC of ATs, specifically Tor, I2P, and Jon- network traffic through multi-classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Donym, reasoning on which degree they can be told apart, Traffic Monitoring Anal., 2011, pp. 122–135.
considering different granularities (the anonymity network [8] N. Cascarano, A. Este, F. Gringoli, F. Risso, and L. Salgarelli, “An
 experimental evaluation of the computational cost of a DPI traffic
adopted, the traffic type tunneled in the network, and the classifier,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2009, pp. 1–8.
application category generating such traffic). The analysis [9] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. De Donato, and A. Pescape, “PortLoad:
has been carried on the public dataset Anon17, processed Taking the best of two worlds in traffic classification,” in Proc.
with random down-sampling (to cope with its strong class IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2010, pp. 1–5.
 [10] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for
imbalance) and by filtering out non-informative (all-zero- internet traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Compayload) flows. Different ML classifiers (Na€ıve Bayes, mun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, Oct.–Dec. 2008.
Multinomial Na€ıve Bayes, Bayesian Networks, C4.5, and [11] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and H.-C. Kim, “Traffic classification
 through joint distributions of packet-level statistics,” in Proc. IEEE
Random Forest) have been applied to the processed data- Global Commun. Conf., 2011, pp. 1–6.
set, based on different feature sets and by assessing the [12] A. Dainotti, F. Gargiulo, L. I. Kuncheva, A. Pescape, and
optimal number of features to consider, by means of fea- C. Sansone, “Identification of traffic flows hiding behind TCP port
ture selection. 80,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2010, pp. 1–6.
 [13] K. Bauer, M. Sherr, D. McCoy, and D. Grunwald, “ExperimenTor:
 Our analysis shows that Tor, I2P, and JonDonym anon- A testbed for safe and realistic Tor experimentation,” in Proc.
ymous networks can be hardly mistaken from each other. USENIX Workshop Cyber Secur. Experimentation Test, 2011, pp. 7–7.
Indeed, results underline that all considered classifiers [14] J. Barker, P. Hannay, and P. Szewczyk, “Using traffic analysis to
obtain extremely satisfactory performance (at least 97% identify the second generation onion router,” in Proc. 9th IEEE/
 IFIP Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput., 2011, pp. 72–78.
accuracy when the number of features is chosen wisely) [15] A. Chaabane, P. Manils, and M. A. Kaafar, “Digging into anonyin discriminating the anonymity networks present in mous traffic: A deep analysis of the Tor anonymizing network,”
Anon17, in both cases of flow-based and early classifiers. in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Netw. Syst. Secur., 2010, pp. 167–174.
 [16] B. Westermann and D. Kesdogan, “Malice versus AN. ON: Possible
Furthermore, it is shown that digging down in the spe- risks of missing replay and integrity protection,” in Proc. Springer
cific type of traffic tunneled, and the specific type of Int. Conf. Financial Cryptography Data Secur., 2011, pp. 62–76.
application generating such traffic, is possible with up to [17] M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s perfor-
73.99% accuracy and 69.05% F-measure with a flow-based mance using real-time traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Conf.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2012, pp. 73–84.
RF. Performance of “early” classifiers at application level [18] P. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Tan, Q. Li, X. Wang, and J. Shi, “Empirical
is lower (66.76% and 50.10% in terms of accuracy and F- measurement and analysis of I2P routers,” J. Netw., vol. 9, no. 9,
measure, respectively, with the early BN_TAN) and more pp. 2269–2279, 2014.
 [19] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Packet momentum for
structured feature representations should be conceived. identification of anonymity networks,” J. Cyber Secur. Mobility,
Thanks to the public availability of Anon17 dataset and vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27–56, 2017.
the detailed description of methods and (open-source) [20] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, and A. Pescape, “Anonymity
tools, our results are easily repeatable, comparable, and services Tor, I2P, JonDonym: Classifying in the dark,” in Proc.
 IEEE 29th Int. TeleTraffic Congr., 2017, pp. 1–6.
extensible by the research community. [21] Z. Rao, W. Niu, X. Zhang, and H. Li, “Tor anonymous traffic iden-
 As future work we will investigate (i) hierarchical clas- tification based on gravitational clustering,” Peer-to-Peer Netw.
sification, (ii) comparison with other public labeled data- Appl., pp. 1–10, Jun. 2017, https://link.springer.com/article/
 10.1007/s12083-017-0566-4
sets (possibly also in an open-world assumption), should
 [22] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Weighted factors for
they become available, (iii) development of classifier evaluating anonymity,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Found. Practice Secur.,
fusion techniques for anonymous TC, and (iv) implemen- 2017, pp. 235–240.
tation of features and classifiers in the open-source TC [23] Z. Ling, J. Luo, W. Yu, and X. Fu, “Equal-sized cells mean equalsized packets in Tor?” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2011,
platform TIE [49] to allow researchers to evaluate them pp. 1–6.
on live traffic traces.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
MONTIERI ET AL.: ANONYMITY SERVICES TOR, I2P, JONDONYM: CLASSIFYING IN THE DARK (WEB) 675

[24] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website finger- Antonio Montieri received the MS degree from
 printing: Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the University of Napoli “Federico II,” in July 2015.
 the multinomial Na€ıve-Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop He is working toward the PhD degree in the
 Cloud Comput. Secur., 2009, pp. 31–42. Department of Electrical Engineering and Informa-
[25] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fin- tion Technology (DIETI), University of Napoli
 gerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in “Federico II” since February 2017. Currently, he is
 Proc. ACM 10th Annu. Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, part of the TRAFFIC research group whose activipp. 103–114. ties are carried out in the field of Computer Net-
[26] A. Panchenko, et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in works. In detail, his work is focused on network
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15. measurements, (encrypted and mobile) traffic clas-
[27] A. Almubayed, H. Ali, and J. Atoum, “A model for detecting Tor sification and modeling, monitoring and assessencrypted traffic using supervised machine learning,” Int. J. Com- ment of cloud network performance. He has co-authored 13 papers and
 put. Netw. Inf. Secur., vol. 7, no. 7, 2015, Art. no. 10. 4 posters in international journals and conference proceedings.
[28] A. Springall, C. DeVito, and S.-H. S. Huang, “Per connection
 server-side identification of connections via Tor,” in Proc. IEEE
 29th Int. Conf. Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl., 2015, pp. 727–734. Domenico Ciuonzo (S’11-M’14-SM’16) received
[29] X. Bai, Y. Zhang, and X. Niu, “Traffic identification of Tor and the PhD degree in electronic engineering from the
 Web-mix,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Des. Appl., 2008, Second University of Naples, Italy and, from 2011,
 pp. 548–551. he has held a number of visiting researcher
[30] G. He, M. Yang, J. Luo, and X. Gu, “Inferring application type appointments. He is researcher at Network Meainformation from Tor encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 2nd Int. surement and Monitoring (NM2), Naples, Italy.
 Conf. Adv. Cloud Big Data, 2014, pp. 220–227. Since 2014, he is member of the editorial board of
[31] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Benchmarking two tech- several IEEE, IET and ELSEVIER journals. His
 niques for Tor classification: Flow level and circuit level classi- research interests include data fusion, statistical
 fication,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. Cyber Secur., 2014, signal processing, wireless sensor networks, trafpp. 1–8. fic analysis, and machine learning.
[32] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Traffic flow analysis of
 Tor pluggable transports,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Netw. Service Manage., 2015, pp. 178–181. Giuseppe Aceto received the PhD degree in tele-
[33] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “An analysis of Tor plug- communication engineering from the University of
 gable transports under adversarial conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Napoli “Federico II”. He is a post doc in the Depart-
 Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., 2017, pp. 1–7. ment of Electrical Engineering and Information
[34] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Effects of shared band- Technology, University of Napoli “Federico II”. His
 width on anonymity of the I2P network users,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. work falls in measurement and monitoring of net-
 Secur. Privacy Workshop Traffic Meas. Cybersecur., 2017, pp. 235–240. work performance and security, with focus on cen-
[35] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. Mamun, I. Saiful, and A. A. Ghor- sorship. Recently, he is working on bioinformatic
 bani, “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in and ICTs applied to health. He is the recipient of a
 Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. best paper award at IEEE ISCC 2010.
[36] S. Burschka and B. Dupasquier, “Tranalyzer: Versatile high performance network traffic analyser,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Series
 Comput. Intell., 2016, pp. 1–8. Antonio Pescape  (SM’09) is a full professor of
[37] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. computer engineering with the University of Napoli
 Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2012. “Federico II”. His work focuses on Internet technol-
[38] Tranalyzer2. Sep. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://tranalyzer.com ogies and more precisely on measurement, moni-
[39] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian, toring, and analysis of the Internet. Recently, he is
 “Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Com- working on bioinformatic and ICTs for a smarter
 mun. Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, 2006. health. He has co-authored more than 200 confer-
[40] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, and K. Salamatian, “Early application ence and journal papers and is the recipient of a
 identification,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT Conf., 2006, Art. no. 6. number of research awards. He is a senior member
[41] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, M. A. Hall, and C. J. Pal, Data Mining: Prac- of the IEEE.
 tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. San Mateo, CA, USA:
 Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.
[42] M. Hall, F. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and " For more information on this or any other computing topic,
 I. H. Witten, “The WEKA data mining software: An update,” please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.
 ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, 2009.
[43] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt, “Bayesian network
 classifiers,” Mach. Learn., vol. 29, no. 2/3, pp. 131–163, 1997.
[44] J. R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Amsterdam,
 The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2014.
[45] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
 32, 2001.
[46] NIMS: Network Information Management and Security Group.
 Jul. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://projects.cs.dal.ca/projectx/
[47] D. Tammaro, S. Valenti, D. Rossi, and A. Pescape, “Exploiting
 packet-sampling measurements for traffic characterization and
 classification,” Int. J. Netw. Manage., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 451–476, 2012.
[48] E. Hjelmvik and W. John, “Breaking and improving protocol
 obfuscation,” Tech. Rep. 2010-05, Chalmers Univ. Technol.,
 G€ oteborg, Sweden, 2010.
[49] W. De Donato, A. Pescape, and A. Dainotti, “Traffic identification
 engine: An open platform for traffic classification,” IEEE Netw.,
 vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 56–64, Mar./Apr. 2014.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:59:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.