2020 3rd International Conference on Hot Information-Centric Networking

 BFSN: A Novel Method of Encrypted Traffic
 Classification Based on Bidirectional Flow
2020 3rd International Conference on Hot Information-Centric Networking (HotICN) | 978-1-7281-9216-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/HotICN50779.2020.9350824

 Sequence Network
 Xinxin Tong1, Xiaobin Tan2, Lingan Chen2, Jian Yang2, Quan Zheng2
 1Department of Cyberspace Security, University of Science and Technology of China
 2Department of Automation, School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China

 AnHui Province Key Laboratory of Future Networks, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
 txx1204@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xbtan@ustc.edu.cn, cla@mail.ustc.mail.edu.cn, jianyang@ustc.edu.cn, qzheng@ustc.edu.cn

 Abstract—With the rapid development of network technol- traditional network traffic identification methods, such as portogy and encryption technology, network security issues have based classification [5], which only needs to obtain the first
 received more and more attention, and network encryption traffic packet of traffic can realize traffic identification, deep packet
 is increasing, which results in a huge challenge for network
 traffic classification. Combining machine learning algorithms inspection(DPI) [6], which conducts the traffic classification
 with manual design has become a mainstream approach to by regular expression for matching the packet payload data.
 solve this problem, However, it requires a large amount of However, due to the hiding of port information in the case
 human effort to extract and process features, which depend on of encryption and the occurrence of dynamic port, the DPIprofessional experience heavily. In this paper, We discuss the based methods could only identify the traffic that its type was
 essential reason why convolutional neural network(CNN) can
 deal with the problem of encrypted traffic classification and recoded in the expression library, but it is difficult to obtain
 propose a novel classification framework the Bidirectional Flow the expression of the encrypted payload. Although due to the
 Sequence Network(BFSN) based on long short-term memory emergence of machine learning, encrypted traffic identification
 (LSTM). Compared with the traditional traffic classification has a certain progress [7]– [11], whereas, its good performance
 scheme, the BFSN is an end-to-end classification model that is highly dependent on the excellent feature extraction and the
 learns representative features from the raw traffic and classifies
 them. Moreover, We apply the length and direction information classification algorithm selection, which are complicated and
 of the encrypted traffic to construct the bidirectional traffic time-consuming.
 sequence and then process it based on LSTM. Our Experiments Recently, deep learning has rapidly developed and has
 gains the excellent accuracy about 91% based the ISCX VPN- witnessed its great success in a variety of areas, such as speech
 NonVPN dataset. recognition, natural language processing, etc. Meanwhile, deep
 Index Terms—Encrypted Traffic Classification, Bidirectional
 Flow Sequence Network, Long Short-Term Memory learning methods have been widely used in the scenario of
 communication networks. Network traffic classification can be
 I. I NTRODUCTION regarded as a common classification problem in the field of
 Along with the rapid development of Internet technol- machine learning. Therefore, this paper proposes an encryption
 ogy, the Internet has been playing an important role in traffic identification method based on the discussion about
 deep learning algorithms, where two deep learning algorithmspublic life and bringing great convenience to network users.
 Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) and Long Short Term
 Thereby, an accurate traffic classification becomes the basic
 Memory(LSTM)–are employed. The CNN is used to adopting
 task of crucial importance so as to more effectively enhance
 automatically for flows feature extraction to deal with the task
 the level of network management, improve service quality and
 of traffic classification, which has emerged in many existing
 guarantee the network security [1]– [3]. Whereas, the network
 studies. However, in this paper, we mainly discuss and reveal
 traffic is increasingly expanding with advent of various new
 the essential reason why CNN can classify the encrypted
 network application. Thus, network traffic classification betraffic, and then construct the bidirectional traffic sequence
 comes more and more challenging owing to the proposed facts
 for each flow based on above discussion, besides, the different
 [4].
 sequence with packet length and direction of flow are handled
 up to now, many researchers have been proposed various
 by the LSTM to improve traffic classification performance.
 methods for traffic classification. However due to the wide use
 This paper’s contributions can be summarized as follows:
 of cryptographic protocol, network traffic payload characteris-
 • We propose a novel DL-based method which can estabtics and its statistical characteristics have obvious change, so
 that it no longer has the characteristics of the fixed field, which lish a framework for classify multiple kinds of encrypted
 results in a significant reduction in traffic visibility, thus the traffic, where the LSTM is employed. The presented
 method takes advantage of supervised learning, builds a
 more more efficient and accurate framework owing to the

 978-1-7281-9216-1/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 160
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 dataset. may come to own privacy. Besides, owing to taking statistic
 • we discuss and reveal the essential reason why convo- features into account, i.e., the features of flow and packet(e.g.
 lutional neural network can deal with the problem of flow bytes per second and packet size).
 encrypted traffic classification through our comprehensive
 experiments.
 • Based on the previous discussion, we take into consid- C. Deep learning Traffic Classification
 eration the length and direction information of encrypted
 traffic and propose the BFSN. Besides, applying the Therefore, Deep learning has been implemented to the
 LSTM to process the bidirectional traffic sequence and encrypted traffic in that it can automatically select underobtain the results of classification in that feature vectors lying features from the raw traffic. What’s more, there is
 associated with continuous packets in a given traffic a more stronger learning capability for methods based on
 exhibit correlated time behavior similar to that of the deep learning, so that they make it easier to deal with heavy
 NLP. network tasks with multiple layers of neural networks. In
 The structure of this paper is as follows. Section II describes addition, they require fewer computation resources but can
some of the related work of network traffic classification. Sec- achieve a higher accuracy than traditional methods. Most
tion III details the methodology of the proposed method based methods adopted convolution neural network(CNN) or long
on LSTM. In section IV and V, we discuss several models short-term memory(LSTM) or spare auto encoder(SAE) [12]–
based on CNN and describe the network traffic classification [18]. Wang et al. [12] proposed an end-to-end encrypted traffic
model BFSN we presented in this paper, respectively. Finally, classification method based on the 1dCNN for encrypted traffic
section VI gives a conclusion of this this article. service classification, but 1dCNN requires features have no
 relation to their location while we think the order of the
 II. R ELATED W ORK packets and its location of bytes content should be taken into
A. Traditional Traffic Classification account. Zeng et al. [17] applied the combination of CNN
 Port-based method is the most traditional traffic identifica- and LSTM to directly deal with the first 784 bytes data of
tion that relies on the port, which use the information in the the flow. Although the results seems ideal, the data input into
TCP or UDP headers of the packets to exact the port number LSTM does not actually have time characteristics. Lotfollahi
that is assumed to be associated with a particular application, et al. [14] extracted the first 1500 bytes of only one packet and
and then compared them with the assigned IANA TCP or took them as the inputs of CNN. They train CNN and Stack
UDP port numbers for traffic classification. Of course, the Auto Encoder (SAE) to classify encrypted traffic. They both
extraction procedure and the identification are so simple and perform well in the classification problem, but they ignore
fast. whereas, the method is failed in the situation with the the time sequence features hidden in a flow. Liu et al. [18]
port obfuscation, port forwarding, protocol embedding and the proposed the FS-Net framework and applied the bi-GRU to
dynamic port [5], which resulted in significant reduction of the process the sequence feature of encrypted traffic.
identification accuracy. DPI analyzes the whole packets and In summary, traditional methods proposed above may not
use predefined patterns like the expressions as the signature deal with the classification problem of encrypted network
for every protocol and application [6], but the patterns need to traffic. As for the machine learning methods, They considered
update whenever a new protocol released that is more difficult the whole flow of statistical information, they depend on
for the encrypted traffic and privacy issues are among the professional experience heavily, which require a large amount
drawbacks of the method. of human effort to extract and process features. Therefore,
 more and more researchers apply the deep learning that can
B. Machine Learning Traffic Classification automatically extract the features from the flow and process
 With the goal of classifying the encrypted traffic, many of them efficiently to solve the classification of encrypted traffic.
the current researchers mainly adopt the machine learning However, these hybrid methods above involve the payload
approach, such as Decision Tree, Random Forest [8]– [9] or some header information of the traffic packet, in the era
and SVM [7], etc. For example, Auld et al. [11] proposed of traffic explosion, handling packets alone may be costly,
a Bayesian neural network, which is trained to classify the privacy policies and laws prohibit accessing, which limits
traffic with P2P protocol such as the bittorrent and kazaa and the use of payload features [19], More importantly, in some
the accuracy was up to 99%. Ding et al. [8] first filtered cases, although convolutional neural network can solve the
the HTTPS traffic with a machine learning algorithm C4.5 problem of encrypted traffic identification to a certain extent,
decision tree, then classify the services with random forest. the essential reason of its identification has not been discussed
Liu et al. [10] preferred to packet-level statistical features in previous studies. In addition, the direction information
which include maximum and mean of packets of the sessions of traffic is usually ignored, but it should be as one of
and built a composite feature-based semi-supervised method the important characters of traffic identification. Thereby, we
for encrypted traffic identification. However, their efficiency proposed the BFSN and apply LSTM that can effectively
extremely rely on manually selected features, rich prior- process the information based on the time to deal with the
experiences and profession knowledge, where some features problem of classifying encrypted traffic.

 161
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 III. M ETHODOLOGY (4)update cell state: The step is to update the original cell
 In the real network, many hidden security problems of state Ct−1 by the corresponding calculation of the results
plaintext traffic make network service providers start to apply obtained above.
various network encryption protocols, which bring some chal- Ct = ft ∗ Ct−1 + it ∗ yt (4)
lenges to traffic identification. This chapter briefly introduces
the interaction process of network encryption protocols and (5)output gate: It is necessary to determine the state of the
the deep learning method. cell, so that we can obtain the final output value. Of course,
 First, Considering the input and the previous output layer to
A. Encryption Protocol generate a filter value to determine which parts of the cell
 state should to act on the output. Then, the cell state needs to
 The interaction process of encryption protocol generally
 be mapped through the tanh function, and the result obtained
includes two processes: first, the establishment of a secure
 after multiplying the filter value.
connection, that is, the encryption algorithm supported by the
communication parties through negotiation.The second phase ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1 , xt ] + bo ) (5)
is mainly used for the first phase of the secret key encryption
 ht = ot ∗ tanh(Ct ) (6)
to transmit content, implementation of normal communication
[10]. such as SSH secure shell protocol, the communication C. Dataset
between the two parties establishes encrypted channel to keep In this paper, the public dataset published by the University
the transmission of data from eavesdropping, and uses the of New Brunswick is selected in the evaluation of our proposed
secret key exchange algorithm to ensure the safety of the secret model: ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [20]. The dataset
key itself HTTPS encryption protocol. The main are to create contains 25GB raw traffic in the pcap format, which includes
an encrypted security channel to guarantee safe information 14 network application classes. We relabel the raw traffic
transmission and realize the server certification that is the into 6 classes from the VPN encrypted traffic to be used
HTTP protocol with SSL protocol or a combination of TLS in our experiments, according to the work [12]. The classes
protocol can be verified. of the datasets applied to our model are listed in Table I in
 details. The dataset is split into the flow level according to the
B. LSTM
 five tuples: source IP, destination IP, source port, destination
 As a special RNN, LSTM has the feature that the output port, protocol. We select randomly split the dataset into 90%
of the neuron can directly act on itself at the next moment. training dataset and 10% testing dataset, respectively.
In this paper, LSTM is selected mainly because it adds the
following key components in the neuron, so as to eliminate
the influence caused by the disappearance of the gradient. TABLE I. DATASET TYPE TABLE
 (1)forget gate: The first step in the LSTM network is to T ype the number of flows the number of packets
determine the information to be discarded from the cell state V pn Chat 4029 86117
Ct−1 , which is provided a parameter value between 0 and 1 V pn Email 298 21558
 V pn F ile 1020 376703
by the forget gate layer, 0 indicates complete discard of infor-
 V pn Streaming 349 528299
mation, and 1 indicates complete reservation of information. V pn P 2P 477 422074
Besides, The forget gate not only reads the input layer xt , but V pn V oIP 1618 723569
considers the information of the previous output layer ht−1 to
obtain the value and operate to the cell state Ct−1 through the IV. D ISCUSSION ABOUT M ODELS BASED ON CNN
activation function.
 Although convolutional neural network can solve the probft = σ(Wf · [ht−1 , xt ] + bf ) (1) lem of encrypted traffic identification to a certain extent, the
 essential reason of its identification has not been discussed
 (2)input gate: The process of input gate is similarity to those in previous studies. Therefore, we proposed different model
operations above of forget gate, which is mainly to filter the graphs and discuss the reason with comprehensive experiments
information of input layer xt . based on the CNN. Fig. 1 illustrates the workflow of our
 it = σ(Wi · [ht−1 , xt ] + bi ) (2) encrypted traffic classification.

 (3)input node: How much information should be selected to Construct
 Split to Extract
 matrix to CNN Softmax
add the cell state is the main task of the step, which considers flow payload
 images
the information of the previous output layer ht−1 and the input
layer xt to get a value between 0 and 1 through the tanh Traffic Truncate Output
function, the purpose of the tanh is to map content between captured or pad label

-1 and 1, so as to generate the candidate value of input layer.
 Fig. 1. The architecture of the CNN model
 yt = tanh(Wy · [ht−1 , xt ] + by ) (3)

 162
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
A. Graph of Flow whose size is 5*5 with 1 stride. Relu [21] is employed as the
 The packets that have the same five tuples belong to activation function. After a 2*2 max-pooling layer, we take the
a flow, and we make use of the packet payload bytes as output to Con − 2, whose structure is same with the Con − 1,
the inputs of neural networks. Different bytes lengths may and then the output of Con−2 is sent to the F c layer. Finally,
appear in different packets, while the size of the inputs of we can obtain a flow vector with 6 dimensions. the design of
CNN is necessarily constant. Thereby, in our approach, the CNN is indicated in Table II (where N equals to 32).
number of the packets and the length of the payload byte
sequence of any packet equals to N and M . Besides, the data TABLE II. DESIGN TABLE OF CNN
packet header is wiped off in that it is stuffed by the some
addresses information which contain useless features for traffic Layer Name Input Filter Output
classification. Additionally, we will truncate if the number of convolutional 32 ∗ 128 5∗5 32 ∗ 128 ∗ 32
 Cno − 1
 maxpooling 32 ∗ 128 ∗ 32 2∗2 16 ∗ 64 ∗ 32
packets exceeds N or the payload length exceeds M , and pad convolutional 16 ∗ 64 ∗ 32 5∗5 16 ∗ 64 ∗ 128
 Cno − 2
zero if less. maxpooling 16 ∗ 64 ∗ 128 2∗2 8 ∗ 32 ∗ 128
 After the above operation, we obtained an N *M two- Fc Dense 8 ∗ 32 ∗ 128 −− 6
dimensional matrix for each flow. As is known, one byte can
be transformed into an integer in the range of [0,255], so a D. Experiments and Analysis
byte can be viewed as a pixel. Correspondingly, the matrix
is constructed as an image with M -pixel width and N -pixel In general, accuracy is used to evaluate the overall perforheight. At last, we normalize the scale to [0,1] by dividing the mance of a classifier.
bytes by 255. TP + TN
 accuracy = (7)
 TP + FP + TN + FN
B. Different Model Graphs of Flow
 where TP represents the number of items correctly classified as
 Firstly, we only consider the packets that contain payload, P, TN is the number of items correctly classified as belonging
and extract the first 32 packets(containing payload) and the to Not-P, FN is the number of items incorrectly classified as
first 128 payload bytes to construct the graph of Type-1. As we belonging to Not-P, and FP is the number of items incorrectly
know, this graph model appeared the previous research [12], classified as P.
but it ignores the actual sequence relationship of packets, that The results of experiments is showed in Table III. According
is, the existence of empty packets. Hence, the second kind to the Type-1 and Type-2, the accuracy of Type-2 is similar to
of graph Type-2 arises, in this model, we extract the first 32 that of Type-1, but Type-2 takes into account the empty packets
packets and the first 128 payload bytes to obtain the graph. in the flow, so that it can identify the type of the encrypted
Compared to the first, it takes less time to extract the feature traffic in less time. Although Type-3 increases the number of
information from the traffic, and can be faster to identify the packets to 128, it does not improve the accuracy in that many
categories of encrypted traffic, which can achieve the online flows have fewer packets than this value. Additionally,
classification of encrypted traffic. Moreover, We try to increase we found that the accuracy was also similar to that before
the number of packets to 128 to improve the accuracy, i.e., the padding payload content with 255 for each type. Therefore,
Type-3. we can conclude that the input really processed by the
 Through the above model, we can explore whether the convolutional neural network is not the encrypted payload
empty packets in the flow provide useful features for encrypted content, but the contour features constructed by different
traffic identification, and lay a foundation for the future use packet lengths.
of the direction as the identification features.
 In order to explore whether the payload of the encrypted TABLE III. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS
traffic has a real effect on the traffic identification, We treated
 T ype Size Empty packets Pad 255 Accuracy
the three model diagrams above, and overlaid the payload No 71%
 T ype − 1 32 ∗ 128 No
content with 255 after extracting the payload, that is, all the Y es 70%
diagrams were made up of 255 or 0. Therefore, for the first No 71%
 T ype − 2 32 ∗ 128 Y es
 Y es 71%
type which is a black and white picture. However, because No 70%
different packets convey bytes with different lengths, they have T ype − 3 128 ∗ 128 Y es
 Y es 71%
different segmentation profiles. For the second and third types
model graph, there is another feature that the black and white
 V. S CHEME OF BFSN
lines appear at intervals(due to the existence of empty packets).
 To solve the problem of classifying the encrypted traffic,
C. Detailed Model Architecture Based on CNN some researchers made use of the payload based on CNN
 The convolutional neural network consists of two convo- [12] [16], whereas, it is limited the use of the payload fealutional layers (Con − 1 and Con − 2) and a fully connect tures due to the privacy policies and laws prohibit accessing.
layer (F c). For the design of convolutional layer, Con − 1 More importantly, according to the results on encrypted traffic
firstly filters the 32(or 128)*128 graph with 32 (128)kernels, identification in the previous discussion of models based on

 163
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
CNN, the encrypted payload data of flow does not play a role TABLE IV. DESIGN TABLE OF LSTM
in the identification, but the contour information formed by the
load length of different flows has some effect in the process. Layer Input Output dropout
Therefore, we consider length sequence information of packets Embedding 2 ∗ 32 128 ∗ 32 −−
as one of the features, LST M 128 ∗ 32 128 ∗ 32 0.5
 Sof tmax 128 ∗ 32 6 −−
 In addition, Owing to the difference of the interactions
information of different types of traffic and the results on
encrypted traffic identification in the previous discussion on TABLE V. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS
the empty packets, we believe that the directional information
of packet should be as the feature. T ype Length sequence Directional sequence Accuracy
 BFSN Y es Y es 91%
 FS-Net Y es No 81%
A. Design of BFSN
 As is showed in Fig. 2, we proposed the BFSN based on
the analysis above, i.e., we first split the encrypted traffic Apart from the accuracy metric, there are two other common
according to the information of five tuples, the temporal and and widely-used metrics: precision and recall, where TP,
directional correlation features that contained in the back and FP and FN have been described in the section of previous
forth packets belonging to a flow between the source node and experiments above. These metrics are formulated as follows:
destination node, also attach important information for traffic
 TP
classification. Then extracting the length sequence information precision = (8)
of the first N packets and directional information for each TP + FP
packet, where the directional feature is set to -1 or 1. Besides, TP
in order to verify the validity of directional information of recall = (9)
 TP + FN
the packets, we make the experiment FS-Net [18] that only
considers the sequence information of the first N packets.
 Due to recurrent neural networks have shown a considerable 1
power for exploiting sequential tasks [22]. In this paper, 0.9
 0.8
considering the effectiveness of LSTM in processing the 0.7
 Precision

 0.6
time series, we apply LSTM to process the extracted feature 0.5
sequence. We forward the 2-dimension (i.e., the length and 0.4
 0.3
direction information) packet feature vectors to the LSTM cells 0.2
 0.1
with the time sequence T=N . 0

 length
 Split
 Extract Preprocess
 to LSTM Softmax
 features direction sequences
 flow
 BFSN FS-Net

 Traffic Output Fig. 3. The Precision comparison of BFSN and FS-Net
captured label

Fig. 2. The architecture of the BFSN model
 1
 0.9
 In our experiments, the design of LSTM is showed in 0.8
 0.7
Table IV, and the N equals to 32. Besides, the sequence
 Recall

 0.6
 0.5
information is sent to the embedding layer that learns from 0.4
 0.3
word embedding in natural language processing [23], and take 0.2
the 2-layer hidden layer, where the number of the hidden 0.1
 0
units is set to 64, in LSTM network. Furthermore, we take
dropout [24] with 0.5 ratio to in the LSTM to avoid overfitting problem and the Adam optimizer [25] with learning rate
0.001 is applied. Finally, the outputs of the last hidden layer
are fed into a 6-way softmax which produces a distribution BFSN FS-Net

over the 6 class labels.
 Fig. 4. The Recall comparison of BFSN and FS-Net
B. Experiments and Analysis The overall comparison results between our model and FS-
 First, we make use of the accuracy to evaluate the overall Net are exhibited in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. A first glance of the
performance of model, and the results is showed in Table V. figure shapes the performance advantages of our model in

 164
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
contrast with FS-Net in different types of encrypted traffic. [7] A. Saber, B. Fergani and M. Abbas, “Encrypted Traffic Classification:
As Fig. 3 shows, the precision of all types in BFSN is better Combining Over-and Under-Sampling through a PCA-SVM,”2018 3rd
 International Conference on Pattern Analysis and Intelligent Systems
than that in FS-Net, and the performance of Vpn File is more (PAIS), Tebessa, 2018, pp. 1-5.
than 20% higher than that of FS-Net, in particular. Fig. 4 [8] R. Ding and W. Li, “A hybrid method for service identification of
demonstrates that our model hits the higher values in recall SSL/TLS encrypted traffic,”2016 2nd IEEE International Conference on
 Computer and Communications, Chengdu, 2016, pp. 250-253.
for most of the types of traffic than FS-Net. Thereby, the [9] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz and M. E. Karsligil,
fact beneath the results suggests the effectiveness of the flow “Application identification via network traffic classification,”2017 Interdirection sequence features in our model. national Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications,
 Santa Clara, CA, 2017, pp. 843-848.
 [10] H. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, “Semi-supervised Encrypted Traffic Classi-
 VI. C ONCLUSION fication Using Composite Features Set,”Journal of Networks, vol.7, pp.
 1195–1200, 2012.
 In this paper, we construct different graphs of the payload [11] T. Auld, A. W. Moore and S. F. Gull “Bayesian Neural Networks
that whether we consider empty packets and apply 255 to for Internet Traffic Classification,” in IEEE Transactions on Neural
 Networks, vol. 18, pp. 223-239, Jan. 2007.
cover the encrypted payload, to explore the essential reason [12] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
why convolutional neural network can deal with the problem encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
of encrypted traffic classification. We come to the conclusion networks,” 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and
 Security Informatics (ISI), Beijing, 2017, pp. 43-48.
that the input really processed by the convolutional neural [13] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri and A. Pescap, “Mobile Encrypted
network is not the encrypted payload content, but the contour Traffic Classification Using Deep Learning,” 2018 Network Traffic
features constructed by different packet lengths. Therefore, Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA), Vienna, 2018, pp. 1-
 8.
we take into consideration the length and direction informa- [14] M. Lotfollahi, R. Shirali, M. J. Siavoshani and M. Saberian,“Deep
tion of encrypted traffic based on the previous analysis and Packet: A Novel Approach For Encrypted Traffic Classification Using
propose the BFSN, i.e, Creating length and direction feature Deep Learning,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02656, 2017.
 [15] A. Pradhan, S. Behera and R. Dash, “Hybrid RBFN Based Encrypted
sequences of consecutive packets in given flow. Besides, we SSH Traffic Classification,” Signal Processing and Integrated Networks
apply the LSTM to process the bidirectional flow sequence 2018 5th International Conference on, pp. 264-269, 2018.
in that features extracted associated with consecutive packets [16] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Ma and F. Huang, “STNN: A Novel
 TLS/SSL Encrypted Traffic Classification System Based on Stereo
in a given traffic exhibit correlated time behavior. Experiment Transform Neural Network,” 2019 IEEE 25th International Conference
results have shown that our model outperforms the existing on Parallel and Distributed Systems, Tianjin, China, 2019, pp. 907-910.
state-of-the-art model based on CNN or LSTM in terms of [17] Y. Zeng, Z. Qi, W. Chen, Y. Huang, X. Zheng and H. Qiu, “TEST:
 an End-to-End Network Traffic Examination and Identification Framehigher effectiveness. work Based on Spatio-Temporal Features Extraction,”arXiv:1908.10271,
 2019.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [18] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A Flow Sequence
 Network For Encrypted Traffic Classification,” IEEE INFOCOM 2019
 This work is supported by the National Key R&D Program - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, Paris, France, 2019,
 pp. 1171-1179.
of China under grant No. 2018YFF01012200, the National [19] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic Classifi-
Science Foundation of China under grant No. 61673360 and cation: An Overview,” in IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 76-81,
the CETC Joint Advanced Research Foundation under grant May 2019.
 [20] ISCX Vpn-nonVpn dataset, http://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/vpn.html.
No. 6141B08080101. [21] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines,” International Conference on International Conference
 R EFERENCES on Machine Learning. Omnipress, Madison, USA, 2010, pp. 807C814.
 [22] J. Donahue, L. A. Hendricks, M. Rohrbach, S. Venugopalan, S. Guadar-
[1] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng and X Cao, “An efficient feature rama, K. Saenko et al., “Long-Term Recurrent Convolutional Networks
 generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection for Visual Recognition and Description,” in IEEE Transactions on
 techniques for traffic classification,” Computer Networks, pp. 81–98, Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 677-691, April 2017.
 2018. [23] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean,
[2] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner: “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Composi-
 Automatic Fingerprinting of Smartphone Apps from Encrypted Network tionality,”in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2013,
 Traffic,” 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 3111-3119.
 Saarbrucken, 2016, pp. 439–454. [24] G. Hinton, N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdi-
[3] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing nov, “Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature
 Android Encrypted Network Traffic to Identify User Actions,” in IEEE detectors,” CoRR, abs/1207.0580, 2012.
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, pp. 114-125, Jan. [25] Z. Chang, Y. Zhang and W. Chen, “Effective Adam-Optimized LSTM
 2016. Neural Network for Electricity Price Forecasting,” International Confer-
[4] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin and J. Aguilar, ence on Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), Beijing,
 “Towards the Deployment of Machine Learning Solutions in Network China, 2018, pp. 245-248.
 Traffic Classification: A Systematic Survey,” in IEEE Communications
 Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1988–2014, Secondquarter 2019.
[5] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
 in traffic classification,” in IEEE Network, pp. 35-40, January-February
 2012.
[6] G. Aceto, A. Dainotti, W. de Donato and A. Pescape, “PortLoad: Taking
 the Best of Two Worlds in Traffic Classification,”2010 INFOCOM IEEE
 Conference on Computer Communications Workshops, San Diego, CA,
 2010, pp. 1-5.

 165
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:27:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.