Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Journal of Network and Computer Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation based on Gaussian mixture models and
Hidden Markov Models
Zhongjiang Yao a,b , Jingguo Ge a,b, ∗∗ , Yulei Wu c, ∗ , Xiaosheng Lin d , Runkang He a,b ,
Yuxiang Ma e
a
 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
b
 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
c College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK
d
 Jilin Province Academy of Environmental Sciences, Jilin, China
e School of Computer and Information Engineering, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: To protect user privacy (e.g., IP address and sensitive data in a packet), many traﬃc protection methods, like
Traﬃc classiﬁcation traﬃc obfuscation and encryption technologies, are introduced. However, these methods have been used by
Encrypted traﬃc
 attackers to transmit malicious traﬃc, posing a serious threat to network security. To enhance network traﬃc
Gaussian mixture model
 supervision, this paper proposes a new traﬃc classiﬁcation model based on Gaussian mixture models and hidden
Hidden Markov model
 Markov models, named MGHMM. To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed model, we ﬁrst classify protocols
 and identify the obfuscated traﬃc by experiments. Then, we compare the classiﬁcation performance of MGHMM
 with that of the latest Vector Quantiser-based traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm. On the basis of the experiment,
 the relation between the classiﬁcation and the number of hidden Markov states, and the number of mixture of
 Gaussian distributions required to describe the hidden states, are analyzed.

1. Introduction million malicious activities based on SSL/TLS are blocked every day. In
 addition, Matthew Prince, CEO of a cloud security and services com-
 With the fast development of network monitoring systems, such as pany CloudFlare, said on the company’s blog that 94% of Tor network
ﬁrewalls and intrusion detection systems, traﬃc generated by users can traﬃc is malicious (Prince, 2016). The fact that Tor currently integrates
be easily monitored by a third party, e.g., Internet service providers traﬃc obfuscation techniques (e.g., Meek, obfs4) fuels malicious activand service providers. The third party can even infer the user’s behav- ities. Therefore, traﬃc classiﬁcation, especially for the regulation of
ior and intention by analyzing network traﬃc. For example, the authors traﬃc that imposes protective measures, is of paramount importance.
(Queiroz et al., 2019) proposed that the network monitors the utiliza- Traﬃc classiﬁcation is one of the most important traﬃc engineertion of network resources by user traﬃc. To protect personal data, users ing methods. It uses the inherent characteristics of network traﬃc, such
adopt many traﬃc protective measures, such as using encrypted trans- as packet size and packet arrival interval, to identify the types of trafmission protocols (e.g., SSL/TLS) to protect their sensitive data and ﬁc. Traditional traﬃc classiﬁcation methods are mainly to distinguish
using anonymous communication networks (e.g., Tor (Dingledine et al., the types of protocols (such as P2P) or applications (such as BitTor-
2004)) to hide their IP address. rent) that the traﬃc is dependent on. In recent years, network security
 However, traﬃc protective measures are currently being used by has received more attention for the identiﬁcation of encrypted traﬃc,
malicious users to protect and disguise their attacks. The growth in the which lead to rapidly progresses in research of traﬃc classiﬁcation.
use of SSL/TLS encompasses both legal and malicious activities, e.g., Traﬃc protection measures such as network traﬃc obfuscation techcriminals rely on legitimate SSL certiﬁcates to spread their malicious niques, have been constantly introduced into the Internet, bringing big
content. On the Zscaler cloud platform (Desai, 2018), an average of 8.4 challenges to eﬃcient traﬃc classiﬁcation.

 ∗ Corresponding author.
∗∗ Corresponding author. Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
 E-mail addresses: yaozhongjiang@iie.ac.cn (Z. Yao), gejingguo@iie.ac.cn (J. Ge), Y.L.Wu@exeter.ac.uk (Y. Wu), linxiaosheng@163.com (X. Lin),
herunkang@iie.ac.cn (R. He), yma@henu.edu.cn (Y. Ma).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102711
Received 19 December 2019; Received in revised form 23 March 2020; Accepted 13 May 2020
Available online 21 May 2020
1084-8045/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

 Traditional traﬃc classiﬁcation mainly identiﬁes traﬃc through model parameters.
protocol ports, such as the port 21 for FTP and the port 80 for HTTP.
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
However, many applications currently use dynamic port negotiation
 the motivation of our work and related work. Section 3 presents the
mechanisms, making port-based methods no longer applicable (Kara-
 MGHMM model, including the model inputs and the detailed derivagiannis et al., 2005). Deep packet inspection (DPI)-based approaches
 tions. In Section 4, the validity of MGHMM in traﬃc classiﬁcation is
have been considered to be eﬀective and reliable for unencrypted trafveriﬁed by extensive experiments. It is compared with the latest classi-
ﬁc. However, the number of encrypted Internet traﬃc is signiﬁcantly
 ﬁcation algorithm. The corresponding parameter optimization method
increasing, and many applications are using protocol encapsulation
 is also proposed. Section 5 gives the conclusion of this paper.
or obfuscation techniques to circumvent network monitoring policies
(Karagiannis et al., 2004). Therefore, DPI-based methods are no longer
eﬀective. 2. Related work
 A statistical-based approach analyzes traﬃc attributes ﬁrstly, such
as information entropy and the number of connections. A machine The current traﬃc protective measures can resist the port-based
learning (ML) based algorithm is then used to classify traﬃc based on rules of ﬁrewalls and intrusion detection systems through dynamic port
the statistical attributes of these features. For example, the authors in methods, and encryption algorithms can be used to get rid of the ﬁlter-
Dong and Jain (2019) proposed a machine learning method based on a ing of DPI systems. Researchers have therefore highlighted the need to
Bayesian model to identify encrypted Skype traﬃc, which also can be move away from port and DPI based approaches and focus on statistical
used to obfuscate other traﬃc. However, many traﬃc protective mea- methods of traﬃc classiﬁcation (Tahaei et al., 2020).
sures usually use encryption or padding techniques to interfere traﬃc Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation is still a research hotspot in recent
statistics. Thus, the performance of existing methods based on feature years, and new research results are constantly being produced. Accordstatistics is low, and there is high rate of miss detection and false detec- ing to the summary of Wang et al. (2019), the classiﬁcation of encrypted
tion. traﬃc usually uses deep learning methods, such as convolutional neu-
 Based on the feature selection and extraction method in the paper ral network (CNN) (Rezaei and Liu, 1812) and long short-term memory
(Liu et al., 2019a), this paper investigates existing traﬃc protective (LSTM) (Zou et al., 2018). In addition, new methods have been promeasures and ﬁnds that existing traﬃc generation relies on a single posed. For examples, Casino et al. (2019) proposed a method called
traﬃc protection policy, which cannot be changed once implemented HEDGE to classify encrypted and compressed packets using a thresholdas it is introduced in the form of a plug-in and is cold-started. The based method. FS-net was an end-to-end classiﬁcation model in Liu et
unchanged protection policy makes the Inter-Packet Time (IPT) and al. (2019b) for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation, and MIMETIC used mul-
Packet Size (PS) interference rule ﬁxed. That is to say, the statistical timodal deep learning for classifying mobile encrypted traﬃc as procharacteristics of IPT and PS are basically stable even if some techniques posed in Aceto et al. (2019). The above methods either have complex
are called to randomize or regularize the packet attribute values. Mean- feature extraction, or are diﬃcult on model training. They are therefore
while, the analysis of Tan et al. (2019) considers that features-varying not conducive to generalization.
behavior patterns, such as IPT, can imply traﬃc content information, so The protected traﬃc is often not only encrypted but also obfusthe combination of these features will inevitably make the traﬃc more cated. The obfuscation technology makes the encrypted traﬃc no difdetailed. Therefore, to improve the ability of monitoring network traf- ference from unencrypted traﬃc by tunneling or regularization, but
ﬁc, this paper proposes a new traﬃc classiﬁcation mechanism by using it is still encrypted in essence. This is achieved by making the trafthe state features formed by a two-dimensional observation vector that ﬁc payload being randomized and the other features of the traﬃc are
is consisted of IPT and PS. It is useful for eﬃcient traﬃc classiﬁcation disturbed. However, the IPT and PS are the only features to make staif the traﬃc protective measure has a single encryption policy or obfus- tistical analysis work for a given protective measure. IPT and PS have
cation strategy. been widely used for traﬃc classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation. An early
 The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: application ﬂow identiﬁcation classiﬁer which relied on the ﬁrst 4 ∼10
 packets’- sizes of an observation sequence, was proposed in Wright et al.
 • To establish the connection between IPT and PS, we propose to (2004). The authors proposed two separate classiﬁers using IPT and PS
 introduce the parameters of the covariance matrix of a mixture of in Wright et al. (2004) and Auld et al. (2007), respectively. An exten-
 Gaussians (MOG) to associate IPT and PS, which can eﬀectively sion of Wright et al. (2004) was proposed in Georgoulas and Moessimprove the accuracy of the ﬂow feature description. ner (2010), in which they presented a complex state structure for each
 • This paper proposes a novel traﬃc classiﬁcation model - Mixture packet and proposed a method trying to join IPT and PS through vector
 of Gaussians based Hidden Markov Model (MGHMM). For the ﬁrst quantisation with a codebook. A packet-level traﬃc classiﬁer managed
 time, it merges MOG with Hidden Markov Model (HMM) for traf- to join IPT with PS in Korczynski and Duda (2014), but these two fea-
 ﬁc classiﬁcation. The model uses MOG to depict two-dimensional tures were still computed separately within the same function.
 observation probability density of each state. It then constructs the HMM has been proposed for traﬃc classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation.
 HMM model by considering the state changes of traﬃc during the Wright et al. (2004) proposed two HMM models using IPT and PS sepcommunication. arately. A traﬃc classiﬁer that is based on multiple Packet-Level Hid-
 • MGHMM is evaluated using the traﬃc dataset collected from a lab- den Markov Models (PL-HMMs) and uses Gamma function to characbuilt local area network and a publicly available traﬃc dataset. terize IPT and PS probabilities density, was proposed in Dainotti et al.
 Extensive experimental results verify the eﬀectiveness of the pro- (2008). Its idea of combining multiple modular traﬃc classiﬁers is simposed MGHMM model for traﬃc classiﬁcation from three levels, i.e., ilar to Aceto et al. (2018). Although PL-HMMs can be used to identify
 traﬃc protocol, traﬃc content, and application. diﬀerent application traﬃc and obtain high traﬃc classiﬁcation accu-
 • We compare MGHMM with the latest Vector Quantiser-based traﬃc racy, it is computationally expensive as multiple PL-HMMs are required.
 classiﬁcation algorithm in terms of their classiﬁcation performance Although Chen et al. (2016) constructed a single HMM model based on
 on mainstream traﬃc protocols. The experimental results show the Tor network virtual circuit construction process and Tor log informasuperiority of our proposed model. tion, it can only eﬀectively identify Tor ﬂows which contain Tor circuit
 • We propose a new method for selecting model parameters. By ﬁtting initial messages and have not been obfuscated by obfuscation technolo-
 F1 performance metric and the computing cost with the variation gies like Meek. Similarly, Korczynski and Duda (2014) used the rancurve of the number of hidden states and the number of mixture of dom ﬁngerprint of SSL/TLS-based application traﬃc in diﬀerent appli-
 Gaussians, we present a method for eﬃciently selecting the optimal cations to construct HMM to identify diﬀerent application traﬃc, but

 2
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

 Table 1
 The comparison of existing recent traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithms.
 Algorithm Input Advantages Disadvantages
 CNN (Rezaei and Liu, 1812) packet-level data good at classifying diﬃcult in model training
 application traﬃc
 HEDGE (Casino et al., 2019) three features from randomly high accuracy diﬃcult in feature extraction
 sampled subset traﬃc
 FS-net (Liu et al., 2019b) raw data end-to-end traﬃc diﬃcult in feature extraction
 classiﬁcation and model training
 MIMETIC (Aceto et al., 2019) traﬃc object segmentation can overcome performance diﬃcult in feature extraction
 limitations
 LSTM (Zou et al., 2018) packet-level data analysis of feature timing diﬃcult in model training
 PL-HMM (Wright et al., packet-level data reliable classiﬁcation high computation overhead
 2004) performance
 WENC (Pan et al., 2017) packet-level data reliable classiﬁcation poor adaptability to new
 performance scenarios
 Hidden semi-Markov model packet-level data simple to implement lack of veriﬁcation of real
 (Huang et al., 2017) data
 hybrid DNN-HMM (Tan et ﬂow-level data ﬁne-grained ability to complicated to implement
 al., 2019) identify load types

it needs a large amount of observation and analysis work in the early • We propose a new method for selecting model parameters. By ﬁtting
stage. The most recent studies on traﬃc classiﬁcation based on HMM F1 performance metric and the computing cost with the variation
were conducted in Pan et al. (2017), Huang et al., 2017 and Tan et al. curve of the number of hidden states and the number of mixture of
(2019). Weighted ENsemble Classiﬁer (WENC) based on HMM, which Gaussians, we present a method for eﬃciently selecting the optimal
studied the HTTPS handshake process and the following data transmis- model parameters.
sion period, was proposed for classiﬁcation of HTTPS encrypted traﬃc
in Pan et al. (2017). The authors in Huang et al., 2017 proposed a
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) signal detection scheme based on Hidden 3. The proposed MGHMM model
semi-Markov model to capture the spatial-temporal characteristics of
normal wakeup packet generation behavior, but the experiments were In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the proposed model and its
based on simulation rather than real network environment. A hybrid detailed derivations, and then present the training method for the
DNN-HMM model proposed in Tan et al. (2019) identify content types model.
based on the GMM-HMM captured underlying time-varying behavior
patterns, in which it does not need to inspect the external protocols or
 3.1. The proposed MGHMM
applications.
 After analyzing the above encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation methods (a
 In order to get rid of the limitation of a speciﬁc type ﬂow and classummary is presented in Table 1), we propose MGHMM, an HMM based
 sify target traﬃc f from background traﬃc, this paper presents the
on MOG to describe the traﬃc ﬁngerprint by using two-dimensional
 MGHMM model. MGHMM takes the two-dimensional observation vecprobability density distribution of the observation formed by IPT and
 tors composed of IPT and PS as inputs. In MGHMM, the observations
PS. MOG introduces a mixing factor that can more accurately charare clustered as hidden states. Each hidden state cluster is characterized
acterize the density distribution of IPTs and PSs, including the links
 by MOG, and the hidden state transition rule is characterized by the
between IPTs and PSs. The hidden states of observation and their tran-
 Markov chain. The occurrence probability of the observation sequence
sition probability form a fully connected state topology. An observation
 then outputs.
sequence maps a hidden state transition sequence, whose occurrence
 Speciﬁcally, MGHMM is composed of a series of hidden states and
probability can be used as a discriminant index. MGHMM is a single
 observation sequence. The hidden state variable si is contained in the
HMM and needs fewer features and computational overhead for traﬃc
 state set S = {s1 , … , si , … , sN }, where N is the sum of the states.
classiﬁcation.
 The observable variable rl is contained in the observation sequence
 This journal paper is an extended version of a previously pub-
 R = {r0 , … , rl , … , rL }. Each observation in R is rl = {log(iptl ), psl }T ,
lished conference paper (Yao et al., 2018). This journal version further
 where log(iptl ) is the logarithm of IPT between the lth packet and
expands on the following aspects:
 (l + 1)th packet and psl is the PS of the lth packet. The two variables
 • The investigation of classic and latest studies of traﬃc classiﬁcation of iptl and psl can be correlated with a mixing coeﬃcient. As MGHMM
 are added, which enriches related work. is based on MOG and HMM, both the MOG and HMM are characterized
 • More detailed derivation process of MGHMM is presented. In the with their own parameters. Therefore, MGHMM can be characterized
 derivation process, we show the ﬁtting eﬀects on states and Gaussian by a set of parameters as:
 mixture distributions for IPT logarithm and PS separately to prove
 that our model is well constructed. 𝜆 = {𝜀, A, w, m, Φ} (1)
 • We add experimental results on traﬃc classiﬁcation for protocolwhere 𝜀 is a prior probability for hidden states. A is the state transition
 level traﬃc with MGHMM using UNB open dataset. The results show
 matrix, whose element aij (1 ≤ i ≤ N, 1 ≤ j ≤ N) is the probability of
 that our model not only can be used to identify obfuscated traﬃc but
 transition from state si to state sj . w is the vector of mixture coeﬃcient,
 also can classify general protocol traﬃc.
 also called weight, whose element wib is the bth Gaussian distribution in
 • We compare the performance of the proposed MGHMM model with
 the state si . m is the mean vector, whose element is the mean 𝜇 ib of the
 the existing VQ-based traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm in identifybth Gaussian. Φ is the full covariance matrix of Gaussian distribution,
 ing protocol traﬃc and obfuscating traﬃc. The experimental results
 whose element is 𝜎 ib .
 show the superiority of the proposed scheme.
 Each observation sub-sequence corresponds to a hidden state
 sequence of HMM. Each state is characterized by a bank of B Gaussian

 3
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

as follows: a prevalent and eﬃcient algorithm to compute transition probability
 among HMM states.
 ∑
 B
ℏ i (R ) = wib N (R; m, Φ) (2) The Forward variable is:
 b =1
 ∑
 N

where N(R; m, Φ) is the bth Gaussian distribution of state si . In what fol- 𝛼jl+1 = 𝛼jl 𝜉ji fi (rl+1 ) (7)
 j =1
lows, the MOG and HMM in the construction of the proposed MGHMM
are elaborated. The Backward variable can be given by:

 ∑
 N
3.1.1. Mixture of Gaussians (MOG) 𝛽il = 𝜉ij fj (rl+1 )𝛽jl+1 (8)
 To characterize a hidden state, we introduce MOG. Each state has an j =1
MOG combined with several diﬀerent Gaussians with diﬀerent weights.
 The transition probability from state si to state sj is:
Each Gaussian computes a two-dimensional variable with a covariance
matrix, which joins IPT and PS. The two-dimensional probability den- 𝛼l𝛽 l
sity of the HMM state estimated by MOG is the basis of the HMM’s 𝜉lij = ∑N i i l l (9)
assessment of state transition probabilities. j=1 𝛼j 𝛽j

 The Expectation-Maximization algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977) is M-step: After obtaining the transition probabilities between states,
a well-founded statistical algorithm to get around this problem by an the parameters of MGHMM, including the component parameters and
iterative process. In order to obtain the optimal parameter value of prior probabilities for each state, are re-evaluated.
MOG, this paper introduces the Expectation-Maximization algorithm, The probability of the observation generated by the bth Gaussian of
where the expectation step (E-step) computes the expected probability state si can be expressed as:
of an observation coming from a speciﬁc Gaussian component with the
current estimate for the parameters, and the maximization step (M-step) 𝛼l𝛽 l 𝜔 N (R; m, Φ)
 𝛾ilb = 𝜉lij · 𝜂lb = ∑N i i l l · ∑B ib (10)
computes parameters maximizing the expected log-likelihood found in 𝛼
 j =1 j j𝛽 b=1 wib N (R; m, Φ)
the E-step. In the training phase, the observations in every ﬂow are
clustered into N states, and the observation sub-sequence {r′0 , … , r′l } The prior probability is:
is re-ordered by time stamp after being extracted as state si from the ∑B
 w N (R; m, Φ)
original observation sequence. 𝜀̂i = b=1 ib (11)
 L
 E-step: we ﬁrst choose a state si from the clustered observations, and
each state consists of B Gaussian components. Then, we estimate the The weight of the bth Gaussian distribution is:
probability of the lth observation in the training observation sequence ∑L
 l=1 𝛾ilb
with prior probability, which is generated by the bth Gaussian compo- ̂ilb = ∑L
 𝜔 ∑B (12)
nent. l=1 b=1 𝛾ilb

 𝜔 N (R; m, Φ) The mean of the bth Gaussian distribution can be given by:
𝜂lib = ∑B ib (3)
 ∑L
 b=1 wib N (R; m, Φ)
 l=1 𝛾ilb · rl
 n
 𝜇̂lib = ∑ L
 (13)
 l=1 𝛾ilb
 M-step: After E-step, it needs to re-determine the parameters of each
Gaussian component to maximize the Gaussian parameters to obtain the
optimal values. The mixed Gaussians parameters mainly contain mean The covariance of the bth Gaussian distribution is:
 ∑L
vector m and covariance matrix Φ, and its weight in state si . 𝛾 (rl − 𝜇̂ib )(rl − 𝜇̂ib )T
 The weight of a Gaussian is: 𝜂lib = l=1 ilb ∑ L
 (14)
 l=1 𝛾ilb
 ∑L
 𝜂 Based on the derivation above, the state-based ﬁngerprint of traﬃc
̂l = l=1 lb
𝜔 (4)
 B f can be achieved. We can identify a target ﬂow by calculating the
The mean vector can be expressed as: occurrence probability of an observation sequence as follows:
 ∑L
 𝜂 r L ∑
 ∑ B
𝜇̂l = ∑l=L 1 lb l (5) 𝜁ilb = ℘(R|𝜆) = 𝛼il 𝛽jl (15)
 l=1 𝜂lb l=1 b=1

The covariance matrix of a Gaussian distribution is: where ℘(R|𝜆) donates the likelihood of the observation R under the
 ∑L condition 𝜆, the training results of which allow us to choose a threshold
 𝜂 (rl − 𝜇lb )(rl − 𝜇lb )T
̂2l = l=1 lb ∑
𝜎 L
 (6) 𝜃 . A ﬂow from the testing traﬃc dataset will then be determined as
 l=1 𝜂lb traﬃc f when 𝜁 is greater than 𝜃 ; otherwise it is not the traﬃc f .
 Repeat the E-step and M-step to improve the parameters of MOG
until the parameters go convergence. 3.2. Training

3.1.2. Hidden Markov Model (HMM) The traﬃc hidden states classiﬁed manually has a big deviation. To
 Diﬀerent traﬃc have diﬀerent state clusters and diﬀerent transitions obtain better classiﬁcation results, we adopt the well-known K-means
among states, which can be used as the traﬃc ﬁngerprint. After the esti- algorithm at the initial state classiﬁcation. In order to obtain the best
mation of the parameters of MOG, we compute the HMM parameters of ﬁtting eﬀect, we choose diﬀerent state clustering and Gaussian mixture
MGHMM with the Expectation-Maximization algorithm, where E-step components. For ease of understanding, the selected number of states in
computes the transition probability between any two HMM states and all the ﬁgures in this section is 3. For each observation state, we select
M-step re-computes the MGHMM parameters. the appropriate number of mixed Gaussians in the range of Dong and
 E-step: After determining each hidden state of HMM, E-step begins Jain (2019) and Aceto et al. (2019).
to calculate the probability of occurrence of each state. The probability In Fig. 1, the x-axis is the logarithm of inter-packet time and the
of an HMM state is estimated with the Forward-Backward algorithm y-axis is the packet size. Fig. 1 shows the clustering result of K-means
(Fan, 2001). The Forward-Backward algorithm is adopted because it is algorithm with 50 iterations when it has converged. The black cross in

 4
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

 The MOG ﬁtting eﬀect of the two-dimensional vector observations
 composed of IPT and PS, are evaluated in Fig. 4. In this ﬁgure, x-axis
 denotes the logarithm of inter-packet time and y-axis denotes packet
 size. Fig. 4 ﬁts the overall variable density distribution formed by the
 two-dimensional vectors of IPT and PS. The results show that a Gaussian
 mixture can ﬁt well for each type of observation. The place where the
 observation points are concentrated becomes the Gaussian center of
 the MOG, and each MOG can cover most of the observations. Those
 observations that cannot be covered need a larger training datasets.
 That is to say the training set used in this paper is not large enough,
 which is the reason why there are observations that are not covered by
 the MOG in Fig. 4(a).
 After the above training, the proposed MGHMM becomes the maximum likelihood of traﬃc f with diﬀerent states and Gaussian compo-
 Fig. 1. Traﬃc classiﬁcation with the K-means cluster algorithm. nents. The traﬃc f identiﬁcation is obtained based on the observation
 ranges characterized by those MGHMM parameters.

Fig. 1 indicates the centroid position of each class. It can be seen from 4. Experimental results and analysis
the cluster results that there is a clear boundary between the three types
of states. Therefore, the cluster results can be taken as three diﬀerent This section ﬁrst introduces the evaluation indicators used in this
HMM states. paper, and then uses the self-captured traﬃc dataset and the public
 Based on cluster results obtained by the K-means algorithm, traﬃc dataset to evaluate the traﬃc classiﬁcation performance of the
MGHMM trains to obtain the maximum likelihood of MOG parame- MGHMM model.
ters, i.e., weight, mean vector and covariance matrix of each cluster. To
comprehensively evaluate how well MOG ﬁts with each state cluster,
the training results in this section will be presented in three parts: the 4.1. Evaluation metrics
ﬁrst part shows how MOG ﬁts with IPT; the second part shows how
MOG ﬁts with PS; the third part shows how MOG ﬁts with the two- All traﬃc classiﬁcation results can be classiﬁed into the following
dimensional vector consisting of IPT and PS. It deserves attentions that four results: True Positive (TP) represents the identiﬁcation of the true
IPT is usually small. However, in the case of network congestion or traﬃc f as traﬃc f , and False Positive (FP) is the variable falsely idenretransmission, the IPT is usually much larger than most IPTs. In light tifying the ordinary traﬃc as traﬃc f . False Negative (FN) is the one
of its size, we use the logarithm of IPT sequence as both the training falsely identifying traﬃc f as ordinary traﬃc, and True Negative (TN) is
and testing inputs, to make sure that MOG ﬁts well with IPT. On the the one correctly identifying the true ordinary traﬃc as ordinary traﬃc.
other hand, the range of PS is narrowed as the ordinary packet size. The evaluation indicators used in this paper to assess the performance
Therefore, we only make use of the PS value. of the proposed MGHMM are based on these four metrics, and can be
 Fig. 2 depicts the MOG IPT logarithm ﬁtting results to traﬃc f after expressed as follows:
the training based on the three state clusters, where x-axis is the inter-
 TP + TN
packet time logarithm and y-axis is the occurrence of the inter-packet Accuracy = (16)
 TP + FP + TN + FN
time. The blue bar is the number of current IPT logarithms in the training dataset, and the brown curve shows the ﬁtting curve of the MOG TP
to the IPT logarithms. Fig. 2(a)–(c) show the probability density distri- Precision = (17)
 TP + FP
butions of the logarithm of IPT in the three states of HMM with MOG,
respectively. Fig. 2(d) is the overall ﬁtting result based on the ﬁtting of TP
 Recall = (18)
the three HMM states. It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the peak and bot- TP + FN
tom of the density distribution in the four maps are basically the same
as the mixed Gaussian distribution, and the peak values are basically 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 = (19)
the same. The curve of MOG can describe the strip distribution trend of Precision + Recall
IPT logarithm almost accurately. The reason is that the distribution of
 The above four evaluation indicators have been widely used in the
IPT is continuously changing in each state. It can be concluded that the
 related studies [29–34]. The Accuracy is identiﬁed as the proportion
MOG density function ﬁts the IPT time logarithm very well.
 of correctly identiﬁed traﬃc, namely, the proportion of classiﬁed true
 After MGHMM training, the PS ﬁtting results of the three types of
 traﬃc f from ordinary traﬃc with all tested traﬃc. The Precision is
states and all training datasets are shown in Fig. 3. This ﬁgure shows
 identiﬁed as the proportion of correctly classiﬁed traﬃc f , namely, the
the PS ﬁtting results of mixed Gaussian to traﬃc f based on the three
 proportion of identiﬁed true traﬃc f with all the identiﬁed traﬃc f .
state clusters, where x-axis denotes the packet size and y-axis is the
 Recall is the proportion of correctly identiﬁed traﬃc f with all the traﬃc
probability of packet size. The blue bar is the number of current PSs
 f , namely, the proportion of the identiﬁed true traﬃc f with all the true
in the training datasets, and the brown curve is the ﬁtting curve of
 traﬃc f . F1 is an important indicator to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the
the MOG to the PSs. In the four plots, Fig. 3(a)–(c) are the probability
 classiﬁcation method.
density distributions of PSs ﬁtted to the three states of HMM by MOG,
and Fig. 3(d) is the overall ﬁt of all PSs in the training dataset based on
the three HMM state ﬁts. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the peak and 4.2. Experimental results
bottom of the density distribution of training data in the four maps are
basically the same as the MOG density distribution. The ﬁtting eﬀects This section mainly includes three aspects, 1) verifying the eﬀectiveof state 1 and state 3 are not as good as expected because the volume ness of traﬃc classiﬁcation from two perspectives, i.e., protocol-level
in these two states are relatively less in our traﬃc datasets. From the and application-level; 2) comparing our MGHMM model with the latabove four ﬁgures, it can be seen that the Gaussian density function can est VQ-based traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithm; 3) optimizing the model
have a good ﬁt of the PS. parameters selection of MGHMM.

 5
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 2. MGHMM portrays the hidden states of IPTs logarithm. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(c) show the ﬁtness of IPT logarithm with MOG in states 1–3, respectively, and
(d) shows the ﬁtness of IPT logarithm with MOG in all states of IPTs.

Fig. 3. MGHMM depicts the hidden states of PSs. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(c) present the ﬁtness of PS with MOG in states 1–3, respectively, and (d) shows the ﬁtness of
PS with MOG in all state PSs.

4.2.1. Traﬃc classiﬁcation • Classiﬁcation based on protocol-level traﬃc
 To verify the validity and eﬀectiveness of the proposed MGHMM,
 We use the Wireshark tool to mark the protocol of the public dataset
this paper ﬁrst veriﬁes the model’s performance in protocol-level (i.e.
 and extract the binary feature vector (IPT, PS). The main protocol types
HTTP, SMB, STUN, TLS, etc.) traﬃc classiﬁcation with the UNB open
 included in the traﬃc dataset and the classiﬁcation results of MGHMM
traﬃc dataset (Sharafaldin et al., 2018) and in application-level (i.e.,
 are shown in Fig. 5. In this ﬁgure, x-axis indicates diﬀerent types of promeek, FTE, Obfs, etc.) obfuscation traﬃc classiﬁcation with the traﬃc
 tocols and y-axis is the value of Precision, Accuracy, Recall, F1 of those
dataset intercepted in the lab environment.
 protocols. Among those protocols, FTP (File Transfer Protocol), TLSv1

 6
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 4. MGHMM shows the hidden states of observations. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(c) show the ﬁtness of the two-tuple observation consisting of IPT logarithm and PS
with MOG in states 1–3, respectively, and (d) depicts the ﬁtness of the two-tuple observation consisting of IPT logarithm and PS with MOG in all states for the
two-tuples.

 and ﬁles (e.g., executables, source code, and PDF ﬁles), generated by
 browsers such as Chrome, Firefox, Tor Browser, Arora, etc. All the traf-
 ﬁc is captured with a browser driver script on the gateway of a local
 area network.
 Based on the training results in Section 3.2, we make the corresponding experiment of Meek-based Tor traﬃc identiﬁcation. The evaluation results are shown in Fig. 6, where x-axis is the number of Gaussian components of each state and y-axis denotes the traﬃc identiﬁ-
 cation accuracy. The results are under the conditions that the traﬃc
 observations are divided into 3 states, 6 states and 10 states, and each
 state consists of 7–15 Gaussian components. From Fig. 6, we can see
 Fig. 5. Traﬃc classiﬁcation for protocol-level traﬃc. that the more states are divided, the higher classiﬁcation accuracy is,
 if each state is characterized with the same number of Gaussians. Similarly, the larger the number of Gaussians is, the higher classiﬁcation
 accuracy is, when the traﬃc has the same states volume. It is worth
(Transport Layer Security version 1), X11 (X Window System ProtocolX
 noting that the evaluation metrics tend to be less steady when fewer
Version 11), SMB (Server Message Block) and SMB2 (Server Message
 states are divided. The main reason is that some observations far away
Block version 2) can be classiﬁed clearly with 99% of all four indicators,
 from a state cluster center is forcedly clustered into the state when there
while the metrics of H1 (SINEC H1 protocol), STUN (Session Traversal
 are only a few clusters. When the test traﬃc is divided into 10 states
Utilities for NAT) and OCSP (the Online Certiﬁcate Status Protocol) are
 and each state has 11 Gaussian components, the Tor traﬃc identiﬁcalower relatively. H1 is a simple protocol to transfer PLC (programmable
 tion results can be seen from Fig. 6, that the proposed MGHMM can get
logic controller) data between Siemens SIMATIC S5 devices. STUN is a
 99.98% on accuracy, 100% on precision, 99.43% on recall, and 99.72%
standardized set of methods for traversal of network address translaon F1 . The reason why such good results can be obtained is that, on the
tor (NAT) gateways in applications of real-time voice, video, messaging
 one hand, the adoption of K-means algorithm provides a good initial
and other interactive communications. H1 and STUN are used for realclassiﬁcation result, and on the other hand, MOG is used to characterize
time large data transition. Therefore, IPT and PS of H1 and STUN are
 the observed density distribution of each state which can cover almost
relatively more concentrated, which is why they are more diﬃcult to
 each peak and trough. The experiment results indicate that MGHMM
classify. OCSP is used for obtaining the revocation status of an X.509
 can eﬀectively identify the Meek-based Tor traﬃc.
digital certiﬁcate, which is usually in the front of HTTP or other application layer protocol. That is the reason why the evaluation metrics are
lower. 4.2.2. Comparison of MGHMM with the latest VQ-based algorithm
 Tree Structured Vector Quantise (TSVQ) uses a tree-based search
 • Classiﬁcation based on application-level obfuscation traﬃc
 method to improve the VQ algorithm, and the data in each branch of the
 To evaluate the eﬀectiveness and accuracy of the proposed MGHMM tree is clustered. The Parallel Tree Structured Vector Quantiser (PTSVQ)
in the application-level, we use our model to identify the Meek-based algorithm is an extension of the tree structure vectorizer, attempting
Tor traﬃc, which is an obfuscated application traﬃc. The traﬃc dataset to represent input data using multiple codes. PTSVQ creates a TSVQ
is 15 GB in size, including web pages, emails, images, videos, audios, instance for each class, with each data point running through all TSVQ

 7
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 6. Traﬃc classiﬁcation comparison with diﬀerent parameters. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(d) show the comparison results with diﬀerent states (i.e., 3 states, 6 states
and 10 states) for Recall, Accuracy, Precision and F1 , respectively.

instances and being assigned to the class that produces the smallest time intervals are very small, while our MGHMM model is more eﬀecdistortion metric for the model. tive for relatively long ﬂows.
 Jeo et al. (Kornycky et al., 2017) proposed the TRee Adaptive Par- The identiﬁcation of obfuscated traﬃc is the original purpose of
allel Vector Quantiser (TRAP-VQ) using the well-known vector quan- MGHMM. To highlight the advantages of MGHMM in this regard, we
tisation algorithm in conjunction with a decision tree. TRAP-VQ per- also use PTS-VQ and TRAP-VQ identiﬁcation methods to compare with
forms vector quantisation preprocessing on the public dataset, con- MGHMM. From Fig. 8, it is clear to see that MGHMM has very obvious
structs a new VQ encoding function, and builds a tree structure. The advantages over PTS-VQ and TRAP-VQ in identifying obfuscated trafbranch tags are target, non-target, and continue. As the latest traﬃc clas- ﬁc. The recognition eﬀect of other obfuscated traﬃc is higher than PTSsiﬁcation research work, VQ-based model is simple in design and has VQ and TRAP-VQ algorithms. The most prominent is that the accuracy
very high practical value. Besides, its experimental results in Korny- of MGHMM is 10% higher than the PTS-VQ and TRAP-VQ algorithms
cky et al. (2017) show that TRAP-VQ and PTSVQ have good eﬀects in identifying Google’s meek obfuscated traﬃc. The reason why such
in traﬃc classiﬁcation. Thus, we use TRAP-VQ and PTS-VQ for clas- a good eﬀect can be obtained is mainly because the confused traﬃc,
siﬁcation performance comparison to show merits of our proposed such as Meek and Obfs, have adopted methods like transmission interscheme. To illustrate the eﬀectiveness of our model, this paper uses val interference and message ﬁlling. While, the Format-Transforming
the traﬃc used in Wang et al. (2015) to compare MGHMM with the Encryption (FTE) obfuscation method uses the regularization method
latest VQ-based traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithms, and selects two traﬃc to shape the traﬃc content, which has a small impact on the packet
recognition scenarios, i.e., protocol identiﬁcation and obfuscated traﬃc interval and packet size. This is why the recognition eﬀect of FTE is
identiﬁcation. lower than the recognition rate of VQ-based algorithms.
 To implement the protocol identiﬁcation comparison, we choose
four commonly used protocols, i.e., FTP, TLSv1, SSH and HTTP from the 4.2.3. The trade-oﬀ between classiﬁcation and computational cost
dataset. It can be seen from Fig. 7 that MGHMM outperforms TRAP-VQ It is not a good practice to use many Gaussian components. For
and PTS-VQ on the four types of traﬃc protocols. From Recall, Accu- example, the application-level classiﬁcation in Section 4.2.1 shows that
racy and Precision, it can be clearly seen that the MGHMM classiﬁcation the accuracy with 14 and 15 Gaussians are lower than that with 11
performance is better than TRAP-VQ’s, and TRAP-VQ’s performance is Gaussians. In addition, the model with 14 and 15 Gaussians take longer
better than PTS-VQ. For protocol FTP, TLSv1 and SSH, MGHMM’s per- calculation time. In the classiﬁcation process, a small number of state
formance is 2% higher than TRAP-VQ and PTS-VQ in terms of Accu- divisions and Gaussian components can cause the accuracy to decrease.
racy. In addition, MGHMM has a recall rate that is nearly 20% higher However, a large number of state divisions and Gaussian components
than that of TRAP-VQ and PTS-VQ in identifying TLSv1. MGHMM has mixed will bring higher computational overhead when the accuracy
a recall that is not less than that of TRAP-VQ and PTS-VQ in identify- reaches a certain value, and the accuracy will not be improved further.
ing FTP and SSH. MGHMM’s performance is 2% higher than TRAP-VQ With an appropriate number of state divisions and Gaussian compoand PTS-VQ in terms of Precision and in F1 . Regrettably, the classiﬁca- nents, not only can the computational overhead be reduced but also
tion performance of MGHMM is lower than TRAP-VQ when identifying an optimal classiﬁcation performance can be obtained. To achieve the
HTTP traﬃc. The reason is that HTTP ﬂows are very short and their better ratio between classiﬁcation and cost, this paper uses F1 and pro-

 8
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 7. Traﬃc classiﬁcation comparison with diﬀerent methods. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(d) depict the comparison results among MGHMM, TRAP-VQ and PTS-VQ for
classifying protocol-level traﬃc (i.e., FTP, TLSv1, SSH and HTTP), for Accuracy, Recall, Precision, and F1 , respectively.

Fig. 8. Obfuscation traﬃc classiﬁcation comparisons with diﬀerent methods. The sub-ﬁgures (a)–(d) show the comparison results among MGHMM, TRAP-VQ and
PTS-VQ for classifying obfuscated traﬃc (i.e., FTE, Meek-Amazon, Meek-Google, Obfs3 and Obfs4), for Accuracy, Recall, Precision and F1 , respectively.

cessing time to optimize our model. F1 is a comprehensive indicator depicted traﬃc and the number of mixed Gaussians aﬀect the classiﬁ-
calculated by Precision and Recall, and longer processing time repre- cation performance. To this end, we explore the relationship between
sents larger cost within the same physical conditions. F1 and the number of hidden states and mixed Gaussians.
 Firstly, the number of hidden states is used as a variable. The incre-
 • F1 increment regression
 ment Icsf of F1 between the mixed 8 Gaussians and the mixed 14 Gaus-
 It can be seen from Fig. 9(a) that the number of hidden states of the

 9
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 9. F1 diﬀerence comparison between diﬀerent Gaussians: (a) F1 diﬀerence between 8 and 14 Gaussians and its ﬁtting curve, and (b) F1 diﬀerence between 14
and 15 Gaussians and its ﬁtting curve.

sians is calculated. The increment Icsf of F1 between 14 Gaussians and Gaussians not only aﬀect the performance of classiﬁcation, but also
15 Gaussians is mixed. From Fig. 9 (a), it can be seen that there is a ten- cause the diﬀerence of computational overhead of the MGHMM model.
dency of decreasing the F1 increment Icsf as the number of hidden states Under the same experimental data and physical resources, we explore
increase. This is also shown by the blue trend curve. This trend curve, the relation between the computation cost and the number of hidden
subject to a power function, can be formalized with the parameters {as , states and mixed Gaussians.
bs , cs } as follows: Firstly, the number of hidden states is used as a variable to calculate
 the cost increment Icsc between the mixing of 8 Gaussians and the mixing
Icsf = Fscores (s) = as sbs + cs (20) of 14 Gaussians, and the cost increment Icsc between 14 Gaussians and
 15 Gaussians is mixed. From Fig. 11(a), it can be seen that there is
where Icsf is the increment of F1 aﬀected by the number of hidden states.
 a tendency of increasing the cost increment of the mixed 8 Gaussians
It can be seen from Fig. 9(b) that the F1 increment between 14 and 15 and 14 Gaussians. The trend curve, subject to a linear function, can be
mixed Gaussians is also a decreasing trend corresponds to a power func- formalized with the parameters {ms , ns } as follows:
tion with a negative exponent, as the ﬁtted blue trend curve. Although
this curve is decreasing faster, it can still be described by Eq. (20). The
 Icsc = Rcosts (s) = ms s + ns (23)
only diﬀerence is that the value of parameters of the ﬁtting function is
diﬀerent. The parameter bs in Fig. 9(b) is smaller.
 where Icsc is the increment of computational cost aﬀected by the number
 Secondly, with the number of mixed Gaussians increasing as the
 g of hidden states. It can be seen from Fig. 11(b) that there is also a
variable, the F1 increment Icf between 6 and 8 hidden states and the
 tendency to increase the cost increments of the mixed 14 Gaussians
same values between 8 and 10 states are calculated. From Fig. 10(a), it
 g and 15 Gaussians. This curve is almost the same with Eq. (23). The
can be seen that Icf has a decreasing trend corresponding to a power
 parameters {ms , ns } should be adjusted slightly because its slope and
function with a negative exponent as the number of mixed Gaussians interception is diﬀerent. As can be seen from in Fig. 11(a) and (b), the
increases. The blue trend curve can also be formalized with parameters more the number of hidden states is divided, the faster the computation
{ag , bg , cg } as follows: overhead increases.
 g Secondly, with the number of mixed Gaussians increasing as a vari-
Icf = Fscoreg (g ) = ag g bg + cg (21) g
 able, the cost increment Icc between 6 and 8 clustered states and the
 g same value between 8 and 10 clustered states are calculated, which
where Icf is the increment of F1 aﬀected by the number of mixed Gausshow a linear increase. From Fig. 12(a), the linear increase tendency
sians. It can be seen from Fig. 10(a) that there is a decreasing tendency
 is ﬁtted with a blue line. The blue trend line can be formalized with
of the F1 increments as the increasing of Gaussians number between the
clustered 6 hidden states and 8 hidden states observations, whose ﬁtted parameters {mg , ng } as follows:
curve is a power function with a negative exponent as shown in Fig. 9(a)
 g
and (b). That is to say, Fig. 10(a) can still be described by Eq. (21). Icc = Rcostg (g ) = mg g + ng (24)
Fig. 10(b) shows the same decreasing tendency of the F1 increments
 g
between the clustered 8 hidden states and 10 hidden states observations where Icc is the increment of computational cost aﬀected by the number
as depicted in Fig. 10(a). The diﬀerences between Fig. 10(a) and (b) are of mixed Gaussians. It can be seen from Fig. 12(b) that there is also a
the diﬀerent parameters of the ﬁtting function, such as the parameter tendency of linear increase of the cost increments between 8 and 10
bg in Fig. 10(b) is smaller. clustered states with the increase of the number of mixed Gaussians.
 The number of hidden states and the number of mixed Gaussian dis- When we ﬁt the cost increment, the blue trend line shows that it can
tributions are constructed as binary variable vectors x = [s, g]. Accord- continue to describe its trend using Eq. (24).
ing to Eqs. (20) and (21), an F1 function that varies with the vector x is The number of hidden states and the number of mixed Gaussians
formed: are constructed as binary variable vectors x = [s, g]. According to Eqs.
 (23) and (24), the cost function varies with the vector x:
Icf = Fscore (x) = Fscore(s, g )

 = 𝛿f Fscores (s) + 𝜚f Fscoreg (g ) Icc = Rcost (x) = Rcost (s, g )

 = 𝛿f (as sbs + cs ) + 𝜚f (ag g bg + cg ) (22) = 𝛿c Rcosts (s) + 𝜚c Rcostg (g )

where Icf is the increment of F1 , which is aﬀected by the number of hid- = 𝛿c (ms s + ns ) + 𝜚c (mg g + ng ) (25)
den states and the mixed Gaussian. 𝛿 f , 𝜚f are used to adjust the degree
of inﬂuence of the hidden state and the mixed Gaussian on F1 . where Icc is the increment of computational cost, which is aﬀected by
 the number of hidden states and the mixed Gaussians. 𝛿 c , 𝜚c are used
 • Cost increment regression
 to adjust the degree of inﬂuence of the hidden state and the mixed
 The number of diﬀerent hidden states and the number of mixed Gaussians on the computational cost.

 10
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Fig. 10. F1 diﬀerence comparison between diﬀerent hidden states: (a) F1 diﬀerence between 6 and 8 states and its ﬁtting curve, and (b) F1 diﬀerence between 8 and
14 states and its ﬁtting curve.

Fig. 11. Cost increment comparison between diﬀerent Gaussians in testing phase: (a) Cost increment between 8 and 14 Gaussians as the number of states increasing
and its ﬁtting curve, and (b) Cost increment between 14 and 15 Gaussians as the number of states increasing and its ﬁtting curve.

Fig. 12. Cost increment comparison between diﬀerent hidden states in testing phase: (a) Cost increment between 6 and 8 states as the number of Gaussians increasing
and its ﬁtting curve, and (b) Cost increment between 8 and 10 states as the number of Gaussians increasing and its ﬁtting curve.

4.2.4. State and Gaussian component decisions where 𝜌 is parameter used for balancing the two slopes of both classiﬁ-
 After the analysis in Section 4.2.3, it can be found that the compu- cation and computational cost increment function. When 𝜅(x) = 0, the
tational cost is gradually increased and F1 increases with the number of value of x = [si , gi ] at this time is the optimal model parameter. The
hidden states and the number of mixed Gaussians until reaching a split growth rate of classiﬁcation result and computation cost of MGHMM
point [st , gt ]. It is unwise to simply chase the upgrade of F1 and ignore are two important factors to determine the parameter selection and are
the increasing cost. Our goal is to search for the best value [sop , gop ] mainly aﬀected by the number of hidden states and mixed Gaussians.
from all the possible hidden states and mixed Gaussians combination To choose the best number of hidden states, we ﬁrst ﬁnd the partial
set. derivative of Eq. (28) as follows:
 We know that both F1 and cost increase with the number of hidden
 𝜕 K (s , g )
states and the number of mixed Gaussians, but the growth rate of F1 𝜅(x)s = 𝜅(s, g )g =
 𝜕s
and cost is diﬀerent. The variations of F1 and computational cost have
 𝜕 Fscore(s, g ) 𝜕 Rcost (s, g )
been expressed geometrically. To determine whether the state quantity = −𝜌
selection and the Gaussian quantity selection are optimal for a certain 𝜕s 𝜕s
type of traﬃc, we deﬁne the growth function as shown below: 𝜕(𝛿f (as sbs + cs ) + 𝜚f (ag g bg + cg ))
 =
 𝜕s
K (x) = Fscore(x) − 𝜌Rcost (x) (26)
 𝜕(𝛿c (ms s + ns ) + 𝜚c (mg g + ng ))
 The growth function is not what we ultimately need. Our aim is −𝜌
 𝜕s
that the construction can be a balance between the F1 growth rate and
the calculation overhead growth rate, so Eq. (27) is derived as follows, = 𝛿f as bs sbs −1 − 𝜌𝛿c ms (28)
which is called discriminant function. To choose the best number of mixed Gaussians, we ﬁnd the partial
 𝜕 K (x) derivative of Eq. (29) as follows:
𝜅(x) =
 𝜕x
 𝜕 Fscore(x) 𝜕 Rcost (x)
 = −𝜌 (27)
 𝜕x 𝜕x
 11
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

 𝜕 K (s , g )
𝜅(x)g = 𝜅(s, g )g = Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., Pescap, A., 2019. Mimetic: mobile encrypted traﬃc
 𝜕g classiﬁcation using multimodal deep learning. Comput. Network. 165, 106944.
 https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2981318525.
 𝜕 Fscore(s, g ) 𝜕 Rcost (s, g )
 = −𝜌 Auld, T., Moore, A.W., Gull, S.F., 2007. Bayesian neural networks for internet traﬃc
 𝜕g 𝜕g classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Neural Network. 18 (1), 223–239.
 Casino, F., Choo, K.-K.R., Patsakis, C., 2019. Hedge: eﬃcient traﬃc classiﬁcation of
 𝜕(𝛿f (as sbs + cs ) + 𝜚f (ag g bg + cg )) encrypted and compressed packets. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 14 (11),
 = 2916–2926. https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2953225812.
 𝜕g Chen, Z., Wen, J., Geng, Y., 2016. Predicting future traﬃc using hidden markov models.
 𝜕(𝛿c (ms s + ns ) + 𝜚c (mg g + ng )) In: 2016 IEEE 24th International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), pp. 1–6.
 −𝜌 Dainotti, A., de Donato, W., Pescape, A., Rossi, P.S., 2008. Classiﬁcation of network
 𝜕g traﬃc via packet-level hidden markov models. In: IEEE GLOBECOM 2008 - 2008
 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, pp. 1–5.
 = 𝜚f ag bg sbg −1 − 𝜌𝜚c mg (29) Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M., Rubin, D.B., 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete
 data via the em algorithm. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. Ser. b-Methodol. 39 (1), 1–38.
 To verify Eqs. (28) and (29), we use the application-level classiﬁca- Desai, D., 2018. February 2018 Zscaler Ssl Threat Report. https://www.zscaler.com/
tion experiment in Section 4.2.1 for veriﬁcation. The results of Meek- blogs/research/february-2018-zscaler-ssl-threat-report.
 Dingledine, R., Mathewson, N., Syverson, P.F., 2004. Tor: the second-generation onion
based Tor experiments show that the optimal parameters of Meek-based router. In: SSYM04 Proceedings of the 13th Conference on USENIX Security
Tor ﬂow are 10 hidden states, and each hidden state adopts 12 Gaus- Symposium, vol. 13, 2121.
sians (after rounding), which is consistent with the classiﬁcation results Dong, S., Jain, R., 2019. Flow online identiﬁcation method for the encrypted skype. J.
 Netw. Comput. Appl. 132, 75–85. https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/
shown in Fig. 6. 2914899172.
 Fan, J.L., 2001. Forward-backward Algorithm, vol. 627. Springer International, pp.
 97–116.
5. Conclusions
 Georgoulas, S., Moessner, K.e. a., 2010. Towards eﬃcient protocol design through
 protocol proﬁling and veriﬁcation of performance and operational metrics. In:
 This paper has proposed a traﬃc classiﬁcation model MGHMM, Proceedings of the 6th International Wireless Communications and Mobile
which is based on hidden Markov model. MGHMM uses K-means clus- Computing Conference, IWCMC10. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 848–852, https://
 doi.org/10.1145/1815396.1815591.
tering algorithm, hidden Markov model and mixed Gaussians to gradu- Huang, C., Min, G., Wu, Y., Ying, Y., Pei, K., Xiang, Z., 2017. Time series anomaly
ally reduce the ﬂow of details. To evaluate and analyze the traﬃc clas- detection for trustworthy services in cloud computing systems. IEEE Trans. Big Data,
siﬁcation eﬀect of our model, ﬁrstly, this paper has used a public traﬃc https://doi.org/10.1109/TBDATA.2017.2711039 11.
 Karagiannis, T., Broido, A., Brownlee, N., Claﬀy, K.C., Faloutsos, M., 2004. Is p2p dying
dataset and a private traﬃc dataset collected from a self-built LAN, or just hiding? [p2p traﬃc measurement]. In: IEEE Global Telecommunications
to evaluate the traﬃc classiﬁcation in protocol-level and application- Conference, 2004. GLOBECOM 04, vol. 3, pp. 1532–1538.
level traﬃc. The experiments have shown a good result on the perfor- Karagiannis, T., Papagiannaki, K., Faloutsos, M., 2005. Blinc: multilevel traﬃc
 classiﬁcation in the dark. ACM Spec. Interest Group Data Communication 35 (4),
mance of the proposed scheme. Secondly, we have compared MGHMM 229–240.
with the latest VQ-based traﬃc classiﬁcation algorithms and have found Korczynski, M., Duda, A., 2014. Markov chain ﬁngerprinting to classify encrypted
that the proposed MGHMM has obvious advantages in traﬃc classiﬁca- traﬃc. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2014 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
 pp. 781–789.
tion. Thirdly, a new model parameter selection method has been pro- Kornycky, J., Abdul-Hameed, O., Kondoz, A.M., Barber, B.C., 2017. Radio frequency
posed, which can achieve better classiﬁcation results with lower com- traﬃc classiﬁcation over wlan. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 25 (1), 56–68.
putational cost. Liu, Z., Wang, R., Japkowicz, N., Cai, Y., Tang, D., Cai, X., 2019a. Mobile app traﬃc ﬂow
 feature extraction and selection for improving classiﬁcation robustness. J. Netw.
 Comput. Appl. 125, 190–208. https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2898307979.
CRediT authorship contribution statement Liu, C., He, L., Xiong, G., Cao, Z., Li, Z., 2019b. Fs-net: a ﬂow sequence network for
 encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE Conference on
 Zhongjiang Yao: Methodology, Data curation, Writing - original Computer Communications, pp. 1171–1179. https://academic.microsoft.com/
 paper/2919493784.
draft, Writing - review & editing. Jingguo Ge: Conceptualization, Pan, W., Cheng, G., Tang, Y., 2017. Wenc: Https encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using
Methodology. Yulei Wu: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain. In: 2017 IEEE
Xiaosheng Lin: Supervision, Visualization. Runkang He: Software, Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, pp. 50–57.
 Prince, M., 2016. The Trouble with Tor. https://blog.cloudﬂare.com/the-trouble-with-
Validation. Yuxiang Ma: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. tor/.
 Queiroz, W., Capretz, M.A.M., Dantas, M.A.R., 2019. An approach for sdn traﬃc
Declaration of competing interest monitoring based on big data techniques. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 131, 28–39.
 https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2914593650.
 Rezaei, S., Liu, X., How to achieve high classiﬁcation accuracy with just a few labels: a
 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial semi-supervised approach using sampled packets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09761
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2906493541.
the work reported in this paper. Sharafaldin, I., Lashkari, A.H., Ghorbani, A.A., 2018. Toward generating a new intrusion
 detection dataset and intrusion traﬃc characterization. In: Proceedings of the 4th
 International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, pp.
Acknowledgment 108–116. https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2789828921.
 Tahaei, H., Aﬁﬁ, F., Asemi, A., Zaki, F., Anuar, N.B., 2020. The rise of traﬃc
 classiﬁcation in iot networks: a survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 154, 102538.
 This work is supported by the National Science and Technology Tan, X., Xie, Y., Ma, H., Yu, S., Hu, J., 2019. Recognizing the content types of network
Major Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant traﬃc based on a hybrid dnn-hmm model. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 142, 51–62.
No.: 2017ZX03001019-003), the National Key R&D Plan “Cyberspace Wang, L., Dyer, K.P., Akella, A., Ristenpart, T., Shrimpton, T., 2015. Seeing through
 network-protocol obfuscation. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference
Security” Major Projects of China (Grant No.: 2017YFB0801801), the on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 57–69. https://academic.microsoft.
Science and Technology Service Network Initiative (STS) Project of Chi- com/paper/2052565897.
nese Academy of Science (Grant No.: Y7X0071105), the Young Elite Wang, P., Chen, X., Ye, F., Sun, Z., 2019. A survey of techniques for mobile service
 encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning. IEEE Access. 7, 54024–54033.
Scientist Sponsorship Program by Henan Association for Science and https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2942239200.
Technology (No. 2020HYTP008), and the Key Scientiﬁc and Techno- Wright, C.V., Monrose, F., Masson, G.M., 2004. Hmm proﬁles for network traﬃc
logical Project of Henan Province (No. 202102210352). classiﬁcation. In: Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Workshop on Visualization and Data
 Mining for Computer Security, pp. 9–15.
 Yao, Z., Ge, J., Wu, Y., Zhang, X., Li, Q., Zhang, L., Zou, Z., 2018. Meek-based tor traﬃc
References identiﬁcation with hidden markov model. In: 2018 IEEE 20th International
 Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; IEEE 16th
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., Pescap, A., 2018. Multi-classiﬁcation approaches for International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 4th International Conference on Data
 classifying mobile app traﬃc. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 103, 131–145. https:// Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), pp. 335–340. https://academic.
 academic.microsoft.com/paper/2768726319. microsoft.com/paper/2913669552.

 12
Z. Yao et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711

Zou, Z., Ge, J., Zheng, H., Wu, Y., Han, C., Yao, Z., 2018. Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation include computer networks, networked systems, software deﬁned networks and systems,
 with a convolutional long short-term memory neural network. In: 2018 IEEE 20th network management, and network security and privacy. He is an Editor of IEEE Trans-
 International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; actions on Network and Service Management, Computer Networks (Elsevier) and IEEE
 IEEE 16th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 4th International Access. He contributes to major conferences on networking as various roles including the
 Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), pp. 329–334. Steering Committee Chair, the General Chair and the Program Chair. His research has
 https://academic.microsoft.com/paper/2911301616. been supported by Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council of United Kingdom, National Natural Science Foundation of China, University’s Innovation Platform and
 industry. He is a Senior Member of the IEEE, and a Fellow of the HEA (Higher Education
 Academy).
Zhongjiang Yao received a Ph.D. degree in computer system architecture from Institute
of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019. His current research
interests include network security, blockchain and machine learning. Xiaosheng Lin received a Ph.D. degree from Jilin University in 2017. She is currently an
 associate professor at Jilin Province Academy of Environmental Sciences.
Jingguo Ge received a Ph.D. degree in computer system architecture from the Institute
 Runkang He is a master student in computer system architecture at the Institute of Inforof Computing Technology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2003. He is currently
 mation Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include
a professor at Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and a
 network anomaly detection and natural language processing.
professor at School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
research focuses on computer network architecture, software deﬁned network (SDN),
network virtualization, cyber security, and mobile communication networks. Yuxiang Ma is currently an associate professor in the School of Computer and Information Engineering at Henan University. He received the B.S. degree from Henan University
 in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from the Computer Network Information Center, Chinese
Yulei Wu is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of Computer Science, College of Engi-
 Academy of Sciences in 2019. His main research interests include future Internet archineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. He
 tecture and technologies, network security, and privacy enhancement technologies.
received the B.Sc. degree (1st Class Hons.) in Computer Science and the Ph.D. degree in
Computing and Mathematics from the University of Bradford, United Kingdom, in 2006
and 2010, respectively. His expertise is on networking and his main research interests

 13