Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with
 Deep Learning
 Chenggang Wang∗ Sean Kennedy Haipeng Li
 University of Cincinnati, USA University of Cincinnati, USA University of Cincinnati, USA
 wang2c9@mail.uc.edu kenneds6@mail.uc.edu li2hp@mail.uc.edu

 King Hudson Gowtham Atluri Xuetao Wei
 University of Cincinnati, USA University of Cincinnati, USA Southern University of Science and
 hudsonk4@mail.uc.edu atlurigm@ucmail.uc.edu Technology, China
arXiv:2005.09800v1 [cs.CR] 20 May 2020

 weixt@sustech.edu.cn

 Wenhai Sun Boyang Wang
 Purdue University, USA University of Cincinnati, USA
 whsun@purdue.edu boyang.wang@uc.edu

 ABSTRACT (WiSec ’20), July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria. ACM, New York,
 This paper investigates the privacy leakage of smart speakers under NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3395351.3399357
 an encrypted traffic analysis attack, referred to as voice command
 fingerprinting. In this attack, an adversary can eavesdrop both out-
 1 INTRODUCTION
 going and incoming encrypted voice traffic of a smart speaker, and Smart speakers, such as Amazon Echo, Google Home and Apple
 infers which voice command a user says over encrypted traffic. We HomePod, are being increasingly adopted in the U.S. with sales surfirst built an automatic voice traffic collection tool and collected passing 133 million [2]. However, privacy remains one of the major
 two large-scale datasets on two smart speakers, Amazon Echo and concerns limiting a more widespread adoption among consumers.
 Google Home. Then, we implemented proof-of-concept attacks by This includes two types of concerns: (1) privacy disclosed to voice
 leveraging deep learning. Our experimental results over the two service providers [1], and (2) the focus of this research, sensitive
 datasets indicate disturbing privacy concerns. Specifically, com- information that can be revealed by external attackers.
 pared to 1% accuracy with random guess, our attacks can correctly We investigated the privacy leakage of smart speakers by considinfer voice commands over encrypted traffic with 92.89% accuracy ering an external attacker that runs voice command fingerprinting
 on Amazon Echo. attacks [18]. In this attack, an attacker eavesdrops encrypted voice
 Despite variances that human voices may cause on outgoing traffic of a smart speaker, and leverages side-channel information,
 traffic, our proof-of-concept attacks remain effective even only including the size, direction, and order of encrypted packets, to
 leveraging incoming traffic (i.e., the traffic from the server). This infer a user’s voice command without decryption. For instance, an
 is because the AI-based voice services running on the server side attacker can be a local eavesdropper on a victim’s WiFi network or a
 response commands in the same voice and with a deterministic compromised WiFi access point. As the content of a response from
 or predictable manner in text, which leave distinguishable pattern the server is correlated with a voice command, an attacker leverages
 over encrypted traffic. We also built a proof-of-concept defense to both outgoing traffic (the encrypted packets of a voice command)
 obfuscate encrypted traffic. Our results show that the defense can and incoming traffic (the encrypted packets of a response) to infer a
 effectively mitigate attack accuracy on Amazon Echo to 32.18%. voice command in this attack.
 Revealing voice commands can uncover users’ activities, lead
 KEYWORDS to unauthorized disclosure, and compromise privacy of millions
 machine learning, encrypted traffic analysis, smart speaker of users. Moreover, an attacker could leverage voice command
 fingerprinting to assist malicious attacks (such as skill squatting [20,
 ACM Reference Format: 50]) to attack specific targets. For instance, an attacker could infer
 Chenggang Wang, Sean Kennedy, Haipeng Li, King Hudson, Gowtham which voice commands a specific victim often says by leveraging
 Atluri, Xuetao Wei, Wenhai Sun, and Boyang Wang. 2020. Fingerprinting
 voice command fingerprinting and then create malicious skills using
 Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning. In 13th
 ACM Conference on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks
 skill squatting, where the names of malicious skills share similar
 pronunciations of words appeared in those voice commands. An
 ∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this research.
 attacker could further record user conversations through smart
 speakers using malicious skills and steal sensitive information such
 WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria
 © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
 as passwords and credit card information [20, 50].
 This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal use. Not for Similar to website fingerprinting [5, 11–14, 19, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30,
 redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published in 13th ACM Conference 34–36, 41] voice command fingerprinting is an encrypted traffic
 on Security and Privacy in Wireless and Mobile Networks (WiSec ’20), July 8–10, 2020,
 Linz (Virtual Event), Austria, https://doi.org/10.1145/3395351.3399357. analysis attack, which can be formulated as supervised learning
 problem. Machine-learning-based encrypted traffic analysis can
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

also be used to fingerprint devices [8, 40]. Kennedy et al. [18] pre- • We designed a proof-of-concept defense, which obfuscates
viously studied voice command fingerprinting over a small dataset, traffic and mitigates privacy leakage against voice command
which consists of 100 commands with 10 traffic traces per com- fingerprinting. According to our results on Amazon Echo
mand. By manually selecting features and utilizing AdaBoost as dataset, with privacy parameter ϵ = 0.005, our defense can
the classifier, their attack can achieve 33.8% accuracy. reduce attack accuracy to 1.23% if an attacker trains models
 This paper aims to improve attack accuracy and advance our un- with original traffic and tests with obfuscated traffic. If an
derstanding of the privacy leakage. Deep learning techniques [21] attacker adapts, in which it trains and tests with obfuscated
that have been found to improve attack accuracy of encrypted traf- traffic, attack accuracy can still be reduced to 32.18%.
fic analysis in website fingerprinting [5, 25, 30, 34, 35], are potential
candidates to address the problem of voice command fingerprinting. However, deep learning techniques require large datasets with
thousands to millions of samples. Currently, there are no large-scale 2 RELATED WORK
research datasets available that can be harnessed in the context of Website Fingerprinting. The purpose of website fingerprinting
voice command fingerprinting. is to infer which website a user visits over encrypted traffic [12–14,
 In this paper, we report the advances we made in bridging the 22, 27, 28, 30, 35, 41]. Early-stage research in website fingerprinting
gap in the understanding of privacy impacts of smart speakers. Our focused on manually extracting features from encrypted traffic and
experimental results derived from neural networks over two large- harnessing different conventional machine learning algorithms to
scale datasets indicate disturbing privacy concerns on smart speak- achieve higher accuracy. Among these studies, Panchenko et al.
ers as well as the driving force of smart speakers — the AI-based [27] proposed CUMUL by considering the cumulative sum function
voice services. According to our results, despite high variances that of traffic size. This attack leveraged Support Vector Machine as
human voices may cause on the outgoing traffic of a smart speaker, the classifier and outperformed other methods [30]. This attack
our proof-of-concept attacks remain effective by only lever- achieved an accuracy of 93%, and is even comparable in performance
aging the incoming traffic from the server side. This is mainly with deep-learning-based attacks [30, 35].
because the AI-based voice services running on the server side response Recent work in website fingerprinting attacks used deep learning
commands in the same voice and with a deterministic or predictable models to automatically extract features and resulted in higher acmanner in text, which leave distinguishable network traffic pattern. curacy. Sirinam et al. [35] leveraged Convolutional Neural Network
 Contributions. Our main contributions are summarized below: (CNN) and attained 98% accuracy in the closed-world setting with
 95 websites. Rimmer et al. [30] investigated website fingerprinting
 • We built an automatic tool to collect encrypted voice traffic
 with CNN, Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Stacked Denoison a smart speaker. It is capable of collecting approximately
 ing Autoencoder (SDAE). SDAE achieved 94% accuracy on a dataset
 3,000 traffic traces per day, which addresses the limitation
 with 900 classes while CNN and LSTM reached 91% and 88%.
 of data collection in voice command fingerprinting.
 Different defense methods have also been proposed. BuFLO [12]
 • We collected two large-scale datasets on two popular smart
 sends packets at a fixed size with fixed intervals but introduces high
 speakers, Amazon Echo and Google Home, using 5 autolatency. Juarez et al. [17] designed WTF-PAD to obfuscate traffic
 mated voices rendered by public text-to-speech APIs. Each
 pattern by using adaptive padding [33], which hides traffic gaps
 dataset consists of 150,000 traffic traces including 100 comand introduces no latency. Wang et al. devised Walkie-Talkie [42],
 mands/classes and 1,500 traffic traces per class.
 which applied half-duplex model and burst molding to Tor traffic.
 • We performed the attack utilizing Convolutional Neural Net-
 Both WTF-PAD [17] and Walkie-Talkie [42] cause low latency,
 works (CNN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Stacked
 but can be compromised by CNN-based attacks [35]. A CNN-based
 Autoencoder (SAE) respectively. Our results using bidirecattack achieved 90% accuracy against WTF-PAD and 49.7% accutional traffic of Amazon Echo in the closed-world setting 1
 racy against Walkie-Talkie. Imani et al. [15] proposed to leverage
 show that, CNN attained 89.05% accuracy, LSTM achieved
 adversarial examples [37] as a defense against website fingerprint-
 88.65% and SAE obtained 75.98%. Both CNN and LSTM outing. However, it requires the knowledge of entire traffic traces in
 performed the previous attack in [18]. Our attack using enadvance, and hence cannot obfuscate traffic on the fly.
 semble learning [26] further improved accuracy to 92.89%.
 Video Stream Fingerprinting. Schuster et al. [32] showed
 • As human voices vary in practice due to age, gender and acthat traffic bursts are useful to identify encrypted MPEG-DASH
 cent, which could cause higher variances on outgoing traffic
 video streams. Zhang et al. [51] demonstrated the threat of video
 than the automated voices we utilized in our data collection.
 stream fingerprinting with 40 YouTube videos with 100 traces per
 We also demonstrated that our attacks are effective using
 video. CNN achieved 95% accuracy and outperformed competing
 incoming traffic only. Specifically, both CNN and LSTM still
 approaches. On the other hand, the authors showed that leveraging
 achieved over 81% accuracy in the closed world-setting on
 differential privacy on time-series data (e.g., d ∗ -privacy [47]) can
 Amazon Echo dataset. Our attack results in the open-world
 obfuscate traffic pattern and preserve privacy over encrypted traffic.
 setting are also highly effective.
 In contrast to website fingerprinting, which extracts features on
 bi-directional traffic, video stream fingerprinting leverages one-way
1 In the closed world setting, an attacker knows a traffic is associated with a given list
 traffic (i.e., encrypted video traffic sent by the server).
of commands and infers which command it is. In the open-world setting, an attacker Voice Command Fingerprinting. Kennedy et al. investigated
decides whether a traffic is associated with a given list of commands. voice command fingerprinting attacks over a small dataset, which
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

 Automatic Speech
 User Smart Speaker WiFi AP ISP Cloud Server Command
 Recognition
 (Audio)

 Encrypted traffic Encrypted traffic Encrypted traffic Command
 (Text)

 Response Natural Language
 (Audio) Understanding

 Attacker

 Figure 1: The system model of voice command fingerprinting attacks.

includes 100 classes and 10 traces per class [18]. The authors ex- voice data traffic between a smart speaker and the server is proamined several traditional machine learning methods in website tected by off-the-shelf encryption technology. For instance, Amazon
fingerprinting and applied to encrypted voice traffic on smart speak- Echo leverages TLS (Transport Layer Security) 1.2 and all traffic is
ers. A method leveraging AdaBoost achieved over 33.8% accuracy encrypted with AES (Advanced Standard Encryption) [18].
in the closed-world setting and outperformed others. The features Threat Model. We assume an attacker is a local eavesdropper
that the authors examined in [18] include the size of each burst, who can sniff the network traffic of a smart speaker. For instance, an
total transmitted bytes, the number of bursts, occurring packet attacker can be an eavesdropper on the victimâĂŹs WiFi network
sizes, percentage incoming packets, and the number of packets. or a compromised WiFi access point. This attacker cannot decrypt
 Apthorpe et al. [8] inferred user activities at home by identifying encrypted packets. In addition, this attacker does not drop, change
different smart home devices (including smart speakers) through or inject packets.
encrypted traffic pattern. In their study, the authors inferred 3 voice We assume there is one smart speaker in the victim’s WiFi netcommands (with 3 samples per command) on Amazon Echo based work. We assume the attacker knows the model of a smart speaker,
on traffic rate. The dataset and attack methods in [8] are not as e.g., Amazon Echo or Google Home. We assume the attacker can
comprehensive as our study. infer the IP address of a smart speaker as well as the IP address of
 Fingerprinting on Encrypted VoIP Traffic. Several previous the server running voice services. With the IP address of a smart
studies examined the privacy of encrypted VoIP (Voice over IP speaker, the attacker can filter out traffic from other devices contraffic) [9, 43–46]. These studies leverage packet size as the only necting to the same WiFi access point [8].
fingerprint because VoIP uses a combination of Variable Bit Rate Inferring the IP address of a smart speaker. Inferring the IP
encoding with stream cipher, but are not effective if data is en- of a smart speaker is feasible for a local eavesdropper. Many existing
crypted with block cipher [46]. These attacks are not applicable to studies [6–8, 10, 16, 23, 24, 38, 39] have shown that it is possible to
voice command fingerprinting as voice traffic on smart speakers is distinguish the traffic of a smart speaker (therefore its IP address)
encrypted with block cipher. from other smart home devices over encrypted traffic.
 Fingerprinting IoT Devices. Many research studies [6–8, 10, Once the IP address of a smart speaker is inferred, the server’s IP
16, 23, 24, 38, 39] have investigated how to identify IoT devices address can be easily observed as a smart speaker mainly commuas well as associated events within a smart home by analyzing nicates with its voice services. Moreover, DNS queries from a smart
encrypted traffic. For instance, Acar et. al. proposed a multi-stage speaker can also be used to infer the IP addresses of its voice services.
attack, which can achieve over 90% accuracy inferring smart home For instance, Amazon Echo in our data collection sent DNS queries
devices. Different from these studies, our attack focuses on analyz- to resolve the IP addresses of domain name unagi-na.amazon.com.
ing privacy within a single type of smart home devices. As DNS queries and responses are not encrypted, and the IP ad-
 Other Attacks on Smart Speakers. Injection attacks can inject dresses in the answer section of a DNS response can be easily
voice commands through similar pronunciations [20, 50], audible obtained (e.g., using Wireshark or dig command).
sounds [31, 49], or songs [48]. These attacks focus on the vulnerabil- A traffic trace contains all of the packets for a voice comities of Automatic Speech Recognition. Abdullah et al. [4] explored mand and its response. We assume packets that are sent to the
the vulnerabilities of the signal processing step before Automatic server are outgoing packets (packets containing a voice command),
Speech Recognition. Zhang et al. [52] investigated the vulnerability and packets that are sent to a smart speaker are incoming packof Natural Language Understanding. In contrast to these active ets (packets containing a response). We assume that an attacker
attacks, voice command fingerprinting is passive. can infer the start time and the end time of each traffic trace2 . An
 attacker can learn side-channel information, including direction,
3 BACKGROUND packet size, and timestamp. A traffic trace of a voice command C
 and its response can be described as
System Model. The system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. It includes
four entities: a smart speaker, a WiFi access point, an Internet Ser- TC = ⟨(b1 , s 1 , t 1 ), ..., (bn , sn , tn )⟩ (1)
vice Provider and a server. When a smart speaker receives a user’s
 2 It is feasible for an attacker to infer the start time of each trace on a smart speaker.
voice command upon hearing a wake word, it records the voice
 For example, through our data collection, there is a significant amount of outgoing
data and then forwards data to its cloud server. The voice services traffic initiated around the start time of a traffic trace. The end time could be identified
on the server side will produce responses to a voice command. The once there is no significant volume of traffic after certain time frame, e.g., 2∼3 seconds.
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

where n is the number of packets in this trace. Each direction bi
is either +1 (outgoing) or −1 (incoming), each packet size si is in
 Speaker
bytes, and each timestamp ti is represented in milliseconds.
 Closed-World Setting and Open-World Setting. We investigate voice command fingerprinting attacks in both the closed-world
 Amazon Echo
setting and the open-world setting. (2nd)
 In the closed-world setting, we assume that an attacker has a Ethernet
prior set of voice commands. For example, this prior set of voice Cable
commands can be a set of popular commands that users would ask.
 Raspberry Pi 3 Model B (as WiFi AP)
Given this prior set, an attacker can harvest labeled traffic traces for
each voice command by itself. An attacker can capture an unlabeled Figure 2: Our automatic voice traffic collection tool.
traffic trace from a userâĂŹs smart speaker. This unlabeled traffic
trace is associated with one of the voice commands in the prior set.
The objective of this attacker is to infer which voice command this speaker, the smart speaker forwards the command to its cloud server
unlabeled trace is associated with. and returns a response. A pre-defined time interval is estimated and
 In the open-world setting, an unlabeled traffic trace may not be applied between the start time of two audio files to ensure that the
in the prior set. The objective of this attacker is to infer whether smart speaker can complete each response. tcpdump is executed
the voice command of this unlabeled traffic trace is in the prior set. on the Raspberry Pi to automatically capture traffic traces for each
 Privacy Metric. We leverage the accuracy of the classification to voice command and its response.
determine the privacy leakage under voice command fingerprinting To the best of our knowledge, this is the first automatic tool that
in the closed-world setting. For the open-world setting, we leverage can be utilized for encrypted traffic analysis on smart speakers. Based
true positive rate and false positive rate. This privacy metric is often on our tests, this tool is capable of automatically collecting approxused in the literature of encrypted traffic analysis. imately 3,000 traffic traces per day without any human interaction.
 We leveraged this tool and collected two large datasets. Details of
 these two datasets are presented in Sec. 5.
4 VOICE COMMAND FINGERPRINTING
4.1 Automatic Traffic Collection Tool 4.2 Data Format
Our first challenge is the lack of sufficient training data (or the lack A raw traffic trace captured by tcpdump is first converted to a
of tools to collect sufficient training data). Existing data collection sequence of tuples as described in Eq. 1. Since this format cannot
methods can automatically capture web traffic. However, they do be directly passed to neural networks, we further transformed the
not directly apply to the traffic collection on smart speakers, where data into two different formats.
voice interactions are required. Binary Format. Given a traffic trace TC = ⟨(b1 , s 1 , t 1 ), ..., (bm ,
 To automatically collect traffic traces for the study of voice com- sm , tm )⟩, its binary format is TC = (b1 , ..., bm ), which keeps only
mand fingerprinting, we designed a voice command traffic collection the direction of each packet.
tool as shown in Fig. 2. This tool consists of three main components: Numeric Format. Given a traffic trace TC = ⟨(b1 , s 1 , t 1 ), ..., (bm ,
a Raspberry Pi, a regular speaker and a smart speaker. The Rasp- sm , tm )⟩, its numeric format is TC = (b1 × s 1 , ..., bm × sm ), which
berry Pi is leveraged as a compromised WiFi Access Point, which keeps direction and packet size.
can capture and store traffic traces. It is connected to the Internet For instance, given a traffic trace TC = ⟨(1, 20, 0.5), (1, 50, 2.1),
through an Ethernet cable. A smart speaker is connected to the (−1, 250, 5.3), (1, 100, 6.7)⟩, its binary format is (1, 1, −1, 1) and its
Raspberry Pi through WiFi. The regular speaker is connected to the numeric format is (20, 50, −250, 100).
Raspberry Pi via an audio cable. An Amazon Echo (2nd generation) It is worth mentioning that previous studies in deep-learningis used as an example in Fig. 2. The system is generic, and also based website fingerprinting often examine binary format only,
works for other smart speakers, such as Google Home. as Tor networks send fixed-size packets (i.e., cells) [35]. In our
 We prepared a list of commands in text and utilized text-to- study, we observed that the packet size of voice traffic on smart
speech APIs to generate audio files of voice commands. Specifically, speakers varies, so we examined results in both formats. Data in the
we leveraged Google Cloud text-to-speech API and Amazon Polly numeric format is further normalized using MinMaxScaler (with
to generate multiple audio files for each command. We utilized scikit-learn library) before being used for neural networks, as
multiple different automated voices (in US English), including 3 the inputs for deep learning should be within the range of [−1, 1].
female voices (Google, Joanna, Salli) and 2 male voices (Joey and Since neural networks require the same input length for different
Matthew). Google voice is from Google Cloud text-to-speech API classes, different traffic traces are adjusted to an identical vector
and the other four voices are selected from Amazon Polly. For each size. If the original length is smaller than the uniform vector size,
voice command, our tool generates five audio files, one for each we padded the input with 0s; if it is greater, we trimmed the input
voice. More voices can be supported in this tool if needed. by dropping data after the uniform vector size. This uniform vector
 We used a Raspberry Pi (Pi 3 Model B) running the Raspian OS. size is one of the hyperparameters we tuned in our experiments.
We developed a Python script containing 80 lines of code and run Padding traces to an identical size is commonly used in other attacks,
the script on the Raspberry Pi to automatically play audio files such as website fingerprinting [30, 35], if neural networks are used
one by one. Upon receiving each voice command from the regular as classifiers.
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

4.3 Neural Networks 5 ENCRYPTED VOICE TRAFFIC DATASETS
We implement proof-of-concept attacks using three neural net- Overview. We collected two datasets with the tool described in
works, including Convolutional Neural Networks, Long Short-Term Sec. 4. We refer to the two datasets as Amazon Echo Dataset and
Memory and Stacked Autoencoder, respectively. For each type of Google Home Dataset. We ran our data collection tool in a 200
neural networks, we exploited several different structures, and re- square-foot room on campus with a reasonable level of background
ported the structure that achieved the highest accuracy. noise and human activities. Those include a person working on a
 Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). CNN has been widely laptop/PC and typing next to the tool, opening and closing the door
used in various classification problems. According to studies in occasionally as regular office hours, and students passing the door
other research areas, especially image classification [21], the accu- and the windows of the room from the hallway. The two datasets
racy of CNN often outperforms other neural networks. It is likely were collected from March 2019 to August 2019.
that CNN would produce higher accuracy than others in voice Amazon Echo Dataset. For the closed-world setting, we colcommand fingerprinting. lected 150,000 encrypted traffic traces on Amazon Echo (2nd gener-
 The structure of our CNN. Our CNN (described in Fig. 9 in ation). This dataset includes 100 voice commands and 1,500 traffic
Appendix) consists of 11 layers, including 1 input layer, 4 convolu- traces per command. This list of commands is referred to as the
tional layers, 5 pooling layers and 1 output layer. monitored list by following the literature in website fingerprint-
 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). Long Short-Term Mem- ing [30, 35]. For the open-world setting, we chose another 100 voice
ory, is an advanced version of a Recursive Neural Network. It can commands and collected 200 traffic traces for each class. This list of
mitigate the vanishing gradient and exploding gradient problem commands is referred to as the unmonitored list. We leveraged
in (vanilla) RNNs. LSTM performs better over time-series data. En- 5 different voices (Google, Joanna, Joey, Matt, and Salli) for each
crypted traffic, in essence, is time-series data, which implies LSTM command in both the closed-world and the open-world setting.
could outperform others in voice command fingerprinting. Each voice is associated with 20% of traffic traces. This effort lasted
 The structure of our LSTM. Our LSTM (illustrated in Fig. 10 approximately 8 weeks in total to complete all the traffic traces in
in Appendix) consists of 1 input layer, 5 LSTM layers, and 1 output the closed-world setting and approximately 3 weeks to finish the
layer. Each LSTM layer consists of multiple LSTM units. traffic traces in the open-world setting of this dataset. The size of
 Stacked AutoEncoder (SAE). SAE includes an encoder, a code this data is 26.05 GBs (closed-world) and 4.07 GBs (open-world).
and a decoder. SAE first compresses data to a smaller number of di- The voice commands in our study were selected based on Amamensions and then produces the output by decoding the compressed zon Echo weekly emails. These emails include popular voice comdata. SAE can efficiently extract features from a great number of mands that Amazon Echo users often ask. We selected voice comdimensions and increase accuracy in classification. A traffic trace mands based on Amazon Echo weekly emails from December 2018
includes hundreds of packets, where the side-channel information to March 2019. A full list of those commands can be found at [3].
of one packet is a dimension. Leveraging SAE in voice command Google Home Dataset. We collected another dataset on Google
fingerprinting could attain better attack results. Home. For this dataset, we only chose a list of 100 voice commands
 The structure of our SAE. Our SAE (described in Fig. 11 in for the study of the closed-world setting. As 21 voice commands in
Appendix) consists of 9 layers, including 4 layers for encoder, 1 layer the monitored list of Amazon Echo dataset did not work on Google
for code and 4 layers for decoder. Once it is trained, the encoder Home, we chose another 21 new commands and added them to the
and the code are extracted and one dense layer is attached to the monitored list of this dataset. Since the wake word is different, we
end in order to perform classification. regenerated the audio files with the same voices. For each command,
 we still collected 1,500 traffic traces with 20% traces per voice. This
 CNN's softmax w1 effort lasted 9 weeks and resulted in a dataset of size 33.57 GBs.
 Removing Invalid Traffic Traces. We removed invalid traffic
 w2 P traces due to unexpected errors of a smart speaker. For example, an
 LSTM's softmax argmax
 invalid traffic trace could happen when a voice command was correctly played but there was no response from the server. Removing
 SAE's softmax w3 invalid traffic traces is also common in the data collection of other
 encrypted traffic analysis, such as website fingerprinting [36].
 Figure 3: The main idea of our ensemble learning. Only a very small number of traces are invalid and removed.
 Ensemble Learning. In addition to the three neural networks, For the Amazon Echo dataset, it has 148,770 valid traffic traces
we also harness ensemble learning [26]. Ensemble learning combines (99.18%) for the closed-world setting. The minimal number of traces
the predictions of multiple networks, which is known to result in belonging to one class is 1,340, and the maximum number is 1,500.
better performance than any single network. The step for ensemble There are 19,953 valid traffic traces (99.77%) for the open-world
learning in our attack is shown in Fig. 3. Ensemble learning takes setting. The Google Home dataset has 149,745 valid traffic traces
the output of the output layer (i.e., softmax function) of each single (99.83%) for the closed-world setting.
network, calculates a summation and obtains a prediction with an Categories of Voice Commands. Based on the responses of
argmax function. We assign weights w 1 , w 2 and w 3 for the three each command, we grouped commands into three categories, reneural networks. If the weight for each single network is the same, ferred to as single response commands, time-sensitive response comthen it is called average ensemble; otherwise, it is referred to as mands, and multiple response commands.
weighted ensemble [26].
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

 1500
 A single response command indicates that the response was 1000
always (or almost) the same during our data collection. For example, 500
 0
for voice command “Where is Mount Rushmore?" the response from
 −500
the Amazon server was always the same in our study. −1000
 A time-sensitive response command implies that the response −1500

changed overtime. For example, “What is the weather today?" the (a) What is my sports update?
Amazon server replied a different answer each day. 1500
 1000
 A multiple response command suggests that we received a number
 500
of different responses. However, the content of each response did 0
not change over time. For instance, for the command “Tell me a −500
 −1000
barbecue joke." the Amazon server randomly returned one of five −1500
possible jokes during our data collection.
 The ratio of each command category of the monitored list in our (b) What is the date tomorrow?
 1500
Amazon Echo dataset is elaborated in Table. 1. We further discuss 1000
the impact of categories on the attack results in the next section. 500
 0
Table 1: Ratios of Voice Commands in The Three Categories −500

(Amazon Echo Dataset, The Monitored List) −1000
 −1500

 Single Time-Sensitive Multiple (c) What is my traffic report?
 1500
 45% 21% 34%
 1000
 500
 Data Visualization. Before we evaluated the results of our neu- 0
ral networks, we first visualized some traffic traces from Amazon −500
 −1000
Echo dataset by generating heat maps of traffic traces from each
 −1500
command. The main purpose of this step is to demonstrate that
it is feasible to fingerprint voice commands based on encrypted (d) What is the price of Bitcoin?
traffic of smart speakers. Due to space limitation, we only present Figure 4: Each heat map includes 3 encrypted traffic traces
the heat maps of 4 voice commands in Fig. 4 and each heat map of one voice command. Traffic traces were generated by an
only contains 10 traffic traces in Amazon Echo dataset. Alexa Echo. Outgoing traffic are marked with red color and
 First, we observe that it is indeed viable to infer voice commands incoming traffic are marked with blue color. A darker color
based on encrypted traffic. Specifically, the traffic traces of one indicates a packet has a greater packet size.
command are not exactly the same in each heat map, but are very
similar. In addition, the traffic pattern of some commands are com- found a set of tuned hyperparameters with the highest accuracy
pletely different. For instance, the traffic traces from the first three score, we recorded the tuned hyperparameters and trained our
heat maps, including heat map (a), (b) and (c), are obviously distin- networks using these optimal hyperparameters. When we trained
guishable. On the other hand, we also notice that it is not trivial each network, we limited the number of training epochs to 500
to distinguish all the commands based on heat maps as the traffic or stopped the training early if the accuracy did not continue to
pattern of some commands are similar. For example, the difference improve after 10 consecutive epochs. The search space and tuned
of traffic traces between (c) and (d) in Fig. 4 are not obvious. In fact, hyperparameters can be found in Appendix.
most of the classes we investigate have similar pattern as heat map
(c) and (d). This creates the need for sophisticated neural networks 6.1 Closed-World: Outgoing & Incoming Traffic
 We first evaluate attack results in the closed-world setting leverag-
6 ATTACK EVALUATION ing both outgoing and incoming traffic.
Experiment Setting. We implement our proof-of-concept attack Which Input Format is More Effective? We first compared
in Python. We used Keras as the front end and Tensorflow as the the attack results between the binary format and numeric format
back end to implement neural networks. We ran our experiments for each model. As shown in Table 2, the accuracy of the numeric
on a Linux machine with Ubuntu 18.04 OS, 2.8 GHz CPU, 16 GB format is much higher than the accuracy of binary format. This
Memory, and a GPU (NIVIDA GeForce GTX 1070). We ran 5-fold indicates that data in the numeric format leaves more identifiable
cross validation. We used 64% of the data for training, 16% for fingerprints in the encrypted traffic.
validation, and 20% for testing. Which Neural Network is More Effective? We observed that
 Hyperparameter Tuning. We searched hyperparameters for CNN and LSTM resulted in very similar results and were both signifneural networks with NNI (Neural Network Intelligence), a Mi- icantly higher than SAE in the closed-world setting. The variance of
crosoft open-source toolkit. We used TPE (Tree-structured Parzen accuracy in each network is small in 5-fold cross validation, which
Estimator) as our search/tuning algorithm, which is one of the suggests the neural networks are stable.
tuning algorithms provided by NNI. The results on Google Home dataset indicated similar observa-
 For each neural network, we ran NNI with 50 iterations at most tions as the ones derived from Amazon Echo dataset. For the attacks
or stopped the search if it took longer than 200 hours. After we on Google Home dataset, we used the same hyperparameters for
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

Table 2: Attack Results in the Closed-World Setting Based on Both Outgoing and Incoming Traffic (AE: Averaging Ensemble;
WE: Weighted Ensemble; ACC: Accuracy; VAR: Variance)

 Dataset Format CNN LSTM SAE AE WE
 ACC VAR ACC VAR ACC VAR ACC ACC
 Binary 75.88% 0.56 × 10−5 77.51% 4.68 × 10−5 66.59% 0.44 × 10−5 85.49% 85.70%
 Amazon Echo
 Numeric 89.05% 1.50 × 10−5 88.65% 0.49 × 10−5 75.98% 0.48 × 10−5 89.41% 92.89%
 Binary 95.17% 1.62 × 10−5 96.90% 2.48 × 10−5 90.20% 0.47 × 10−5 – –
 Google Home
 Numeric 99.22% 0.06 × 10−5 98.62% 0.13 × 10−5 92.34% 0.28 × 10−5 – –

Table 3: The Comparison with Previous Methods in the Closed-World Setting Based on Both Outgoing and Incoming Traffic
of Amazon Echo Dataset

 Attack Method CNN LSTM SAE CUMUL [27] CNS19 [18] Random Guess
 Accuracy 89.05% 88.65% 75.98% 61.44% 76.32% 1%
 Training Time (second) 5,327 23,967 1,800 6,073 4,421 N/A

each neural network as the ones in Amazon Echo dataset. This 1.0
suggests that our neural networks are transferable across encrypted
traffic from different smart speakers. 0.8

 Accuracy
 Can Ensemble Learning Improve Accuracy? As presented
 0.6
in Table 2, our results demonstrate that ensemble learning can CNN
 LSTM
improve the attack accuracy nearly 4% and outperforms each single 0.4 SAE
 CUMUL
network in the closed-world setting on Amazon Echo dataset. CNS19

 For weighted ensemble, we calculated the normalized weights 0.2
 250 500 750 1000 1250
 Number of traffic traces
using the accuracy on the validation data and reported the attack
accuracy based on test data. The normalized weights we derived Figure 5: The impact of data size on attack accuracy.
for CNN, LSTM and SAE were 0.35, 0.35, and 0.30 respectively on
Amazon Echo dataset. We did not run 5-fold cross validation in increased the number of traces per class from 100 to 1,300 with an
ensemble learning as the variance of each single network was very interval of 100. We tested attack accuracy of five methods, including
low. For Google Home dataset, as CNN already achieved extremely CNN, LSTM, SAE, CNS19, and CUMUL for each different size. For
high accuracy with over 99%, we did not use ensemble learning. different sizes, we used the same hyperparameters, retrained the
 Comparison with Previous Studies. We compared our results neural networks each time based on the corresponding data.
with previous studies. Particularly, we compared our neural net- As shown in Fig. 5, for neural networks, we observed significant
works running the numeric format with two conventional machine improvements by utilizing a greater number of traffic traces. CNN
learning attack methods, CUMUL [27] and CNS19 [18], on Amazon performed the best among all the three deep learning models with
Echo dataset in the closed-world setting. We chose CUMUL as it is every size we tested. CNS19 outperformed others only when the
one of the most effective attack methods, and its accuracy is compa- number of traces for each class was 100. The accuracy of CNS19
rable with deep-learning-based methods in website fingerprinting and CUMUL increased slowly and did not gain much improvement
[30]. CNS19 [18] manually selected a feature set and implemented when the number of traces per class approached 1,300.
the classifier with AdaBoost. We implemented both CUMUL and We could obtained more fine-grained results in Fig. 5 if we in-
CNS19 with Python in our comparison. crease the data size with a smaller interval (e.g., 10). In that case, we
 As shown in Table 3, CNS19 achieved 76.32% accuracy on our would need to re-train hundreds of neural networks, which is time-
Amazon Echo dataset in the closed-world setting, which is signif- consuming even with a GPU. Using the interval of 100 was sufficient
icantly higher than the accuracy of 33.8% reported in [18]. Since for us to observe the impact of data size on attack accuracy.
we applied the same feature set and same classifier as CNS19, this
accuracy increase is likely because the size of our dataset is signifi- 6.2 Closed-World: Incoming Traffic Only
cantly greater than the dataset utilized in CNS19. Specifically, our Will Our Attacks Be Effective on Human Voices? Our attack
dataset has 1,500 traces per class while the dataset in CNS19 only results using both outgoing and incoming traffic are promising.
has 10 traces per class. CNS19 outperformed CUMUL and SAE but However, a key question we have not investigated is whether our
was outperformed by our CNN and LSTM in the comparison. attacks will be effective on human voices in the real world.
 The Impact of The Number of Traces. Next, we evaluated The encrypted traffic traces in our two datasets were triggered
attack accuracy with different sizes of data. Specifically, we kept with five different automated voices from public Text-to-Speech
the same 100 commands in the monitored list of Amazon Echo APIs. Although these automated voices render a certain degree of
dataset, but we randomly selected a subset of traffic traces from variance in voices, human voices vary significantly due to multiple
each command based on a given number of traces per class. We factors, including gender, age, and accent. These factors could lead
 to high variances in the voice data of the same voice command,
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

Table 4: Attack Results in the Closed-World Setting Based on Incoming Traffic Only (AE: Averaging Ensemble; WE: Weighted
Ensemble; ACC: Accuracy; VAR: Variance)

 Dataset Format CNN LSTM SAE AE WE
 ACC VAR ACC VAR ACC VAR ACC ACC
 Binary 24.40% 0.18 × 10−5 24.38% 0.28 × 10−5 24.65% 1.72 × 10−5 24.44% 24.16%
 Amazon Echo
 Numeric 81.69% 1.70 × 10−5 85.09% 1.93 × 10−5 73.77% 2.37 × 10−5 84.41% 86.09%
 Binary 8.90% 0.88 × 10−5 9.25% 0.21 × 10−5 8.92% 0.35 × 10−5 9.26% 9.35%
 Google Home
 Numeric 88.50% 6.97 × 10−5 92.24% 7.84 × 10−5 81.57% 3.01 × 10−5 91.66% 92.48%

which may change the pattern of the traffic to the server and affect Table 5: Attack Results for Different Categories in the
the accuracy of our attacks. Closed-World Setting (Incoming Traffic, Numeric Format)
 In addition, humans can ask the same intent with variations
in text. For example, a human can ask "Will it rain tomorrow?" or CNN LSTM SAE
"Is it going to rain tomorrow?", where both commands have the Single 87.57% 81.50% 80.92%
same semantic intent and will receive the same response. These Time-Sensitive 88.94% 86.67% 83.95%
 Multiple 75.92% 74.46% 68.41%
variations in text could also affect in the pattern of outgoing traffic.
 While investigating all the variances in human voices and texts
is obviously challenging (and nearly impossible), one of our key
 the assumptions of the open-world scenario, which is a binary
observations is that all these variances do not affect the inclassification with the aim to decide whether or not a traffic trace
coming traffic from the server. Specifically, humans can ask the
 is associated with the monitored list. We only reported the results
same commands with different voices and texts, but as long as the
 in the open-world setting with incoming traffic only.
AI-based voice services on the server side understand correctly,
the responses (as well as the incoming traffic) are not affected by
these variances in voices and texts. Thus, we further conducted Table 6: Attack Results in The Open-World Setting on Amaexperiments using incoming traffic only to prove our attacks would zon Echo (Incoming Traffic Only)
be effective in the real world.
 Our results in Table 4 shown that our neural networks are ef- Format Metric CNN LSTM SAE AE
fective even considering incoming traffic only. For instance, LSTM ACC 99.94% 100% 99.92% 100%
 Numeric TPR 100% 100% 99.93% 100%
still achieved 85.09% accuracy with the numeric format on Amazon
 FPR 0.12% 0.00% 0.08% 0.00%
Echo dataset. Between the numeric format and binary format, we ACC 57.09% 57.56% 50.54% 56.33%
observed that the numeric format were more effective. Binary TPR 66.04% 56.46% 47.41% 57.31%
 For each neural network, we re-tuned hyperparameters based on FPR 51.98% 41.32% 46.28% 44.67%
incoming traffic only. The tuned hyperparameters can be found in
Appendix. Our results based on incoming traffic only also indicated
 Our results in Table 6 show that, with data in numeric format,
that the primary reason causing identifiable voice commands over
 an attacker can decide whether a traffic trace is associated with the
encrypted traffic on smart speakers is likely because their AI-based
 monitored list with an extremely high true positive rate and a very
voice services response in a deterministic or predictable manner,
 low false positive rate.
which leave distinguishable fingerprints in encrypted traffic.
 The Impact of Different Voice Command Categories. We
also evaluated the impact of the categories on attack accuracy using 7 A DEFENSE AGAINST FINGERPRINTING
incoming traffic only. We separated Amazon Echo dataset into three We present a proof-of-concept defense to mitigate the privacy leaksubdatasets based on the categories of each command. We evaluated age against voice command fingerprinting. It integrates two existing
attack accuracy based on each subdataset. primitives, including adaptive padding [33] and differential privacy
 According to the results, single response commands and time- [47], to obfuscate traffic pattern.
sensitive response commands were easier to infer. For instance, Defense Details. To minimize latency, we first deploy adaptive
CNN achieved 87.57% accuracy for single response commands and padding in our defense. Adaptive padding, which was proposed
88.94% accuracy for time-sensitive response commands. For com- in [33], adds dummy packets and introduces no latency. Dummy
mands with multiple responses, CNN still revealed significant pri- packets are inserted based on the distribution of interarrival time
vate information with over 75% accuracy. and each real packet is still sent at the original timestamp. As a
 result, it hides traffic bursts and traffic gaps. Details of adaptive
 padding can be found in [33]. This primitive has been used in
6.3 Open-World: Incoming Traffic Only WTF-PAD [17] as a defense in website fingerprinting. However,
We evaluated the open-world setting with our Amazon Echo dataset. adaptive padding does not hide other traffic fingerprints, such as
To keep the data balanced, we used 200 valid traces per class in traffic length or packet size. Recent studies [35] have shown that
the monitored list and we used all the valid traces of each class leveraging adaptive padding alone is not effective against deepin the unmonitored list. We retrained each neural network under learning-based attacks.
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

 To maintain efficacy, we further obfuscate fingerprints that are 0.6
 CNN
not well protected by adaptive padding. First, we randomly deter- LSTM

 Accuracy
mine the size of dummy packets based on the distribution of real 0.4 SAE

packet size. Second, we extend the length of different traffic traces
to identical obfuscated traffic length. Specifically, after sending 0.2
the last real packet in each trace, our defense will keep producing 0.005 0.05 0.5 5
dummy packets with adaptive padding until it reaches an obfus- Privacy parameter ε
cated traffic length. Instead of padding all traffic traces to the same Figure 7: The impact of privacy parameter on defense with
length, which is less efficient, our defense extends a trace with the inputs in the numeric format.
traffic length of m (i.e., the total number of packets) to an obfuscated
 0.6
traffic length of m ′ , where 2a−1 < m ≤ m ′ = 2a and a is an integer. CNN
 LSTM

 Accuracy
 Third, our defense applies differential privacy to obfuscate packet SAE
 0.4
size on the fly. Specifically, we leverage d ∗ -privacy [47] to add noise
to modify packet size, where d ∗ -privacy is a variation of differen- 0.2
tial privacy on time-series data. With d ∗ -privacy, the obfuscated
 0.005 0.05 0.5 5
outputs of two identical length sequences with a distance of d are Privacy parameter ε
indistinguishable. Due to space limitation, details of d ∗ -privacy
can be found in [47]. A recent study [51] has demonstrated that Figure 8: The impact of privacy parameter on defense with
d ∗ -privacy is effective in obfuscating one-way encrypted traffic inputs in the binary format.
in video streams. Building upon [51], we utilize this primitive to
obfuscate bi-directional traffic in our study. A high-level description against attacks based on traditional machine learning algorithms,
of our defense of obfuscating each packet size is described in Fig. 6. such as CUMUL and CNS19.
 We assume the server will obfuscate incoming traffic, and the
 smart speaker (or a proxy) will obfuscate outgoing traffic. In prac-
 A dummy or An obfuscated tice, the server can calculate the distribution information of interar-
 Adaptive
 real packet Differential packet rival time and packet size, and other information that are required
 Send
 Padding Privacy
 to perform the defense, and forward these information to a smart
 speaker. As we do not have the capability to change the current
 network protocol, we run simulations of our defense to generate
 Figure 6: Our defense obfuscates each packet on the fly.
 obfuscated traffic from real traffic and demonstrate its efficacy.
 Given a (real or dummy) packet, if noise produced by d ∗ -privacy
is positive (e.g., σ ), then additional dummy data is inserted to in- 8 DEFENSE EVALUATION
crease the packet size (e.g., l ′ = l + σ ); if noise is negative (e.g., We implemented our defense in Python. We produced obfuscated
−σ ), then the packet size will be reduced (e.g., l ′ = l − σ ) and a traffic traces based on Amazon Echo dataset. The distribution of
corresponding portion of a packet (e.g., σ ) will be buffered until a interarrival time and packet size we used in adaptive padding are
subsequent real or dummy packet is available in a traffic trace. We generated based on Amazon Echo dataset. For differential privacy,
implement the buffer as a queue, which sends buffered data before we generated multiple versions of obfuscated datasets based on
sending new data. different values of privacy parameter ϵ. Privacy parameter ϵ decides
 Unlike [51], which operates d ∗ -privacy (or differential privacy the privacy protection (i.e., the noise level) rendered by differential
in general) over bins, our defense adds the noise on packets. A privacy. A smaller value of ϵ generates higher noise produced and
bin consists of packets within a fixed-size interval. It serves better offers stronger privacy protection.
for one-direction traffic in [51]. For bi-directional traffic, one time We assessed the performance of the defense in two cases: (1)
interval may have traffic on both directions, which makes it hard Training with original traffic. In this case, neural networks are
to aggregate as one bin and apply noise to traffic. Adding noise trained based on original traffic traces, but test data are obfuscated;
directly on packets is more suitable for the bi-directional traffic in (2) Training with obfuscated traffic. In this scenario, we assume
our problem. Besides, this minimizes latency, as our defense does an attacker adapts to the defense, where it trains neural networks
not need to buffer the packets in each bin before inserting noise. with obfuscated traffic traces and tests with obfuscated traffic traces.
 Discussions. Adaptive padding complements differential pri- As shown in Table 7, when training with original traffic, our
vacy in two aspects. First, it hides traffic bursts and traffic gaps, defense can suppress attack accuracy of CNN to 1.23% in the closedwhich differential privacy alone does not. Second, for buffered data world setting, which is nearly the same as random guess. If an
caused by negative noise, the dummy packets produced by adaptive attacker trains a CNN with obfuscated traffic traces, it can improve
padding can send buffered data sooner, which minimizes latency. its accuracy back to 26.81%, which is still significantly lower com-
 Assumptions on Defense. We apply our defense on both in- pared to the accuracy without defense. With average ensemble, an
coming and outgoing traffic to minimize the privacy leakage from attacker can attain 28.41% accuracy (v.s. 89.41% with no defense).
the encrypted traffic. While our results in the previous section Our defense is also effective against CUML and CNS19.
showed that incoming traffic plays a dominating role in the attacks, The Impact of Privacy Parameter. In Fig. 7, we show the
it is still necessary to obfuscate outgoing traffic to preserve privacy impact of ϵ on attack accuracy where the inputs are in the numeric
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

 Table 7: Defense Results in The Closed-World Setting among Different Methods with ϵ=0.005

 CNN LSTM SAE AE CUMUL CNS19
 No Defense 89.05% 88.65% 75.98% 89.41% 61.44% 76.32%
 Training with original traffic 1.23% 1.05% 1.12% 1.07% 1.97% 1.77%
 Training with obfuscated traffic 26.81% 19.48% 15.69% 28.42% 17.14% 14.59%

 Table 8: Tradeoffs with Different Privacy Parameter card transactions. For instance, asking a smart speaker to successfully order an item online with 1,500 times is challenging to perform
 Privacy Latency Bandwidth in a lab setting.
 Parameter ϵ Per Packet (ms) Per Trace (ms) Overhead (KB) We studied 100 popular voice commands in the closed-world
 0.005 16.5 136.0 (2.6%) 55.82 (138.7%) setting. On the other hand, we acknowledge that the number of
 0.05 10.4 31.4 (0.6%) 66.34 (146.0%) voice commands users could ask in practice is much greater than
 0.5 7.0 17.4 (0.3%) 70.38 (148.8%)
 100. It would be interesting to assess the privacy leakage of voice
 command fingerprinting on data with a much greater number of
format. When ϵ decreases, the noise level generated by differential voice commands (e.g., 1,000). A more effective way of collecting
privacy increases, which can reduce attack accuracy. data will be needed in that case.
 We also studied the impact of privacy parameter ϵ on attack Packet Timing. We did not leverage packet timing information
accuracy with inputs in the binary format. As illustrated in Fig 8, [29] in our attack. It would be interesting to examine how packet
we found that attack accuracy remained relatively stable when we timing information could be utilized in voice command fingerprintchanged privacy parameter. The reason is that changing privacy ing. We will leave it as a future work.
parameter ϵ does not have effect on the inputs if they are in the Different Prior Probabilities. In this study, as other existing
binary format. There are still some minor changes in accuracy as fingerprinting attacks, we assume that each class in the closedthe privacy parameter changes in Fig. 8. It is because the obfuscated world setting has a uniform prior probability. However, this is not
datasets in binary format are not exactly the same across different the most accurate way to formulate the problem. Different voice
values of ϵ as adaptive padding is a probabilistic algorithm. commands could have different prior probabilities if an attacker
 It is worth mentioning that when ϵ = 0.005, accuracy with inputs takes into account additional background information.
in the binary format is slightly higher than the one in the numeric For instance, given two voice commands, Q1: “How many days
format. For instance, CNN achieved 30.18% accuracy compared to until Thanksgiving?" and Q2: “How many days until Tax Day?", if it
26.81% in the numeric format. Average ensemble attained 32.18% is in October, the probability of asking Q1 is obviously greater than
accuracy compared to 28.42% in the numeric format. the probability of asking Q2. On the contrary, if it is in March, then
 Latency. We examined the latency of our defense by evaluating the probability of asking Q2 is clearly greater than the probability
latency per packet and also latency per traffic trace. Latency per of asking Q1. Without the statistic information from voice service
packet indicates how many milliseconds it takes to clear the (po- providers, accurately formulating the prior probabilities of different
tential) buffered data for each real packet. Latency per traffic trace voice commands is challenging.
suggests how many extra milliseconds it takes to complete sending
all the real packets of a traffic trace. Our results in Table 8 show that 10 CONCLUSION
the defense introduced minimal latency. The latency per packet We advance the understanding of privacy impacts of smart speakers
hardly aggregated over packets as the buffered data is cleared rather by investigating voice command fingerprinting attacks using neusoon either by dummy packets or the next real packet. ral networks. Our attack results show worrying privacy concerns
 Bandwidth. The bandwidth overhead introduced by the defense especially using incoming traffic only. The experimental results
is affordable. If ϵ decreases, the latency increases but bandwidth show that our proposed defense can mitigate privacy leakage.
overhead decreases. The reason is that when privacy parameter
is lower, noise generated by differential privacy is higher, which ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
causes more buffered data per packet and therefore a longer latency
on average. On the other hand, more buffered real data are sent by We thank the anonymous reviewers and our shepherd, Dr. Selcuk
dummy packets generated by adaptive padding, which reduces the Uluagac, for their insightful comments on this paper. UC authors
overall dummy data needed in each traffic trace. were partially supported by National Science Foundation (CNS-
 1947913), UC Office of the Vice President for Research - Pilot Program, and Ohio Cyber Range at UC. King Hudson was partially
9 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
 supported by NSF LSAMP (Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Par-
Human Voices. In this study, we leveraged automated voices but ticipation) program. Wenhai Sun was partially supported by Purdue
not human voices to trigger encrypted traffic on a smart speaker Research Foundation Summer Faculty Grant. The code, datasets,
during our data collection. One of our future work is to evaluate and other additional information of this study can be found at [3].
voice command fingerprinting with human voices by considering
different genders, ages and accents. REFERENCES
 Voice Commands. We did not study popular voice commands [1] [n.d.]. Amazon Staff Are Listening To Alexa Conversations. https:
that require interactions with other IoT devices or involve credit //www.forbes.com/sites/kateoflahertyuk/2019/04/12/amazon-staff-are-
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

 Max Max
 Input Conv Dropout Conv Dropout Conv
 Pooling Pooling

 Dense GlobalAver Max Max
 Dense agePooling Conv Dropout
 Softmax Pooling Pooling

 Figure 9: The structure of our CNN.

 LSTM LSTM LSTM
 Input Dropout Dropout Dropout
 Layer Layer Layer

 Dense LSTM LSTM
 Dense Flatten Dropout Dropout
 Softmax Layer Layer

 Figure 10: The structure of our LSTM.

Table 9: Tuned Hyperparameters of Each Neural Network with Both Outgoing and Incoming Traffic in the Numerical Format

 Hyperparameters Search Space CNN LSTM SAE
 Input Dimension {300, 325, 350, ..., 575, 600} 475 350 375
 Optimizer {Adam, SGD, Adamax, Adadelta} Adamax Adamax Adam
 Learning Rate {0.001, 0.002, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1} 0.002 0.002 0.001
 Decay {0.00, 0.01, 0.02, ..., 0.50} 0.13 0.19 0.30
 Batch Size {30, 40, 50, ..., 120, 130} 70 130 110
 Activation Function {softsigh, tanh, elu, selu} [tanh; elu; elu; selu | | selu] [tanh; tanh; tanh; tanh | | selu] [elu; tanh; selu; elu; softsign | | tanh]
 Dropout {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5} [0.1; 0.3; 0.1; 0.0] [0.4; 0.1; 0.1; 0.3; 0.5] [0.2; 0.0; 0.0; 0.3]
 Dense Layer Size {100, 110, 120, ..., 170, 180} 180 70 130
 Convolution Number {16, 32, 64, 128, 256} [128; 128; 64; 256] − −
 Filter Size {7, 9, 11, ..., 25, 27} [7; 19; 13; 23] − −
 Pool Size {1, 3, 5, 7} [1; 1; 1; 1] − −
 LSTM Layer Size {90, 100, 110,..., 300, 310} − [210; 190; 190; 190; 130] −
 SAE Encoder Layer Size {200, 210, ..., 390, 400} − − [330; 260; 330; 280; 250]

 Table 10: Tuned Hyperparameters of Each Model with Incoming Traffic Only in the Numerical Format

 Hyperparameters Search Space CNN LSTM SAE
 Input Dimension {300, 325, 350, ..., 575, 600} 450 500 350
 Optimizer {Adam, SGD, Adamax, Adadelta} Adam Adamax Adadelta
 Learning Rate {0.001, 0.002, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1} 0.002 0.002 1.0
 Decay {0.00, 0.01, 0.02, ..., 0.50} 0.50 0.20 0.30
 Batch Size {30, 40, 50, ..., 120, 130} 150 170 130
 Activation Function {softsigh, tanh, elu, selu} [tanh; selu; elu; selu || selu] [tanh; tanh; tanh; tanh || elu] [elu; selu; selu; softsign; tanh || elu]
 Dropout {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5} [0.2; 0.1; 0.4; 0.5] [0.1; 0; 0.1; 0; 0.1, 0.5] [0.1; 0.0; 0.0; 0.0]
 Dense Layer Size {100, 110, 120, ..., 170, 180} 140 150 160
 Convolution Number {16, 32, 64, 128, 256} [256; 32; 128; 32] − −
 Filter Size {7, 9, 11, ..., 25, 27} [9; 9; 11; 15] − −
 Pool Size {1, 3, 5, 7} [3; 2; 1; 2] − −
 LSTM Layer Size {90, 100, 110,..., 300, 310} − [170; 290; 170; 90; 250] −
 SAE Encoder Layer Size {200, 210, ..., 390, 400} − − [330; 290; 270; 250; 220]

 listening-to-alexa-conversations-heres-what-to-do [7] A. Alshehri, J. Granley, and C. Yue. 2020. Attacking and Protecting Tunneled
 [2] [n.d.]. Smart Speaker Market, Worth USD 11.79 Billion by 2023. https://www. Traffic of Smart Home Devices. In Proc. of ACM CODASPY’20.
 marketsandmarkets.com/ [8] N. Apthorpe, D. Y. Huang, D. Reisman, A. Narayanan, and N. Feamster. 2019.
 [3] [n.d.]. Voice Command Fingerprinting with Deep Learning. https://github.com/ Keeping the Smart Home Private with Smart(er) IoT Traffic Shaping. In Proc. of
 SmartHomePrivacyProject/DeepVCFingerprinting PETS’19.
 [4] H. Abdullah, W. Garcia, C. Peeters, P. Traynor, K. R. B. Butler, and J. Wilson. 2019. [9] M. Backes, G. Doychev, M. Durmuth, and B. Kopf. 2010. Speaker Recognition in
 Practical Hidden Voice Attacks against Speech and Speaker Recognition Systems. Encrypted Voice Streams. In Proc. of ESORICS’10.
 In Proc. of NDSS’19. [10] B. Bezawada, M. Bachani, J. Peterson, H. Shirazi, I. Ray, and I. Ray. 2018. Behavioral
 [5] K. Abe and S. Goto. 2016. Fingerprinting Attack on Tor Anonymity Using Deep Fingerprinting of IoT Devices. In Proc. of Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in
 Learning. In Proc. of Aisa Pacific Advanced Network (APAN). Hardware Security.
 [6] A. Acar, H. Fereidooni, T. Abera, A. K. Sikder, M. Miettinen, H. Aksu, M. Conti, [11] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas. 2019. Var-CNN: A Data-Efficient Website
 A. R. Sadeghi, and A. Selcuk Uluagac. [n.d.]. Peek-a-Boo: I see your smart home Fingerprinting Attack Based on Deep Learning. In Proc. of PETS’19.
 activities, even encrypted! ([n. d.]). https://arxiv.org/pdf/1808.02741.pdf.
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

 Input Output Input
 Code Code
 Dense
 Softmax

 Encoder Decoder Encoder Classifier

 Figure 11: The structure of our SAE. Encoder and code are trained in training (left) and used in classification (right).

[12] Kevin P. Dyer, Scott E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton. 2012. Peek-a-Boo, [39] R. Trimananda, J. Varmarken, A. Markopoulou, and B. Demsky. 2020. Packet-
 I Still See You: Why Efficient Traffic Analysis Countermeasures Fail. In Proc. of Level Signatures for Smart Home Devices. In Proc. of NDSS’20.
 IEEE S&P’12. [40] A. S. Uluagac, S. V. Radhakrishnan, C. Corbett, A. Baca, and R. Beyah. 2013. A
[13] J. Hayes and G. Danezis. 2016. K-Fingerprinting: A Robust Scalable Website Passive Technique for Fingerprinting Wireless Devices with Wired-Side Obser-
 Fingerprinting Technique. In Proc. of USENIX Security’16. vations. In Proc. of IEEE CNS’13.
[14] D. Hermann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath. 2009. Website Fingertinging: [41] T. Wang, X. Cui, R. Nithyannand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg. 2014. Effective
 Attacking Popular Privacy Enhancing Technologies with the Multinomial Naive- Attacks on Provable Defenses for Website Fingerprinting. In Proc. of 23rd USENIX
 Bayes Classifier. In Proc. of ACM Workshop on Cloud Computing Security. Security Symposium.
[15] M. Imani, M. S. Rahman, N. Mathews, and M. Wright. [n.d.]. Mockingbird: [42] T. Wang and I. Goldberg. 2017. Walkie-Talkie: An Efficient Defense Against
 Defending Against Deep-Learning-Based Website Fingerprinting Attacks with Passive Website Fingerprinting Attacks. In Proc. of USENIX Security’17.
 Adversarial Traces. ([n. d.]). https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.06626. [43] X. Wang, S. Chen, and S. Jajodia. 2005. Tracking Anonymous Peer-to-Peer VoIP
[16] H. Jafari, O. Omeotere, D. Adesina, H. Wu, and L. Qian. 2018. IoT Devices Calls on the Internet. In Proc. of ACM CCS’05.
 Fingerprint Using Deep Learning. In Proc. of IEEE MILCOM’18. [44] A. M. White, A. R. Matthews, K. Z. Snow, and F. Monrose. 2011. Phonotactic
[17] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright. 2016. Toward an Efficient Reconstruction of Encrypted VoIP Conversations: Hookt on Fon-iks. In Proc. of
 Website Fingerprinting Defense. In Proc. of ESORICS’16. IEEE S&P’11.
[18] S. Kennedy, H. Li, C. Wang, H. Liu, B. Wang, and W. Sun. 2019. I Can Hear Your [45] C. Wright, L. Ballard, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson. 2007. Language Identification
 Alexa: Voice Command Fingerprinting on Smart Home Speakers. In Proc. of IEEE of Encrypted VoIP Traffic: Alejandra y Roberto or Alice and Bob?. In Proc. of
 CNS’19. USENIX Security’07.
[19] K. Kohls, D. Rupprecht, T. Holz, and C. Popper. 2019. Lost Traffic Encryption: [46] C. V. Wright, L. Ballard, S. E. Coull, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson. 2008. Spot
 Fingerprinting LET/4G Traffic on Layer Two. In Proc. of Wisec’19. me if you can: Uncovering spoken phrases in encrypted VoIP conversations. In
[20] D. Kumar, R. Paccagnella, P. Murley, E. Hennenfent, J. Mason, A. Bates, and Proc. of IEEE S&P’08.
 M. Bailey. 2018. Skill Squatting Attacks on Amazon Alexa. In Proc. of USENIX [47] Q. Xiao, M. K. Reiter, and Y. Zhang. 2015. Mitigating Storage Side Channels Using
 Security’18. Statistical Privacy Mechanisms. In Proc. of ACM CCS’15.
[21] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. E. Hinton. 2015. Deep Learning. Nature 521 (2015), [48] X. Yuan, Y Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Long, X. Liu, K. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Huang, X. Wang,
 436 – 444. and C. A. Gunter. 2018. CommandSong: A Systematic Approach for Practical
[22] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine. 2006. Inferring the Source of Encrypted HTTP Adversarial Voice Recognition. In Proc. of USENIX Security’18.
 Connections. In Proc. of ACM CCS’06. [49] G. Zhang, C. Yan, X. Ji, T. Zhang, T. Zhang, and W. Xu. 2017. DolphinAttack:
[23] M. H. Mazhar and Z. Shafiq. [n.d.]. Characterizing Smart Home IoT Traffic in the Inaudible Voice Commands. In Proc. of ACM CCS’17.
 Wild. ([n. d.]). https://arxiv.org/pdf/2001.08288.pdf. [50] N. Zhang, X. Mi, X. Feng, X. Wang, Y. Tian, and F. Qian. 2019. Dangerous Skills:
[24] N. Msadek, R. Soua, and T. Engel. 2019. IoT Device Fingerprinting: Machine Understanding and Mitigating Security Risks of Voice-Controlled Third-Party
 Learning based Encrypted Traffic Analysis. In Proc. of IEEE WCNC’19. Functions on Virtual Personal Assistant Systems. In Proc. of IEEE S&P’19.
[25] S. E. Oh, S. Sunkam, and N. Hopper. 2019. p-FP: Extraction, Classification, and [51] X. Zhang, J. Hamm, M. K. Reiter, and Y. Zhang. 2019. Statistical Privacy for
 Predication of Website Fingerprints. In Proc. of PETS’19. Streaming Traffic. In Proc. of NDSS’19.
[26] D. Opitz and R. Maclin. 1999. Popular ensemble methods: An empirical study. [52] Y. Zhang, L. Xu, A. Mendoza, G. Yang, P. Chinprutthiwong, and G. Gu. 2019. Life
 Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (1999). after Speech Recognition: Fuzzing Semantic Misinterpretation for Voice Assistant
[27] A. Panchenko, F. Lanze, A. Zinnen, M. Henze, J. Penekamp, K. Wehrle, and T. Applications. In Proc. of NDSS’19.
 Engel. 2016. Website Fingerprinting at Internet Scale. In Proc. of NDSS’16.
[28] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel. 2011. Website Fingerprinting in
 Onion Routing Based Anonymization Networks. In Proc. of Workshop on Privacy
 in the Electronic Society. APPENDIX
[29] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and M. Wright. 2020.
 Tik-Tok: The Utility of Packet Time in Website Fingerprinting Attacks. In Proc.
 Tuned Hyperparameters. For the search space of each hyperof PETS’20. parameter in Table 9 and Table 10, we represent it as a set. We
[30] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. V. Goethem, and W. Joosen. 2018. Auto- searched for learning rate and decay values if the optimizer is Stomated Website Fingerprinting through Deep Learning. In Proc. of NDSS’18.
[31] N. Roy, S. Shen, H. Hassanieh, and R. R. Choudhury. 2018. Inaudible Voice Com- chastic Gradient Decent (SGD). If the tuned optimizer is not SGD,
 mands: The Long-Range Attack and Defense. In Proc. of 15th USENIX Symposium we used the default learning rate and decay provided by Keras.
 on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI’18). For the activation functions, dropout, filter size and pool size, we
[32] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer. 2017. Beauty and the Burst: Remote
 Identification of Encrypted Video Streams. In Proc. of USENIX Security’17. searched for hyperparameters at each layer. For each of these, the
[33] V. Shamtikov and M. H. Wang. 2006. Timing Analysis in Low-Latency Mix tuned parameters we report in the table are presented as a sequence
 Networks: Attacks and Defenses. In Proc. of ESORICS’06.
[34] A. Shusterman, L. Kang, Y. Haskal, Y. Meltser, P. Mittal, Y. Oren, and Y. Yarom.
 of values by following the order of layers we presented in Fig. 9,
 2019. Robust Website Fingerprinting Through the Cache Occupancy Channel. In Fig. 10, and Fig. 11. For instance, for our CNN, the tuned activation
 Proc. of USENIX Security’19. functions are tanh (1st Conv), elu (2nd Conv), elu (3rd Conv) and
[35] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright. 2018. Deep Fingerprinting:
 Understanding Website Fingerprinting Defenses with Deep Learning. In Proc. of selu (4th Conv). The selu after symbol || in the table means that
 ACM CCS’18. the second to last dense layer in our CNN uses selu as its activation
[36] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright. 2019. Triplet Fingerprint- function. We did not include relu as one of the activation functions
 ing: More Practical and Portable Website Fingerprinting with N-shot Learning.
 In Proc. of ACM CCS’19. in the search space. It is because relu maps all the negative values
[37] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. (the sizes of all the incoming packets) to 0s, which is not suitable
 Fergus. 2014. Intriguing Properties of Neural Networks. In Proc. of ICLR’14.
[38] V. Thangavelu, D. M. Divakaran, R. Sairam, S. S. Bhunia, and M. Gurusamy.
 for traffic analysis and has been pointed out in a previous study
 2019. DEFT: A Distributed IoT Fingerprinting Technique. IEEE Internet of Things [35]. Due to space limitation, we skip the tuned hyperparameters
 Journal (2019). in the binary format.
Fingerprinting Encrypted Voice Traffic on Smart Speakers with Deep Learning WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria

 Table 11: The monitored list of voice commands in the closed-world setting.

 Index Voice Command Index Voice Command
 1 Are you wearing green? 51 What is gluten?
 2 Announce Happy Valentines Day. 52 What is Homecoming about?
 3 Do dogs dream? 53 What is my sports update?
 4 Do you like cats or dogs? 54 What is my traffic report?
 5 Flip a coin. 55 What is on your mind?
 6 Give me a dinosaur fact. 56 What is Roblox?
 7 Give me a fun fact about sleep. 57 What is the AFC North Standings?
 8 Good Morning. 58 What is the best comedy movie?
 9 Help. 59 What is the capital of Spain?
 10 How deep is the Indian Ocean? 60 What is the date tomorrow?
 11 How do you spell appreciate? 61 What is the fourth book in the Narnia series?
 12 How far away is the moon? 62 What is the history of Labor Day?
 13 How hot is the sun? 63 What is the longest word?
 14 How many days are in September? 64 What is the number one song this week?
 15 How many days in a year? 65 What is the price of bitcoin?
 16 How many days until Christmas? 66 What is the scariest movie of all time?
 17 How many days until Thanksgiving? 67 What is the score of the Eagles game?
 18 How many fantasy points does LeBron James have? 68 What is the score of the Red Sox game?
 19 How many ounces in a pound? 69 What is the time in Singapore?
 20 How many seconds are in a year? 70 What is the weather for Sunday?
 21 How many teaspoons are in a tablespoon? 71 What is the weather?
 22 How much does an elephant weigh? 72 What is trending?
 23 How much is an ounce of gold? 73 What is your favorite flower?
 24 How old are you? 74 What is your favorite game?
 25 How old is Henry Winkler? 75 What is your favorite hobby?
 26 How old is Serena Williams? 76 What is your favorite sport?
 27 How tall is Steph Curry? 77 What is your mission?
 28 How tall is the Empire State Building? 78 What is zero divided by zero?
 29 How tall is The Rock? 79 What movies are playing?
 30 Is a tomato a fruit or a vegetable? 80 What were yesterdays scores?
 31 Pick a number? 81 When does daylight saving time end?
 32 Surprise me. 82 When does Game of Thrones return?
 33 Talk like a pirate. 83 When is Boxing Day?
 34 Tell me a barbecue joke. 84 When is Hanukkah?
 35 Tell me a coffee joke. 85 When is the NBA all star game?
 36 Tell me a fun fact. 86 When is the next full moon?
 37 Tell me a Halloween hack. 87 Where did Yoda live?
 38 Tell me a joke. 88 Where is Mount Rushmore?
 39 Tell me a palindrome 89 Who do you love?
 40 Tell me a Star Wars joke. 90 Who is in Mastodon?
 41 Tell me some good news. 91 Who is nominated for best actor?
 42 Tell me something weird. 92 Who is playing Monday Night Football?
 43 Translate good morning to Spanish. 93 Who is second in the NBA Western Conference?
 44 What are some flower shops nearby? 94 Who is winning the World Series?
 45 What are the most popular books this week? 95 Who is your favorite author?
 46 What are the standings in the English Premier League? 96 Who is your favorite poet?
 47 What are you thankful for? 97 Who is your favorite superhero?
 48 What can you do? 98 Who scored for the Golden Knights?
 49 What happened in the midterm elections? 99 Why do leaves change color in the fall?
 50 What is brief mode? 100 Will it rain tomorrow?

 0.16 0.16
 0.12 0.12
 0.08 0.08
PDF

 PDF

 0.04 0.04
 0.00 0.00
 0.01 0.1 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.5 1 5 10 30 50 70 100 500 1000 0.05 0.1 0.5 1 3 5 10 12 14 16 18 20 25 30 50 100 500 1000
 Packet inter-arrival time (ms) Packet inter-arrival time (ms)

 (a) Inter-arrival time distribution of incoming packets. (b) Inter-arrival time distribution of outgoing packets.

 Figure 12: The distribution of packet inter-arrival time.

 Packet Inter-arrival Time. Fig. 12 describes the distribution
of packet interarrival time in Amazon Echo dataset. We leveraged
this distribution to perform adaptive padding in our defense.
WiSec ’20, July 8–10, 2020, Linz (Virtual Event), Austria C. Wang, S. Kennedy, H. Li, K. Hudson, G. Atluri, X. Wei, W. Sun and B. Wang

 Table 12: The unmonitored list of voice commands in the open-world setting.

 Index Voice Command Index Voice Command
 1 Are you skynet? 51 What are you reading?
 2 Beatbox for me 52 What can I do with more than one Echo device?
 3 Can you auto-tune? 53 What is 90 degrees Fahrenheit in Celsius?
 4 Can you do an impression? 54 What is Carrie Underwood’s net worth?
 5 Can you rap? 55 What is pi?
 6 Convert one pound to ounces 56 What is the dollar to euro exchange rate?
 7 Define lexicon 57 What is Don’t Worry, He Won’t Get Far on Foot movie about?
 8 Do the hokey pokey? 58 What is the next book by Rachel Hollis?
 9 Drum roll please 59 What is the stock price of General Motors?
 10 Give me a blooper 60 What is the tallest animal?
 11 Give me a palindrome 61 What is the tallest mountain?
 12 Give me a patriots burn. 62 What is the upcoming book by Neil Gaiman?
 13 Give me a prank 63 What languages can you translate?
 14 Give me a shark limerick 64 What should I be for Halloween?
 15 Give me some bad poetry. 65 What time are the Emmys?
 16 How are you? 66 What time does L.A. Fitness close?
 17 How did Dow Jones do today? 67 What time is Big Brother on TV?
 18 How do I keep my family in sync? 68 What is the birthday roundup?
 19 How do I play music everywhere? 69 What is the most popular TV show?
 20 How do I say happy birthday in Korean? 70 What is the net worth of Jennifer Lawrence?
 21 How do you say happy birthday in Chinese? 71 What is your favorite word?
 22 How does the intercom work? 72 When do I have to register to vote?
 23 How many calories are in a donut? 73 When does Avengers: Endgame release in theaters?
 24 How many gallons of water are in the Atlantic Ocean? 74 When does fall begin?
 25 How many hits did Derek Jeter have in 2012? 75 When does the new season of The Walking Dead premiere?
 26 How many people live in China? 76 When does Wimbledon start?
 27 How many people live in New York? 77 When is April Fools Day?
 28 How many rushing yards did Emmitt Smith have in his career? 78 When is Shark Week?
 29 How many times has Duke been to the Final Four? 79 When is the autumn equinox?
 30 How much does a Lamborghini cost? 80 When is the next lunar eclipse?
 31 How old is Queen Elizabeth? 81 When is the Patriots’ first game?
 32 Is a hot dog a sandwich? 82 When is the Tour de France?
 33 Make animal noises 83 When was McDonald’s founded?
 34 Pretend to be a supervillain 84 Where is the MLB All-Star game being played?
 35 Rap about the cloud 85 Who does Alabama play in their first game?
 36 Recite a haiku 86 Who inspires you?
 37 Release the Kraken 87 Who invented GPS?
 38 Roll the dice 88 Who is leading the Players Championship?
 39 Sing a song for the 4th of July 89 Who is Peppa Pig?
 40 Star Wars or Star Trek 90 Who is Rainbow Dash?
 41 Tell me a baseball story 91 Who is running for Senate in California?
 42 Tell me a basketball joke 92 Who is your favorite baseball player?
 43 Tell me a giraffe fact 93 Who is your favorite PokÃľmon?
 44 Tell me a joke about you 94 Who leads the WNBA in scoring?
 45 Tell me a pun 95 Who signed the Declaration of Independence?
 46 Tell me a shark joke 96 Who stars in Gringo?
 47 Tell me a tongue twister 97 Who won the Winter Classic?
 48 What are some good Halloween movies to watch? 98 Who is going to win the Final Four?
 49 What are the best books of the year so far? 99 Who is hosting Saturday Night Live this weekend?
 50 What are the rarest skins in Fortnite? 100 Who is your favorite college basketball team?