Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Journal of Network and Computer Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jnca

On the classiﬁcation of fog computing applications: A machine learning
perspective
Judy C. Guevara a , Ricardo da S. Torres b , Nelson L.S. da Fonseca a, ∗
a
 Institute of Computing, University of Campinas, Campinas, 13083-852, SP, Brazil
b
 Department of ICT and Natural Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Ålesund, Norway

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Currently, Internet applications running on mobile devices generate a massive amount of data that can be trans-
Fog computing mitted to a Cloud for processing. However, one fundamental limitation of a Cloud is the connectivity with end
Edge computing
 devices. Fog computing overcomes this limitation and supports the requirements of time-sensitive applications
Cloud computing
 by distributing computation, communication, and storage services along the Cloud to Things (C2T) continuum,
Internet of things
Scheduling
 empowering potential new applications, such as smart cities, augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR).
Classes of service However, the adoption of Fog-based computational resources and their integration with the Cloud introduces
Quality of service new challenges in resource management, which requires the implementation of new strategies to guarantee
Machine learning compliance with the quality of service (QoS) requirements of applications.
Feature selection In this context, one major question is how to map the QoS requirements of applications on Fog and Cloud
Attribute noise resources. One possible approach is to discriminate the applications arriving at the Fog into Classes of Ser-
Classiﬁcation algorithms vice (CoS). This paper thus introduces a set of CoS for Fog applications which includes, the QoS requirements
 that best characterize these Fog applications. Moreover, this paper proposes the implementation of a typical
 machine learning classiﬁcation methodology to discriminate Fog computing applications as a function of their
 QoS requirements. Furthermore, the application of this methodology is illustrated in the assessment of classiﬁers in terms of eﬃciency, accuracy, and robustness to noise. The adoption of a methodology for machine
 learning-based classiﬁcation constitutes a ﬁrst step towards the deﬁnition of QoS provisioning mechanisms in
 Fog computing. Moreover, classifying Fog computing applications can facilitate the decision-making process for
 Fog scheduler.

1. Introduction power and storage space (Byers, 2017), others such as mission-critical
 require strict response time. Mobile users need to have continuous
 Cloud computing enables ubiquitous access to shared pools of con- access to applications when on the move. Moreover, IoT devices and
ﬁgurable resources and services over the Internet that can be rapidly sensors generate large amounts of data. Not all data need to be sent to
provisioned with minimal management eﬀort (Mell and Grance, 2011). the Cloud while some data have to be processed immediately.
However, with the increasing relevance of the Internet of Things (IoT), Fog computing aims at coping with these demands by hosting
mobile and multimedia applications, the transfer delays between the Cloud services on connected heterogeneous devices, typically, but
Cloud and an end device have been deemed too long and not suitable not exclusively located at the edge of the network (Bonomi et al.,
for latency-sensitive applications, making the main limitation in the 2012; Wang et al., 2019). The Fog provides a geographically disuse of the Cloud (OpenFog Reference Architecture, 2017; Alkassab et tributed architecture for computation, communication, and storage,
al., 2017) for latency-sensitive and mobile applications (Bittencourt et which targets real-time applications and mobile services. End-users benal., 2017; Hu et al., 2017; Kumari et al., 2019). eﬁt from pre-processing of workloads, geo-distribution of resources, low
 The plethora of applications running on the Internet has hetero- latency responses, device heterogeneity (Bonomi et al., 2012), and locageneous processing and communications demands, as well as Quality tion/content awareness (Deng et al., 2016). The Fog can support the
of Service (QoS) requirements. While multimedia demand processing diversity of applications requirements in the Cloud to Things (C2T)

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: jguevara@lrc.ic.unicamp.br (J.C. Guevara), ricardo.torres@ntnu.no (R.S. Torres), nfonseca@ic.unicamp.br (N.L.S. da Fonseca).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102596
Received 7 May 2019; Received in revised form 7 February 2020; Accepted 9 March 2020
Available online 17 March 2020
1084-8045/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

continuum, which is comprised of end devices, one or more levels of The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 overviews
Fog nodes, and the Cloud. Fog nodes located at the edge of the net- related work. Section 3 proposes a set of classes of service for Fog comwork are usually limited in resources (Shao et al., 2019). Still, their puting, and provides a mapping between the recommended classes of
use involves only brief delays in communication while the Cloud has service and the layers of the reference architecture presented by the
a large (“unlimited”) number of resources, but involves long delays in OpenFog Consortium. Section 4 introduces the use of a typical machine
communication. On the lowest level of this continuum, the initial pro- learning-based methodology for Fog computing. Section 5 illustrates
cessing can be carried out, and results passed on to a higher layer in a the implementation of the methodology described in Section 4 with a
Fog hierarchy, or to the Cloud itself for further processing (Byers, 2017; case study, which includes two scenarios, diﬀering by the place where
Arkian et al., 2017). noise is introduced (either in the training set or in the testing set).
 Applications are usually composed of (dependent) tasks. The Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and points out directions for
scheduling of tasks using C2T resources is much more challenging than future research.
that of tasks on grids (conﬁned systems) (Batista and Fonseca, 2010;
Batista and da Fonseca, 2011; Krauter et al., 2002; Xu et al., 2011) 2. Related work
and on Clouds (more homogeneous systems) (Bittencourt et al., 2012;
Fonseca and Boutaba, 2015; Genez et al., 2019; Tsai and Rodrigues, Diﬀerent studies have analyzed application requirements to develop
2014; Kliazovich et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2015) due to the considerable service models for both Cloud and Fog computing. In Cloud computheterogeneity of both demands of applications and the capacity of the ing, these studies have focused on Service Level Agreements (SLA)
devices. Consequently, there is a need for schedulers to analyze various (Alhamad et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2013; Emeakaroha et al., 2010, 2012)
parameters before making decisions as to where tasks and virtualized and Quality of Experience (QoE) management (Hobfeld et al., 2012),
resources should be run, including consideration of the availability of while in Fog computing, investigations have emphasized processing and
resources and their cost (Byers, 2017). analytics for speciﬁc applications (Yang, 2017), scheduling of applica-
 It is thus crucial for the eﬃcient provisioning of services that the tions to resources (Cardellini et al., 2015), resource estimation (Aazam
demands of applications arriving at the edge of the network be well et al., 2016) and allocation (Wang et al., 2017; He et al., 2018) for
understood and classiﬁed so that resources can be assigned for their pro- the processing of applications, and service placement (Mahmud et al.,
cessing. The mapping of applications onto Class of Services (CoS) should 2019; Skarlat et al., 2017). Next, these studies are brieﬂy described.
facilitate the matching between task requirements and resources, since Alhamad et al. (2010) presented nonfunctional requirements of
labeling these tasks removes the burden of the analysis of the applica- Cloud consumers, and deﬁned the most important criteria for the
tion requirements by the scheduler. Without a precise classiﬁcation, the deﬁnition and negotiation of SLAs between consumers and Cloud serscheduling of application tasks and the allocation of resources can be vice providers.
less than optimal due to the complexity in dealing with the diversity Wu et al. (2013) developed a Software as a Service (SaaS) broker for
of QoS and resource requirements. Mapping applications onto Class of SLA negotiation. The aim was to achieve the required service eﬃciently
Service is typical in communications network technologies that support when negotiating with multiple providers. The proposal involved the
QoS, such as LTE, 5G (Ali et al., 2017), and ATM (Cohen et al., 1998) design of counter oﬀer strategies and decision-making heuristics which
networks, and it is a key element for network providers to be able to considered time, market constraints and trade-oﬀ between QoS paramoﬀer diﬀerent grades of service. Moreover, it is essential for the use of eters. Results demonstrated that the proposed approach increases by
eﬃcient classiﬁcation algorithms to deal with the speciﬁc characteris- 50% the proﬁt and by 60% the customer satisfaction level.
tics of C2T. Emeakaroha et al. (2010) presented an approach for mapping SLA
 Techniques for the classiﬁcation of network traﬃc have been exten- requirements to resource availability, called LoM2Hi, which is capable
sively studied for the past few decades, especially for the provisioning of detecting future SLA violations based on predeﬁned thresholds to
of secure network services (Callado et al., 2009; Finsterbusch et al., avert these violattions.
2014). However, very little attention has been paid to the classiﬁca- Emeakaroha et al. (2012) proposed an architecture for application
tion of the demands and requirements of applications and services over monitoring architecture, named Cloud Application SLA Violation Detecthe Internet (Zhong et al., 2004). Moreover, device mobility and the tion architecture (CASViD). CASViD monitors and detects SLA viola-
IoT have introduced new applications to the Internet, and these appli- tions at the application layer, and includes tools for resource allocation,
cations have not been considered in any of the classiﬁcation schemes. scheduling, and deployment. Results showed that the proposed archi-
This paper contributes with the deﬁnition of a set of Classes of Service tecture is eﬃcient in monitoring and detecting situations of a single SLA
for Fog computing, that takes into consideration the QoS requirements violation.
of the most relevant Fog applications, thus allowing the diﬀerentiation Hobfeld et al. (2012) discussed the challenges for QoE provisionof the demands of a broad spectrum of applications. ing for Cloud applications with emphasis on multimedia applications.
 The original contribution of this paper is a methodology for the clas- The authors also presented a QoE-based classiﬁcation scheme of Cloud
siﬁcation of applications as to Class of Service, which considers their applications aligned to the end-user experience and usage domain.
QoS requirements. This methodology can be used to design eﬀective Yang (2017) investigated common components of IoT systems such
classiﬁers with an output that can facilitate the job of schedulers of as stream analytics, event monitoring, networked control, and real-time
applications tasks. In the scenario assumed in this paper, users subscribe mobile crowdsourcing, for deﬁning an architecture for Fog data streamdirectly or indirectly to Fog infrastructure services. The ﬁrst packet of ing.
a ﬂow contains the QoS requirements of the application generating the Cardellini et al. (2015) modiﬁed the Storm data stream processing
packet ﬂow. The proposed classiﬁer will then map this application into system (DSP) to operate in a geographically distributed and highly varia CoS using the information provided in the ﬁrst packet. The CoS can able environment. To demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the extended
then be used by a Fog task scheduler to schedule application tasks and Storm system, the authors implemented a distributed QoS aware
allocate resource to these tasks. It is our best knowledge that no pre- scheduling algorithm for placing DSP applications near to the data
vious paper has addressed the classiﬁcation of Fog applications. A case sources and the ﬁnal consumers. The main limitation of this study is
study dealing with the classiﬁcation of a dataset containing Fog appli- the instability of the scheduling algorithm that aﬀects negatively the
cation features illustrates the use of this methodology. This methodol- application availability. Results showed that the distributed QoS-aware
ogy constitutes a ﬁrst step towards the deﬁnition of a QoS provisioning scheduler outperforms the default centralized one, improving the appliframework to facilitate the deﬁnition of new business models in Fog cation performance.
computing.

 2
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Aazam et al. (2016) developed a method, called MEdia FOg allocation of resources. A very ﬁrst step in resource management is to
Resource Estimation (MeFoRE), to provide resource estimation on the separate incoming ﬂow of requests into Classes of Service (CoS) accordbasis of service give-up ratio, the record of resource usage and the ing to their QoS requirements.
required quality of service. The aim was to avoid resource underuti- Bandwidth. Some applications request a minimally guaranteed
lization and enhance QoS provisioning. MeFoRE methodology uses real throughput, i.e., a Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR). Multimedia applications
IoT traces and traces of Amazon EC2 service. are bandwidth sensitive, although some of them use adaptive coding
 Wang et al. (2017) presented an edge architecture, called mobile techniques to encode digitized voice or video at a rate that matches the
micro-Cloud, to provide situational awareness to processing elements. currently available bandwidth.
The authors introduced an approach for consistent representation of Delay sensitivity. Some applications involve a speciﬁc latency threshapplication requirements for deployment in the mobile micro-Cloud old, below which latency must be assured, especially for real-time applienvironment. cations.
 He et al. (2018) introduced QoE model which included user oriented Loss sensitivity indicates the proportion of packets which does not
metrics such as the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) and content popularity reach their destination.
as well as the cost of cache allocation and transmission rate. The com- Reliability is concerned with the ability of the Fog components to
puted QoE value was used in a resource allocation problem formulated carry out the desired operation in the presence of many types of failure.
as a maximization problem solved by a shortest path tree algorithm. Some applications need to have failed Fog components quickly reestab-
Results showed the beneﬁt of using dynamic allocation to achieve high lished so that tasks can be performed within some latency bounds.
QoE values. Availability provides a measure of how often the resources of the Fog
 Mahmud et al. (2019) proposed a QoE-aware application placement are accessible to end-users. High availability is needed by applications
policy that prioritizes placement requests according to user expectation and services that must be running all the time, such as mission-critical
and the Fog available capacity. Two fuzzy logic models were employed applications.
to map applications to resources. Requests for application placement Security refers to the design and implementation of authentication
consider metrics such as service access rate, required resources and and authorization techniques to protect personal and critical informaexpected processing time. A linear optimization problem ensures that tion generated by end users.
prioritized requests for application placement are mapped to Fog Data location indicates where the application data should be stored.
resources so that user QoE is maximized. Results indicated that the pol- Data can be stored locally, at the end device itself; near, or at a Fog
icy signiﬁcantly reduces the processing time, resource availability, and node, or in a remote repository, in the Cloud. Requirements of data
the quality of service. location for an application depend on factors such as response time
 Skarlat et al. (2017) evaluated the placement of IoT services on Fog constraints, the computational capacity of each Fog layer, and available
resources, taking into account QoS requirements. The authors proposed capacity on network links.
an approach for the optimal sharing of resources among IoT services Mobility is an intrinsic characteristic of many edge devices. Conby employing a formal model for Fog systems. The authors introduced tinuity of the oﬀered services should be ensured, even for highly
the Fog Service Placement Problem (FSPP) for placing IoT services on mobile end-users. Continuous connectivity is essential for the processvirtualized Fog resources while taking into account constraints such as ing needed.
execution time deadlines. Results showed that the proposed optimiza- Scalability is related to the capability of an application to operate
tion model prevents QoS violations and decreases the execution cost eﬃciently, even in the presence of an increasing number of requests
when compared to a purely Cloud-based solution. from end users. The number of users in a Fog can ﬂuctuate due to
 The classiﬁcation methodology introduced in this paper diﬀers from the mobility of the users, as well as the activation of applications or
the aforementioned proposals by the deﬁnition of a set of Class of Ser- sensors. Streams of data in big data processing may need to be provice for Fog computing and the use of machine learning algorithms to cessed within a speciﬁc time frame. The demand on Fog nodes can ﬂucmap applications onto these classes. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst tuate and resource elasticity needs to be provided to cope with these
study that introduces a machine learning classiﬁcation methodology to demands.
discriminate Fog computing applications on the basis of QoS require- The mapping of applications into a set of classes of service is the ﬁrst
ments. It is crucial for the eﬃcient provisioning of services that the step in the creation of a resource management system capable of coping
demands of applications arriving at the edge of the network be classi- with the heterogeneity of Fog applications. This paper proposes various
ﬁed so that resources can be assigned for their processing. The related classes of service for Fog computing: Mission-critical, Real-time, Interwork in Fog computing reported above concentrates on resource allo- active, Conversational, Streaming, CPU-bound, and Best-eﬀort. These
cation and scheduling of applications. Most of the decisions on resource classes will be deﬁned and the typical applications using these classes
allocation and scheduling in those papers is limited to information on identiﬁed.
resource consumption by the applications. They do not consider sev- The ﬁrst CoS to be discussed is the Mission-critical (MC) class. It comeral QoS requirements as done in the present manuscript. Moreover, prises applications with a low event to action time-bound, regulatory
no previous paper has addressed the classiﬁcation of applications on compliance, military-grade security, privacy, and applications in which
the Cloud to Things (C2T) continuum. Most of the work dealing with a component failure would cause a signiﬁcant increase in the safety
SLAs and QoS/QoE considers only the Cloud. The Fog layers in C2T risk for people and the environment. Applications include healthcare
will increase the capacity of the system to support new applications, and hospital systems, medical localization, healthcare robotics, crimiespecially those with real-time constraints, which are not possible to be nal justice, drone operations, industrial control, ﬁnancial transactions,
handled by the Cloud. ATM banking systems, and military and emergency operations.
 The Real-time (RT) class, on the other hand, groups applications
3. Classes of Service for Fog applications requiring tight timing constraints in conjunction with eﬀective data
 delivery. In this case, the speed of response in real-time applications
 Fog computing enables new applications, especially those with strict is critical, since data are processed at the same time they are generated.
latency constraints and those involving mobility. These new applica- In addition to being delay sensitive, real-time applications often require
tions will have heterogeneous QoS requirements and will demand Fog a minimum transmission rate and can tolerate a certain amount of data
management mechanisms to cope eﬃciently with that heterogeneity. loss. This real-time class includes applications such as online gaming,
Thus, resource management in Fog computing is quite challenging, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
calling for integrated mechanisms capable of dynamically adapting the

 3
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 The third class is denominated Interactive (IN). In this case, respon- and command/control of sensors and actuators, while nodes that are
siveness is critical, the time between when the user requests and actions closer to the Cloud aggregate and transform data into knowledge. As
manifested at the client being less than a few seconds. Moreover, users one moves further away from the edge, the overall intelligence and
of interactive applications can be end devices or individuals. Exam- capacity of the system increase.
ples of applications belonging to this class are interactive television, Fig. 1 presents a distributed multi-layer architecture, based on the
web browsing, database retrieval, server access, automatic database OpenFog reference architecture, which is composed of four layers: the
inquiries by tele-machines, pooling for measurement collection, and Cloud, at the top, a layer of end devices at the bottom and two intermesome IoT deployments. diate Fog layers. Fig. 1 also provides a mapping between the proposed
 The fourth class is the Conversational (CO) class. These applications classes of service and a multi-layer Fog-Cloud architecture. The bottom
include some of the video and Voice-over-IP (VoIP). They are charac- layer, composed of IoT and end-devices, sends application requests to
terized by being delay-sensitive but loss-tolerant with delays less than the classiﬁer, located on the ﬁrst Fog layer. An application request is
150 ms being perceived by humans, delays between 150 and 400 ms composed of the workﬂow of tasks and their demands, as well as the
can be acceptable, and those exceeding 400 ms resulting in completely QoS requirements for the application. The classiﬁer identiﬁes the CoS of
unintelligible voice conversations. On the other hand, conversational the application and forwards it to the scheduler, which decides where
multimedia applications are loss-tolerant with occasional losses causing the application should be processed, whether on the ﬁrst Fog layer, on
only occasional glitches in audio or video playback, and these losses can the second Fog layer, or in the Cloud.
often be partially or fully concealed (Kurose and Ross, 2012). Not all layers are involved in the processing of all tasks. Since Real-
 The ﬁfth class of service is Streaming (ST), which releases the user to time, Interactive, Conversational, and Streaming applications, such as
download entire ﬁles, although in potentially long delays are incurred, online sensing, object hyperlinking, video conferencing, and stored
before playout begins. Streaming applications are accessed by users on streaming are delay-sensitive, these applications must be processed as
demand and must guarantee interactivity and continuous playout to the close as possible to the end user, preferably at nodes located on the
user. For this reason, the most critical performance measure for stream- ﬁrst and second Fog layer. CPU-bound applications require many proing video is average throughput (Kurose and Ross, 2012). Additionally, cessing resources, and for this reason, can involve all the layers of the
streaming can refer to stored or live content. In both cases, the net- reference architecture for the processing of tasks. Best-eﬀort applicawork must provide each ﬂow with an average throughput that is larger tions, such as e-mails, can be processed in the Cloud since there are no
than the content consumption rate. In live transmissions, the delay can delay constraints for this class.
also be an issue, although the timing constraints are much less strin- The possibility of having a hierarchical layered system is one of
gent than those of conversational voice. Thus, delays of up to 10 s or so the signiﬁcant diﬀerences between Fog computing and edge computfrom when the user chooses to view a live transmission to when playout ing. Edge computing is mainly concerned in bringing the computation
begins can be tolerated. Examples of streaming applications are high- facilities closer to the user; however, in a ﬂat non-hierarchical architecdeﬁnition movies, video (one-way), streaming music, and live radio and ture (Mahmud and Buyya, 2016). A layered architecture can introduce
television transmissions. additional communication overhead for processing tasks at diﬀerent
 The sixth class is CPU-Bound (CB) class which is used by applications layers. However, it has been shown that if the scheduling of tasks and
involving complex processing models, such as those in decision making, resource reservations are properly carried out, processing in a hierarwhich may demand hours, days, or even months of processing. Face chical architecture can reduce communication latency and task waiting
recognition, animation rendering, speech processing, and distributed time for processing when compared to a ﬂat architecture (Chekired et
camera networks, are examples of CPU-Bound applications. al., 2018).
 The ﬁnal class is that of Best-Eﬀort (BE). It is dedicated to traditional In the scenario assumed in this paper, users subscribe directly or
best-eﬀort applications over the Internet. For Best-eﬀort applications, indirectly to Fog infrastructure services. The ﬁrst packet of a ﬂow conlong delays are annoying but not particularly harmful; the complete- tains the QoS requirements of the application generating the packet
ness and integrity of the transferred data, however, are of paramount ﬂow. The proposed classiﬁer will then map this application into a CoS
importance. Some examples of the Best-Eﬀort class are e-mail down- using the information provided in the ﬁrst packet. Alternatively, the
loads, chats, SMS delivery, FTP, P2P ﬁle sharing, and M2M communi- ﬁrst packet could already carry the CoS of the application. However,
cation. such an option would make rigid the CoS adopted by the Fog provider,
 Table 1 presents the relationship between the applications sup- preventing the redeﬁnition of this CoS for the handling of new applicaported by Fog computing and the requirements of the classes of ser- tions with unique QoS requirements.
vice explained above. The ﬁrst column shows the recommended priority
level of each class for potential adoption in scheduling systems. 4. Classiﬁcation methodology based on machine learning
 Table 2 shows the range of QoS requirement values for each class of
service: Bandwidth (Kurose and Ross, 2012; Hobfeld et al., 2012), Reli- This section introduces a methodology for choosing and evaluating
ability (Böhmer et al., 2011), Security (Khan et al., 2017), Data storage classiﬁers for Fog computing applications. It provides a step-by-step
(Alhamad et al., 2010; Hobfeld et al., 2012), Data location (Alhamad et procedure for grounded choices of classiﬁers. Indeed, this methodology
al., 2010; Hobfeld et al., 2012; Böhmer et al., 2011), Mobility (Böhmer can be easily modiﬁed for the classiﬁcation of applications in networked
et al., 2011), Scalability (Alhamad et al., 2010; Hobfeld et al., 2012; systems.
Böhmer et al., 2011), Delay sensitivity (Byers, 2017; Hobfeld et al., Classiﬁcation techniques based on ML aim at mapping a set of new
2012), Loss sensitivity (Ali et al., 2013). These ranges are used to gen- input data to a set of discrete or continuous valued output. Fig. 2 sumerate the synthetic dataset of Fog applications and are employed for marizes the key steps in the building of a classiﬁer of Fog applications
training and testing samples to evaluate the classiﬁers in this paper based on ML algorithms. In this paper, the classiﬁcation steps were exe-
(Section 5). cuted oﬄine. Indeed, the best performing classiﬁer evaluated in these
 The reference architecture proposed by the OpenFog consortium in steps can be executed on-line in an operational Fog.
(OpenFog Reference Architecture, 2017) provides a structural model The ﬁrst step is the creation of a labeled dataset containing QoS
for Fog-based computation on several tiers of nodes. The tiers diﬀer attributes of Fog applications, which can be either real or synthetic. A
in relation to the amount and type of work which can be processed real dataset is one collected from a system in operation while a synthetic
on them, the number of sensors, the capacity of the nodes, the latency one involves data collection generated by models. Real-world datasets
between nodes, reliability, and availability of nodes. Nodes at the edge usually contain sensitive data (McGregor et al., 2004) and are often
are involved in sensor data acquisition/collection, data normalization, unavailable for the maintenance of the user information. Thus, the use

 4
 J.C. Guevara et al.
 Table 1
 Class of Service and their requirements.
 Allocation Class of Service Quality Requirements Applications
 Priority Service
 Bandwidth Reliability Security Data storage Data location Mobility Scalability Delay Loss
 sensitivity sensitivity
 Low Important Critical Low Medium High Transient Short Long Local Vicinity Remote Low Medium High Low Medium High
 duration duration
 1 MC GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes Yes Healthcare, criminal
 justice, ﬁnancial,
 biological traits,
 residence and
 geographic, military,
 emergency.
 2 RT GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes No Online gaming, IoT
 deployments,
 industrial control,
 virtual and
 augmented reality,
 interactive television,
 telemetry.
 3 IN GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes Yes Interactive television,
 object hyperlinking,
 web browsing,
 database retrieval,
 server access,
5

 automatic database
 enquiries by
 tele-machines,
 pooling for
 measurements
 collection, and some
 IoT deployments.
 4 CO GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes No Voice messaging,
 VoIP,

 Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596
 videoconference.
 5 ST GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes No Internet radio, video
 (one-way), high
 quality streaming
 audio.
 6 CB GBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Yes Yes Face recognition,
 animation rendering,
 speech processing,
 distributed camera
 networks.
 7 BE NGBR ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ No Yes Network signaling, all
 non-critical traﬃc
 such as TCP-based
 data: www, e-mail,
 chat, FTP, P2P ﬁle
 sharing, progressive
 video and other
 miscellaneous traﬃc.
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Table 2
 Intervals of the QoS requirements for Fog computing.
 QoS Requirements Nominal Categories Intervals Class of Service
 MC RT IN CO ST CB BE
 Bandwidth (Mbps) Low 0 < x ⩽ 1 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
 Medium 1 < x ⩽ 5 ✓ ✓
 High 5 < x ⩽ 1000 ✓
 Reliability Low x = 1 ✓ ✓
 Important x = 2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
 Critical x = 3 ✓
 Security Low x = 1 ✓
 Medium x = 2 ✓ ✓ ✓
 High x = 3 ✓ ✓ ✓
 Data storage (h) Transient 0 < x ⩽ 1 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
 Short duration 1 < x ⩽ 730 ✓
 Long duration 730 < x ⩽ 8760 ✓ ✓ ✓
 Data location (ms) Local 0 < x ⩽ 10 ✓ ✓
 Vicinity 10 < x ⩽ 20 ✓ ✓
 Remote 20 < x ⩽ 100 ✓ ✓ ✓
 Mobility (Km/h) Low 0 < x ⩽ 5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
 Medium 5 < x ⩽ 25 ✓ ✓
 High 25 < x ⩽ 100 ✓ ✓ ✓
 Scalability (No. of IoT users/end users) Low 0 < x ⩽ 60 ✓
 Medium 60 < x ⩽ 120 ✓ ✓
 High 120 < x ⩽ 200 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
 Delay sensitivity (Interaction latency in ms) Low 1000 < x ⩽ 100000 ✓ ✓ ✓
 Moderate 10 < x ⩽ 1000 ✓ ✓
 High 0 < x ⩽ 10 ✓ ✓
 Loss sensitivity (PELR) Low 10−3 < x ⩽ 10−2 ✓
 Moderate 10−6 < x ⩽ 10−3 ✓ ✓
 High 0 < x ⩽ 10−6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

 Fig. 1. Fog computing architecture and Class of Service.

 6
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

Fig. 2. Typical ML-based classiﬁcation methodology adopted in the context of
Fog computing networks.
 Fig. 3. The three types of samples considered in this paper: safe (S), borderline
 (B), and noisy (N).

of synthetic data sets is quite common, especially in the studies of sys- 5. Classiﬁcation of Fog applications
tems yet to be built.
 Since the value of QoS attributes diﬀers widely, these values should This section illustrates step by step the methodology presented in
be pre-processed to produce compatible ranges of values for classiﬁca- the previous section for the classiﬁcation of Fog applications using the
tion. Pre-processing includes operations for data transformation, which CoS presented previously. Moreover, an example of a Decision Tree
standardize and consolidate data into more appropriate forms for clas- that classiﬁes Fog computing applications from the values of their QoS
siﬁcation, while data reduction includes the selection and extraction of requirements is provided at the end of this section.
both features and examples in a database (García et al., 2015; Tan et al.,
2005). Data normalization avoids the handling of an attribute which has 5.1. Labeled dataset
large values that dominate the results of the classiﬁcation, thus improving the predictive power of the model. Feature selection, on the other To train and test the classiﬁers employed in this paper, we built
hand, removes redundant and irrelevant data from the input of the clas- a dataset 1 composed of 14,000 mutually exclusive applications gensiﬁer, without compromising critical attribute information (Tan et al., erated from data in the intervals of values acceptable for each QoS
2005). requirement of the application. 90% of the data were reserved for train-
 Noise is an unavoidable problem in collecting data from real-world ing, while the remaining 10% were used for testing. It was assumed
systems. It can change the knowledge extracted from the data set and that each incoming application had additional ﬁelds containing nine
aﬀects the accuracy of the classiﬁcation, building time, size, and inter- QoS requirements, from now on referred to as “attributes”: Bandwidth,
pretability of the classiﬁer (Zhong et al., 2004; Zhu and Wu, 2004). Reliability, Security, Data Storage, Data location, Mobility, Scalability,
Common sources of noise are channel capacity ﬂuctuation, ﬂuctuation Delay sensitivity, and Loss sensitivity.
in the availability of computational resources, imprecision inherited Attribute values were assigned by employing a uniform probabilfrom measurement tools, and the inability to accurately estimate the ity distribution, within the intervals speciﬁed for each CoS in Table 2.
true demands of applications. An independent random number generator randomly created the val-
 In such noisy scenarios, robustness is considered more important ues of each attribute. Transient data were removed according to the
than performance because robustness allows a priori knowledge of the Moving Average of Independent Replications procedure (Jain et al.,
behavior expected from a learning method despite noise when it is 1991). Attribute values were made up of safe and borderline examples.
unknown (García et al., 2015). Robustness (Huber, 1981) is deﬁned Safe examples were placed in relatively homogeneous areas concerning
as the capability of an algorithm to be insensitive to data corruption the class label. Borderline examples, on the other hand, are located in
and, consequently, more resilient against the impact of noise. A copy of the area surrounding class boundaries, where diﬀerent classes overlap.
the original dataset should be contaminated by the introduction of noise Also, to estimate the robustness of the classiﬁers, the third group of
at diﬀerent levels to check the robustness of a classiﬁer. In this paper, attribute values, called noisy examples, was generated. The term noisy
uniform attribute noise levels of 10%, 30%, and 50% are employed. sample will be used in this paper to refer to the samples generated to
The performance of the classiﬁers which learned from the original data represent the corruption of their attribute values.
set is compared to that of those which learned from a noisy data set. Fig. 3 illustrates the safe samples, labeled as S, the borderline exam-
The most robust classiﬁers are those which learned from noisy data sets ples, labeled as B, and thenoisy samples, labeled as N. The continuous
yet produced results similar to those learned from a noise-free data set line shows the decision boundary between the two classes.
(García et al., 2015).
 Classiﬁcation techniques based on ML can then be applied. The per- 5.2. Pre-processing
formance of the classiﬁer should be assessed by a performance evaluation
process, which encompasses both the measurement of performance and Z-score normalization was used to adjust attribute values deﬁned on
the result of statistical tests. The adequacy of performance is usually a diﬀerent scale. Mean and standard deviation were computed on the
assessed by metrics such as accuracy, eﬃciency, and robustness. Statis- training set, and then, the same mean and standard deviation were then
tical testing gathers evidence of the extent to which an evaluation met- used to normalize the testing set.
ric on the resampled data sets is representative of the general behavior We reduced the number of input attributes to be used by classiof the classiﬁer (Naqa et al., 2015). ﬁcation algorithms. This process, known as dimensionality reduction,
 At this point, the classiﬁcation model is ready to receive new input
for scoring. The new data, however, must also be subjected to a pre-
 1
processing process. publicly available at http://bit.ly/34x6X1O.

 7
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Fig. 4. Attribute association estimates.

removes irrelevant, redundant, and noisy information from the data, each attribute to the two principal components in the plot. For instance,
often leading to enhanced performance in learning and classiﬁcation Fig. 6 shows the coeﬃcients of each attribute concerning the ﬁrst two
tasks (Roﬀo, 2016). Two techniques can be used for dimensionality principal components.
reduction: one, by using feature selection techniques such as Relief-F The other ﬁve principal components were also plotted in bi-plots.
(Liu and Motoda, 2007), CFS (Guyon et al., 2002), MCFS (Cai et al., Table 3 shows the contribution of the attributes to each principal com-
2010), and the Student’s t-test, which rank the given feature set so that ponent.
the least signiﬁcant features can be removed from the problem. The Interpretation of the principal components is based on ﬁnding which
second way involves feature extraction techniques, such as Principal variables are most strongly correlated with each component, that is,
Components Analysis (PCA), which creates new features from the given which of these numbers is large, the farthest from zero in either direcfeature set. The resulting number of the features is less than that the tion. The decision as to what values should be considered large is a
initial set of features. subjective one and reﬂects knowledge of the system under evaluation. It
 In this paper, the signiﬁcance level of the impact of each input was determined that a correlation value was relevant to our study when
attribute on the system is determined utilizing a PCA, guided further it was above 0.48, since this value is the largest within each principal
by a correlation analysis and the semantics of the Fog computing envi- component, and most of the variables having this high value are highly
ronment. The correlation analysis and complementarity with the PCA correlated, as shown by the components of the correlation matrix. These
are explained below. large correlation values are in boldface in Table 3.
 The correlation analysis is a statistical evaluation technique used The principal component results can be interpreted with respect
to study the strength of a dependence between pairs of attributes. to the value deemed to be signiﬁcant. The ﬁrst principal component
Fig. 4 provides a graphic representation of the correlation matrix among correlated strongly with three of the original attributes. Thus, the ﬁrst
dataset attributes for Fog applications. principal component increases with increasing Data storage, Data loca-
 The correlation matrix shows that there is a statistical association tion, and Delay sensitivity, suggesting that these three attributes vary
of more than 50% between the following variables: “Data storage” together.
and “Data location” (0.623), “Data storage” and “Delay sensitivity” On the other hand, the coeﬃcients belonging to the second prin-
(0.596), “Loss sensitivity” and “Mobility” (0.563), “Bandwidth” and cipal component show that the behavior of the feature bandwidth
“Scalability” (−0,605) and, “Data location” and “Delay sensitivity” opposes that of the behavior of the features Mobility and Scalability.
(0.674). The symbol “-”in the correlation value between the attributes This reﬂects the fact that greater mobility is associated with changes in
of “Bandwidth”and “Scalability”indicates an inverse relationship the network topology, which, in turn, increases the ﬂuctuations in combetween the two. munication links and reduces the bandwidth availability. Moreover,
 Principal components analysis (PCA) (Pearson, 1901) is a com- since bandwidth is a ﬁnite resource, if the number of users connected
mon approach for dimensionality reduction that uses techniques from to the Fog increases the rate at which each user transmits and receives
linear algebra to ﬁnd new attributes, denominated principal compo- data decreases.
nents, which are linear combinations of the original attributes. They are Other features that reveal an inverse relationship are Data Storage
orthogonal to each other, and capture the maximum amount of varia- and Loss sensitivity, in the ﬁfth principal component, and mobility and
tion in the data. Fig. 5 shows the scree plot of the percent variability loss sensitivity in the seventh principal component.
explained by each principal component. Finally, the third, fourth, and sixth principal components increase
 As illustrated by Fig. 5, the ﬁrst seven principal components explain with only one of the values, that is, there is only one variable with
94.314% of the total variance. The ﬁrst component by itself explained a value 0.48 or higher. These variables are Security, Reliability, and
less than 35% of the variance, so more components might be needed. Delay sensitivity, respectively. Accordingly, the third, fourth, and sixth
Also, Fig. 5 reveals that the ﬁrst three principal components explain principal components can be interpreted as measures of how necessary
roughly two-thirds of the total variability in the standardized ratings. the use of isolated nodes is to process the application, how quickly
 In addition to the percent variability explained by each principal failed Fog components should be reestablished, and how sensitive the
component, all nine attributes were represented in a bi-plot by a vec- Fog application is to the delay.
tor. The direction and length of the vector indicate the contribution of

 8
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Fig. 5. Scree plot of the percent variability explained by each principal component.

 Fig. 6. Orthonormal principal component coeﬃcients for each variable and principal component scored for each observation (principal components 1 and 2).

 Table 3
 Attribute coeﬃcients for each principal component.
 Attribute Principal Component
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 Bandwidth −0.161 −0.524 −0.449 −0.065 0.079 0.118 0.114
 Reliability −0.312 −0.001 0.040 0.702 0.313 0.295 −0.318
 Security −0.297 −0.085 0.595 0.283 −0.342 −0.286 −0.021
 Data Storage 0.486 0.062 −0.099 0.181 0.490 −0.375 −0.389
 Data location 0.497 0.075 0.022 0.213 −0.351 −0.283 0.062
 Mobility −0.169 0.491 −0.327 0.350 0.117 −0.207 0.645
 Scalability −0.020 0.530 0.337 −0.366 0.309 0.318 −0.014
 Delay sensitivity 0.480 0.016 0.016 0.295 −0.273 0.673 0.134
 Loss sensitivity −0.213 0.432 −0.460 −0.044 −0.481 0.011 −0.544

 Based on the analysis described above and considering the semantics tion, Data storage, and Mobility have been removed. Thus, six of the
of the case study about which variables deserve more attention into the original nine attributes were selected and maintained for the stage of
Fog computing environment, redundant attributes such as Data loca- classiﬁcation. These were Delay sensitivity, Scalability, Loss sensitivity,

 9
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

Security, Reliability, and Bandwidth. Table 4
 Accuracy estimation results.
5.3. Classiﬁcation Classiﬁcation Technique Testing
 Average Accuracy (%) Average Time (s)
 Seven classiﬁers are evaluated for potential adoption: Adaptive
 ANFIS 99.271 0.048
neuro-fuzzy inference system from data, using subtractive clustering
 DT 99.986 0.029
(ANFIS), Decision Tree (DT) Artiﬁcial neural network with 2 hidden lay- ANN(1) 100 0.032
ers, trained with the Levenberg-Marquardt backpropagation algorithm, ANN(2) 100 0.035
(ANN(1)); Artiﬁcial Neural Network with 1 hidden layer, trained with ANN(3) 100 0.031
the algorithm Scaled conjugate gradient backpropagation (ANN(2)); KNN 100 0.073
 SVM 100 0.044
Artiﬁcial Neural Network with 2 hidden layers, trained with the algorithm Scaled conjugate gradient backpropagation (ANN(3)); K-Nearest
Neighbors (KNN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM). These algorithms have diﬀerent characteristics with respect to noise sensitivity, algorithm divides the input space, matching the way the attributes were
the speed of learning, and the speed of prediction. For instance, SVMs deﬁned and assigned to each CoS by using intervals. The way the synare known to be very accurate but also sensitive to noise (García et thetic dataset was created may have led to application instances with
al., 2015). ANNs predict rapidly, but the speed of learning is low, properties which were easy to model, thus boosting the performance of
while KNN provides rapid learning, but are considered diﬃcult to inter- the evaluated classiﬁers.
pret (Choose Classiﬁer Options, 2018). These classiﬁers are typically A two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test with a signiﬁcance level of
employed in the context of complex recognition or prediction applica- 0.05 was also applied to the observations obtained from the diﬀertions, especially when there is a lack of labeled samples, a lack of time ent classiﬁers with no attribution of noise. The results revealed that
for training and testing, or even a lack of appropriate hardware for the accuracy level of the classiﬁcation obtained from the DT, ANN(1),
timely assessment of the quality of classiﬁcation models. These same ANN(2), ANN(3), KNN, and SVM were approximately the same. In conconditions are present in typical Fog computing scenarios, as shown trast, observations obtained from the ANFIS reveled statistically signiﬁ-
in Fig. 1, in which heterogeneous devices with limited computing and cant diﬀerences in relation to the observations obtained from the other
storage capabilities must interoperate in real time to ensure compliance classiﬁers.
with the QoS requirements of time-sensitive applications. The investi- An attribute noise was introduced into the original dataset to check
gation of data-driven approaches (e.g., based on deep learning models) the eﬀect of noise on the classiﬁers. Corrupting the data impacts directly
for constrained processing scenarios (Howard et al., 2017; Sandler et on the signiﬁcance of the attributes for the purpose of classiﬁcation
al., 2018; Iandola et al., 2016) as in our target application is left for (García et al., 2015). Moreover, attribute noise includes erroneous
future work. attribute values, which is one of the most common types of noise in
 real-world data (Zhu and Wu, 2004).
5.4. Performance evaluation Noise is introduced into each partition in a controlled manner, i.e.,
 a certain percentage of the values of each attribute in the dataset were
 This section focuses on two main subtasks of the evaluation pro- altered. To this end, the steps employed by the authors in (García et al.,
cess: measurements of the performance and statistical signiﬁcance of 2015) were followed. To corrupt each attribute Ai , a certain percentage
the performance metrics. The hardware conﬁguration used for both the of the examples in the dataset were chosen, and the Ai value of each was
dataset generation and the experiments carried out was: Intel Core i7 assigned a random uniform value from the domain Di of the attribute
processor, 12 GB of RAM, 1 TB of storage and Windows 10 operating Ai .
system. First, the performance of each classiﬁer is evaluated under ideal Noise was introduced into the training partitions to create a noisy
conditions, that is, without noise. Each classiﬁer is assessed by measur- data set from the original, as follows:
ing its accuracy and eﬃciency. Then, the performance of each classi-
 1. Noise as a percentage of the original value was introduced into a
ﬁer is assessed in the presence of noise. In this case, the robustness of
 copy of the full original dataset.
each classiﬁer in two diﬀerent scenarios is assessed: when noise is intro-
 2. The two datasets, the original and the noisy copy, were partitioned
duced into the training set, and when noise is introduced in the testing
 into 10 equal folds, i.e., each with the same number of examples of
set. In both cases, with and without noise, Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test
 each class.
is employed to determine whether or not the diﬀerence in accuracy
 3. The training partitions are built from the noisy copy, whereas
between two classiﬁers is statistically signiﬁcant. Inserting noise in the
 the test partitions were formed from examples from the noise-free
training data set is designed to evaluate the robustness of the classiﬁer
 dataset.
trained by the speciﬁc data set. Inserting noise in the test data set aims
at assessing the robustness of a classiﬁer in the face of data sets with Noise was introduced into the testing partitions following the same
no evident data relationship, for which data relationships are not so steps described above, except that in Step 3 the testing partitions are
evident. built from the noisy copy, while the training partitions were formed
 A stratiﬁed 10-Fold Cross-validation (10-FCV) (Kohavi, 1995) pro- from examples from the noise-free data set.
tocol was adopted. In this protocol, there are 10 partitions, each with The methodology followed in this subsection presents two diﬀerthe same proportion of samples belonging to each class. Nine of them ences concerning the methodology described in (García et al., 2015).
are used for training, and the remaining fold is used for testing. This First, the one proposed here includes the same number of examples of
process is repeated 10 times, with each of the 10 folds used exactly each class in the percentage of values of each attribute in the data set to
once as the testing data. Finally, the 10 results obtained from each one be corrupted. Second, the introduction of attribute noise was extended
of the test partitions are combined to produce a single average value to a second simulation scenario in which accuracy and robustness were
representing accuracy. Table 4 summarizes the results obtained from estimated for each one of the individual classiﬁers using a clean trainthe accuracy estimation for each classiﬁer assessed without noise. ing set and a testing set with attribute noise. Introducing attribute noise
 Table 4 shows that the average accuracy results for the testing pro- into the training set while maintaining the testing set clean enabled
cess were close to 100%, except for the ANFIS was only 99.2% accurate. the assessment of the capacity of the classiﬁer to deal with problems
The shortest prediction time was obtained with the DT algorithm, while in the training stage, such as overﬁtting. Overﬁtting occurs when the
the KNN took the longest time. One possible explanation is that the DT model is too tightly adjusted to data oﬀering high precision in known

 10
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Table 5
 Test accuracy and RLA results of classiﬁers trained with noisy datasets.
 Noise Level (%) ANFIS DT ANN(1) ANN(2) ANN(3) KNN SVM
 Test accuracy results 0 99.271 99.986 100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000
 10 94.429 99.986 99.911 99.950 99.921 99.800 99.997
 30 84.900 99.950 99.676 99.800 99.691 99.029 99.836
 50 78.564 99.979 90.807 91.370 91.419 99.193 99.600

 RLA values results 0 – – – – – – –
 10 0.04878 0.00000 0.00089 0.00050 0.00079 0.00200 0.00003
 30 0.14477 0.00036 0.00324 0.00200 0.00309 0.00971 0.00164
 50 0.20859 0.00007 0.09193 0.08630 0.08581 0.00807 0.00400

cases, but behaving poorly with unseen data. Conversely, introducing
attribute noise into the testing set while maintaining the training set
clean, enables us to assess the robustness of the trained model.
 After introducing noise, the accuracy of classiﬁers is determined by
means of 5 runs of a stratiﬁed 10-Fold Cross-Validation (FCV). Hence,
a total of 50 runs per dataset, noise type, and level are averaged. Ten
partitions make the noise eﬀects more notable, since each partition has
a large number of examples (1,400). The robustness of each algorithm
is then estimated by using the Relative Loss of Accuracy (RLA) given by
Equation (1) is:

 Acc0% − Accx%
RLAx% = , (1)
 Acc0%

 where RLAx% is the relative loss of accuracy at a noise level of
x%. Acc0% is the test accuracy in the original case, that is, with 0%
of induced noise, and Accx% is the test accuracy with a noise level x%.
 Next, the robustness of the classiﬁers when the noise has been introduced for the two mentioned scenarios will be evaluated.

5.4.1. Classiﬁcation using a training set with attribute noise and a clean
testing set
 Table 5 shows the average performance and robustness results for
each classiﬁcation algorithm at each noise level, from 0% to 50%, on Fig. 7. Accuracy rates concerning the testing time for classiﬁers trained with
training datasets with uniform attribute noise. both clean and noisy datasets.
 As can be observed in Table 5, the DT is the most robust classiﬁer for
all noise levels. On the other hand, the ANN(1), ANN(2), and ANN(3)
present high robustness for noise levels (10–30%). Conversely, the RLA Table 6 shows the eﬀect of noise data sets in training. The perof classiﬁers based on neural networks rises linearly to 9% when the formance of ANFIS is the least accurate. ANN(1), ANN(2), and SVM
noise level is 50%. The least robust classiﬁer is the ANFIS, for which produce a similar performance while the DT outperform most of the
the loss of accuracy increases exponentially as the proportion of noise results of the rest of classiﬁers when it is trained using datasets with an
level rises, to the point that when the noise level is 50%, its RLA is attribute noise level equal to or greater than 30%.
above 21% of that a clean dataset.
 Fig. 7 shows the accuracy ratio and testing time when training takes 5.4.2. Classiﬁcation using a clean training set and a testing set with
place with both clean datasets, and those disrupted by uniform attribute attribute noise
noise levels of 10%, 30%, and 50%. A marker identiﬁes each classiﬁ- Table 7 shows the results for average performance and robustness
cation algorithm, and a diﬀerent color identiﬁes each noise level. The for each classiﬁcation algorithm at each noise level, from 0% to 50%,
light-bands indicate the areas of the greatest accuracy or the slowest from the testing of datasets with uniform attribute noise.
testing times, and the light-purple intersection of these bands indicates As evinced in Table 7, for all classiﬁers, accuracy decreases exponenthe area where the best results for both accuracy and testing time are tially with an increase in the noise level of the testing dataset. In this
found. situation, the most robust classiﬁers are ANN(2), DT, ANN(3), ANN(1),
 The DT algorithm takes only 25 ms for classiﬁcation with the great- and KNN.
est accuracy for up to 1400 applications simultaneously arriving at Fig. 8 illustrates the results of the classiﬁcation algorithms when
the edge, when training has taken place using datasets with a uniform both accuracy and testing time are considered with both clean and noise
attribute noise level of 50%. datasets (levels of 10%, 30%, and 50%). A marker identiﬁes each clas-
 Table 6 presents the results of a two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank siﬁcation algorithm, and a diﬀerent color identiﬁes each noise level.
test (considering a signiﬁcance level of 0.05) to verify statistical dif- The light-blue bands indicate the areas of the greatest accuracy rates
ferences between the accuracy results of classiﬁers trained with noisy or the slowest testing times, and the light-purple intersection of these
datasets. Each cell shows the results of the statistical tests between a bands indicates the area where the best results were obtained when
single classiﬁer with the others for the four levels of noise (nl). Left ‘←’ considering both accuracy and testing time.
and up ‘↑’ arrows indicate the most accurate, while an empty cell refers The DT algorithm takes less than 30 ms for classiﬁcation for with
to “no statistical diﬀerence between the pairs of classiﬁers” in that row the greatest level of accuracy, up to 1400 applications simultaneously
and column. arriving at the edge, when the input is a noise dataset as long as the

 11
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Table 6
 Statistical test for the accuracy of classiﬁers trained with noisy datasets. nl denotes the percentage of noise
 level present in the training dataset.
 nl ANFIS DT ANN(1) ANN(2) ANN(3) KNN SVM
 ANFIS 0 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 10 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 30 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 50 – ↑ – – – ↑ ↑
 DT 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – – – – ← –
 30 ← – ← ← ← ← ←
 50 ← – ← ← ← ← ←
 ANN(1) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – – – – – –
 30 ← ↑ – – – ← –
 50 – ↑ – – – – –
 ANN(2) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – – – – ← –
 30 ← ↑ – – – ← –
 50 – ↑ – – – – –
 ANN(3) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – – – – – ↑
 30 ← ↑ – – – ← ↑
 50 – ↑ – – – – –
 KNN 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ↑
 30 ← ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ – ↑
 50 ← ↑ – – – – ↑
 SVM 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – – – ← ← –
 30 ← ↑ – – ← ← –
 50 ← ↑ – – – ← –

 Table 7
 Test accuracy and RLA results of classiﬁers tested with noisy datasets.
 Noise Level (%) ANFIS DT ANN(1) ANN(2) ANN(3) KNN SVM
 Test accuracy results 0 99.271 99.986 100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000 100.000
 10 72.214 85.693 83.570 86.131 84.031 84.093 81.79
 30 41.343 63.114 59.464 63.860 60.467 59.971 55.403
 50 27.414 47.264 45.381 48.564 46.176 44.764 40.799

 RLA values results 0 – – – – – – –
 10 0.273 0.143 0.164 0.139 0.160 0.159 0.189
 30 0.584 0.369 0.405 0.361 0.395 0.400 0.446
 50 0.724 0.527 0.546 0.514 0.538 0.552 0.592

noise level does not exceed 10%. reliability takes on a “critical” value. Therefore, assessing certain fea-
 Table 8 presents the results of a two-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tures makes classiﬁcation a more eﬃcient process. This is an attractests (considering a signiﬁcance level of 0.05) to verify the statistical tive characteristic which makes Decision Tree an ideal algorithm for
diﬀerences between the accuracy of the diﬀerent classiﬁers when tested the classiﬁcation of applications in Fog computing. Moreover, the Deciwith noisy datasets. Each cell shows the result of the statistical test sion Tree algorithm is easy to interpret, fast for ﬁtting and prediction,
between the pairs of classiﬁers with diﬀerent percentages of noise (nl). and does not use much memory. Given these characteristics, the Deci-
Left ‘←’and up ‘↑’arrows indicate the greatest accuracy while an empty sion Tree algorithm can be run by devices such as routers, switches,
cell refers to “no statistical diﬀerence between the pair of classiﬁers” in and servers, located on the ﬁrst Fog layer of the reference architecture
that row and column. introduced by the OpenFog Consortium in (OpenFog Reference Archi-
 The eﬀect of noisy data set in testing is shown in Table 8. The per- tecture, 2017). After classiﬁcation, the output of the classiﬁer serves as
formance of ANFIS is the least accurate. Moreover, the DT produces the input for the scheduler, also located at the ﬁrst Fog layer, which decides
most accurate classiﬁcation results in classiﬁcations independent of the where the application should be processed.
presence of noise.

 6. Conclusions
5.5. Classiﬁcation model
 This paper has introduced the use of ML classiﬁcation algorithms
 The ﬁnal step of the proposed methodology is the selection of a as a tool for QoS-aware resource management in Fog computing. First,
classiﬁer. The results indicate that the DT was the most accurate and potential Fog computing applications are grouped in seven CoS accordrobust classiﬁer. ing to their QoS requirements. A synthetic database of Fog applications
 The decision tree algorithm does not need to assess all the attributes is built from the deﬁnition of the intervals that each QoS requirement
to classify an application since various services have exclusive features. relevant for a speciﬁc Class. At this point, the dataset is pre-processed
For example, mission-critical applications are the only ones for which to convert prior useless data into new data that can be used by ML

 12
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

 Table 8
 Statistical test for the accuracy of classiﬁers tested with noisy datasets. nl denotes the percentage of noise
 level present in the testing dataset.
 nl ANFIS DT ANN(1) ANN(2) ANN(3) KNN SVM
 ANFIS 0 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 10 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 30 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 50 – ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑
 DT 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – ← – ← ← ←
 30 ← – ← – ← ← ←
 50 ← – – – – ← ←
 ANN(1) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 30 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 50 ← – – ↑ – – ←
 ANN(2) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← – ← – ← ← ←
 30 ← – ← – ← ← ←
 50 ← – ← – – ← ←
 ANN(3) 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 30 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 50 ← – – – – – ←
 KNN 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 30 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 50 ← ↑ – ↑ – – ←
 SVM 0 ← – – – – – –
 10 ← ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ –
 30 ← ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ –
 50 ← ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ ↑ –

 This ML-based classiﬁcation methodology allows the implementation of CoS to manage the traﬃc in Fog, which constitutes a ﬁrst step in
 the deﬁnition of QoS provisioning mechanisms in the C2T continuum.
 Moreover, the integration of IoT, Fog, and Cloud requires eﬃcient management strategies capable of facilitating resource management tasks
 such as scheduling, allocation, and federation. The classiﬁcation of Fog
 applications resolves all these issues; moreover, it is easy to implement
 into existing devices, and represents a new way of self-adaptive and cognitive network mechanisms (Batista et al., 2007, 2008; Mesodiakaki et
 al., 2014; Baggio et al., 2019; Merchant et al., 2018), which are fundamental for the deployment of autonomic Fog systems in environments
 with limited availability of processing resources.
 For future work, an ML-based classiﬁcation algorithm will be integrated into the Fog network scheduler, thus enabling the network
 scheduler to prioritize processing requests. It will also allow more
 delay sensitive demands to be satisfactorily fulﬁlled. We also suggest
 the inclusion of other feature selection methods such as Relief-F, CFS,
 MCFS, and the Student’s t-test in the pre-processing stage for future
 classiﬁcation studies in the context of Fog computing. Moreover, we
 recommend a broad study on the distribution of noise for data analysis
 oriented to parameters related to Cloud/Fog/edge applications as well
 as network traﬃc.

 Author-contribution
Fig. 8. Accuracy rates concerning the testing time for classiﬁers tested with
both clean and noisy datasets. Judy Guevara – the manuscript is part of her Ph.D. thesis. She programmed, generated the data, co-wrote and revised the manuscript.
 Ricardo Torres – advised on machine learning techniques, co-wrote
techniques. Next, a set of popular ML algorithms is selected and puts and revised the manuscript. Nelson Fonseca – thesis supervisor, advised
through the training and testing processes, using the examples in the on Fog and networking content, co-wrote and revised the manuscript.
synthetic database to measure the degree of accuracy and eﬃciency
in their prediction of the CoS to which the application belongs. For Declaration of competing interest
this, the synthetic database is contaminated with three diﬀerent levels
of attribute noise. For each noise level, the classiﬁer conducts training None.
and testing to measure the degree of robustness.

 13
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

Acknowledgments Emeakaroha, V.C., Brandic, I., Maurer, M., Dustdar, S., 2010. Low level metrics to high
 level slas - lom2his framework: bridging the gap between monitored metrics and sla
 parameters in cloud environments. In: 2010 International Conference on High
 This work was supported by the Brazilian National Research Agency Performance Computing Simulation, pp. 48–54, https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCS.
CNPq and the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World (TWAS), 2010.5547150.
under process 190172/2014-2 of the CNPq-TWAS program. The authors Emeakaroha, V.C., Ferreto, T.C., Netto, M.A.S., Brandic, I., De Rose, C.A.F., 2012.
 Casvid: application level monitoring for sla violation detection in clouds. In: 2012
are also grateful to CAPES (grant No. 88881.145912/2017–01), CNPq IEEE 36th Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference, pp. 499–508,
(grant No. 307560/2016-3), FAPESP (grants Nos. 2014/12236-1, https://doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2012.68.
2015/24494-8, 2016/50250-1, and 2017/20945-0) and the FAPESP- Finsterbusch, M., Richter, C., Rocha, E., Muller, J., Hanssgen, K., 2014. A survey of
 payload-based traﬃc classiﬁcation approaches. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 16 (2),
Microsoft Virtual Institute (grants Nos. 2013/50155-0, 2013/50169-1, 1135–1156.
and 2014/50715-9) The authors would like to thank reviewers con- Fonseca, N.L. S.d., Boutaba, R., 2015. Cloud Services, Networking, and Management.
structive comments. John Wiley & Sons.
 Garca, S., Luengo, J., Herrera, F., 2015. Dealing with noisy data. In: Data Preprocessing
 in Data Mining. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 107–145.
References Genez, T.A.L., Bittencourt, L.F., Fonseca, N.L. S.d., Madeira, E.R.M., 2019. Estimation of
 the available bandwidth in inter-cloud links for task scheduling in hybrid clouds.
Aazam, M., St-Hilaire, M., Lung, C., Lambadaris, I., 2016. Mefore: qoe based resource IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 7 (1), 62–74.
 estimation at fog to enhance qos in iot. In: 2016 23rd International Conference on Guyon, I., Weston, J., Barnhill, S., Vapnik, V., 2002. Gene selection for cancer
 Telecommunications (ICT), pp. 1–5, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICT.2016.7500362. classiﬁcation using support vector machines. Mach. Learn. 46 (1), 389–422.
Alhamad, M., Dillon, T., Chang, E., 2010. Conceptual sla framework for cloud He, X., Wang, K., Huang, H., Miyazaki, T., Wang, Y., Sun, Y., 2018. Qoe-driven joint
 computing. In: 4th IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and resource allocation for content delivery in fog computing environment. In: 2018
 Technologies, pp. 606–610, https://doi.org/10.1109/DEST.2010.5610586. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6, https://doi.org/
Ali, N.A., Taha, A.M., Hassanein, H.S., 2013. Quality of service in 3gpp r12 10.1109/ICC.2018.8422843.
 lte-advanced. IEEE Commun. Mag. 51 (8), 103–109, https://doi.org/10.1109/ Hobfeld, T., Schatz, R., Varela, M., Timmerer, C., 2012. Challenges of qoe management
 MCOM.2013.6576346. for cloud applications. IEEE Commun. Mag. 50 (4), 28–36, https://doi.org/10.1109/
Ali, M.A., Esmailpour, A., Nasser, N., 2017. Traﬃc density based adaptive QoS classes MCOM.2012.6178831.
 mapping for integrated LTE-WiMAX 5G networks. In: 2017 IEEE International Hu, P., Dhelim, S., Ning, H., Qiu, T., 2017. Survey on fog computing: architecture, key
 Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–7. technologies, applications and open issues. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 98, 27–42.
Alkassab, N., Huang, C.T., Chen, Y., Choi, B.Y., Song, S., 2017. Beneﬁts and schemes of Huber, P., 1981. J. Wiley, W. InterScience, Robust Statistics. Wiley, New York.
 prefetching from cloud to fog networks. In: 2017 IEEE 6th International Conference Sandler, M., Howard, A., Zhu A., Zhmoginov, A., Chen, L.-C., 2018. MobileNetV2:
 on Cloud Networking (CloudNet), pp. 1–5. Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks, arXiv:1801.04381 [cs]ArXiv:
Arkian, H.R., Diyanat, A., Pourkhalili, A., 2017. MIST: fog-based data analytics scheme 1801.04381.
 with cost-eﬃcient resource provisioning for IoT crowdsensing applications. J. Netw. Iandola, F.N., Han, S., Moskewicz, M.W., Ashraf, K., Dally, W.J., Keutzer, K., 2016.
 Comput. Appl. 82, 152–165. SqueezeNet: AlexNet-Level Accuracy with 50x Fewer Parameters and <0.5mb Model
Baggio, G., Bassoli, R., Granelli, F., 2019. Cognitive software-deﬁned networking using Size, arXiv:1602.07360 [cs]ArXiv: 1602.07360.
 fuzzy cognitive maps. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Comm. Network. 5 (3), 517–539, https:// Howard, A. G, Zhu, M., Chen, B., Kalenichenko, D., Wang, W., Weyand, T., Andreetto,
 doi.org/10.1109/TCCN.2019.2920593. M., Adam, H., 2017. MobileNets: Eﬃcient Convolutional Neural Networks for
Batista, D.M., Fonseca, N.L. S.d., 2010. A survey of self-adaptive grids. IEEE Commun. Mobile Vision Applications, arXiv:1704.04861 [cs]ArXiv: 1704.04861.
 Mag. 48 (7), 94–100. Jain, R., Jain, R.K., Jain, 1991. The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis:
Batista, D.M., da Fonseca, N.L.S., 2011. Robust scheduler for grid networks under Techniques for Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation, and Modeling, Edio,
 uncertainties of both application demands and resource availability. Comput. 1 Edition. Wiley, New York.
 Network. 55 (1), 3–19. Khan, S., Parkinson, S., Qin, Y., 2017. Fog computing security: a review of current
Batista, D.M., Fonseca, N.L. S.d., Granelli, F., Kliazovich, D., 2007. Self-adjusting grid applications and security solutions. J. Cloud Comput. 6 (1), 19, https://doi.org/10.
 networks. In: 2007 IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 1–5. 1186/s13677-017-0090-3.
Batista, D.M., da Fonseca, N.L.S., Miyazawa, F.K., Granelli, F., 2008. Self-adjustment of Kliazovich, D., Pecero, J.E., Tchernykh, A., Bouvry, P., Khan, S.U., Zomaya, A.Y., 2016.
 resource allocation for grid applications. Comput. Network. 52 (9), 1762–1781. CA-DAG: Modeling communication-aware applications for scheduling in cloud
Bittencourt, L.F., Madeira, E.R.M., Fonseca, N.L.S.D., 2012. Scheduling in hybrid clouds. computing. J. Grid Comput. 14 (1), 23–39, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10723-015-
 IEEE Commun. Mag. 50 (9), 42–47. 9337-8.
Bittencourt, L.F., Diaz-Montes, J., Buyya, R., Rana, O.F., Parashar, M., 2017. Kohavi, R., 1995. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and
 Mobility-aware application scheduling in fog computing. IEEE Cloud Comput. 4 (2), model selection. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on
 26–35. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 2. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
Bhmer, M., Hecht, B., Schning, J., Krger, A., Bauer, G., 2011. Falling asleep with angry USA, pp. 1137–1143. IJCAI95.
 birds, facebook and kindle: a large scale study on mobile application usage. In: Krauter, K., Buyya, R., Maheswaran, M., 2002. A taxonomy and survey of grid resource
 Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction management systems for distributed computing. Software Pract. Ex. 32 (2),
 with Mobile Devices and Services, MobileHCI 11. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 135–164, https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.432.
 47–56, https://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037383. Kumari, A., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., Kumar, N., Parizi, R.M., Choo, K.-K.R., 2019. Fog data
Bonomi, F., Milito, R., Zhu, J., Addepalli, S., 2012. Fog computing and its role in the analytics: a taxonomy and process model. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 128, 90–104.
 Internet of Things. In: Proceedings of the First Edition of the MCC Workshop on Kurose, J.F., Ross, K.W., 2012. Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach, sixth ed.
 Mobile Cloud Computing, MCC 12. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 13–16. Pearson. sixth ed..
Byers, C.C., 2017. Architectural imperatives for fog computing: use cases, requirements, Liu, H., Motoda, H., 2007. In: Computational Methods of Feature Selection (Chapman &
 and architectural techniques for fog-enabled IoT networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 Hall/Crc Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Series). Chapman & Hall/CRC.
 (8), 14–20, https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600885. Mahmud, R., Srirama, S.N., Ramamohanarao, K., Buyya, R., 2019. Quality of experience
Cai, D., Zhang, C., He, X., 2010. Unsupervised feature selection for multi-cluster data. In: (qoe)-aware placement of applications in fog computing environments. J. Parallel
 Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Distr. Comput. 132, 190–203, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2018.03.004, http://
 Discovery and Data Mining, KDD 10. ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 333–342. www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731518301771.
Callado, A., Kamienski, C., Szabo, G., Gero, B.P., Kelner, J., Fernandes, S., Sadok, D., McGregor, A., Hall, M., Lorier, P., Brunskill, J., 2004. Flow clustering using machine
 2009. A survey on Internet traﬃc identiﬁcation. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 11 (3), learning techniques. In: Barakat, C., Pratt, I. (Eds.), Passive and Active Network
 37–52. Measurement, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.
Cardellini, V., Grassi, V., Presti, F.L., Nardelli, M., 2015. On qos-aware scheduling of 205–214.
 data stream applications over fog computing infrastructures. In: 2015 IEEE Mell, P., Grance, T., Sep. 2011. The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing. Tech. Rep.
 Symposium on Computers and Communication. ISCC, pp. 271–276, https://doi.org/ NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-145. National Institute of Standards and
 10.1109/ISCC.2015.7405527. Technology.
Chekired, D.A., Khoukhi, L., Mouftah, H.T., 2018. Industrial iot data scheduling based Merchant, K., Revay, S., Stantchev, G., Nousain, B., 2018. Deep learning for rf device
 on hierarchical fog computing: a key for enabling smart factory. IEEE Trans. Industr. ﬁngerprinting in cognitive communication networks. IEEE J. Select. Top. Sign. Proc.
 Inform. 14 (10), 4590–4602, https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2018.2843802. 12 (1), 160–167, https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTSP.2018.2796446.
Choose Classiﬁer Options - MATLAB & Simulink, 2018. Available: https://www. Mesodiakaki, A., Adelantado, F., Alonso, L., Verikoukis, C.V., 2014. Energy-eﬃcient user
 mathworks.com/help/stats/choose-a-classiﬁer.html. (Accessed 21 May 2018). association in cognitive heterogeneous networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52 (7),
Cohen, R., Fonseca, N.L.S., Zukerman, M., 1998. Traﬃc Management and Control, 22–29, https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2014.6852079.
 Multimedia Communication Network: Technologies and Services. Artech House, Naqa, I.E., Li, R., Murphy, M.J. (Eds.), 2015. Machine Learning in Radiation Oncology:
 Norwood, MA, USA. Theory and Applications. Springer International Publishing.
Deng, R., Lu, R., Lai, C., Luan, T.H., Liang, H., 2016. Optimal workload allocation in OpenFog Reference Architecture: OpenFog Consortium, 2017. Available: https://www.
 fog-cloud computing toward balanced delay and power consumption. IEEE Intern. openfogconsortium.org/ra/. (Accessed 24 May 2017).
 Things J. 3 (6), 1171–1181. Pearson, K., 1901. On lines and planes of closest ﬁt to systems of points in space. Phil.
 Mag. 2 (11), 559–572.

 14
J.C. Guevara et al. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 159 (2020) 102596

Mahmud, R., Buyya, R., 2016. Fog computing: A taxonomy, survey and future directions, vation, COLCIENCIAS; and the CNPq-TWAS Postgraduate Fel-
 CoRR abs/1611.05539. arXiv:1611.05539. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.05539. lowship (2014). Her research interests focus on resource man-
Roﬀo, G., 2016. Feature Selection Library (MATLAB Toolbox), arXiv:1607.01327 agement and scheduling in Cloud and Fog computing net-
 [cs]ArXiv: 1607.01327. works.
Shao, Y., Li, C., Fu, Z., Jia, L., Luo, Y., 2019. Cost-eﬀective replication management and
 scheduling in edge computing. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 129, 46–61. Ricardo da S. Torres is Professor in Visual Computing at the
Skarlat, O., Nardelli, M., Schulte, S., Dustdar, S., 2017. Towards qos-aware fog service Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). He
 placement. In: 2017 IEEE 1st International Conference on Fog and Edge Computing used to hold a position as a Professor at the University of
 (ICFEC), pp. 89–96, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICFEC.2017.12. Campinas, Brazil (2005 - 2019). Dr. Torres received a B.Sc.
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M., Kumar, V., 2005. Introduction to Data Mining, ﬁrst ed. in Computer Engineering from the University of Campinas,
 Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA. Brazil, in 2000 and his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science at
Tsai, C., Rodrigues, J.J.P.C., 2014. Metaheuristic scheduling for cloud: a survey. IEEE the same university in 2004. Dr. Torres has been developing
 Syst. J. 8 (1), 279–291, https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2013.2256731. multidisciplinary eScience research projects involving Mul-
Wang, S., Urgaonkar, R., He, T., Chan, K., Zafer, M., Leung, K.K., 2017. Dynamic service timedia Analysis, Multimedia Retrieval, Machine Learning,
 placement for mobile micro-clouds with predicted future costs. IEEE Trans. Parallel Databases, Information Visualisation, and Digital Libraries. Dr.
 Distr. Syst. 28 (4), 1002–1016, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2016.2604814. Torres is author/co-author of more than 200 articles in refer-
Wang, T., Liang, Y., Jia, W., Arif, M., Liu, A., Xie, M., 2019. Coupling resource eed journals and conferences and serves as a PC member for
 management based on fog computing in smart city systems. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. several international and national conferences. Currently, he
 135, 11–19. has been serving as Senior Associate Editor of the IEEE Signal
Wu, L., Garg, S.K., Buyya, R., Chen, C., Versteeg, S., 2013. Automated sla negotiation Processing Letters and Associate Editor of the Pattern Recogframework for cloud computing. In: 2013 13th IEEE/ACM International Symposium nition Letters.
 on Cluster, Cloud, and Grid Computing, pp. 235–244, https://doi.org/10.1109/
 CCGrid.2013.64. Nelson L. S. da Fonseca received the Ph.D. degree in com-
Wu, F., Wu, Q., Tan, Y., 2015. Workﬂow scheduling in cloud: a survey. J. Supercomput. puter engineering from the University of Southern California,
 71 (9), 3373–3418, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-015-1438-4. Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 1994. He is currently a Full Pro-
Xu, Jin, Lam, A.Y.S., Li, V.O.K., 2011. Chemical reaction optimization for task fessor with the Institute of Computing, State University of
 scheduling in grid computing. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distr. Syst. 22 (10), 1624–1631, Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. He has authored or coauthored
 https://doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2011.35. over 400 papers and has supervised over 60 graduate stu-
Yang, S., 2017. Iot stream processing and analytics in the fog. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 dents. Prof. Fonseca is currently the Vice President Technical
 (8), 21–27, https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600840. and Educational Activities of the IEEE Communications Soci-
Zhong, S., Khoshgoftaar, T.M., Seliya, N., 2004. Analyzing software measurement data ety (ComSoc). He served as the ComSoc VicePresident Pubwith clustering techniques. IEEE Intell. Syst. 19 (2), 20–27. lications, Vice President Member Relations, Director of Con-
Zhu, X., Wu, X., 2004. Class noise vs. Attribute noise: a quantitative study. Artif. Intell. ference Development, Director of Latin America Region, and
 Rev. 22 (3), 177–210. Director of On-Line Services. He is the Past Editor-in-Chief of
 IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials. He is Senior Editor of the IEEE Communications Magazine, an Editorial Board
 Judy C. Guevara received her degree in control engineer-
 Member of Computer Networks, Peer-to-Peer Networking and
 ing (2009) and M.Sc. degree in Information and Communica-
 Applications. He was a recipient of the 2012 IEEE Communication Sciences (2012) from the Universidad Distrital Francisco
 tions Society (ComSoc) Joseph LoCicero Award for Exemplary
 José de Caldas, Bogotá, Colombia, and is currently working
 Service to Publications, the Medal of the Chancellor of the Unitoward the Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Computing, State
 versity of Pisa, in 2007, and the Elsevier Computer Network
 University of Campinas (Unicamp), Brazil. Her awards include
 Journal Editor of Year 2001 Award.
 the Young Researchers and Innovators “Virginia Gutiérrez
 de Pineda” fellowship (2010), supported by the Colombian
 Administrative Department of Science, Technology and Inno-

 15