PacketCGAN: Exploratory Study of Class
 Imbalance for Encrypted Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation
 Using CGAN
 Pan Wang∗ , Shuhang Li∗ , Feng Ye† , Zixuan Wang∗ and Moxuan Zhang‡
 ∗ School of Modern Posts, Nanjing University of Posts & Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
 † Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA
 ‡ Schools of International Education, Jinling Institute of Technology, Nanjing, China
 Email: ∗ wangpan@njupt.edu.cn

 Abstract—With the popularity of Deep Learning (DL), re- a huge challenge for QoS, network management and security
 searchers have begun to apply DL to tackle with encrypted trafﬁc monitoring. Therefore, studies on encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcaclassiﬁcation problems. Although these methods can automati- tion not only help to improve the ﬁne-grained network resource
 cally extract trafﬁc features to improve the ability of feature
 engineering of traditional methods like DPI, a large amount allocation based on application, but also enhance security level
 of data is still needed to learn the characteristics of various of network and applications.
 types of trafﬁc. Therefore, the performance of classiﬁcation Traditionally, the evolution of encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation
 model always signiﬁcantly depends on the quality of datasets. technology has gone through three stages: port matching,
 Nonetheless, the building of datasets is a time-consuming and payload matching and ﬂow statistical characteristics based
 costly task, especially encrypted trafﬁc. Apparently, it is often
 more difﬁcult to collect a large amount of trafﬁc samples of those classiﬁcation methods. Port matching based method infers
 unpopular applications than well-known ones, which often leads applications’ types by assuming that most applications consisto the problem of class imbalance between major and minor tently use ’well known’ TCP or UDP port numbers, however,
 encrypted applications in datasets. In this paper, we proposed the emergence of port camouﬂage, dynamic port, proprietary
 a novel trafﬁc data augmenting method called PacketCGAN protocols with user-deﬁned ports and tunneling technology
 using Conditional GAN, which can control the modes of data
 to be generated. PacketCGAN exploit the beneﬁt of CGAN to makes these methods lose efﬁcacy quickly. Payload matchgenerate speciﬁed samples with the input of applications’ types ing based methods, namely, DPI (Deep Packet Inspection)
 as conditional and thereby achieve data balancing . As a proof of technology cannot deal with encrypted trafﬁc because of
 concept, three classical DL models including CNN were adopted invisible packet content of encrypted trafﬁc, in addition, it
 to classify four types of encrypted trafﬁc datasets augmented incurs high computational overhead and requires manual sigby Random Over Sampling (ROS), SMOTE(Synthetic Minority
 Over-sampling Techinique) , vanilla GAN and PacketCGAN natures maintenance [1, 2]. As a result, in order to attempt to
 respectively using public datasets. The experimental evaluation solve the aboved problems of encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation
 results demonstrate that DL based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁer , ﬂow-based methods emerged, which usually combine staover our new dataset augmented by PacketCGAN can achieve tistical or time series trafﬁc features with Machine Learning
 better performance than the other three in terms of encrypted (ML) algorithms, such as naive bayes(NB), support vector
 trafﬁc classiﬁcation.
 Index Terms—encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation, data augmenta- machine(SVM), decision tree, Random Forest(RF), k-nearest
 tion, Conditional Generative Adversarial Network, trafﬁc iden- neighbor(KNN) [3]. Although classical machine learning
 tiﬁcation, class imbalance approaches can solve many issues that port and payload based
 methods cannot solve, it still has some limitations, such as
 I. I NTRODUCTION handcrafted trafﬁc features driven by domain-expert, time-
 With the rapid development of network technology, the consuming, lack of ability of automation, rapidly outdated
 types and quantity of trafﬁc data in cyberspace are increasing. when compared to the evolution. Unlike most traditional
 Network trafﬁc identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation is a crucial re- ML algorithms, DL performs automatic feature extraction
 search task in the area of network management and security. It without human intervention, which undoubtedly makes it a
 is the footstone of dynamic access control, network resources highly desirable approach for trafﬁc classiﬁcation, especially
 scheduling, content based billing, intrusion and malware de- encrypted trafﬁc. Recent research work has demonstrated the
 tection etc. High efﬁcient and accurate trafﬁc classiﬁcation superiority of DL methods in trafﬁc classiﬁcation [4], such as
 is of great practical signiﬁcance to provide service quality MLP [5], CNN [6], SAE [7], LSTM [8].
 assurance, dynamic access control and abnormal network be- However, due to the different popularity of various applicahaviors detection. With the widespread adoption of encryption tions, the class imbalance problem of trafﬁc samples often
 techniques for internet, especially 5G and IoT applications, the occurs when building trafﬁc datasets. That is, the number
 growth of portion of encrypted trafﬁc has dramatically posed of popular applications samples is much larger than others,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 978-1-7281-5089-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
 which always leads to the misclassifying problems of minor B. Traditional methods for handling imbalanced data
 applications and thereby incurs deterioration of classiﬁer per- In general, there are three methods for dealing with class
 formance. Imbalanced class distribution of a dataset has posed imbalance problem: Modifying the objective cost function,
 a serious challenge to most ML based classiﬁers which assume Sampling and Generating artiﬁcial data [11]. The approach
 a relatively balanced distribution. Network trafﬁc classiﬁcation of modifying objective cost function alleviates the problem
 is no exception due to the imbalanced property of network by means of weighting differently the data samples in minor
 trafﬁc data [9], especially encrypted trafﬁc. Therefore, it is and major classes, which gives higher score on the minor
 very crucial to address such challenges of imbalanced class samples to penalize more intensely on miss-classiﬁying of
 distribution of trafﬁc datasets for network trafﬁc classiﬁcation. the sample in the minor class. Sampling methods include two
 However, there are very few studies focusing on trafﬁc data different ways of under-sampling and over-sampling, which
 augmentation for trafﬁc classiﬁcation to overcome the limita- is to reduce the size of major class by removing some major
 tion of class imbalance. data samples and raise the ones in the minor class, respectively.
 In this paper, we proposed trafﬁc data augmentation method Random under sampling (RUS) and Random over sampling
 called PacketCGAN using Conditional GAN, one of a genre (ROS) are two main methods of under-sampling and overof GAN, which can control the modes of the data to be sampling [12]. RUS randomly removes some instances in magenerated. As a generative model, PacketCGAN exploits the jor class, accordingly, ROS generates some copies of samples
 beneﬁt of CGAN to generate synthesized trafﬁc samples by of the minor class. However, overﬁtting problem is always the
 learning the characteristics of the original trafﬁc data. The main drawback of ROS due to generating same copies from the
 synthesized data is then combined with the original (viz. real) minor class. A classical method for generating artiﬁcial data
 data to build the new trafﬁc dataset and thereby keep balance is Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Techinique (SMOTE) in
 between major and minor classes of the dataset. As a proof which minority samples are generated by synthetic samples
 of concept, three classical DL models like CNN were adopted rather than copies [13].
 and designed to classify four types of encrypted trafﬁc datasets
 augmented by ROS, SMOTE, vanilla GAN and PacketCGAN C. The application of GAN and other DL techniques in
 respectively using public datasets. The experimental evaluation generating trafﬁc data samples
 results demonstrate that DL based encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁer Due to the great success of GAN applying in images,
 over our new dataset augmented by PacketCGAN can achieve computer vision and NLP etc., this innovative technique has
 better performance than the other three in terms of encrypted been already applied to network security recently. As for
 trafﬁc classiﬁcation. trafﬁc classiﬁcation, some researchers have introduced some
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II approaches based on GAN to generate the trafﬁc samples to
 introduces related works of trafﬁc classiﬁcation and some cur- overcome the imbalaced limitation of network data. In [14],
 rent methods for tackling with the problem of imbalanced class the authors proposed a novel method called auxiliary classiﬁer
 data. Section III describes the principles of GAN and CGAN. GAN (AC-GAN) to generate synthesized trafﬁc samples for
 Section IV illustrates the methodology of PacketCGAN. The balancing between the minor and major classes over a wellexperimental results are provided and discussed in Section known trafﬁc dataset NIMS. The AC-GAN took both a random
 V. Section VI concludes our work and presents some future noise and a class label as input in order to generate the
 works. samples of the input class label accordingly. The experimental
 results has shown that their proposed method achieved better
 performance compared to other methods like SMOTE. How-
 II. R ELATED WORKS ever, the NIMS dataset was only composed of SSH and non-
 SSH two classes. In [15], the authors proposed a novel data
 A. DL based approach of Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation augmentation approach based on the use of Long Short Term
 Memory (LSTM) network to learn the trafﬁc ﬂow patterns
 Unlike most traditional ML algorithms, Deep Learning and Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) for replicating the
 performs automatic feature extraction without human interven- sequence of packets in a ﬂow for classes with less population.
 tion, which undoubtedly makes it a highly desirable approach The results have shown that this method can improve the
 for trafﬁc classiﬁcation, especially encrypted trafﬁc. Recent performance of DL algorithms over augmented datasets.
 research work has demonstrated the superiority of DL methods
 in trafﬁc classiﬁcation [4–6, 8, 10]. The workﬂow of DL based III. C ONDITIONAL G ENERATIVE A DVERSARIAL
 classﬁcation usually consists of three steps. First, model inputs N ETWORKS
 are deﬁned and designed according to some principles, such In GAN, there is no control over modes of the data to
 as raw packets, PCAP ﬁles or ﬂow statistics features. Second, be generated. The conditional GAN changes that by adding
 models and algorithms are elaborately chosen according to the constraint condition y as an additional parameter to the
 models’ characteristics and aim of the classiﬁer. Finally, the generator G and hopes that the corresponding images are
 DL classiﬁer is trained to automatically extract the features of generated. For example, in MNIST, the digit generated by
 trafﬁc. GAN may be either any digit from 0-9 instead of speciﬁed

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 one or always output the same digit. Fig. 1 shows the network 3XEOLF'DWDVHW
 7KH:RUNIORZRI3DFNHW&*$1EDVHG(QFU\SWHG7UDIILF&ODVVLILFDWLRQ

 ,QSXW3DFNHW'DWD3UHSURFHVVLQJ
 structure of CGAN. Unbalanced)

 ,6&; )LOH+HDGHU
 7UXQFDWLRQ=HUR
 5HPRYDO 1RUPDOL]DWLRQ
 3DGGLQJ
 3DFNHW)LOWHULQJ (D)
 867&7)& (C)
 (B)

 (A)
 3DFNHW%\WH
 7UDIILF6DPSOHV*HQHUDWLRQ
 9HFWRU

 *HQHUDWLQJ Packet
 'DWDVHW Byte
 VDPSOHV 3DFNHW&*$1 &69WR0DWUL[
 $XJPHQWLQJ Matrix
 (F) (E)
 (G) (PBM)

 2XWSXW%DODQFHG
 7UDIILF'DWDVHWV

 7UDLQLQJ 9DOLGDWLRQ
 7HVW'DWDVHW
 'DWDVHW 'DWDVHW

 10-fold cross validation
 7UDIILF&ODVVLILHU7UDLQLQJ

 6RIWPD[ 3HUIRUPDQFH
 &110/36$(
 &ODVVLILHU 0HWULFV
 (H)
 (I) (J)

 Fig. 2: The workﬂow of PacketCGAN.

 from 0 to 255, which resemble the pixel range of the single-
 Fig. 1: The network structure of CGAN. channel grayscale image. Apparently, trafﬁc classiﬁcation can
 refer to DL methods of image recognition. However, packets
 The principle, structure and training process of CGAN are from PCAP ﬁles can not directly be used for model training
 similar to GAN. The cost function is slightly different as is and need to be pre-processed.
 shown in (1): Packet data preprocessing consists of three steps as follows:
 • File header removal and packet ﬁltering as shown in (B)

 min max V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata (x) [log D(x|y)] of Fig. 2. The ﬁrst 24 bytes of the PCAP ﬁle header need
 G D (1) to be removed which only contains ﬁle information and
 +Ez∼pz (z) [log(1 − D(G(z|y)))] does not help with trafﬁc classiﬁcation. Filtering useless
 As shown in Fig. 1, CGAN’s training process includes the packets in PCAP ﬁle for classiﬁcation is also needed,
 following steps: such as ARP and DHCP packets etc., which is irrelevant
 to speciﬁc trafﬁc types.
 • Sampling the real data to obtain Pdata (x), obtaining the
 • Truncation or zero padding as shown in (C) of Fig. 2.
 label y corresponding to the sampling data Pdata (x), feed During the training of DL model, the input of which
 Pdata (x) and y into the discriminator D, then updating needs to be converted into a vector or matrix, which
 the parameters according to the output results; requires the length of the data input to be ﬁxed. Nev-
 • Generating random noise Pz (z), which is then fed into
 ertheless, the length of captured packet in dataset tends
 generator G together with label y in the above step, and to be different, so it is necessary to truncate the long
 G generates synthesized data. packets or padding those short ones based on a ﬁxed and
 • Feeding the synthesized data and the label y generated
 predeﬁned length value [16], which is 1480 in this paper.
 in the above step into the discriminator D, and G will • Data normalization as shown in (D) of Fig. 2. Normalizoptimize the parameters according to the output result of ing the pre-processed trafﬁc data to the range [0,1] can
 D. improve the accuracy and enhance convergence speed of
 • Repeat the above steps until G and D reach the Nash
 the model training.
 equilibrium.
 After all above mentioned operations, each processed packet
 IV. T HE M ETHODOLOGY OF PACKET CGAN will be formated to a Packet Byte Vector (PBV) [5] which can
 be stored in csv format.
 A. The Workﬂow of PacketCGAN Based Encrypted Trafﬁc 2) Phase 2: Data balancing is the most critical problem in
 Classiﬁcation this phase. It is essential to read the vectors of PBV from csv
 The workﬂow of PacketCGAN based encrypted trafﬁc clas- ﬁles to build the matrix of PBM as the input of PacketCGAN
 siﬁcation is shown in Fig. 2, in which there are three phases: as shown in (E) of Fig. 2, which will be illustrated in detail in
 packet data preprocessing, class balancing using PacketCGAN Section. IV-B. Synthesized packet samples will be generated
 and trafﬁc classiﬁer training. by PacketCGAN in PBM format and then combined with the
 1) Phase 1: Generally speaking, packet data preprocessing samples of original dataset to build the new balanced trafﬁc
 is the fundermental task of DL modelling. As we all know, dataset as shown in (E) and (F) of Fig. 2.
 the captured network trafﬁc data is often saved in PCAP or 3) Phase 3: Trafﬁc Classiﬁer Training: In this paper, we
 PCAPNG format, in which packet bytes of trafﬁc data are adopted some DL trafﬁc classiﬁers to evaluate the performance
 saved in hexadecimal. The bytes converted to decimal range of datasets augmented by PacketCGAN. The new balanced

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 trafﬁc datasets will always be devided into three parts: training, testing and validation datasets. Finally, classiﬁer related
 performance metrics will be evaluated to indirectly verify the Dout = Dh1 · W2D + bD
 2 (3)
 quality of datasets generated by different data augmentation
 The model uses the Adam optimization algorithm as the
 methods as shown in (H,I,J) of Fig. 2.
 optimizer to update weights W1D , W2D and bias bD D
 1 , b2 . The

 B. The Model Architecture and Algorithm Description of overall training process of⎛the discriminator is
 ⎞ shown ⎛ Algoin ⎞
 x11 · · · x1k y11
 PacketCGAN ⎜ .
 rithm. 1, in which Xτ = ⎜ .. .. ⎟
 ⎟
 ⎜ . ⎟
 ⎜ ⎟
 1) The Description of Model Architecture: The model of ⎝ .. . . ⎠ ,yτ = ⎝ .. ⎠
 our proposed PacketCGAN is shown in Fig. 3, in which both xm1 · · · xmk ym1
 G and D adopted MLP as the basic architecture. Random ,k is 1480, which is the data dimension. m is mini batch
 noise Pz (z) as the input of model with Normal Distribution referring to a group of packets from dataset.
 are N*100-dimentional vectors, which will be fed into G with
 G(z) distribution. Different from vanilla GAN, the label of Algorithm 1 The training of Discriminator of PacketCGAN
 trafﬁc/applications types with one-hot encoding will also be Input: real data Xτ and label yτ from Section IV-B2, τ is
 fed into our PacketCGAN as conditional c. The synthesized the number of iterations
 samples as the output of G are N*1480 vectors, which will Output: the probability of the output data being real or false
 be compose of the matrix of PBM and fed into D with 1: Initializing the relevant parameters, e represents the train-
 D(x) distribution eventually. Meanwhile, PBM from original ing cycle: epoches.
 unbalanced datasets with Pdata (x) distribution will be fed into 2: for τ in e do
 D with the same 1480-dimentional to compete to reach Nash 3: for each batch of m input data do
 equilibrium with ﬁne-tune training. 4: concatenate Xτ with yτ :
 5: Compute the output using Equation. (2);
 7KH0RGHO$UFKLWHFWXUHRI3DFNHW&*$1 6: Compute the output using Equation. (3);
 Normal Distribution
 G( z)
 Pz ( z ) *HQHUDWRU Synthesized Samples 7: Output discriminating results according to Equa-
 Fine Tune tion. (3);
 Ċ

 Ċ

 Ċ

 Ċ

 Ċ

 . Training
 .
 .
 .
 .
 .
 8: Optimize the loss function
 D( x)
 N*100 N*1480
 Prediction Real 9: Update weights and bias;
 'LVFULPLQDWRU Fake
 10: end for
 Label of Traffic Type
 Pdata ( x)
 Conditional 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Ċ 14 11: end for
 c 3DFNHW . Fine Tune
 One-Hot Encoding %\WH .
 Training
 .
 0DWUL[

 Unbalanced
 Dataset
 N*1480 Step 2 is to train the generator G. The parameters of D
 need to be ﬁxed like step 1. The input layer of G consists of
 Fig. 3: The Architecture of PacketCGAN. 115 neurons, which includes stochastic noise Pz (z) with 100
 neurons and sample label y with 15 neurons of applications
 2) The Description of Model Algorithm: In general, Pack- types. The hidden layer also has 128 neurons to update the
 etCGAN’s training mainly includes the following three steps: weight and bias of the input data:
 the training of discriminator D, generator G and ﬁne-tune
 optimization. During the training of D in step 1, one needs
 to ﬁx the parameters of G while training D. We adopt the 1)
 Gh1 = ReLU (inputG · W1G + bG (4)
 simple MLP to build the D model, in which there are three
 The ’input’ in (5) is made up of random noise Pz (z) and
 layers: the input layer, a hidden layer and the output layer. The
 the sample label y with ReLu as the activation function. The
 data for the input layer is derived from the N*1480 matrix of
 output layer contains 1480 neurons with the same dimension
 PBM aforementioned in Section IV-A1 with the distribution
 of the Pdata (x). The computed result will be activated by the
 of Pdata (x). The hidden layer consists of 128 neurons with
 sigmoid function for discrimination of real or fake.
 the notation of Dh1 .

 2 )
 G out = sigmoid(Gh1 · W2D + bD (5)
 1 )
 Dh1 = ReLU (inputD · W1D + bD (2)
 The optimization function is the same as the discriminator.
 The inputD in (2) is composed of the real data x with The generator training algorithm is shown in Algorithm. 2.
 Pdata (x) and the trafﬁc/applications types label y in one-hot The sample label y in Algorithm. be consistent with
 2 should ⎞
 ⎛
 encoding, such as 0 for SSH, 1 for YouTube. The hidden z11 · · · z1n
 layer Dh1 adopts ReLU as the activation function. The output ⎜ . .. ⎟
 layer has only one neuron referring to real or fake sample as y in Algorithm. 1. Zτ = ⎜
 ⎝ ..
 ..
 . ⎟
 . ⎠,n = 100.
 following Equation: 3: zm1 · · · zmn

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Algorithm 2 The training of Generator of PacketCGAN TABLE I: Experimental Environment Parameters
 Input: random noise Zτ , and label yτ , τ is the number of
 iterations Category Parameters
 Output: synthesized data gτ GPU Nvidia GPU(GeForce GTX 1050Ti)
 1: Set the relevant initialization parameters, e represents the
 Operating System Win 10
 training cycle: epoches.
 Deep learning platform TensorFlow 1.13.1 + Keras 1.0.7
 2: for τ in e do
 3: for each batch of m input data do CUDA Version 9.0
 4: concatenant Zτ with yτ : CuDNN Version 7.6.0
 5: Compute the output using Equation. (4);
 6: Compute the output using Equation. (5);
 7: Output generation data according to Equation. (5); posed classiﬁcation methods, precision is the percentage
 8: Optimal the loss function of packets that are properly attributed to the targeted
 9: Update weights and bias; application.
 10: end for nP
 11: end for rp = P T P . (6)
 nT + nF
 • Recall: recall rc is the ratio of nP P
 T over the sum of nT
 V. E VALUATION AND E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS N
 and false negatives nF or the percentage of packets in
 A. Experimental Settings an application class that are correctly identiﬁed.
 1) Dataset for Evaluation: Two public datasets used in this nP
 paper are ISCX2012 [17] and USTC-TFC2016 [18], which are rc = T
 . (7)
 nT + nN
 P
 F
 both composed of PCAP ﬁles. The full name of ’ISCX2012’
 dataset is ’ISCX VPNnonVPN trafﬁc dataset’, which contains • F1 -score: the F1 score rf is a widely-used metric in
 many encryption applications or protocols such as HTTPS, information retrieval and classiﬁcation that considers both
 SFTP, Facebook, Hangouts, etc. In addition to these appli- precision and recall as follows:
 cations encapsulated in regular session, some VPN tunnel’s 2rp · rc
 applications were also captured in this dataset. 15 applications rf = . (8)
 rp + r c
 were chosen to build the original dataset. Apparently, the original chosen dataset happens to the problem of class imbalance, B. Data Augmenting using PacketCGAN
 in which the majority class such as Netﬂix accounting for 1) Data Augmenting Methods handling the problem of class
 25.13%, while the minor class ICQ account for only 2.05%. imbalance: In this paper, four methods were used to address
 10 applications were chosen from USTC-TFC2016. Balanced the problem of the unbalanced dataset for the purpose of
 dataset made by different generative methods are all 10000 comparism. The ﬁrst one is random oversampling method
 samples per applications. (ROS) mentioned in Section II-B . The essence of this method
 2) Conﬁgurations of the Computing Platform: The exper- is to randomly copy some samples of minor class to supimental environmental parameters of this paper are shown in plement the dataset. Since the simple method is only a copy
 Table I. The performance evaluations are conducted using a of the original data, it will lead to some wrong features be
 Dell R730 server with an Intel I7-7600U CPU 2.8 GHz, 16 GB learned by the model easily and even over-ﬁtting. The second
 RAM and an external GPU (Nvidia GeForce GTX 1050TI). method is SMOTE in which minority samples are generated
 The software platform for deep learning is built on Keras by synthetic samples rather than copies. The third one is
 library with Tensorﬂow (GPU-based version 1.13.1) as the vanilla GAN with a generator and discriminator based on
 back-end support. MLP. The last method is to generate minor sample data using
 3) Description of deep learning based network trafﬁc clas- our PacketCGAN generator. The dataset balanced by different
 siﬁer: To verify the feasibility and evaluate the performance methods is described in V-A1.
 of the PacketCGAN algorithm, we adopted three classical DL 2) The Architecture of PacketCGAN: In our experiments,
 models to classify the trafﬁc over the datasets synthesized by a fully connected MLP network was adopted to design gendifferent generative methods, which is MLP, CNN and SAE, erators and discriminators. The generator’s input is a 100-
 respectively. The detail of these three models can be ﬁnd in dimensional vector generated by random Gaussian noise with
 our previous works [5]. additional 15 applications types for ISCX2012 or 10 for
 4) Performance Metrics for Classiﬁcation: The perfor- USTC-TFC2016 datasets. The next three hidden layers have
 mance metrics used for evaluations of network trafﬁc clas- 128, 256, 512 neurons, and 1480 output neurons with addisiﬁers are Precision, Recall and F1 score. tional 15 for ISCX2012 or 10 for USTC-TFC2016 datasets.
 P
 • Precision: precision rp is the ratio of true positives nT Therefore, input of discriminator network is 1495 or 1490
 P P
 over the sum of nT and false positives nF . In the pro- dimension vectors mixed by real trafﬁc data or generated data.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Three hidden layers and output layers are both activated by TABLE III: Classiﬁcation Performance Statistics.
 LeakyReLU.
 3) The Training of PacketCGAN: Table II shows the param- data augmenting methods Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
 eters of the optimizer, loss function, epoches, and mini batch unbalanced dataset 0.9797 0.9759 0.9775 0.9766
 used in the deep training model training process. ROS dataset 0.9889 0.9892 0.9889 0.9891
 SMOTE dataset 0.9769 0.9751 0.9789 0.971
 TABLE II: Training Parameters of Packet CGAN GAN dataset 0.9766 0.9766 0.9767 0.9766
 PacketCGAN dataset 0.9951 0.9936 0.9958 0.9947
 Training Parameters Generator Discriminator

 Optimizer Adma Adma
 Loss Function Cross-Entropy Cross-Entropy VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK
 Epoches 200000 200000 In this paper, we proposed a CGAN-based trafﬁc data
 Mini batch 64 64 augmenting method called PacketCGAN to solve the class
 imbalance problem in the dataset. After the speciﬁed sample data is generated by the generator of PacketCGAN, the
 Figure 4 shows the trend of loss of generator and dis- synthesized data is combined with the original data to build
 criminator during the PacketCGAN training process. It can a new balanced dataset. We use MLP/CNN/SAE models to
 be seen that PacketCGAN does not improve the unstability verify the classiﬁcation performance over different datasets.
 characteristics of GAN. The loss of G and D always ﬂuctuates The experimental results show that the balanced dataset augwithin a range instead of convergence. Nevertheless, it is a big mented by FlowCGAN can achieve better performance than
 improvement that only one CGAN model needs to be trained the others including ROS, SMOTE and GAN. In the future, we
 when using PacketCGAN compared with vanilla GAN. One will further study other types of GAN applications in trafﬁc
 can generate any samples with the additional input of the classiﬁcation and try to solve the problems of unstable training
 applications types as conditional c, while vanilla GAN can and mode collapse.
 only generate one type of samples at a time, that means we
 can control the output of the PacketCGAN generator so that
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 we can easily generate speciﬁed minor classes samples needed
 to be augmented to handle the problem of class balance. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (61972211)

 R EFERENCE
 [1] P. Wang, F. Ye, and X. Chen, “A smart home gateway platform for data
 collection and awareness,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56,
 no. 9, pp. 87–93, Sep. 2018.
 [2] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A smart automated signature
 extraction scheme for mobile phone number in human-centered smart
 (a) d loss for ISCX2012 (b) g loss for ISCX2012
 home systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 30 483–30 490, 2018.
 [3] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
 Fig. 4: Loss of PacketCGAN
 in trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” IEEE Network, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, January
 2012.
 Fig. 5 shows the Confusion Matrices of the CNN-based
 encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation model based on 4 datasets [4] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap, “Mobile encrypted
 augmented by four different generative methods, which trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,” in 2018 Network Trafﬁc
 are ROS/SMOTE/GAN/CGAN over USTC-TFC2016, respec- Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA), June 2018, pp. 1–8.
 tively. The elements on the diagonal of Confusion Matrix refer [5] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep learning based
 to the correct ones of classiﬁcation and all the others are mis- encrypted network trafﬁc classiﬁcation in sdn home gateway,” IEEE
 classiﬁed. It can be clearly seen that the false positive rate Access, vol. 6, pp. 55 380–55 391, 2018.
 of minor class in Fig. 5(d) is lower than ROS as shown in
 [6] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 Fig. 5(a), SMOTE as shown in Fig. 5(b) and GAN as shown
 encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation with one-dimensional convolution neural
 in Fig. 5(c).
 networks,” 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and
 Fig 6 shows the performance metrics of 4 datasets augmented on ISCX2012 more clearly. As we can see from Fig 6 Security Informatics (ISI), pp. 43–48, 2017.
 that PacketCGAN greatly outperforms the other three methods [7] Z.Wang, “The application of deep learning on trafﬁc identiﬁcation,”
 for the minor class like gmail, facebook. Available from http:// www.blackhat.com, 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 (a) ROS (b) SMOTE (c) GAN (d) PacketCGAN

 Fig. 5: Confusion Matrices of CNN-based encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method on USTC-TFC2016

 (a) ROS (b) SMOTE (c) GAN (d) PacketCGAN

 Fig. 6: Performance metrics of DL-based encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method on ISCX2012

 [8] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Net- “Smote: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Int.
 work trafﬁc classiﬁer with convolutional and recurrent neural networks Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002. [Online]. Available:
 for internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18 042–18 050, 2017. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622407.1622416
 [9] L. Vu, C. T. Bui, and Q. U. Nguyen, “A deep learning based method [14] L. Vu, C. Thanh Bui, and U. Nguyen, “A deep learning based method
 for handling imbalanced problem in network trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” in for handling imbalanced problem in network trafﬁc classiﬁcation,” 12
 Proceedings of the Eighth International Symposium on Information 2017, pp. 333–339.
 and Communication Technology, ser. SoICT 2017. New York, [15] R. Hasibi, M. Shokri, and M. Dehghan, “Augmentation scheme for deal-
 NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 333–339. [Online]. Available: http: ing with imbalanced network trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep learning,”
 //doi.acm.org/10.1145/3155133.3155175 ArXiv, vol. abs/1901.00204, 2019.
 [10] X. Chen, J. Yu, F. Ye, and P. Wang, “A hierarchical approach to [16] C. X. Wang Pan, “Encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation method based on
 encrypted data packet classiﬁcation in smart home gateways,” in 2018 stacked automatic encoder,” 2018, pp. 1–8.
 IEEE 16th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, [17] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani, “Char-
 16th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th Intl Conf on acterization of encrypted and vpn trafﬁc using time-related features,” 02
 Big Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology 2016.
 Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), Aug 2018, pp. 41–45. [18] and, , and and, “Malware trafﬁc classiﬁcation using convolutional neural
 [11] L. Vu, D. Van Tra, and Q. U. Nguyen, “Learning from imbalanced network for representation learning,” in 2017 International Conference
 data for encrypted trafﬁc identiﬁcation problem,” in Proceedings of the on Information Networking (ICOIN), Jan 2017, pp. 712–717.
 Seventh Symposium on Information and Communication Technology,
 ser. SoICT ’16. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 147–152.
 [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3011077.3011132
 [12] N. Japkowicz, “Learning from imbalanced data sets: A comparison of
 various strategies.” AAAI Press, 2000, pp. 10–15.
 [13] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:55:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.