IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021 2367

 Accurate Decentralized Application Identification
 via Encrypted Traffic Analysis Using Graph
 Neural Networks
 Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Jinpeng Zhang, Liehuang Zhu , Member, IEEE, Ke Xu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Xiaojiang Du , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Decentralized Applications (DApps) are increas- world scenarios. In addition, GraphDApp maintains its high
 ingly developed and deployed on blockchain platforms such accuracy when being applied to the traditional mobile application
 as Ethereum. DApp fingerprinting can identify users’ visits classification.
 to specific DApps by analyzing the resulting network traffic,
 revealing much sensitive information about the users, such as Index Terms— Decentralized applications, encrypted traffic
 their real identities, financial conditions and religious or political classification, deep learning, graph neural networks, blockchain.
 preferences. DApps deployed on the same platform usually adopt
 the same communication interface and similar traffic encryption I. I NTRODUCTION
 settings, making the resulting traffic less discriminative. Existing
 encrypted traffic classification methods either require handcrafted and fine-tuning features or suffer from low accuracy.
 It remains a challenging task to conduct DApp fingerprinting
 W ITH the recent development of blockchain technology,
 the number of decentralized applications (DApps) are
 increasing dramatically. Unlike regular mobile or web applicain an accurate and efficient way. In this paper, we present
 GraphDApp, a novel DApp fingerprinting method using Graph tions deployed on centralized servers, DApps run their backend
 Neural Networks (GNNs). We propose a graph structure named codes on a decentralized peer-to-peer (P2P) network without
 Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) as an information-rich represen- the control of a single entity. Among the blockchain platforms
 tation of encrypted DApp flows, which implicitly reserves multiple on which DApps are hosted, such as EOS, NEO, Stellar, and
 dimensional features in bidirectional client-server interactions. Tron, we focus on Ethereum [1] in this paper, as it attracts the
 Using TIG, we turn DApp fingerprinting into a graph classification problem and design a powerful GNN-based classifier. largest developer community, where more than 3,200 DApps
 We collect real-world traffic datasets from 1,300 DApps with are deployed on Ethereum and the number of daily active users
 more than 169,000 flows. The experimental results show that has reached nearly 110,000 by 2020 [2].
 GraphDApp is superior to the other state-of-the-art methods The prosperity of DApps is attributed greatly to their
 in terms of classification accuracy in both closed- and open- resistance to censorship [3], [6]. Compared with the traditional
 Manuscript received June 24, 2020; revised September 30, 2020 and mobile or web applications, DApps are completely open-
 December 11, 2020; accepted January 4, 2021. Date of publication sourced and autonomously managed without a single authority
 January 11, 2021; date of current version February 12, 2021. This work to manage all codes and data. Once a piece of information in
 was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development
 Program of China under Grant 2020YFB1006101, in part by the Beijing DApp is added to the underlying blockchain, it gets stored
 Nova Program under Grant Z201100006820006, in part by the NSFC Projects permanently and thus cannot be removed or modified. In
 under Grant 61972039, Grant 61932016, and Grant 61872041, in part by addition, blockchain technology naturally provides anonymity
 the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4192050, in part by the
 Zhejiang Lab Open Fund under Grant 2020AA3AB04, in part by the China to each participant and thus can potentially protect identity
 National Funds for Distinguished Young Scientists under Grant 61825204, privacy of DApp users. These features make DApps trustable
 and in part by the Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist Program under Grant to censorship and governance.
 BJJWZYJH01201910003011. The associate editor coordinating the review
 of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Issa Traore. Although these service-level enchantments provide users
 (Corresponding author: Liehuang Zhu.) with safety and security, the network traffic generated when
 Meng Shen is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Institute of individual users visit DApps can still reveal plenty of sensitive
 Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and also with the Cyberspace Security
 Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail: information of users. Passive adversaries (e.g., campus netshenmeng@bit.edu.cn). work administrators, residential network service providers, or
 Jinpeng Zhang is with the School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of malicious eavesdroppers) could conduct DApp fingerprinting
 Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: zhangjinpeng@bit.edu.cn).
 Liehuang Zhu is with the School of Cyberspace Security, Beijing Institute to identify the specific DApps that a user visits by analyzing
 of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: liehuangz@bit.edu.cn). the resulting network traffic. An adversary can infer users’
 Ke Xu is with the Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, financial conditions from their usage of gambling DApps
 Beijing 100084, China, also with the Beijing National Research Center for
 Information Science and Technology (BNRist), Beijing 100084, China, and or learn their religious preferences and political views from
 also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China (e-mail: their visits to social DApps. DApp fingerprinting can also be
 xuke@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn). conducted by governors to deanonymize DApp users or even
 Xiaojiang Du is with the Department of Computer and Information Sciences,
 Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA (e-mail: dxj@ieee.org). block access attempts to certain DApps without affecting visits
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3050608 to the rest DApps on the same platform (e.g., Ethereum).
 1556-6021 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 A question naturally arises in this scenario is to what provide quantitative measures to demonstrate the advanextent DApps can be identified from the traffic generated by tages of representing flows using TIGs over the tradiuser visits. Due to the adoption of SSL/TLS protocols in tional packet length sequence.
 DApps, traditional traffic classification methods (e.g., Deep 2) We design GraphDApp, a powerful GNN-based classi-
 Packet Inspection) lose efficacy. Encrypted traffic analysis fier using Multi-Layer Perceptions (MLPs) and a fullyis not a new research area and a number of methods have connected layer. It maps TIGs of different DApp flows
 been proposed for website fingerprinting [18], [26], mobile to different representations in the embedding space and
 application fingerprinting [27], and user action identification does not require hand-crafted features so that the clas-
 [9], but few efforts have been made on DApp fingerprinting. sification can be conducted in an effective and accurate
 It remains a challenging task to accurately and efficiently way.
 identify DApps via traffic analysis. Unlike regular mobile 3) We collect real-world traffic datasets from 1,300 DApps
 applications or websites, DApps deployed on Ethereum imple- on Ethereum with more than 169,000 flows. We demonment the same frontend interface, adopt similar settings strate the accuracy and efficiency of GraphDApp in
 of SSL/TLS protocols, and share the same decentralized closed- and open-world settings. Compared with the
 blockchain network for running their backend codes and state-of-the-art methods, GraphDApp has the highest
 managing their data. As a result, the traffic of different DApps classification accuracy with the shortest training time.
 has lots of common features, leading to low accuracy of In addition, it is also applicable to traditional mobile
 existing fingerprinting methods employing SSL/TLS packet application classification.
 flags [15], [23] or packet length statistics [16], [17], [27] To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that
 (Section IV-A). Efficiency is also of importance to construct addresses the encrypted traffic classification problem using
 a DApp fingerprinting method. Existing studies that employ graph classification techniques. The rest of this paper is
 machine learning classifiers usually resort to hand-crafted fea- organized as follows. Section II introduces the background
 tures (e.g., fusing multiple dimensional features [25]), or even of DApps and summarizes the related work. Section III
 require compute-intensive feature processing (e.g., dynamic presents the rationale of representing DApp flows using graph
 time warping of packet time series [17]). It is more desirable to structures, and Section IV builds the GNNs-based classifier.
 simplify the sophisticated feature selection process and reduce Section V evaluates the performance of GraphDApp and
 the computational overhead for training classifiers. makes a comprehensive comparison with the state-of-the-art
 In this paper, we extend our previous work [25] and pro- methods. After a brief discussion of GraphDApp in Section VI,
 pose GraphDApp, a DApp fingerprinting method using Graph Section VII concludes this paper.
 Neural Networks (GNNs). We are motivated by an observation that each traffic flow, consisting of a series of packets II. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND R ELATED W ORK
 resulting from client-server interactions, can be represented by
 In this section, we describe the DApp fingerprinting proban information-rich graph structure named Traffic Interaction
 lem, briefly review existing studies, and emphasize the differ-
 Graph (TIG). The benefit of TIG lies in that it is capable
 ences between our work and the existing methods.
 of reserving as much information as the original flow, such as
 packet direction, length, ordering, and bursts without selecting
 features explicitly by hand. A. Problem Description
 With TIG, we convert the encrypted flow classification prob- DApp fingerprinting is a traffic analysis attack that aims
 lem into a graph classification problem. As deep learning has at identifying users’ visits to a certain collection of monitored
 shown its superiority over traditional machine learning tech- DApps. To be able to perform this attack, an adversary needs to
 niques, we design a GNN-based classifier using multi-layer observe the traffic when a victim is visiting DApps. Following
 perceptions. The classifier can automatically extract features the common assumption on threat model in existing literature,
 from input TIGs and distinguish different graph structures by we assume that the potential adversary is local and passive,
 mapping them to different representations in the embedding which means that the adversary exists in the local network of
 space. We conduct extensive experiments using real-world victims (e.g., campus network administrators) and performs
 datasets to evaluate the performance of GraphDApp in the merely traffic collection without any active attacks such as
 closed- and open-world settings. traffic hijacking, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Compared with our previous work [25], the novelty of In this paper, we focus on DApps deployed on the popular
 this paper includes the new graph-based representation of platform Ethereum, as it has the largest developer community.
 encrypted flows and the new classifier using GNNs. We further Most DApps on Ethereum provide browser plug-ins so that
 extend performance evaluation by conducting a comprehen- they can be visited via browsers (e.g., Chrome). The frontend
 sive comparison with the state-of-the-art on real-world traffic of a DApp implements user interfaces uniformly defined by
 datasets. The additional contributions beyond the original Ethereum to render pages. The backend is smart contracts
 paper [25] are as follows: connecting to Ethereum blockchain network, which is com-
 1) We propose Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) to represent pletely different from that of a web application that connects
 each individual encrypted flow, where vertices in a TIG to a centralized database.
 represent packets and edges represent the packet-level To initialize a visit, a DApp client (short for client) sends
 interactions between a pair of client and server. We also a request to the server equipped with the corresponding smart

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2369

 studies leverage either time information [10] or packet length
 information [20], [21] to build effective classifiers.
 2) Mobile Application Classification Methods: The goals of
 this category mainly contain mobile application classification
 and user action identification. Taylor et al. [27] proposed
 Appscanner that combined statistical features of packet length
 with the random forest classifier to identify applications on
 smartphones. Several studies resorted to SSL/TLS flags in
 encrypted traffic and applied Markov Models to classify different smartphone applications [15], [23], [24]. User action
 Fig. 1. Typical Workflow of DApps on Ethereum.
 identification attempts to recognize certain user operations on
 smartphone applications [9], [11], such as sending mail and
 replying a message in social network applications.
 contracts, whose IP address can be obtained by DNS query. 3) DApp Fingerprinting Methods: DApps are emerging
 The smart contracts are the functionalities that determine the as a new service paradigm that relies on the underlying
 outcomes for each operation in DApp conducted by clients. blockchain platform. In our previous study [25], we obtained
 All data records of these operations and outcomes are then several key observations. First, statistical features of packet
 packaged in the form of blocks by the miners on the underlying length are similar among DApps, e.g., the statistics of a
 blockchain platform and stored on the distributed ledger. DApp named Kitty are similar to those of Origin Protocol.
 The client also gets a list of blockchain servers from the Second, the adoption of the same blockchain platform makes
 smart contract server, through which it can acquire updated the SSL/TLS message types of different DApps quite similar.
 information from the ledger to render webpages. The observations indicate that the classifiers built based merely
 SSL/TLS protocols are used to encrypt the transmission on these features lose their efficacy for DApp fingerprinting.
 data between clients and the blockchain platform. There are As a result, we proposed a feature fusion method, which
 mainly two layers: the Handshake layer and the Record leveraged mixed features of packet length, timestamp and
 layer [23]. The former is used to negotiate secure parameters burst, to build a classifier using Random Forest [25].
 of an SSL/TLS session, while the latter is responsible for 4) Summary: The limitations of existing methods lie in
 transferring encrypted data under the secure parameters. two aspects. First, the methods using traditional machine
 Different from traditional mobile and web applications, learning classifiers (e.g., [17], [22], [25], [27], [28]) rely on
 DApps on Ethereum implement the same frontend interface, carefully-selected features, which become less discriminative
 adopt similar settings in SSL/TLS implementation, running for DApp classification and require a time-consuming process
 their backend codes and storing their data in the same decen- of feature extraction (see Section V). Second, the methods
 tralized blockchain network. These common features make the using deep neural networks (e.g., [19], [26]) generally employ
 resulting traffic of different DApps less discriminative [25]. packet direction sequence or packet length sequence as their
 input, which are not expressive enough to achieve high
 accuracy.
 B. Related Work
 Recent studies resort to machine learning techniques to deal C. Differences From Existing Work
 with encrypted traffic classification. Here, we only review Our goal is to achieve high classification accuracy of
 those that are closely related to our work, which can be DApp flows and avoid the exhausting process of feature
 roughly classified into three categories as shown in Table I. selection. This paper tackles these challenges from a novel
 1) Web Application Classification Methods: The goals of angle. Our observations on DApp traffic interactions motivates
 this category mainly focus on website fingerprinting and the graph representation of DApp flows, which naturally conwebpage fingerprinting. Website fingerprinting aims to identify verts DApp fingerprinting into a graph classification problem.
 the traffic generated from visits of certain websites. In prac- Then, GNNs are employed to build a powerful classifier
 tice, homepages are usually used as representatives of the that automatically extracts multi-dimensional features from
 corresponding websites. Panchenko et al. [17] leveraged the the raw input. The evaluation results show that the proposed
 accumulated sum of packet lengths as features that were fed to method is superior to the state-of-the-art methods metioned
 a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier. Wang et al. [28] in Section V. We also demonstrate that the proposed method
 used a large feature set and adopted a k-Nearest Neighbor can be generalized to other classification problems, such as
 (k-NN) model to classify different websites. Recent studies the traditional mobile application classification.
 attempted to use deep neural networks, such as Convolutional
 Neural Networks (CNNs) [18], [19], [26] and Long-Short III. G RAPH S TRUCTURE A BSTRACTION FOR DA PP F LOWS
 Term Memory (LSTM) [19] to construct more accurate fin- In this section, we first elaborate on the rationale for
 gerprints. representing DApp flows by graph structure before for-
 The webpage fingerprinting aims to construct traffic finger- mally describing the graph construction process. We also
 prints at the granularity of webpage, which can be viewed present case studies to illustrate the differences of the graphs
 as a fine-grained version of website fingerprinting. Existing abstracted from different DApps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC A NALYSIS M ETHODS

 A. Traffic Interaction Graph
 According to the problem description in Section II, we can
 collect all the traffic (i.e., a sequence of incoming and outgoing
 packets) when a client visits a certain DApp. Since the packet
 sequence usually consists of multiple flows, we first partition
 the whole sequence into individual flows, where each flow
 is defined as a series of packets with the same 5-tuple (i.e.,
 source/destination IP addresses, source/destination ports, and
 protocol). The definition of flows is also commonly used in the
 literature. More details of flow partitioning will be described
 in Section V-B.
 We take a specific flow as an example to illustrate the
 client-server interactions in terms of packet lengths and directions, as shown in Fig. 2(a). From the perspective of client,
 we set the length of upstream packets as negative and that of
 downstream packets as positive. The gray and white blocks
 in Fig. 2(a) represent the Handshake stage and the Record
 stage in SSL/TLS protocols, respectively. It is worth noting
 that the timestamp of packets is not considered in this paper, Fig. 2. Graph-based Representation of DApp Flows.
 as it is easily affected by varying network conditions and the
 alignment of time series for different flows is proved to be of consecutive packets transmitted along the same direction
 time-consuming [20]. during a short time interval [7]. Here, we misuse the terminol-
 In the existing literature [17], a flow P consisting of n ogy burst to define a series of consecutive packets transmitted
 packets is usually represented by a packet length vector. It along the same direction, even if there is only a single packet.
 can be expressed as P = ( p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ), where pi is the As shown in Fig. 2(a), the arrows in orange and blue represent
 signed length of the i -th packet (i.e., negative for upstream different bursts in the flow.
 and positive for downstream). However, this vector has lim- Edges. There are two types of edges in TIG: intra-burst
 ited representational capacity of the client-server interactions. edges and inter-burst edges. Intra-burst edges sequentially
 Inspired by information-rich graph structures, we attempt to connects the consecutive vertices (i.e., packets) in each burst.
 represent a traffic flow by a graph, which is referred to as For instance, for the burst [-118, -140, -330], two edges
 Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG). are used to connect the three vertices. Inter-burst edges are
 We first describe TIG construction process with the example used to connect a burst with its preceding burst, i.e., starting
 in Fig. 2 before presenting the formal definition of TIG. from the second burst, the first and the last vertices in each
 Vertex. Given a specific flow, a vertex of the corresponding burst are connected to the corresponding first and last vertices
 TIG represents a packet in the flow. Each vertex is also in its preceding burst. Note that at most one edge can be
 associated with the length of the packet. To reflect packet added between each pair of vertices in case that only one
 direction, we maintain the signed value of each packet length. packet exists in a burst. Figure 2(b) shows the resulting TIG
 When vertices are determined, edges should be added to corresponding to the flow in Fig. 2(a).
 connect these vertices together. A flow typically contains Definition 1 (Traffic Interaction Graph): A TIG is repremultiple bursts, where a burst is usually defined as a sequence sented by a three-tuple, TIG = (V, E, L), such that:

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2371

 Fig. 3. TIG Samples of Three Different DApps.

 • V is a set of vertices. Each vertex v ∈ V is associated Algorithm 1 Construction of Traffic Interaction Graph
 with a signed non-zero integer lv ∈ L representing the Input: A packet length sequence P = ( p1 , . . . , p N )
 packet direction and length. Output: The corresponding traffic interaction graph G =
 • E is a set of edges. Each edge e ∈ E is either an intra- (V, E)
 burst edge connecting two consecutive vertices in a burst 1: Initialize V and E as empty sets
 or an inter-burst edge connecting the starting or ending 2: for pi ∈ P do
 vertices of two consecutive bursts. 3: Add a vertex with a length value of pi in V
 • L is the set of non-zero integers, where the absolute value
 4: Separate V into bursts B = (b1 , . . . , b K ) according to
 of each integer is limited by the summation of packet
 packet direction
 header length and Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU).
 5: for bi ∈ B do
 6: if len(bi ) > 1 then
 B. TIG Samples of DApps 7: for v j ∈ bi do
 With an intuitive description of TIG in the last subsec- 8: Add an edge between v j and v j +1 in E
 tion, we formally present the construction process of TIG, 9: for bi ∈ B do
 as depicted in Algorithm 1. 10: if len(bi ) = 1 and len(bi+1 ) = 1 then
 The construction process considers the packet length 11: Add an edge between bi and bi+1 in E
 sequence of a specific flow as the input and starts with an 12: else
 initialization of the vertex set V and edge set E. Then, 13: Add two edges between bi and bi+1 in E
 it constructs the vertex set (lines 2-3) and obtain the bursts
 14: return G
 (line 4). After that, it iteratively adds intra-burst edges (lines
 5-8) and inter-burst edges (lines 9-13). Finally, the resulting
 G is the desired TIG. used as the key features in encrypted traffic classification
 To get a better understanding of the representation capacity [17]. Vertices in TIG are associated with the correof TIG, we select 3 kinds of DApps (i.e., Aigang, Aragon sponding packet lengths, which can be naturally used
 and AaveProtocol) and visualize the corresponding TIGs by classifiers.
 constructed with Algorithm 1, as shown in Fig. 3. Since it 3) Packet burst information. The vertices of the same
 is impossible to enumerate the TIGs for all the flows, we layer in TIG represent the packets composing an indirandomly select a flow for each DApp and use Matplotlib vidual burst. The burst-level behaviors for different
 [4] to draw the corresponding TIG. It is clear to observe the applications can vary significantly and thereby act as
 differences in terms of graph structure: Aigang owns spindle- discriminative features learned by classifiers.
 shaped TIGs for its flows, Aragon has simple and compact 4) Packet ordering information. TIG can represent the
 TIGs, while AaveProtocol exhibits complex and fish-shaped order of packets from the beginning of SSL/TLS session
 TIGs. negotiation to the end of application data transmission.
 In addition, TIG also reflects the interaction between the
 C. The Benefits of TIG server and the client.
 The following explains why TIG is a powerful representa- We resort to quantitative measures to demonstrate that
 tion of DApp flows. In general, TIG can extract features of TIG is more informative than other representations. An ideal
 DApp flows from four aspects, each of which has been proven representation should make a flow similar to flows from the
 to be valuable for traffic classification. same DApp while distinctive from those of different DApps.
 1) Packet direction information. The direction informa- We select packet length sequence as a baseline representation
 tion is revealed by the sign of the vertex in TIG, for comparison, as it is commonly used in the literature
 where positive values indicate downstream packets while [17]. We employ graph edit distance [5] and the Euclidean
 negative for upstream packets. distance as the similarity metrics for TIGs and packet length
 2) Packet length information. The packet length sequences, respectively. Note that a smaller distance indicates
 sequence, as well as its mathematical variants, are often more similarity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 Fig. 4. Similarity Measurements with Metrics of Euclidean Distance (a) and Graph Edit Distance (b) among 40 DApps.

 We randomly select 100 flows from each of the 40 DApps TABLE II
 in Table III and calculate the pairwise distance of flows. When L IST OF N OTATIONS
 calculating the graph edit distance, we follow the setting in [5],
 i.e., the node substitution cost is set to the Euclidean distance,
 the node insertion and deletion cost is set to 90, and the edge
 insertion and deletion cost is set to 15.
 The distance measurements are shown in Fig. 4. For
 each DApp, the blue marker represents the average distance
 between flows in the same DApp (i.e., intra-class distance),
 and each boxplot represents typical distances from other
 DApps (i.e., inter-class distances), i.e., the maximum values,
 75th percentile, 50th percentile, 25th percentile, and the minimum values. We can obtain the following observations by
 comparing Figs. 4(a) and 4(b):
 1) With packet length sequence, only 4 DApps have their
 intra-class distances smaller than the minimum value of
 their inter-class distances; while TIG makes 21 DApps
 have this property.
 2) With packet length sequence, there are 15 DApps whose and a fully-connected layer to construct GraphDApp, as they
 intra-class distance are larger than the median (i.e., do not require selection and fine-tuning features by hand and
 the 50th percentile) of inter-class distances; while there can effectively classify different graph structures [29]. In the
 is only one such case with TIG. testing stage (not shown in Fig. 5), the well-trained classifier is
 Through quantitative measures, we demonstrate that TIG- used to label the TIGs abstracted from unknown DApp flows.
 based representation exhibits high similarity for flows of the
 same DApp and is more discriminative across different DApps. B. GNN Architecture
 Given a set of TIGs {G 1 , . . . , G N } ⊆ G and their labels
 IV. T HE P ROPOSED G RAPH DA PP {y1 , . . . , y N } ⊆ Y, GNNs aim to learn a representation vector
 With the help of TIG, the classification of DApp flows is h G that can predict the label of each TIG, i.e., ŷ N = g(h G ).
 turned into a graph classification problem. GNNs become a The main body of GNNs used in GraphDApp consists of
 natural solution to this problem, as they can automatically MLPs and a fully-connected layer, where MLPs are used to
 extract features from input graphs and distinguish between extract features from the TIGs for training while the fullythese graph structures [29]. In this section, we present the connected layer is used to make a classification decision.
 design details of the proposed GNN-based classifier named GNNs try to gradually reduce the value of a loss function
 GraphDApp. L, which quantitatively measures the differences between the
 predicated and the actual labels. The notations used in this
 paper are shown in Table II.
 A. GraphDApp Overview 1) Multi-Layer Perceptions: In GraphDApp, MLPs are used
 The overview of training GraphDApp is presented in Fig. 5. to learn the representation vector h G for each TIG G. We
 In the training process, we first collect encrypted traffic of employ n layers of perceptions, and each layer acts as a
 DApps and parse the packet sequences into flows. Using recursive neighborhood aggregation scheme, in which a feature
 Algorithm 1 described in Section III, we can obtain the vector h v of each node v ∈ G is calculated by aggregating the
 corresponding TIGs for all the DApp flows. Then, the TIGs are features of its neighbors. Thus, the feature vector h v can store
 fed into GNNs to learn a powerful classifier. We employ MLPs the feature information of its neighbor nodes in the graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2373

 Fig. 5. Structure of Neural Networks in GraphDApp.

 More specifically, each layer of MLPs consists of a Linear different graph structures, which means that it should be
 function and a BatchNorm function. The Linear function able to map different graphs to different representations in
 performs linear transformation that is required to learn the an embedding space. This implies that the ability also solves
 weights and biases in the learning process. The BatchNorm the graph isomorphism problem, where non-isomorphic graphs
 function is used to make sure that the input of each layer of should be mapped to different representations [8].
 MLPs has the same distribution during the training process. Recent advances [29] in theoretical analysis of GNNs char-
 We use a dropout function to avoid over-fitting when neural acterize the expressiveness of GNNs by the Weisfeiler-Lehman
 network forward propagates. Finally, the representation of (WL) graph isomorphism test, which is a powerful heuristic to
 the entire graph is obtained through a concatenation of the address the graph isomorphism problem. It has been proved
 Readout function across all the layers of MLPs. We defer the that GNNs are at most as representational as the WL test
 design detail of MLPs in the next subsection. in distinguishing different graph structures [8]. Following the
 2) Fully-Connected Layer: Following MLPs, Graph- theoretical basis for establishing a GNN as powerful as WL,
 DApp uses a linear function to perform linear transformation we should make sure that the sufficient conditions should be
 on the output data of MLPs. Again, a dropout function is satisfied, i.e., node feature aggregation and the graph-level
 used to avoid over-fitting. For each TIG G i , we refer to the readout in GNNs should be injective [29].
 output of the linear function as its feature representation vector To map different graphs to different representations, GNNs
 h G i . To facilitate the following prediction process, we need to should have an injective neighbor aggregation method. The
 map h G i into a new latent space HG i ∈ RC , where C is the update method of node feature vectors [29] is expressed as
 amount of distinct elements in Y (i.e., the number of DApps shown in Eq. (3),
 to identify). Then, a softmax function is used to obtain the   
 predicted probability vector ŷic indicating the likelihood that h (k)
 v = ø h (k−1)
 v , f h (k−1)
 u : u ∈ N (v) (3)
 G i belongs to each type of DApp, as shown in Eq. (1).
 where h (k)
 v is the feature vector of node v at the k-th iteration
  
 ŷic = So f tmax HG i (1) (i.e., layer), N (v) is the set of nodes adjacent to node v.
 On each layer, the function f is responsible for aggregating
 3) Loss Function: GraphDApp leverages the cross entropy neighbor nodes of v and the function ø updates node features.
 function as the loss function, as it is commonly used in In addition, ø and f should be injective.
 multi-classification problem to calculate the loss between the Note that these aggregation functions should work on the
 predicted labels and the ground truth, as defined in Eq. (2), multiset that allows multiple instances of each distinct element.
 |X | Some popular injective functions, such as mean aggrega-
 1 
 C
  
 L=− yic log ŷic (2) tion, are not injective on multisets. As a concrete example,
 |X| the summation function is injective over multisets [18]. Many
 i=1 c=1
 where |X| is the number of instances (i.e., TIGs) for training aggregation schemes can potentially satisfy the injectivity over
 and yic is the ground truth label. In our multi-classification multisets. Theorem 1 provides a simple and concrete formula
 scenario, it has better convergence properties than the Mean in many of these aggregation schemes [29].
 Squared Error (MSE) loss function. Theorem 1 (Aggregation [29]): Assume  is countable.
 4) Optimizer: We adopt the Adam optimizer in Graph- There exists a function f :  → Rn so that for infinite choices
 DApp. Adam is a stepwise optimization algorithm based on of ε, including all irrational numbers, h (c, X) = (1 + ε) ·
 a stochastic objective function of adaptive low-order moment f (c) + x∈X f (x) is unique for each pair (c, X), where
 estimation. It is an effective stochastic optimization method c ∈  and X ⊂  is a multiset of bounded size. Moreover, any
 that requires only first-order gradients and little memory. function
   decomposed as g (c, X) =
 g over such pairs can be
 ϕ (1 + ε) · f (c) + x∈X f (x) for some function   ϕ. 
 This theorem shows that for any (c, X)   = c , X with
 C. Design of MLPs c, c ∈  and X, X  ⊂ , h (c, X) = h c , X  holds, if ε
 The design of MLPs is motivated by the fundamental goal of is an irrational number. Here we provide an intuition of the
 a GNN-based model. Ideally, GraphDApp should distinguish correctness of Theorem 1, where a rigorous proof can be found

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

  
 in [29]. In general, there are two cases with (c, X) = c , X  : TABLE III
 1) c = c but X = X  , and 2) c = c . In the first case, D ATASETS FOR C LOSED -W ORLD E VALUATION
 the injectivity of f (x) makes x∈X f (x) = x∈X  f (x) and
 thus the conclusion holds. In the second case, since the left part
 of h () is irrational and the right part is rational, the differences
 of two parts for c and c never counteract with each other and
 thus the conclusion holds.
 MLPs are able to model and learn f and ϕ in Theorem 1
 according to the universal approximation theorem [13], [14].
 Since MLPs can represent the composition of functions,
 we model f (k+1) ◦ ϕ (k) for one MLP. As the summation of
 the input features with one-hot encoding is naturally injective,
 MLP is not required in the first iteration. Then, GNNs update
 node representations as shown in Eq. (4):
 ⎛ ⎞
   
 h kv = M L P k ⎝ 1 +  (k) · h k−1
 v + h (k−1)
 u
 ⎠ (4)
 u∈N (v)

 where  is a learnable parameter.
 The node representation of subtree structure becomes more
 refined and global with the increment of the number of iterations. It is crucial to have a sufficient number of iterations for
 achieving good discrimination. To extract enough information
 form the neural networks, information from all the iterations
 (i.e., layers) of the model should be reserved. We use an
 architecture similar to Jumping Knowledge to achieve this goal
 as shown in Eq. (5),
    
 h G = Con Readout h (k) v |v ∈ G |k ∈ [0, K ] (5) • AppScanner (APPS), which captures statistical features
 from a sequence of packets, such as mean, minimum,
 where graph representation in each layer is obtained by
 maximum, standard deviation of incoming packets, out-
 Readout and then concatenated across all layers of MLPs.
 going packets, and bi-directional packets. It uses a Ran-
 With all the designs above, GraphDApp captures the similardom Forest classifier to identify encrypted or unencrypted
 ity of graph nodes and structures through training, which will
 traffic flows from mobile applications [27].
 be demonstrated by experimental results in the next section.
 • Feature Fusion (FEAF), which is the method proposed
 in our previous conference version [25]. It fuses different
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 dimensional features (e.g., packet length, burst, packet
 In this section, we are devoted to evaluating the effec- timestamps) by kernel functions and uses a Random
 tiveness of GraphDApp. We first introduce the experimental Forest classifier to identify encrypted flows from DApps.
 settings and the datasets for evaluation before tuning the hyper- • DeepFingerprinting (CNN+D), which uses the informaparameters of GraphDApp and comparing the performance tion of packet direction to construct Convolutional Neural
 of GraphDApp with the state-of-the-art in closed-world and Networks (CNNs) to classify the encrypted traffic of
 open-world scenarios. In addition, we also demonstrate the different websites [26].
 applicability of the proposed method on the classification of • CNN+L, which uses the same CNN structure as CNN+D
 traditional mobile applications. but takes the packet length sequence as input to build
 classifiers.
 A. Preliminary • LSTM+L, which takes packet length sequence as input

 1) Methods in Evaluation: To fully understand the perfor- and uses a double-layer LSTM [19] to learn feamance of GraphDApp, we leverage 6 typical methods for ture representations and a fully-connected layer for
 comparison, which are briefly described as follows. To make classification.
 a fair comparison, all the methods are fine tuned to achieve 2) Cross-Validation: The 10-fold cross-validation is used
 their best accuracy on the datasets used for evaluation. to evaluate the performance of each method. We randomly
 • Markov Model (MARK), which uses Markov chains to divided the dataset into 10 mutually exclusive subsets of
 model the sequences of message types in SSL/TLS ses- similar sizes. Then, we conducted 10 times of training and
 sions and feeds the state transition features into machine tests, using 9 subsets as the training set and the rest one as
 learning classifiers. The Maximum Likelihood principle the test set each time. The average value of the 10 tests is
 is used to identify the application from which encrypted used as the final result. All the experiments are conducted on
 flows are generated [15]. a server with an Intel Core Duo 3.60GHz and 16GB memory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2375

 TABLE IV
 H YPERPARAMETERS S ELECTION FOR G RAPH DA PP

 Fig. 6. Process of Network Traffic Collection.

 B. Dataset Collection
 Figure 6 shows the dataset collection process in our experiments. The network traffic capture tools are deployed on the
 routers of laboratories located in different university campuses TABLE V
 in China. When users visit a certain DApp through a Chrome I MPACT OF THE N UMBER OF T RAINING E POCHS ON C LASSIFIER T RAINING
 browser on PCs, the resulting network traffic is captured by T IME (CTT), T ESTING A CCURACY, AND D IFFERENCE B ETWEEN THE
 T RAINING AND T ESTING A CCURACY OF G RAPH DA PP
 WireShark and saved on data servers. All visits use Chrome,
 as it is the designated browser by some DApps. Network flows
 are then exported to a Comma Separated Value (CSV) file,
 each row of which contains the information obtained from the
 packets, including time, source/destination IP addresses, ports,
 protocols, packet lengths, and TCP/IP flags. The encrypted
 payload of each packet is not used for classification.
 Closed- and Open-World Settings: In the closed-world set- the best combination. More specifically, at the training stage,
 ting, an adversary aims at identifying victims’ visits to a we change each hyperparameter to estimate the gradient
 certain collection of monitored DApps, which can be viewed of the parameters and decide whether the hyperparameters
 as a multi-classification problem. The open-world setting should be increased or decreased. After completing this
 considers a more realistic scenario, where victims not only process, we select the best top-k values for each parameter
 visit the monitored DApps, but also visit a larger amount of and use them as the candidates for selecting the final best
 unmonitored DApps. The goal is to identify monitored DApps combination of all the hyperparameters. We use accuracy as
 from unmonitored DApps, which is usually treated as a binary- the performance metric, which is defined as the proportion
 classification problem [26]. of all the DApps flows that are classified correctly.
 To construct the closed-world dataset, we select the top The hyperparameter search ranges and the selected values
 40 DApps on Ethereum with the most users [2] as the mon- are shown in Table IV. GraphDApp is set with the learning
 itored DApps. The categories include social communication rate of 0.0005, the training epoch of 10 and the batch size
 applications, finance, online shopping, etc. The number of of 150. It uses MLPs to extract features and a fully-connected
 flows for each monitored DApp is summarized in Table III. layer to output the predicted results.
 In total, we collect 155,500 flows. Next, we investigate the impact of parameters on trade-offs
 To build the background traffic for open-world evaluation, between classification accuracy and time consumption.
 we randomly select 1,260 DApps on Ethereum as the unmon- 2) Epochs: Table V shows the Classifier Training Time
 itored DApps and collect 14,000 flows in total. Following the (CTT) and testing accuracy with different epochs. Graphstrategy in the literature, each unmonitored DApp is accessed DApp can reach a testing accuracy of around 0.83 with
 only once [26]. only one epoch (25.27s). In general, increasing the number
 of epochs helps improve classification accuracy. When the
 C. Parameter Tuning of GraphDApp number is larger than 10, the accuracy increment becomes
 In this subsection, we will introduce the hyperparameters trivial while CTT increases significantly. Therefore, we use
 used in GraphDApp and evaluate the trade-offs between clas- 10 epochs to achieve a better balance between accuracy and
 sification accuracy and efficiency. Note that all the experiments training efficiency.
 are conducted in the closed-world setting. The difference between training accuracy and testing
 1) Hyperparameter Selection: An important step in accuracy of neural networks is usually used to determine
 training GNNs is to tune the hyperparameters, which adjusts whether the classifier is over-fitting [26]. Table V also shows
 the trade-offs between variance, bias and classification that GraphDApp keeps the difference less than 0.02, indicating
 performance. Due to the large number of training instances that it can avoid over-fitting. The reason is we use dropout
 and hyperparameters in GraphDApp, it is a challenging task and BatchNorm to prevent over-fitting: The dropout function
 to find the optimal setting of hyperparameters. Therefore, randomly selects hide units and temporarily removes them
 we search the hyperparameters from an interval and select from training the neural networks, and BatchNorm normalizes

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 TABLE VI
 I MPACT OF N UMBER OF PACKETS U SED IN E ACH F LOW ON F EATURE
 E XTRACTION T IME (FET), C LASSIFIER T RAINING T IME (CTT) AND
 A CCURACY OF G RAPH DA PP

 TABLE VII
 I MPACT OF D ATASET S CALE ON F EATURE E XTRACTION T IME (FET),
 C LASSIFIER T RAINING T IME (CTT) AND A CCURACY OF G RAPH DA PP
 Fig. 7. Closed-world: Confusion Matrix of GraphDApp.

 D. Closed-World Evaluation
 In this subsection, we investigate the effectiveness and
 time efficiency of different classifiers in the closed-world
 setting. In this scenario, all the visits to DApps are limited
 the fully-connected layer and the output of the MLPs, which to the monitored DApps (i.e., those listed in Table III) and
 helps accelerate learning process and reduce over-fitting. DApp identification is a multi-classification problem.
 1) Accuracy: We also use accuracy to measure the perfor-
 3) Packet Number: The number of packets in each flow used
 mance of all the methods. The average accuracy and the stanto construct the corresponding TIG also has an impact on the
 dard deviation in cross-validation are exhibited in Table VIII.
 performance of GraphDApp. To take a deeper look at the time
 We can obtain several major observations:
 consumption, we roughly divide the training process into two
 stages: feature extraction (i.e., constructing TIGs from flows) 1) GraphDApp outperforms the rest methods, with the
 and classifier training (i.e., learning graph representation from highest accuracy (0.8922) and the smallest standard
 TIGs), as shown in Fig. 5. deviation (0.0011). Figure 7 shows the confusion matrix
 The FET and CTT of GraphDApp, as well as its accuracy, of GraphDApp. The accuracy of 5 DApps reaches
 with a varying number of packets used in each flow are shown 1.0 and the accuracy of 67.5% DApps reaches above 0.9,
 in Table VI. When only the first 6 packets of each flow are while the accuracy of only 3 DApps is lower than 0.6.
 used, the accuracy of GraphDApp can reach 0.8532. With the 2) Traditional machine learning methods with statistical
 increase of the number of intercepted packets, both FET and features (e.g., FEAF and APPS) are comparable to deep
 CTT become larger accordingly but are with different growth learning methods with packet length sequences (e.g.,
 trends: a slowdown in the growth of FET and an accelerated CNN+L). MARK results in low accuracy, because the
 growth of CTT, because a larger amount of packets leads to Markov state transition features used in MARK are
 more complex TIGs, requiring much more time to learning quite similar for flows from the same platform (i.e.,
 their representations in the classifier training stage. At the Ethereum).
 same time, the accuracy is also improved when provided 3) Packet length sequence cannot work well with LSTM,
 with more packets to construct TIGs. We set the packet as the accuracy of LSTM+L is around 20% less than
 number as 25 to achieve higher accuracy with moderate time CNN+L. The reason is most packets of DApps are
 overhead. transmitted with the fixed maximum length, making the
 4) Dataset Scale: To investigate the impact of dataset scale temporal information in packet length sequence less
 on the performance of GraphDApp, we vary the proportion of distinguishable. It is consistent with the conclusion in
 our original dataset (see Table III). Given a proportion value, previous literature [19].
 e.g., 20%, we randomly select 20% flows of each DApp and The results demonstrate the superiority of representing trafconstitute a new dataset, over which the 10-fold cross- fic flows using TIGs and transforming the traffic classification
 validation strategy is applied to evaluate the time consumption problem into the graph classification.
 and accuracy. The results are summarized in Table VII. 2) Time Overhead: We evaluate the time cost of all the
 GraphDApp can achieve 0.8764 accuracy when only 20% methods from two aspects: training time and testing time.
 samples are used, indicating that it can learn sufficient graph Tables IX and X present the results of different methods in
 representations from limited training data. When provided with the closed-world scenario.
 more training samples, GraphDApp can further improve its Training Time: In general, the training process of each
 accuracy. An interesting observation is that a lager dataset method in comparison can be divided into two stages: feature
 does not lead to a significant increase of CTT, which shows extraction from encrypted flows and classifier training using
 that graph representation learning is not severely affected by these features. The time on each stage and the total time are
 redundant TIGs. In the following experiments, we use the reported in Table IX. Note that all the methods are trained on
 entire dataset in Table III unless otherwise specified. the same dataset.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2377

 TABLE VIII
 C LOSED -W ORLD : A CCURACY OF THE S TATE - OF -T HE -A RT M ETHODS

 TABLE IX 3) Summary: The closed-world evaluation demonstrates
 T RAINING T IME OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS that GraphDApp can achieve the most accurate classification
 results with the shortest training time.

 E. Open-World Evaluation
 In this subsection, we will evaluate the performance of
 different methods in a more realistic open-world scenario.
 Existing studies usually treat this problem as a binary classification [12], [26]. Following this standard model, the classifier
 in open-world evaluation aims at distinguishing between flows
 TABLE X of the monitored and unmonitored DApps. Note that if a flow
 T ESTING T IME OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS is determined to be monitored, we can further use the multiclass classification (i.e., the closed-world setting) to identify
 to which monitored DApp it belongs.
 1) Dataset: We randomly select an average of 800 flows
 for each monitored DApp from those listed in Table III and
 obtain a total of 32,000 monitored flows.
 To conduct cross-validation, we partition the unmonitored
 flows at the granularity of DApps. Given a certain number of
 unmonitored DApps, e.g., 1,260, we divide these DApps into
 10 subsets, where each subset has 126 unique unmonitored
 DApps. Each time 9 subsets are used for training and the
 rest subset is used for testing. By this way, we can make
 FEAF takes the longest time in training, because it needs sure that there is no overlap between the training and testing
 to first calculate features from packet length, timestamps datasets in terms of unmonitored DApps. In other words, all
 and bursts using a kernel function and then merge features the unmonitored DApps for testing are not learned in advance.
 by selecting features with relatively high contribution before 2) Criteria: We use the prediction probability output by
 finally training the Random Forest classifiers. APPS calcu- the classifier to label unknown flows. If a flow of monitored
 lates statistical features from packet length, which is a time- DApp has a prediction probability greater than a certain
 consuming process. Even though it takes the least time to train threshold, we will record it as True Positive (TP), or False
 classifiers, APPS eventually becomes the second most time- Negative (FN) otherwise. Similarly, if a flow of unmonitored
 consuming method. DApp is correctly labeled, it will be considered True Negative
 Compared with the deep learning methods (i.e., LSTM+L, (TN), or False Positive (FP) otherwise.
 CNN+D and CNN+L), GraphDApp takes slightly longer time To evaluate the performance of classifiers on the two-class
 to construct TIGs from flows. However, it has more powerful classification, we use True Positive Rate (TPR), False Positive
 learning capabilities and needs less iterations to achieve the Rate (FPR), precision, recall and Area Under Curve (AUC)
 desirable accuracy. Thus, GraphDApp has the highest time as criteria. TPR is calculated by T P/(T P + F N) and FPR
 efficiency in terms of the total training time. equals to F P/(F P + T N). Precision and recall are defined
 Testing Time: The testing time refers to the time spent as T P/(T P + F P) and T P/(T P + F N), respectively. AUC
 on classifying an unknown flow by a well-trained classifier, refers to the area under the ROC curve, which is a performance
 which includes two parts: feature extraction time to obtain indicator to measure the pros and cons of a classifier. With
 required features from the flow and prediction time to label this these criteria, we can evaluate to what extent a method can
 flow. solve the open-world binary classification problem.
 In general, the testing time of all the methods are no more 3) Results: Figure 8 shows the TPR and FPR of different
 than 0.03 seconds. FEAF takes the longest time to make a methods with a varying number of unmonitored DApps. In
 decision, as it needs more time to fuse multi-dimensional general, TPR and FPR of all the methods decrease with the
 features from a flow. Similarly, the time of feature extraction increase of the number of unmonitored DApps. When the
 makes APPS the second most time-consuming method in number of unmonitored DApps reaches 720, the TPR and FPR
 testing. Compared with FEAF and APPS, the deep learning of GraphDApp tend to be stable, which are 0.99 and 0.05,
 methods are much more efficient in labeling an unknown flow. respectively. In contrast, TPR of other methods still tends to
 GraphDApp has a more complex neural network structure, so it decrease when the number of unmonitored DApps reaches to
 takes slightly longer time for prediction. 1,260, as more flows of monitored DApps are mislabeled.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 Fig. 10. Open-world: Precision-Recall Curves.

 TABLE XI
 O PEN -W ORLD : AUC FOR S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS

 covers the curves of other methods, which can also be quantitatively measured by the AUC values in Table XI. The AUC
 value of GraphDApp is the largest among all the methods,
 which can reach 0.9973 and is quite close to the maximum
 Fig. 8. Open-world: Impact of the Number of Unmonitored DApps on TPR
 value of 1.
 and FPR. Figure 10 presents the precision-recall curves for different
 methods in the open-world scenario. We calculate the precision
 and recall by varying the prediction threshold from 0.0 to
 1.0 with a step of 0.1. This curve indicates that each classifier
 can be tuned to achieve different goals. For example, if we
 want to reliably recognize the monitored flows, a classifier can
 be optimized to achieve higher precision at the cost of lower
 recall; whereas if we aim at identifying as many potential
 visits to the monitored DApps as possible, the classifier can
 be parameterized to pursue higher recall.
 As it can be seen from Fig. 10, GraphDApp is highly
 effective for any threshold. When the threshold is set to 0.1
 (i.e., the recall of all methods is 1.0), the precision of Graph-
 Fig. 9. Open-world: ROC Curves. DApp can reach 0.96, while the precision of other methods
 is lower than 0.8. When we adjust the threshold to 1.0 to
 achieve high precision (i.e., approaching 1.0), the recall of
 The reason is TIGs are stable and discriminative represen- GraphDApp can reach 0.93, which is much higher than that of
 tations of DApp flows, which can accurately identify flows other methods (all below 0.6). The precision-recall curve also
 of monitored DApps from all the background flows, while demonstrates that GraphDApp outperforms the other methods.
 the other representations (e.g., statistical features and packet
 length sequences) are not distinguishable enough to differentiate between monitored and unmonitored DApp flows. The F. Evaluation on Mobile Application Identification
 results show that GraphDApp outperforms the rest methods, Although GraphDApp is designed to identify encrypted trafespecially when the background noise (i.e., the unmonitored fic of specific DApps, it is still applicable to the classification
 DApps) becomes larger. of mobile applications, which is of great interest to recent
 Next, we fix the number of unmonitored DApps as 1,260 to studies [15], [24], [27]. To evaluate the generalizability of
 evaluate the performance of different methods. In this set of GraphDApp on mobile application classification, we conduct
 experiments, the number of monitored and unmonitored flows experiments using the datasets in our previous work [23]. This
 are 32,000 and 14,000, respectively. dataset contains the encrypted traffic of 15 popular mobile
 The ROC curve helps us to investigate the trade-offs applications, such as Facebook, Twitter and Alipay. There
 between TPR and FPR for each classifier [18]. Taking Graph- are more than 54,000 flows in the datasets. Note that only
 DApp for example, we can optimize GraphDApp either for dowstream flows are involved. As a closed-world evaluation,
 high TPR or for low FPR. Figure 9 shows the ROC curves of we also use accuracy as the metric to provide the overall
 different methods. The ROC curve of GraphDApp completely performance of all methods.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 SHEN et al.: ACCURATE DECENTRALIZED APPLICATION IDENTIFICATION VIA ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 2379

 work, we plan to make GraphDApp more adaptable to traffic
 changes and further improve its time efficiency.

 R EFERENCES

 [1] Ethereum. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 ethereum.org/
 [2] State of the Dapps. Accessed: Oct. 1, 2019. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.stateofthedapps.com/dapps?page=1
 [3] Countries and Territories. Accessed: Oct. 5, 2019. [Online]. Available:
 https://freedomhouse.org/countries/freedom-world/scores
 [4] Matplotlib. Accessed: Oct. 20, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://
 matplotlib.org/
 [5] Z. Abu-Aisheh, R. Raveaux, J.-Y. Ramel, and P. Martineau, “An exact
 Fig. 11. Classification Results with Different Methods on Mobile graph edit distance algorithm for solving pattern recognition problems,”
 Applications. in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Appl. Methods, Lisbon, Portugal,
 vol. 1, Jan.2015, pp. 271–278.
 Figure 11 presents the classification accuracy with different [6] A. A. Niaki et al., “ICLab: A global, longitudinal Internet censorship
 measurement platform,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP),
 methods. APPS, FEAF, LSTM+L, CNN+L have relatively May 2020, pp. 214–230.
 high accuracy, indicating their features are discriminative [7] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bienough to distinguish these mobile applications. Compared directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
 Appl., Los Angeles, CA, USA , Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
 with the results shown in Table VIII, the accuracy of CNN+D [8] J. Cai, M. Fürer, and N. Immerman, “An optimal lower bound on the
 significantly reduces to 0.627. The reason lies in that CNN number of variables for graph identifications,” Combinatorica, vol. 12,
 can only extract limited information (i.e., one-way packet no. 4, pp. 389–410, 1992.
 [9] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Anadirection sequence) from the downstream flows in the dataset. lyzing Android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,”
 The accuracy of GraphDApp reaches nearly 1.0. Although the IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125,
 graph structure of these flows reduces to sequential lines due Dec. 2016.
 to the absence of upstream packets, TIGs can also extract [10] S. Feghhi and D. J. Leith, “A Web traffic analysis attack using only
 timing information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 11, no. 8,
 enough information for building powerful GNN-based classi- pp. 1747–1759, Aug. 2016.
 fiers. GraphDApp outperforms the other methods in terms of [11] E. Grolman et al., “Transfer learning for user action identication in
 classification accuracy, indicating that GraphDApp can also be mobile apps via encrypted trafc analysis,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 33,
 no. 2, pp. 40–53, Mar. 2018.
 applied for mobile application fingerprinting. [12] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “K-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website
 fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp., Austin,
 VI. D ISCUSSION TX, USA, vol. 16, Aug. 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
 [13] K. Hornik, “Approximation capabilities of multilayer feedforward net-
 There are mainly two limitations with our method. The first works,” Neural Netw., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 251–257, 1991.
 limitation is that GraphDApp needs a relatively long time to [14] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward
 networks are universal approximators,” Neural Netw., vol. 2, no. 5,
 label an unknown flow. This can be solved by appropriately pp. 359–366, Jan. 1989.
 reducing the number of packets in TIGs to shorten feature [15] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 extraction time, and employing less MLP layers and hidden encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Toronto, ON,
 Canada, Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 units to accelerate the prediction speed. The second limitation
 [16] M. H. Mazhar and Z. Shafiq, “Real-time video quality of experience
 is that, as a fingerprinting solution, when the fingerprints of monitoring for HTTPS and QUIC,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 an application changes, the accuracy will decrease accordingly. Commun., Honolulu, HI, USA, Apr. 2018, pp. 1331–1339.
 To address this problem, we can regularly update the TIGs of [17] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2016,
 the application and fine-tune the parameters in the classifier. pp. 1–5.
 In the future work, we will further investigate techniques to [18] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classificamake GraphDApp more adaptable to traffic changes. tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
 Dec. 2019.
 [19] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. V. Goethem, and W. Joosen,
 VII. C ONCLUSION “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2018,
 In this paper, we proposed GraphDApp, which can identify pp. 1–15.
 encrypted traffic of DApps using GNNs. We constructed the [20] M. Shen, Y. Liu, S. Chen, L. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Webpage finger-
 TIGs of encrypted flows based on the packet length and packet printing using only packet length information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Commun. (ICC), Shanghai, China, May 2019, pp. 1–6.
 direction and turned the DApp identification into a graph clas- [21] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage
 sification problem. Then, we employed multi-layer perceptions fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
 to build a GNN-based classifier. Experiments are conducted IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, early access, Dec. 23, 2020, doi:
 10.1109/TIFS.2020.3046876.
 to evaluate our method on real traffic datasets collected from
 [22] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and N. Guizani, “Optimizing
 DApps on Ethereum, including 40 monitored DApps and feature selection for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A system-
 1,260 unmonitored DApps. The experimental results show that atic approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 20–27, Jul. 2020.
 GraphDApp can improve the accuracy by at least 10% over [23] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
 traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
 the state-of-the-art. We also demonstrated the effectiveness of bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 GraphDApp on mobile application fingerprinting. In the future pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 2380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 16, 2021

 [24] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware Liehuang Zhu (Member, IEEE) is currently a Proencrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in fessor with the Department of Computer Science,
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQoS), Beijing, China, Beijing Institute of Technology. He is selected into
 Jun. 2016, pp. 1–10. the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in
 [25] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted traffic University from Ministry of Education, P.R. China.
 classification of decentralized applications on ethereum using feature His research interests include the Internet of Things,
 fusion,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Qual. Service, Phoenix, AZ, USA, Jun. 2019, cloud computing security, Internet and mobile
 p. 18. security.
 [26] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Toronto, ON,
 Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
 [27] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Saarbrücken, Germany, Mar. 2016, pp. 439–454.
 [28] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
 attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd Ke Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Aug. 2014, pp. 143–157, 2014. degree from the Department of Computer Sci-
 [29] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph ence and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 neural networks?” in 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., New Orleans, LA, China, where he serves as a Full Professor. He
 USA, May 2019, pp. 1–4. has published more than 200 technical papers and
 holds 11 U.S. patents in the research areas of next-
 Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. generation Internet, blockchain systems, the Internet
 degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China, of Things (IoT), and network security. He is a
 in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree from Tsinghua Uni- member of ACM. He has guest-edited several special
 versity, Beijing, China, in 2014, all in computer issues in IEEE and Springer Journals. He is an Editor
 science. He is currently an Associate Professor with of IEEE IoT J OURNAL. He is also the Steering
 the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing. His Committee Chair of IEEE/ACM IWQoS.
 research interests include data privacy and security,
 blockchain applications, and encrypted traffic classification. He has authored over 50 papers in top-level
 journals and conferences, such as ACM SIGCOMM,
 IEEE JSAC, and IEEE TIFS. He has guest edited
 special issues on emerging technologies for data security and privacy in IEEE
 N ETWORK and IEEE I NTERNET- OF -T HINGS J OURNAL. He received the Best
 Paper Runner-Up Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014 and IEEE/ACM IWQoS 2020. Xiaojiang Du (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 He was selected by the Beijing Nova Program 2020 and was the winner of M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua
 the ACM SIGCOMM China Rising Star Award 2019. University, Beijing, China, in 1996 and 1998, respectively, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
 engineering from the University of Maryland College Park, in 2002 and 2003, respectively. He is
 a tenured Professor with the Department of Com-
 Jinpeng Zhang received the B.Eng. degree in puter and Information Sciences, Temple University,
 computer science from Northwest A&F University, Philadelphia, USA. His research interests are wire-
 Shanxi, China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing less communications, wireless networks, security,
 the master’s degree with the Department of Com- and systems. He has authored over 400 journal and
 puter Science, Beijing Institute of Technology. His conference papers in these areas, as well as a book published by Springer. He
 research interests include anonymity networks and has been awarded more than $5 million US dollars research grants from the US
 traffic analysis. National Science Foundation (NSF), Army Research Office, Air Force, NASA,
 the State of Pennsylvania, and Amazon. He won the best paper award at IEEE
 GLOBECOM 2014 and the best poster runner-up award at the ACM MobiHoc
 2014. He serves on the editorial boards of three international journals. He is
 a Life Member of ACM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:41:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.