2021 IEEE 6th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing (ICSP 2021)

 AEFETA: Encrypted traffic classification framework
 based on self-learning of feature
2021 6th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing (ICSP) | 978-1-6654-0413-6/20/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICSP51882.2021.9408973

 *Jingru Yang Yuanbo Guo
 Information Engineering University Information Engineering University
 Zhengzhou, China Zhengzhou, China
 * Corresponding author: yangjingru9601@163.com

 Abstract—This paper proposes an end-to-end framework random forests [3] are used to train and test feature
 based on feature self-learning, AEFETA, to handle the task of vectors. Statistics-based methods can effectively
 encrypted network traffic classification. In the AEFETA, we identify unknown categories, but how to extract
 propose a data preprocessing method based on the structure effective features is an issue worthy of research. At
 information of the network traffic, and at the same time, a the same time, fixed features are easy to be attacked
 lightweight deep learning model combined with an attention is also an ongoing problem.
 mechanism also be proposed in this framework. We can convert
 the raw pcap file into a file with the data type that can be input to ⚫ Deep-learning-based approach [4]. The method based
 the deep neural network through data preprocessing, and then, on deep learning is a research hotspot that has
 automatically extract the spatial-temporal features perform appeared in the field of traffic classification in recent
 classification tasks. AEFETA framework achieved a recall of 0.98 years. [5] proposes to use CNN to learn the feature of
 and precision of 0.97 in the encrypted traffic classification task, network traffic to achieve end-to-end traffic
 meanwhile, we find the best data format through experimental classification. This way can avoid a lot of feature
 comparison. engineering, but, because deep learning is a
 data-driven method, the collection of a dataset in each
 Keyword-deep learning; attention; end-to-end framework
 sub-field of traffic classification is difficult. data
 I. Introduction imbalances in the existing dataset influence
 classification results.
 Due to the increasing awareness of user privacy protection
 and the scalability and ease of operation of traffic encryption At present, deep learning technology has a wide range of
 technology, encrypted traffic accounts for an increasing applications in the field of text recognition. It can abstract and
 proportion in the real world. Whether to use a secure extract the features of samples layer by layer through the
 encryption protocol has become an important indicator for multi-layer neural network structure and the adjustment of a
 evaluating a website. Google uses HTTPS as a reference large number of parameters. Network traffic data has
 factor for search engine ranking. According to Netmarketshare hierarchical features similar to text (network traffic data:
 data[1], as of October 2019, the proportion of global encrypted sessions, packets, bytes; text data: paragraphs, sentences,
 traffic has exceeded 90%. How to accurately identify words). Therefore, To solve the problem of difficulty in
 encrypted traffic has become the hardest challenge of our time. feature selection and fixed features easily targeted by attackers,
 The current traffic classification technology can be divided this article focuses on the common method of text
 into the following three categories: classification, deep learning, to research encrypted network
 traffic classification task. The main contributions of this article
 ⚫ Fingerprint-based approach. Traffic classification are as follows:
 through port number and DPI(deep packet inspection)
 is collectively referred to as a fingerprint-based ⚫ A new classification framework AEFETA is proposed.
 method. The port-based classifier is too old and is no Use deep learning technology to automatically learn
 longer used. The DPI-based classifier is currently the the temporal and spatial features of network traffic,
 main method in the industry, which analyzes the and identify encrypted network traffic from a global
 payload fields for traffic classification. However, it perspective. The classification framework does not
 cannot identify unknown categories. In the encrypted rely on any prior knowledge about the protocol and
 traffic classification task, it can only obtain topology, nor does it require manual feature selection.
 information from unencrypted data such as the ⚫ an attention-based spatiotemporal feature extraction
 protocol packet header, which is difficult to complete algorithm is proposed. Given the different degree of
 the classification task. importance distribution of each session and each
 ⚫ Statistics-based approach. This method usually uses packet information, the algorithm uses the attention
 flow statistics, packet statistics, or behavior statistics mechanism [6] to weight the extracted features
 to classify. After feature extraction, machine learning according to the importance, thereby improving the
 algorithms such as support vector machines [2] and classification accuracy.
 978-1-6654-0413-6/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
 876

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:28:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 ⚫ A data processing method is proposed. We use LSTM model (HABBiLSTM) based on a hierarchical
 experimental comparison to find the data attention mechanism to introduce attention to the traffic
 representation with the best classification effect. classification task for the first time, and achieved good
 classification results.
 Ⅱ. Related work
 Although the deep learning method based on feature
 Encrypted traffic refers to the traffic generated by the self-learning can realize effective end-to-end traffic
encryption algorithm transmitted during the communication classification, data processing and model construction still
process. [13-15] conducted related research on encryption and need more research.
unencrypted, and proposed various methods for traffic
identification, which achieved good results. However, as the Ⅲ. Methodology
demand for traffic analysis increases, only identifying whether
the traffic is encrypted cannot meet the requirements. The In this work, we developed a framework, AEFETA, that
current research on encrypted traffic classification is mainly comprises two parts, data processing, and a deep learning
divided into two categories: anomaly identification and model.
application service identification. Among them, abnormal A. data processing
identification is to identify malicious traffic such as DDoS and This paper uses the original pcap format file as input data
Botnet. Application service identification is to identify the and completes the data preprocessing through the process of
type of service to which encrypted traffic belongs, such as Figure 1 to obtain a set of data, which directly input to the
Browning, Streaming, Chat, etc. model.
A. anomaly identification
 Although data encryption can effectively deal with
man-in-the-middle attacks to protect data, it can also pose new
security threats and risks. Cyren[7] found that 37% of
malware uses HTTPS, and every major ransomware family
has spread through HTTPS. Therefore, it is urgent to detect
encrypted malicious traffic. [8-10] proposed a variety of
methods to identify malware traffic using machine learning
methods. For the TLS protocol, Cisco [11-12] used logistic Fig.1. The process of data preprocessing
regression and ten-fold cross-validation to identify encrypted
malicious traffic, with an accuracy of over 90%. Ivan et al. [16] Step 1: Session generation. Session generation refers to
analyzed and summarized 40 data characteristics in 4 splitting a piece of the original file into multiple files, each of
categories, and used LSTM and 5-fold cross-validation to which is a session. We use the segmentation tool in the
detect malware and phishing software signatures. Frantisek et USTC-TK2016 toolset to complete this step.
al. [17] compared the four machine learning methods of
 Step 2: File removal. This step removes the empty files
XGBoost, Random Forest, Neural Network, and SVM for the
 and UDP files.
detection of TLS encrypted malicious traffic, and concluded
that the XGBoost and Random Forest methods are more Step 3: Paket truncate. In this step we remove 16 bytes
effective. Zeng et al. [22] proposed a DFR model, which slices packet header, 34 bytes link layer and network layer
the original data according to 900 bytes and converts it into a information, and, the 4 bytes port number information in the
30×30 two-dimensional matrix, and then uses the three-layer transport layer. We think this information is not important or
structure of CNN, LSTM, and SAE for traffic identification. even disturbing. The120 bytes after these 54 bytes as useful
 data.
B. application service identification
 Certain network management tasks require fine-grained Step 4: Paket trimming. This step saves the first 4 packets
identification of service types for encrypted traffic. For with the application layer。
example, the use of social networking sites is not allowed in B. deep learning model
certain exams, but applications such as web pages and videos
are not restricted. [18] compared three P2P traffic Our deep learning model for encrypted traffic
identification methods, including identification methods based classification is composed of CNNs and BiLSTM with
on ports, application layer signatures, and flow statistics. [20] attention mechanism. Since the location of the data packet
proposed a method called Skype. Hunter's method recognizes header information is fixed, we think it has certain spatial
Skype traffic in real- time. This method can effectively characteristics; the process of key exchange in the early stage
identify signaling services and data services (such as voice, of the data stream also maps the behavior pattern of a data
video, and file transmission) through a strategy based on a stream. Therefore, this article automatically extraction of
combination of signature and stream statistical characteristics. spatio-temporal characteristics of network traffic data to
[21] Divide the conversation into 784-byte slices, convert classify traffic. Since each data packet in the data stream is of
them into grayscale images, and enter CNN for classification. different importance, we introduce the attention mechanism
Experiments show that the effect of using 1D-CNN is better into our deep learning model (Figure 2).
than 2D-CNN. [23] proposed a deep packet framework The algorithm1 is describe the architecture of deep
combining 1D-CNN and SAE. [19] proposed a bidirectional

 877

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:28:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
learning model in the AEFETA. This process is mainly divided been widely used in tasks such as text classification. In the
into four layers: spatial feature learning layer, temporal feature temporal feature learning layer of the model, we use BiLSTM
learning layer, attention layer, and output layer. It should be to complete the learning of temporal features. Specific steps
noted that the model input is an n*m size matrix, and the are as follows:
output is the predicted category.
 The vector sequence [h1,h2,…,hn] of the data packet is
 1) Spatial feature learning layer sequentially inputted into the BiLSTM to learn the temporal
 Since different convolution kernels will learn different features to obtain the vector .
 The data packet vector sequence is input in the reverse
 order [hn,hn-1,…,h1] into the learning temporal feature of the
 LSTM to obtain the vector .

 ⚫ Splicing and get the output vector vi.
 3) Attention layer
 The attention mechanism is widely used in deep learning
 tasks with Encoder-Decoder structure such as image
 processing and speech recognition. Its core goal is to find out
 more critical information for the current task from a large
 amount of information. In the attention layer of the model, we
 perform a weighted summation on the output vector vi of the
 upper layer to obtain the feature vector c:

 (1)
 Fig.2.deep learning model
 Among them, the calculation formula of αi is:

 (2)
 u is the random initialization vector for subsequent
 training, and the formula for calculating ui is:
 (3)
 4) Output layer
 In the field of deep learning, softmax is a commonly used
 classification function, especially in multiclassification
 scenarios. Softmax maps some inputs to functions between 0-1
spatial features, applications in the field of computer vision and normalizes the final prediction vector to ensure that the
have shown that CNN using different convolution kernels sum is 1. In the output layer of the model, we use softmax as
connected will get better spatial features. In the spatial feature the classifier of the model. Since encrypted traffic recognition
learning layer of the model, we use two CNN with different is a multi-classification problem with the imbalance of
convolution kernel sizes to complete spatial feature learning. categories, we choose cross-entropy as the loss function of the
The specific steps are as follows: model.
 Convert each data packet into one-hot encoding form, and
 Ⅳ. Experiments and Discussion
convert the one-dimensional array into a matrix pi of m*256
sizes. The hardware and software configuration of the
 experiment is as follows. The software framework is Keras
 ⚫ Input pi into two convolutional neural networks with and TensorFlow, running on the Ubuntu operating system. In
 different convolution filters to learn the spatial terms of experimental hardware, a 64-core 256G cpu is used.
 characteristics of the data packet. The output vectors Besides, an Nvidia GeForce RTX 2080Ti gpu is used as a
 of the two neural networks are hi1 and hi2 training accelerator. Table1 describes the architectures of the
 respectively. deep learning model.
 ⚫ splicing hi1 and hi2 to obtain the packet vector hi.

 2) Temporal feature learning layer
 BiLSTM can learn contextual information better and has

 878

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:28:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE1. NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURAL PARAMETERS Our proposed framework performs well than other
 Layer Type Filters/Neurons/Rate encrypted traffic classification methods in the same dataset.
 Table3 shows the comparision results of the[21], [23], and
 1 Conv+tanh 128
 ours. Figure 3 shows the precision, recall, F1-Score value of
 2 dropout 0.2 each class of traffic, all three indicators of the streaming label
 3 GlobalMaxPool / reach 1.
 4 dense 128
 TABLE3. COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS
 5 Conv+tanh 256
 6 dropout 0.2 Methodology Ac Pr Re F1

 7 GlobalMaxPool / [21] 0.817 0.855 0.858 0.856
 8 dense 128 [23] / 0.97 0.97 0.97
 9 concatenate / ours 0.984 0.979 0.980 0.979
 10 dense 64
 11 Bilstm 64
 12 attention /
 13 dense 6
 14 softmax /

A. Dataset
 This article uses the public data set VPN-nonVPN data set
(ISCXVPN2016) [6] to carry out the encrypted traffic
classification experiment proposed in this article. The data set
includes 14 kinds of encrypted traffic (7 kinds of protocol
encapsulated traffic and 7 kinds of conventional encrypted
traffic). This experiment only discusses conventional
encrypted traffic data. Because of the confusion in the
classification of some of the files, for example,
facebook_video and other files can be classified as browser or Fig.3. Recall, precision, F1 value of 6-class classifiers
streaming, so we ignore these files and divide 61 files into 6
categories, namely: chat, email, file_transfer, p2p, streaming, C. discussion
voip(Table2 ). In this section, we discuss the impact of the number of
 packets in a session and the length of the packets on the
 TABLE2. ISCXVPN2016 classification results. Because the larger input format will
 label File greatly reduce the speed of the algorithm, we set the number
 chat AIMchat1, aim_chat, facebookchat, hangouts_chat,
 of packets in the range of 4-6, and the packet length in the
 ICQchat, icq_chat, skype_chat range of 40-140 for experimentation. We compared the recall
 value and accuracy value under different packet lengths and
 email email packet numbers. Through the display of Figure 4 and Figure 5,
 file_transfer skype_file we choose 4 and 120 as the number of packets per session and
 p2p Torrent01 length of per packet.
 streaming netflix, spotify, vimeo, youtube
 voip hangouts_audio, voipbuster

B. Evaluation results
 In this section, we discuss the results of the AEFETA
framework. Generally speaking, detection accuracy, accuracy
rate, recall rate, and F1 value are the four key indicators for
evaluating encrypted traffic recognition. This article uses the
following criteria to evaluate the classification algorithm:
precision, recall, F1-Score.

 Fig.4. The recall value under different packet lengths and packet
 numbers

 879

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:28:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 [11] Anderson, B., Paul, S., Mcgrew, D. (2018) Deciphering malware’s use
 of TLS (without decryption). Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn, 14 (3):
 195-211.
 [12] Blake, A., David, M. (2016) Identifying encrypted malware traffic with
 contextual flow data. In: ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and
 Security (AISec). 2016: 35-46.
 [13] Okad, Y., Ata, S., Nakamura, N., et al. (2011) Comparisons of machine
 learning algorithms for application identification of encrypted traffic. In:
 10th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and
 Applications and Workshops. 2011: 358-361.
 [14] Zhao, B., Guo, H., Liu, Q. R., et al. (2013) Protocol independent
 identification of encrypted traffic based on weighted cumulative sum test.
 Journal of Software, 24(6): 1334-1345.
 [15] Niu, W.N., Zhuo, Z. L., Zhang, X.S., et al. (2019) A heuristic statistical
 testing based approach for encrypted network traffic identification[J].
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 68 (4).
 [16] Ivan, T., Luis, D. C., Alejandro, C. B. (2018) Hunting malicious TLS
 Fig.5. The accuracy value under different packet lengths and packet certificates with deep neural networks. In: The 11th ACM Workshop on
 numbers Artificial Intelligence and Security. 2018:64-73.
 [17] Frantisek, S., Sebastian, G. (2017) Machine learning for network
 HTTPSanalysis. In: BRUCON Conference. 2017:5.
 Ⅴ. Conclusion
 [18] Madhukar, A., Williamson, C. (2006)A longitudinal study of P2P traffic
 In this paper, we presented a framework, AEFETA, that classification. In: Modeling，Analysis, and Simulation of Computer and
automatically extracts features from encrypted traffic for Telecommunication Systems, MASCOTS 2006 179-188.
traffic classification tasks. This paper uses the hierarchical [19] Chong, L. Traffic classification system based on deep
characteristics of network traffic, draws on the application of learning(2019)Adami, D., Callegari, C., Giordano, S., et a1. (2012)
 Skype-hunter: a realtime system for the detection and classification of
attention mechanism in text classification, and uses deep Skype traffic. International Journal of Communication Systems, 25(3):
learning to directly process the original pcap file to achieve 386-403.
end-to-end traffic classification. Our experiment was carried [20] Adami, D., Callegari, C., Giordano, S.et a1. (2012) Skype—hunter: a
out on vpn-nonvpn and achieved good results. At the same real-time system for the detection and classification of Skype traffic.
time, we discussed data processing, which has a particularly International Journal of Communication Systems, 25(3):386-403.
great impact on classification results. What this article is [21] Wang, W., Zhu, M., Wang, J., et al. (2017) End-to-end encrypted traffic
currently doing is classifying ordinary encrypted traffic. In the classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks. In:
field of malware detection, how to perform malware detection IEEE Int Conf Intell Security Informat. 2017:43-48.
on encrypted traffic while protecting user privacy (that is, [22] Zeng, Y., Gu, H., Wei, W., et al. (2019) Deep-full-range: a deep learning
 based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection
without decrypting data packets) is a difficult point, it is also a framework. IEEE Access, 2019: 1.
problem that needs to be research in the next step. [23] Lotfollahi, M., Zade, R.S.H., Siavoshani, M,J., et al.(2017) Deep packet:
 a novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning.
 References eprint arXiv: 1709.02656.
[1] Netmarketshare. (2019).
[2] Kondo, S., Sato, N. (2007) Botnet traffic detection techniques by C&C
 session classification using SVM. In: International Workshop on
 Security. 91-104.
[3] LencunE, Y., Bengio, Y., HintonI, G. (2015) Deep learning. Nature,
 512:436-444.
[4] Bilge, L., Balzarotti, D., Robertson, W., et al. (2012) Disclosure:
 detecting botnet command and control servers through large-scale
 net-flow analysis. In: The 28th Annual Computer Security Applications
 Conference. 129-138.
[5] Wang, W., Zhu, M., Zeng, X., et al. (2017) Malware traffic classification
 using convolutional neural network for representation learning. In: 2017
 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN). 712-717.
[6] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., et al. (2017) Attention Is All You
 Need, arXiv.
[7] Cyren. Malware is moving heavily to HTTPS. https:// www. cyre- n.com
[8] He, G., Xu, B., Zhu, H. (2018) AppFA: a novel approach to detect
 malicious Android applications on the network. Security and
 Communication Networks, 2018 :1-15.
[9] Shabtai, A., Tenenboim, C.L., Mimran, D., et al. (2014) Mobile malware
 detection through analysis of deviations in application network behavior.
 Computers & Security, 43:1-18.
[10] Garg, S., Peddoju, S.K., SarjeA, A.K. (2017) Network-based detection
 of Android malicious Apps. International Journal of Information
 Security,16(4):385-400.

 880

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:28:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.