sensors
Article
CBD: A Deep-Learning-Based Scheme for Encrypted Traffic
Classification with a General Pre-Training Method
Xinyi Hu 1,2, * , Chunxiang Gu 1,2 , Yihang Chen 1 and Fushan Wei 1,2

 1 State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou 450001, China;
 gcx5209@126.com (C.G.); cyhpaper@163.com (Y.C.); weifs831020@163.com (F.W.)
 2 Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou 450001, China
 * Correspondence: huxinyi.1994@foxmail.com

 Abstract: With the rapid increase in encrypted traffic in the network environment and the increasing
 proportion of encrypted traffic, the study of encrypted traffic classification has become increasingly
 important as a part of traffic analysis. At present, in a closed environment, the classification of
 encrypted traffic has been fully studied, but these classification models are often only for labeled data
 and difficult to apply in real environments. To solve these problems, we propose a transferable model
 called CBD with generalization abilities for encrypted traffic classification in real environments.
 The overall structure of CBD can be generally described as a of one-dimension CNN and the
 encoder of Transformer. The model can be pre-trained with unlabeled data to understand the
 basic characteristics of encrypted traffic data, and be transferred to other datasets to complete the
 classification of encrypted traffic from the packet level and the flow level. The performance of the
  proposed model was evaluated on a public dataset. The results showed that the performance of the
 
 CBD model was better than the baseline methods, and the pre-training method can improve the
Citation: Hu, X.; Gu, C.; Chen,Y.; classification ability of the model.
Wei, F. CBD: A Deep-Learning-Based
Scheme for Encrypted Traffic Keywords: encrypted traffic classification; deep learning; transfer learning; nature language processing;
Classification with a General unlabeled pre-training
Pre-Training Method. Sensors 2021, 21,
8231. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s21248231

 1. Introduction
Academic Editors: Nima Karimian
and Hossein Sayadi In recent years, with the rapid development of network technology and people’s
 gradual awareness of private data, a variety of encryption technologies have been widely
Received: 22 November 2021 used in network communications, resulting in a rapid increase in network encrypted
Accepted: 7 December 2021 traffic. At the same time, encrypted traffic is also used by some people as the tool to hide
Published: 9 December 2021 activities, which also provides an opportunity for malicious network attackers to hide
 their command-and control activities. Therefore, encrypted traffic classification can better
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral monitor abnormal conditions in the network, and detect network attack behaviors in time.
with regard to jurisdictional claims in It has also contributed to the improvement in network service performance and the creation
published maps and institutional affil- of a good network environment, which has gained widespread attetion from researchers.
iations. Network traffic classification refers to using algorithms to construct a classification
 model for neiwork traffic, which has three levels of granularity for tasks: sequence-based,
 packet-based, and flow-based classification. The granularity can be determined according
 to practical scenarios, such as application classification, protocol identification, service
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors. analysis, etc. Network traffic classification plays a significant role in network management,
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. traffic control, and security detection. Meanwhile, the efficient and accurate classification
This article is an open access article of network traffic is an important foundation for maintaining network security.
distributed under the terms and However, most of the existing research results are only implemented in a closed
conditions of the Creative Commons environment. The experimental data are often labeled data, and training data and test
Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// data often have high similarities. Moreover, some results tend to require more computing
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ resources and time. In a real environment, the data are often unlabeled, which can greatly
4.0/).

Sensors 2021, 21, 8231. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21248231 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 2 of 18

 decrease the performance of many classification models. To solve this problem, researchers
 have tried to develop a model with a strong generalization ability.
 In this work, we propose a model called CBD (based on a convolutional neural
 network, bidirectional encoder representation from transformers and dense network) that
 supports unlabeled data and has a certain generalization ability. It can directly learn from
 unlabeled data and use this knowledge for model training. Model transfer can also be
 carried out for different datasets, which only need to fine-tune the parameters to complete
 the goal of encrypted traffic classification. The contributions of this paper are summarized
 as follows:
 • A novel encrypted traffic classification model called CBD is designed. It combines a
 Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Bidirectional Encoder Representation from
 Transformers (BERT) to automatically learn the features of traffic data from the packet
 level and flow level to achieve the encrypted traffic classification for applications.
 • A general pre-training method suitable for the field of encrypted traffic analysis is
 proposed. For unlabeled data, this method proposes two tasks of identifying ciphertext
 packets and identifying continuous flows, to deepen the model’s understanding and
 learning of encrypted traffic data.
 • The CBD model has achieved good results when encrypting traffic classification. In
 addition, the performence of the CBD model has obvious advantages compared with
 other methods.
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the related work
 of network traffic analysis. In Section 3, we provide a detailed description of the overall
 model structure. In Section 4, we introduce the specific details of the experiment, and
 we evaluate and compare the experimental results. Finally, we conclude this paper in
 Section 5.

 2. Related Work
 As a multidisciplinary subject, machine learning has three important components:
 data, features, and algorithms. Traditional machine learning methods use different algorithms to build models and take the features of the raw data as input. After training the
 models, the expected prediction results can be obtained in the testing phase. In recent
 years, there has been an increase in research on machine learning, including deep learning and transfer learning. There has also been an increase in research on network traffic
 classification using these methods. In this section, we briefly introduce some methods
 for network traffic classification, ranging from deep learning methods to classic transfer
 learning methods, and then to the applications of Transformer model.

 2.1. Applications of Deep Learning
 For traditional machine learning, the relevant features of the data are not obvious
 in many cases, and it is necessary to perform feature extraction and feature selection
 to obtain the features that can show the data. This feature engineering often relies on
 expert experience, and the quality of the features is critical to the final results. With the
 development of deep learning, due to its end-to-end model structure, which can effectively
 reduce the high cost of feature engineering, more and more researchers have chosen to use
 deep learning in various fields. In 2015, Ref. [1] deep learning was first used in the field of
 traffic analysis, and a large amount of research subsequently emerged.
 In 2017, Höchst et al. [2] proposed a method for unsupervised traffic flow classification
 using the statistical features of flows and clustering based on neural autoencoders. This
 method was based on the feature vector of the time interval and used the semi-automatic
 cluster marking method, which can effectively promote the flow classification independent
 of the known class of traffic. The evaluation experiment was conducted on real datasets
 captured within four months. The results showed that for seven different classes of mobile
 traffic classification, this method can achieve an average accuracy of 80% and an average
 recall rate of 75%.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 3 of 18

 In 2018, Li et al. [3] proposed a Byte Segment Neural Network (BSNN) for protocol
 classification based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN). BSNN took network datagram
 as input. First, the datagram was divided into multiple byte segments. These segments
 were then fed to an encoder based on RNN. The information extracted by the encoder was
 combined into a representation vector of the entire datagram. Finally, the softmax function
 was applied to use this vector to predict the application protocol of the datagram, provoding
 the classification result. Experiments on the real-world data of different protocols showed
 that the BSNN classification of five protocols can achieve an average F1-score of about
 95.82%, which was better than traditional machine-learning-based methods and packet
 inspection methods.
 In 2019, Marín et al. [4] proposed two methods for malicious network traffic detection
 based on deep learning, depending on different forms of raw data. The method based
 on the raw packet combines CNN and Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) network, and
 the method based on the raw flow uses CNN. The experimental results showed that the
 performance of the method based on the raw packet was equivalent to that obtained
 through expert knowledge, while the performance of the method based on the raw flow
 was better than the performance obtained through expert knowledge. Moreover, when
 the same input features were used, the deep learning model was better than the Random
 Forest (RF) model used as the benchmark.
 In 2020, Pacheco et al. [5] proposed a framework based on machine learning and deep
 learning for the classification of heterogeneous Internet traffic in satellite communications.
 The machine learning method chose rf, and the deep learning methods chose 1d and
 2dcnn. This solution combined a classification solution in the satellite architecture for
 QoS management. By dividing the Internet protocol technology and using the multi-label
 classification method to process the tunnel connection, the Internet flow can be classified.
 In addition, the specific feature extraction process of the tunnel connection was designed.
 The experiment verified the reliability of the simulated Internet network placed on the
 cloud platform, and also provided guidance for future work on the simulated and real
 satellite platforms.
 In 2020, Aceto et al. [6] combined and summarized some existing deep-learningbased traffic classification methods, and proposed a general framework for mobile traffic
 classification based on deep learning. To evaluate the framework, the authors conducted
 experiments on three mobile datasets of human user activity. The results showed that the
 classification result was better than the machine learning baseline method and the deep
 learning baseline method.
 In 2021, Hu et al. [7] proposed a model CNN LSTM Dense Network (CLD-Net) to
 classify encrypted network traffic based on CNN and LSTM. This model introduced the
 strategy of recombing traffic in the data-preprocessing part, which can effectively improve
 the efficiency of neural network feature learning. In addition, a method for converting
 the format of the time interval between adjacent packets was proposed, which can fuse
 time information and payload information into a new packet matrix. The method was
 validated on the public dataset ISCXVPN2016 [8]. The results showed that the method
 can classify whether encrypted network flows used a Virtual Private Network (VPN) with
 98% accuracy, and accurately classify the specific traffic classes of Facebook and Skype
 applications with 92.89% accuracy.

 2.2. Applications of Transfer Learning
 Yang et al. [9] summarized the different parts of transfer learning in detail, and
 provided a definition. Researchers have widely used this in various fields and combined
 it with other technologies to propose many improvements. The combination of transfer
 learning and deep learning is a well-known method. After the two are combined, through
 pre-training and parameter fine-tuning, the high training overhead caused by too many
 neural network parameters can effectively be reduced.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 4 of 18

 In 2018, Taheri et al. [10] proposed a botnet detection system based on deep learning.
 In this system, normal and botnet network traffic data were converted into images, which
 were classified by DenseNet and transfer learning. The evaluation results on the CTU-
 13 dataset [11] showed that the use of transfer learning can increase the accuracy from
 33.41% to 99.98%. The baseline method chose Support Vector Machine (SVM) and logistic
 regression, and their accuracy rates were 83.15% and 78.56%, respectively. The system
 also performed well on internal real-time normal datasets and botnet datasets. The realtime processing ability of the system was also better. During the test, it took 0.004868
 milliseconds to process each packet from network traffic data.
 In the same year, Sun et al. [12] proposed a traffic classification method based on
 transfer learning, the so-called Transferred Adaboost (TrAdaBoost). This method used
 TrAdaBoost to extract labeled traffic data from different network traffic sources, and used
 the maximum entropy (Maxent) model as the basic classifier. The proposed method
 realizes the transfer of traffic knowledge from the source domain to the target domain.
 The experiment used a flow dataset collected at Cambridge University. In the case where
 the training and test datasets were not exactly the same, this method achieved a higher
 classification accuracy in the new dataset, while the performance of traffic classification
 based on traditional machine learning models was significantly reduced.
 In 2020, Liu et al. [13] proposed a model based on two-way gated recurrent unit and
 attention mechanism (BGRUA) to classify and identify Web services running on Hyper
 Text Transfer Protocol over SecureSocket Layer (HTTPS) connections. The two-way GRU
 can extract the forward and backward features of the byte sequence in the sessions, and
 the attention mechanism can assign weights to the features according to their contribution
 to the classification. The experiment was conducted on three datasets, two of which
 are publicly available HTTPS datasets, whlie the third was a dataset collected from the
 backbone of China Science and Technology Network. The results showed that BGRUA was
 superior to the baseline method in terms of accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score.
 In 2021, Hu et al. [14] proposed a transferred CLD-Net (tCLD-Net) model combining
 transfer learning and deep learning on the basis of [7]. It can be trained with only a
 small amount of labeled data; that is, it can classify encrypted network traffic with a
 higher accuracy. It pre-trained a CLD-Net model in the source domain dataset, fixed the
 parameters of the CNN module and trained and tested it in the target domain dataset.
 The effectiveness of this method was verified on the public dataset ISCXVPN2016 [8], and
 the results showed that the performance was significantly improved compared with no
 pre-training. When the training set only occupied 20% of the target domain, the training
 time was reduced by two-thirds, and the classification accuracy was increased by more
 than 4%.
 Recently, Wang et al. [15] proposed a new method called adaptive fingerprint identification. This method used adversarial domain adaptation [16,17] in transfer learning to
 obtain high attack accuracy for a small amount of encrypted traffic. Extensive experimental results on multiple datasets showed that the method can achieve 89% accuracy for a
 small number of encrypted traffic in a closed world setting, and 99% accuracy and 99%
 recall in an open world setting. Compared with the recent Triplet Fingerprinting [18], this
 method was more efficient in terms of pre-training time and more scalable, and its attack
 performance was better than Triplet Fingerprinting in both closed-world evaluation and
 open-world evaluation.

 2.3. Applications of Transformer Model
 With the wide application of the Transformer model [19] proposed in 2017 in the field
 of natural language processing (NLP), researchers began to apply the Transformer model
 to traffic analysis tasks based on the similarity of the research objects.
 In 2020, Bikmukhamedo et al. [20] introduced a network traffic model based on
 the generated Transformer to generate and classify network traffic. The model used
 autoregressive training to generate network traffic, and then used Kolmogorov–Smirnov
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 5 of 18

 statistics to evaluate the generated traffic, to achieve the goal of classification. Experimental
 results showed that the generated pre-training had a positive impact on the quality of
 traffic classification tasks. In the case of using the pre-trained model as the feature extractor
 of the linear algorithm, the classification performance was close to the RF trained on the
 raw stream. After training the model, the average macro F1-score of the classifier was 4%
 better than the classifier of the ensemble class.
 In 2021, Wang et al. [21] designed a hybrid neural network (Distributed Denial of
 Service (DDoS) Traffic Classification (DDosTC) model. The model combined an efficient
 and scalable Transformer and CNN to detect DDoS attacks on Software Defined Network
 (SDN), and was tested on the latest dataset CIC-DDoS2019 [22]. The experiment was
 carried out many times by dividing the dataset, and compared with the latest deep learning
 detection algorithm applied in the field of distributed denial of service intrusion detection.
 Experimental results showed that the average Area Under Curve (AUC) of DDosTC is
 2.52% higher than the current optimization model. In terms of average accuracy, recall and
 F1-score, DDosTC was more successful than the current optimization model.
 Kozik et al. [23] proposed a core anomaly detection classifier in the same year. It is
 based on the Transformer Encoder component, followed by a feedforward neural network.
 A time window embedding solution was also proposed, which can process large amounts
 of data efficiently and has a low memory footprint. The experiment verified the effectiveness of this method on the dataset Aposemat IoT-23 [24], compared it with other classic
 machine learning algorithms, and discussed their effectiveness in IoT-related environments.
 The results showed that the average accuracy, recall and F1-score of this method were
 significantly better than other baseline methods.
 Afterwards, Google proposed a pre-trained language representation model BERT
 based on Transformer [25] in 2019. It became a hot new method in the fields of NLP,
 computer vision, etc., producing a large amount of related research. However, there is little
 research on the use of BERT in traffic classification tasks [26].
 In 2021, He et al. [26] introduced the BERT model to traffic classification, and proposed
 a model Payload Encoding Representation from Transformer (PERT) that uses dynamic
 word embedding technology to automatically extract traffic features. The unlabeled traffic
 was used to pre-train the encoding network, and the encoding network learned the context
 distribution of the traffic. When performing downstream classification tasks, the pretrained network was reused to enhance the classification results. Through experiments on
 public encrypted traffic datasets and Android HTTPS traffic captured by the authors, the
 results showed that this method was significantly better than other baseline methods.
 We also conducted research based on BERT and combined with CNN. From the
 perspective of packet and flow, we propose a general pre-training method and design an
 encrypted traffic classification model. This paper is only for the payloads of the packets.
 Compared with some other traffic classification studies, this work does not extract any
 Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (CP/IP) header information, 5-tuple
 information (5-tuple is [source IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, transport
 protocol]), or other obvious ipacket nformation.

 3. Model Structure
 Encrypted traffic has many characteristics, such as high entropy, unobvious statistical
 characteristics, and a weak correlation between adjacent bytes. It is difficult to extract
 features manually and they cannot be well represented. It may be difficult to directly use
 traditional or classic methods in other fields, such as NLP and CV, to classify encrypted
 traffic. Therefore, we designed a CBD model for encrypted traffic, and the overall structure
 is shown in Figure 1, including three modules: CNN module, BERT module, and Dense
 module. The process of the entire model includes the pre-training process and the finetuning process.
 The left side of Figure 1 represents the pre-training process, the right side represents
 the fine-tuning process, and the dotted arrow represents the transfer of the module.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 6 of 18

 Figure 1. The overall framework of the CBD model.

 3.1. Data Preprocess
 For the raw traffic data, the data must be preprocessed before they can be input
 into the neural network model. The preprocess mainly includes traffic segmentation,
 traffic cleaning, traffic conversion and time interval integration. Algorithm 1 represents
 the process.

 Algorithm 1 Preprocessing Algorithm.
 Input: Raw network traffic dataset D; Number of traffic classes c;
 Output: Packet stream set P;
 1: for each i ∈ [1, c ] do
 2: Randomly select n consecutive 10 packets in D;
 3: for each j ∈ [1, 10 × n] do
 4: Trim packet j and uniform length of 256 bytes, packet j → p0j ;
 5: Generate the packet stream, payload p0j → p j ;
 6: Count the time interval of p j and p j+1 ;
 7: if the time interval between p j and p j+1 < 1 sencond then
 8: Continue
 9: else
 10: Add p0 between p j and p j+1 , where p0 = (1, ..., 1)256 ;
 11: end if
 12: end for
 13: Generate packet stream set Pi = {p1 , ..., p0 , ..., p0 , ..., p10∗n };
 14: end for
 15: return Packet stream set P = { P1 , P2 , ..., Pc };
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 7 of 18

 Line 2 is traffic segmentation. Several flow segments with a window of 10 are randomly
 intercepted, that is, each flow segment contains 10 consecutive packets.
 Line 4 is traffic cleaning. The payload part of each packet is read, and then the length
 is unified, the first 256 bytes of each packet are intercepted, and 0 is filled in if the result is
 less than 256 bytes to obtain the raw stream

 p0 = (b1 , b2 , · · · , b8×256 ). (1)

 Line 5 is traffic conversion. The raw stream is converted to decimal, and a value of
 0-255 is taken, according to each byte; then, a 256-dimensional sequence p is obtained.
 Line 6–9 is time interval integration. According to the statistical results of the time
 interval between two adjacent packets of different classes [7], a blank packet is inserted if
 the packet interval is more than 1s, and the packet within 1s is ignored. The blank packet
 uses a 256-dimensional stream of all 1s to represent the payload, which can prevent the
 parameters of each neuron in the neural network from being invalidated by multiplying by
 0 when encountering a blank packet.
 Finally, the preprocessed packet stream set P is obtained, and the model can be input
 in the next step.

 3.2. CNN Module
 The structure of the CNN module is shown in Figure 2. It consists of a 1D-CNN model,
 including four convolutional layers and three pooling layers.

 Figure 2. The framework of the CNN module.

 The input is a 256-dimensional vector p, the kernel size of the first convolutional layer
 is 3, and the number of output channels is 10; therefore, the output is a 10 × 254-dimensional
 matrix. The kernel size of the second convolutional layer is also 10. After the convolutional
 layer, a max pooling layer with a pooling size of 3 and a stride length of 1 is applied,
 and the number of output channels is 20; therefore, the output is a 20 × 250-dimensional
 matrix. The third and fourth layers are consistent with the second layer method, and the
 number of output channels is 10 and 1 respectively, resulting to a 242-dimensional vector
 as output. Finally, a Dense module is connected for dimensionality reduction to facilitate
 the subsequent operation of the BERT module.

 3.3. BERT Module
 The structure of the BERT module is shown in Figure 3, based on the BERT model
 in [25].
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 8 of 18

 Figure 3. The framework of the BERT module.

 The BERT model [21] is mainly composed of the Encoder of the Transformer
 model [17]. The encoder has six layers, and each layer contains two sub-layers, which are a
 multi-head attention mechanism and a fully connected feedforward network. A sentence X
 is input into the Encoder, X ∈ Rbatch_size×seq_len , whose dimension is [batch_size, seq_len].
 Initially, position embedding is performed, obtaining [batch_size, seq_len, embed_dim]-
 dimension Xembed ∈ Rbatch_size×seq_len×embed_dim ,

 Xembed = EmbeddingLookup( X ) + PositionEncoding. (2)
 For the multi-head attention mechanism sub-layer, to learn the expression of multiple
 meanings, a linear mapping is made of Xembed . Three weights are assigned WQ , WK , WV ∈
 Rembed_dim×embed_dim , and three matrices Q, K, V are formed after linear mapping, which is
 consistent with the dimension before linear transformation.

 Q = Linear ( Xembed ) = Xembed WQ , (3)
 K = Linear ( Xembed ) = Xembed WK , (4)
 V = Linear ( Xembed ) = Xembed WV . (5)
 The number of heads is defined as h, head_size = embed_dim/h. After splitting according to head_size, the dimensions of Q, K, V are [batch_size, seq_len, h, embed_dim/h], after
 transposition is [batch_size, h, seq_len, embed_dim/h].
 For the i-th head, the dimensions of Qi , Ki , Vi are all [batch_size, seq_len, embed_dim/h];
 then, the output of the i-th head is
 !
 Qi KiT
 headi = Attention( Qi , Ki , Vi ) = so f tmax √ Vi . (6)
 dk

 where dk is the dimension of Ki , dk = [batch_size, seq_len, embed_dim/h].
 For the multi-head attention mechanism sub-layer, the information of each head is
 connected to obtain Xhidden : [batch_size, seq_len, embed_dim],

 Xhidden = MultiHead( Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1 , ..., headh ). (7)
 Then, residual connection and normalization are performed. Since the dimensions
 of Xembed and Xhidden are the same, we can directly add the elements to make the residual connection. Then, this is normalized to the standard normal distribution, obtaining
 LayerNorm( Xembed + Xhidden ).
 After each sub-layer, a residual connection and normalization will be added, so the
 output of each sub-layer is
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 9 of 18

 SubLayer_output = LayerNorm( X + (SubLayer ( X ))). (8)

 The BERT model [25] contains two tasks. The first task, Masked Language Model
 (MLM), is a token-level task that can solve the problem where bidirectional model causes
 the predicted next word to appear in a given sequence. A part of the token is randomly
 masked in proportion, so that the model predicts and restores the part that is covered
 or replaced. The second task, Next Sentence Prediction (NSP), is a sentence-level task.
 Since many NLP downstream tasks are based on the relationship between sentences, it is
 necessary to determine whether two adjacent sentences are contextual.
 In the BERT module we designed, we set the number of layers of Transformer Encoder
 to 4, 8 and 12, respectively. Since each flow segment contains 10 consecutive packets, each
 packet becomes a packet stream after preprocessing. After adding the time interval, a flow
 segment contains up to 15 packets. Therefore, to enable a flow segment to be input into the
 BERT module for processing at the same time, it is assumed that a flow contains 15 packets.
 If there are fewer than 15 packets, blank packets are inserted before completion. That is,
 the BERT module gathers 15 outputs of the previous module as input at a time. A Dense
 module is also connected after the BERT module for final classification.

 3.4. Dense Module
 The structure of the Dense module is shown in Figure 4, which is mainly composed of
 a fully connected layer.

 Figure 4. The framework of the Dense module.

 After the CNN module and BERT module, there are Dense modules, respectively.
 Dense module 1 after the CNN module contains a fully connected layer, which can change
 the dimension of the output of the CNN module to a dimension suitable for the input of the
 BERT module. Dense module 2 after the BERT module is also a fully connected layer, and
 the specific parameter settings are determined by the number of final classification classes.

 3.5. Pre-Training of Unlabeled Data
 The pre-training proposed in this paper contains two stages, which correspond to the
 two tasks of the BERT model pre-training.
 The first stage is based on the packet level, which corresponds to the token-based
 MLM task in the BERT model. This stage mainly trains the model’s understanding of
 encrypted packets. By calculating the entropy value of the payload, each packet is divided
 into a plaintext packet and a ciphertext packet.
 For a packet, extract the payload part, get p = { x1 , x1 , . . . , xn }, calculate the entropy
 of each packet,
 n
 H = − ∑ P( xi ) log2 P( xi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n, (9)
 i =1

 Entropy is a measure of the degree of chaos in the system. The larger the entropy,
 the more chaotic the system and the less information it carries. For plaintext payload and
 ciphertext payload, the principle is similar. The entropy of the plaintext payload should
 be much smaller than the entropy of the ciphertext payload, because encrypted data have
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 10 of 18

 high randomness and do not contain obvious information. By calculating and comparing
 experimental data, we set the threshold of entropy H0 = 4.
 (
 H (p) < H0 , p ∈ Pplain
 (10)
 H (p) ≥ H0 , p ∈ Pcipher .
 when H ≥ H0 , the packet is considered to be a ciphertext packet; when H < H0 , the packet
 is considered to be a plaintext packet.
 The labeled plaintext and ciphertext packets are utilized to train the model, to identify
 encrypted packets. After completing the first stage of pre-training, proceed to the second
 stage of tasks.
 The second stage is based on the flow level, which corresponds to the sentence-based
 NSP task in the BERT model. This stage mainly trains the model’s understanding of a
 flow, that is, the understanding of the relationship between packets. Initially, positive and
 negative sample sets are constructed.
 The positive sample set S+ contains n positive samples,

 S+ = {s1+ , s2+ , ..., s+
 n }. (11)
 the positive sample s+ is defined as a continuous flow F, where each flow contains 10
 consecutive packets, denoted as

 si+ , Fi = {p1i , p2i , ..., p10
 i
 }, 1 ≤ i ≤ n. (12)
 The negative sample set S− has the same number as the positive sample set S+ , and
 contains n negative samples.

 S− = {s1− , s2− , ..., s−
 n }. (13)
 the negative sample s− is defined as a discontinuous flow F̄, which is obtained by transforming the positive sample. Each packet in the positive sample is replaced with other packets
 with a certain probability, and the sample after the replacement is called a negative sample.

 si− , F̄i = { f (p1i ), f (p2i ), ..., f (p10
 i
 )}, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, (14)
 (
 pij ( P = 0.7) 0 0
 f (pij ) = 0 , (i , j ) 6= (i, j), 1 ≤ j ≤ 10. (15)
 pij0 ( P = 0.3)

 The labeled positive and negative sample sets are utilized to train the model so that
 it can distinguish whether a flow is continuous. After completing the pre-training, the
 CBD model will be further fine-tuned according to the downstream task—encrypted traffic
 classification—to achieve the final goal.

 3.6. Model Transfer and Fine-Tune
 In the entire CBD model, some modules will perform the transfer based on supervised
 learning. In this transfer process, the structure of the module is fixed, but the parameters
 will change according to the tasks after the transfer. This transfer method is also called
 parameter fine-tuning under supervised learning in the deep model.
 It should be noted that, in addition to the three modules in the fine-tuning phase, we
 will also transfer the CNN module and the Dense module in the pre-training phase.
 After the CBD model is fine-tuned, it will output the predicted classification results in
 the test phase. We will evaluate the classification results in the next section.

 4. Experiment
 This section mainly describes the experimental settings, experimental evaluation
 metrics, and specific experimental results to verify the effectiveness of the CBD model
 proposed in this paper.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 11 of 18

 4.1. Experimental Settings
 This paper used the public dataset ISCXVPN2016 [8] published by the Canadian
 Institute of Cyber Security, University of New Brunswick in the downstream task of
 encrypted traffic classification. We choosed the traffic data of the two social networks
 Facebook and Skype as the experimental data. Facebook traffic included two applications:
 chat and audio, and Skype traffic included two applications, chat and file transfer. The
 traffic of each specific application can be encapsulated by VPN protocol, or just ordinary
 network traffic nonVPN. The experiment used eight classes of data, a total of 8000 samples.
 Each class randomly selects 1000 samples from ISCXVPN2016, and each sample is a flow
 segment, that is, it contains 10 consecutive packets. The specific data classes are shown in
 Table 1.

 Table 1. Data classes of encrypted traffic.

 vpn-facebook-chat
 Facebook
 vpn-facebook-audio
 VPN
 vpn-skype-chat
 Skype
 Encrypted Application vpn-skype-file
 Traffic Classes facebook-chat
 Facebook
 facebook-audio
 nonVPN
 skype-chat
 Skype
 skype-file

 In the pre-training process, the plaintext packet in the first stage is composed of
 256-byte plaintext, and the ciphertext packet is composed of randomly selected data, other
 than the eight classes of data mentioned above, regardless of the class and data volume. In
 the second stage, 5000 samples are randomly selected to generate a positive sample set, and
 the class is also ignored. The negative sample set is obtained through the transformation of
 the positive sample set.

 4.2. Evaluation Metrics
 When evaluating the performance of a model, the class of interest is usually regarded
 as the positive class, and the other classes are regarded as the negative class. The evaluation
 index is usually formulated with four basic conditions: True Positive (TP), which predicts
 the positive class as a positive class. False Positive (FP), predicts the negative class as a
 positive class. True Negative (TN), predicts the negative class as a negative class. False
 Negative (FN), predicts the positive class as a negative class. We use five commonly
 used evaluation metrics—Accuracy, F1-score, Precision, Recall, and Area Under Curve
 (AUC)—as a basis for evaluating the performance of the model.
 Accuracy is the ratio of the number of correctly classified samples to the total number
 of samples for a given data.

 TP + TN ncorrect
 Accuracy = = . (16)
 TP + TN + FP + FN n
 where ncorrect represents the number of samples that are correctly predicted, and n represents the total number of samples.
 F1-score is the harmonic average of Precision and Recall. Precision refers to the
 proportion of the real class in the sample predicted as the positive class, and Recall refers
 to the proportion of all the positive classes that are predicted to be the positive class.

 2 1 1
 = + , (17)
 F1-score Precision Recall
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 12 of 18

 Recall
 F1-score = 2Precision × , (18)
 Preciaion + Recall
 TP
 Precision = , (19)
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall = . (20)
 TP + FN
 In multi-class problems, we calculate the macro-F1-score. The macro-F1-score calculates the F1-score for each class separately, and then takes the unweighted average.
 Macro-precision and macro-recall are the same.

 1 C
 C i∑
 macro-F1-score = F1-scorei , (21)
 =1

 1 C
 C i∑
 macro-Precision = Precisioni , (22)
 =1

 1 C
 C i∑
 macro-Recall = Recalli . (23)
 =1
 where C represents the number of classes.
 The ROC Curve (receiver operating characteristic curve) is a curve obtained by using
 the False Positive Rate (FPR) as the x-axis and True Positive Rate (TPR) as the y-axis. The
 larger the area of the AUC, the better the classification effect. FPR represents the probability
 that negative samples are mistakenly classified as a positive class, and TPR represents the
 probability of positive samples are correctly classified as a positive class.

 TP
 TPR = , (24)
 TP + FN
 FP
 FPR = . (25)
 FP + TN

 4.3. Experimental Results
 The CBD model selects 4-layer, 8-layer, and 12-layer BERT for experiments. The
 experiment is an eight-class experiment; that is, the random classification accuracy rate is
 12.5%. In the experiment, we found that an eight-layer BERT can achieve the best results.
 In order to demonstrate the performance of our proposed model, we perform experiments on a small-scale dataset, as shown below:
 1. Sample Size = 20% or 0.2 (200 samples are randomly selected from each class of data
 to form a new dataset);
 2. Sample Size = 40% or 0.4 (400 samples are randomly selected from each class of data
 to form a new dataset);
 3. Sample Size = 60% or 0.6 (600 samples are randomly selected from each class of data
 to form a new dataset);
 4. Sample Size = 80% or 0.8 (800 samples are randomly selected from each type of data
 to form a new dataset).
 Additionally, we perform eight-class experiments on four different sample sizes to
 compare three types of BERT. The results are shown in Figure 5.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 13 of 18

 1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0
 BERT layers=4 BERT layers=8 BERT layers=12

 Sample Size=0.2 Sample Size=0.4 Sample Size=0.6 Sample Size=0.8

 Figure 5. The three models with different BERT layers and eight-class accuracy on four sample sizes.
 The abscissa is the BERT model with three different layers, the ordinate is the eight-class accuracy,
 and the four colors represent four different sample sizes.

 It can be seen from Figure 5 that the classification accuracy of all three models increases
 as the sample size increases. Overall, the eight-layer BERT model has the best effect. It can
 achieve a classification accuracy of 70% in a sample size of 0.2, and it also performs best in
 a sample size of 0.4, reaching a classification accuracy of approx. 84%. As the sample size
 increases, the advantages of the eight-layer BERT model compared to the other two are no
 longer obvious.
 Table 2 shows the detailed comparison results under the four metrics.

 Table 2. Classification performance of models with different BERT layers—sample size=0.4, pre-training epoch = 200.

 Models 4-Layer BERT 6-Layer BERT 8-Layer BERT 10-Layer BERT 12-Layer BERT
 Metrics
 Accuracy 0.8163 0.82 0.8388 0.8263 0.7788
 macro-F1-score 0.8147 0.8197 0.8397 0.8242 0.7793
 macro-Precision 0.8161 0.8225 0.8449 0.8321 0.7924
 macro-Recall 0.8150 0.8192 0.8381 0.8239 0.7769

 It can be seen from Table 2 that, when the number of layers is too low, the model
 learning ability is poor, the improvement speed is slow, and the final performance is not
 high enough. When the number of layers is too high, the model is too complex, and
 when the sample size provided by the target task is limited, the model’s improvement
 performance is limited. Therefore, in the experiment, the performance of the CBD model of
 the eight-layer BERT is the best.
 The general pre-training method is an important part of the CBD model. To verify
 the effectiveness of the pre-training method, we compare the CBD model with the no
 pre-training CBD model, and the results are shown in Figure 6.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 14 of 18

 1.0 1.0

 0.8 0.8

 True Positive Rate

 True Positive Rate
 0.6 0.6

 facebook-autio (area = 0.93) facebook-autio (area = 0.97)
 0.4 facebook-chat (area = 0.98) 0.4 facebook-chat (area = 0.97)
 skype-chat (area = 0.96) skype-chat (area = 0.98)
 skype-file (area = 0.96) skype-file (area = 0.96)
 0.2 vpn-facebook-audio (area = 0.95) 0.2 vpn-facebook-audio (area = 0.97)
 vpn-facebook-chat (area = 0.96) vpn-facebook-chat (area = 0.97)
 vpn-skype-chat (area = 0.98) vpn-skype-chat (area = 0.98)
 0.0 vpn-skype-files (area = 0.96) 0.0 vpn-skype-files (area = 0.96)
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
 False Positive Rate False Positive Rate
 (a) (b)

 Figure 6. ROC curve of eight-layer BERT (best) at 40% sample size. The picture on the left (a) is
 the model without pre-training, and the picture on the right (b) is the model with pre-training. The
 abscissa is the FPR, and the ordinate is the TPR. The eight colors represent the eight classes of data in
 the downstream tasks.

 It can be seen from Figure 6 that no pre-training model performed worse than original
 CBD model. For a complex model with many BERT layers and many neuron parameters,
 the accuracy without pre-training is not good. This is due to insufficient data and insufficient model learning. However the pre-trained model has been fully learned, and the
 higher the number of layers layers, the stronger the learning ability. The model has learned
 the hidden features in the data, so the accuracy is high. However, after reaching a certain
 level, the performance improvement brought by increasing the number of layers is very
 limited. In addition, we found that, without pre-training, the smaller the sample size, the
 more the number of training failures.
 In order to verify whether the number of pre-training epochs has an effect on the final
 classification result, we set different pre-training epochs and compared the experimental
 results. The results are shown in Table 3.

 Table 3. The classification performance of models with different pre-training epochs when the number of BERT layers is
 eight and sample size is 0.4.

 Epochs 40 100 200 400 800
 Metrics
 Accuracy 0.8062 0.8175 0.8388 0.8338 0.8163
 macro-F1-score 0.8042 0.8160 0.8397 0.8341 0.8146
 macro-Precision 0.8127 0.8184 0.8449 0.8370 0.8170
 macro-Recall 0.8053 0.8161 0.8381 0.8335 0.8149

 We also observed the changes in the model accuracy during the training process, and
 the results are shown in Figure 7.
 It can be seen from Table 3 and Figure 7 that the higher the number of pre-training
 epochs, the more adequate the pre-training, and the better the performance of the model.
 However, after more than 200 epochs, the increase in pre-training brings little performance
 improvement. Therefore, we chose the optimal pre-training epochs number of 200.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 15 of 18

 0.8

 0.7

 0.6
 Accuracy

 0.5

 0.4 bert_layers:8 pretrain_epoch:40 sample_rate:40%
 bert_layers:8 pretrain_epoch:100 sample_rate:40%
 bert_layers:8 pretrain_epoch:200 sample_rate:40%
 0.3 bert_layers:8 pretrain_epoch:400 sample_rate:40%
 bert_layers:8 pretrain_epoch:800 sample_rate:40%
 0 10 20 30 40 50
 Epoches
 Figure 7. The impact of different pre-training epochs on accuracy when sample size is 0.4. The
 abscissa is the number of epochs during training in the downstream task, and the ordinate is the
 classification accuracy of the test. The four colors represent the performance of the eight-layer BERT
 in different epochs during pre-training.

 To verify the indispensability of each module in the CBD model, we compare the
 CBD model with other models. First, the necessity of the BERT module is verified. tCLD-
 Net is similar to the CBD model, which combines deep learning and transfer learning.
 The difference is that tCLD-Net did not use the BERT module, but the LSTM module.
 We compared the two models in the same dataset. The dataset is in the target domain
 mentioned in [14]. The comparison results are shown in Figure 8.

 1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0
 20% 40% 60%

 CBD Model tCLD-Net CBD Model (no Pre-train) CLD-Net (no Transfer)

 Figure 8. Test results on the three-class target domain. The abscissa represents the sample size,
 and the ordinate represents the accuracy of classification. The four colors represent CBD Model,
 tCLD-Net, CBD Model without pre-training and CLD-Net without transfer.

 It can be seen from Figure 8 that the CBD Model performs better than tCLD-Net on
 the three-class dataset. However, it is worth noting that the pre-training of tCLD-Net (also
 called source domain training) is based on label data, and a large amount of artificially
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 16 of 18

 labeled label data need to be provided. For the CBD Model, the performance is similar
 when the target task training set is the same, and the pre-training data do not need to be
 artificially provided with labels. In addition, the performance of the no pre-training CBD
 Model is worse than the no pre-training CLD-Net when the amount of data is insufficient.
 This is caused by the high complexity of the model and insufficient amount of data.
 In order to verify the necessity of CNN module, we removed the CNN module in
 the CBD model. An embedding layer was directly embedded on the ciphertext packet,
 and then the BERT module and the Dense module were connected to form an Embedding
 BERT Dense (EBD) model. The results of a comparison between the performance of the
 EBD model and the CBD model are shown in Table 4.

 Table 4. Evaluation metrics of CBD model and EBD model when BERT layers = 8, sample size = 0.4,
 and pre-training epoch = 200.

 Models CBD EBD
 Metrics
 Accuracy 0.8388 0.5462
 macro-F1-score 0.8397 0.5372
 macro-Precision 0.8449 0.5693
 macro-Recall 0.8381 0.5512

 It can be seen from Table 4 that the classification effect of the EBD model is poor,
 and the time efficiency of the EBD model in the experiment is very low. When BERT is
 directly used for data with a close contextual correlation, the effect is better, but the context
 correlation of encrypted data is deliberately confused and the correlation is weak; therefore,
 the effect of the EBD model is poor. The reason for the unsatisfactory effect of the EBD
 model may be that a sample in the experiment is 10 consecutive packets randomly selected
 from a flow, and the sample data are likely to be ciphertext packets. If the experiment does
 not randomly select, but selects the first 10 packets of a flow as a sample, it is likely to
 obtain plaintext packets or handshake packets. At this time, the performance of the EBD
 model may be better than the current results. Therefore, CNN has an irreplaceable role.
 In addition, if there is no CNN module and no Embedding layer, directly using the
 Bert module to learn the packet payload is equivalent to encoding the payload, and every
 two bytes are mapped to a number, that is, 0-65535. In this encoding process, every two
 bytes correspond to a word in NLP. At this time, when this model is iterated to 60 epochs,
 the classification accuracy of 8-class fluctuates at around 10%, and the highest is 10.25%.
 Therefore, every module in the CBD model is indispensable.
 We also select five models in the existing researches to compare with the CBD model.
 The five models are one-dimensional CNN (1D-CNN) and two-dimensional CNN (2D-
 CNN) mentioned in [5], Stacked Autoencoder (SAE) mentioned in [2], a combination of
 CNN and LSTM (CNN-LSTM) mentioned in [4], and CLD-Net mentioned in [7]. The five
 models are all performed on the dataset mentioned in this paper. The comparison results
 are shown in Figure 9.
 The comparative experiments are implemented on a three-class dataset. It can be seen
 from Figure 9 that the accuracy of the CBD model is the highest, reaching more than 91%.
 CLD-Net also has good results, which may be related to the traffic recombination strategy
 mentioned in [4]. The accuracy of 1D-CNN, 2D-CNN, SAE, and CNN-LSTM models are all
 less than 80%. This may be due to the small sample size and the simple structure of several
 models, which makes it unable to learn and understand the hidden features of encrypted
 traffic. At the same time, the sample of our experiment is a random 10 consecutive packets
 without header information or handshake phase packets. Some existing traffic classification
 models may not randomly select packets in their own experiments. This contains not only
 the payload, but also other information. However, the data in the real situation often only
 have payload information, so the effect of experimenting with several existing models is
 not ideal.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 17 of 18

 1
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7
 0.6
 0.5
 0.4
 0.3
 0.2
 0.1
 0
 1D-CNN 2D-CNN SAE CNN-LSTM CLD-Net CBD

 Figure 9. Accuracy comparison results of several models when the sample size is 0.4.

 5. Conclusions
 In this paper, we proposed an encrypted traffic classification model with a general
 pre-training method. Compared with other traffic classification methods that combine deep
 learning and transfer learning, this model can directly learn the basic characteristics of
 traffic data from unlabeled data, and use CNN and BERT to automaticly learn the features
 of traffic from the perspective of packets and flows. The experiment was performed on the
 public dataset, and a class-balanced dataset was constructed for eight-class tasks. When
 the sample size was only 0.4 and the number of BERT layers was eight, the CBD model
 could achieve a classification accuracy of more than 91% in three-class tasks. In eight-class
 tasks, the classification accuracy rate could reach about 84%, which was nearly 8% higher
 than that of the model without pre-training. The eight-class tasks refer to the encrypted
 traffic classification tasks performed on the balanced dataset proposed in this paper, and
 the three-class tasks refer to the classification tasks performed on the target domain dataset
 mentioned in [14].
 In future work, we will consider the classification of unknown classes of encrypted
 traffic to further fit the actual network environment. At the same time, the classification
 of real-time network traffic will also be regarded as the research goal of the next stage.
 Another research direction is designing a model that uses less time and computational
 resource, which can detect and classify unknown traffic, and supports real-time updates.

 Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.G.; methodology, X.H. and Y.C.; software, X.H. and
 Y.C.; validation, X.H.; formal analysis, X.H.; investigation, X.H.; resources, C.G. and F.W.; data
 curation, X.H. and Y.C.; writing—original draft preparation, X.H.; writing—review and editing, X.H.;
 visualization, X.H. and Y.C.; supervision, C.G. and F.W.; project administration, C.G. and F.W. All
 authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
 Funding: This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China grant number
 61772548.
 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
 Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
 Data Availability Statement: Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. This data can
 be found here: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/vpn.html (accessed on 18 June 2021).
 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Sensors 2021, 21, 8231 18 of 18

References
1. Wang, Z. The Applications of Deep Learning on Traffic Identification. BlackHat USA 2015, 24, 1–10.
2. Höchst, J.; Baumgärtner, L.; Hollick, M.; Freisleben, B. Unsupervised Traffic Flow Classification Using a Neural Autoencoder. In
 Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE 42nd Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN), Singapore, 9–12 October 2017; pp. 523–526.
3. Li, R.; Xiao, X.; Ni, S.; Zheng, H.; Xia, S. Byte Segment Neural Network for Network Traffic Classification. In Proceedings of the
 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), Banff, AB, Canada, 4–6 June 2018; pp. 1–10.
4. Marín, G.; Casas, P.; Capdehourat, G. Deep in the Dark—Deep Learning-Based Malware Traffic Detection without Expert
 Knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), San Francisco, CA, USA, 23 May 2019;
 pp. 34–42.
5. Pacheco, F.; Exposito, E.; Gineste, M. A framework to classify heterogeneous Internet traffic with Machine Learning and Deep
 Learning techniques for satellite communications. Comput. Netw. 2020, 173, 107213. [CrossRef]
6. Aceto, G.; Ciuonzo, D.; Montieri, A.; Pescapé, A. Toward effective mobile encrypted traffic classification through deep learning.
 Neurocomputing 2020, 409, 306–315. [CrossRef]
7. Hu, X.; Gu, C.; Wei, F. CLD-Net: A Network Combining CNN and LSTM for Internet Encrypted Traffic Classification. Secur.
 Commun. Netw. 2021, 2021, 5518460. [CrossRef]
8. Lashkari, A.; Draper-Gil, G.; Mamun, M.; Ghorbani, A. Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic Using Time-Related
 Features. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), Rome, Italy,
 19–21 February 2016.
9. Pan, S.; Yang, Q. A Survey on Transfer Learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2010, 22, 297–315. [CrossRef]
10. Taheri, S.; Salem, M.; Yuan, J. Leveraging Image Representation of Network Traffic Data and Transfer Learning in Botnet Detection.
 Big Data Cogn. Comput. 2018, 2, 37. [CrossRef]
11. Garcia, S.; Grill, M.; Stiborek, J.; Zunino, A. An empirical comparison of botnet detection methods. Comput. Secur. J. 2014, 45,
 100–123. [CrossRef]
12. Sun, G.; Liang, L.; Chen, T.; Xiao, F.; Lang, F. Network traffic classification based on transfer learning. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2018,
 69, 920–927. [CrossRef]
13. Liu, X.; You, J.; Wu, Y.; Li, T.; Li, L.; Zhang, Z.; Ge, J. Attention-based bidirectional GRU networks for efficient HTTPS traffic
 classification. J. Inf. Sci. Eng. 2020, 541, 297–315. [CrossRef]
14. Hu, X.; Gu, C.; Chen, Y.; Wei, F. tCLD-Net: A Transfer Learning Internet Encrypted Traffic Classification Scheme Based on
 Convolution Neural Network and Long Short-Term Memory Network. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on
 Communications, Computing, Cybersecurity, and Informatics (CCCI), Beijing, China, 15–17 October 2021; pp. 1–5.
15. Wang, C.; Dani, J.; Li, X.; Jia, X.; Wang, B. Adaptive Fingerprinting: Website Fingerprinting over Few Encrypted Traffic. In
 Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Data and Application Security and Privacy, Virtual Event, 26–28 April 2021.
16. Ganin, Y.; Ustinova, E.; Ajakan, H.; Germain, P.; Larochelle, H.; Laviolette, F.; Marchand, M.; Lempitsky, V. Domain-adversarial
 training of neural networks. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2016, 17, 2030–2096.
17. Tzeng, E.; Hoffman, J.; Saenko, K.; Darrell, T. Adversarial Discriminative Domain Adaptation. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 2962–2971.
18. Sirinam, P.; Mathews, N.; Rahman, M.; Wright, M. Triplet Fingerprinting: More Practical and Portable Website Fingerprinting
 with N-shot Learning. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, London,
 UK, 11–15 November 2019.
19. Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.; Kaiser, L.; Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 5998–6008.
20. Bikmukhamedo, R.; Nadeev, A. Generative transformer framework for network traffic generation and classification. T-Comm-
 Telecommun. Transp. 2020, 14, 11. [CrossRef]
21. Wang, H.; Li, W. DDosTC: A Transformer-Based Network Attack Detection Hybrid Mechanism in SDN. Sensors 2021, 21, 5047.
 [CrossRef]
22. Sharafaldin, I.; Lashkari, A.; Hakak, S.; Ghorbani, A. Developing Realistic Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) Attack Dataset
 and Taxonomy. In Proceedings of the IEEE 53rd International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, Chennai, India, 1–3
 October 2019.
23. Kozik, R.; Pawlicki, M.; Choraś, M. A new method of hybrid time window embedding with transformer-based traffic data
 classification in IoT-networked environment. Pattern Anal. Appl. 2021, 24, 1441–1449. [CrossRef]
24. Garcia, S.; Parmisano, A.; Erquiaga, M. IoT-23: A labeled dataset with malicious and benign IoT network traffic (Version 1.0.0)
 [Data set]. Zenodo 2020. [CrossRef]
25. Devlin, J.; Chang, M.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
 In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL),
 Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2–7 June 2019, 4171–4186.
26. He, H.; Yang, Z.; Chen, X. PERT: Payload Encoding Representation from Transformer for Encrypted Traffic Classification. In
 Proceedings of the 2020 ITU Kaleidoscope: Industry-Driven Digital Transformation (ITU K), Online, 7–11 December 2020; pp. 1–8.