See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348355205

DISTILLER: Encrypted Trafﬁc Classiﬁcation via Multimodal Multitask Deep
Learning

Article in Journal of Network and Computer Applications · January 2021
DOI: 10.1016/j.jnca.2021.102985

CITATIONS READS

176 1,270

4 authors:

 Giuseppe Aceto Domenico Ciuonzo
 University of Naples Federico II University of Naples Federico II
 81 PUBLICATIONS 5,866 CITATIONS 172 PUBLICATIONS 6,928 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE

 Antonio Montieri Antonio Pescapè
 University of Naples Federico II University of Naples Federico II
 62 PUBLICATIONS 3,239 CITATIONS 335 PUBLICATIONS 16,673 CITATIONS

 SEE PROFILE SEE PROFILE

 All content following this page was uploaded by Domenico Ciuonzo on 09 January 2021.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 DISTILLER: Encrypted Traffic Classification via Multimodal Multitask Deep Learning

 Giuseppe Acetoa , Domenico Ciuonzoa , Antonio Montieria , Antonio Pescapéa
 a University of Napoli “Federico II”, Italy

Abstract
Traffic classification, i.e. the inference of applications and/or services from their network traffic, represents the workhorse for
service management and the enabler for valuable profiling information. The growing trend toward encrypted protocols and the fastevolving nature of network traffic are obsoleting the traffic-classification design solutions based on payload-inspection or machine
learning. Conversely, deep learning is currently foreseen as a viable means to design traffic classifiers based on automaticallyextracted features. These reflect the complex patterns distilled from the multifaceted (encrypted) traffic, that implicitly carries
information in “multimodal” fashion, and can be also used in application scenarios with diversified network visibility for (simultaneously) tackling multiple classification tasks. To this end, in this paper a novel multimodal multitask deep learning approach
for traffic classification is proposed, leading to the Distiller classifier. The latter is able to capitalize traffic-data heterogeneity
(by learning both intra- and inter-modality dependencies), overcome performance limitations of existing (myopic) single-modal
deep learning-based traffic classification proposals, and simultaneously solve different traffic categorization problems associated
to different providers’ desiderata. Based on a public dataset of encrypted traffic, we evaluate Distiller in a fair comparison with
state-of-the-art deep learning architectures proposed for encrypted traffic classification (and based on single-modality philosophy).
Results show the gains of our proposal over both multitask extensions of single-task baselines and native multitask architectures.
Keywords: deep learning, encrypted traffic, traffic classification, multimodal learning, multitask learning.

1. Introduction deed, stronger privacy needs have arisen in recent years, especially for anonymity tools and censorship evasion [7].
 The clear understanding of the processes occurring in net-
 In this complex scenario, Machine Learning (ML) classifiers
works is of paramount importance for multiple stakeholders,
 have proved to be the most appropriate for modern-traffic clasincluding network operators, who aim at the full visibility resification, since they also suit Encrypted Traffic (ET) while
quired by both network management and security. Indeed, the
 not necessarily relying on port information [8]. However,
effectiveness of security and quality-of-service enforcement detheir use relies on obtaining handcrafted (domain-expert driven)
vices, as well as network monitors, is limited (or even hamfeatures, which in TC context usually correspond to packetpered) when there is no accurate knowledge of the application
 sequence statistics. Such feature engineering process is unable
generating the observed traffic.
 to cope with modern network-traffic evolution, and impairs the
 The process of inferring such knowledge, known as Traffic
 design of both accurate and up-to-date traffic classifiers [9] us-
Classification (TC), has a long-established application in seving “traditional” ML approaches [10, 11, 12].
eral fields [1]. However, TC is severely challenged by both the
volume growth and the evolving nature of the traffic travers- Therefore, Deep Learning (DL) has emerged as the methoding today’s networks, that in turn is impacted by the new ways ological set of algorithmic solutions toward the fulfillment of
users behave, interact, and access the network [2]. Also, the high performance in the dynamic and challenging (encrypted)
widespread adoption [3] of encrypted protocols (e.g., Transport TC contexts. Indeed, DL allows to train classifiers directly from
Layer Security) as well as network address translation and dy- input data by automatically distilling structured and complex
namic ports, increases the difficulty of accurate TC, defeating feature representations [13]. Accordingly, in the last few years
established approaches such as deep packet inspection and port- several works have started tackling TC via DL [14, 15, 16, 17].
based methods, and can be only bypassed in closed-world (e.g., However, these attempts revealed a low level of maturity in apenterprise) scenarios by man-in-the-middle proxies [4]. plying DL to this specifically hard problem: we found in [18]
 Interestingly, the assessment of TC performance provides how misguided design choices in this field led to biased convaluable insight also to designers of privacy-preserving proto- clusions or inflated classification outcomes. Moreover, DL apcols, and obfuscation and circumvention techniques [5, 6]. In- proaches provide new performance enhancement possibilities:
 by neglecting these, designers would fail to harness DL full potential.
 Email addresses: giuseppe.aceto@unina.it (Giuseppe Aceto),
domenico.ciuonzo@unina.it (Domenico Ciuonzo),
 To face these shortcomings in TC state-of-the-art, in [18] we
antonio.montieri@unina.it (Antonio Montieri), pescape@unina.it laid a sound groundwork for the design of DL-based classifiers
(Antonio Pescapé) aimed at highly-diverse traffic. The objective was two-fold: (i)
Preprint submitted to Journal of Network and Computer Applications January 9, 2021
avoiding the pitfalls of naïve adoption of DL to TC and (ii) of the multimodal traffic representation during the fineallowing for best exploiting the potential of DL architectures. tuning.
Then, in [19] we have leveraged such groundwork to explore
multimodal approaches to enhance the performance of ET clas- • We experimentally compare a specific instance of
sification. Indeed, we have proved multimodal approaches to the Distiller architecture on the public dataset ISCX
be able to leverage traffic data according to the different in- VPN-nonVPN [23] to validate our proposal, collecting trafput information (e.g., payload bytes or header fields), i.e. to fic from activity of real human users. Such well-known
represent the same concept according to different “views” or dataset naturally surfaces the multitask goals related to net-
“modalities”. Hence, a multimodal DL traffic classifier can au- work monitoring, and provides a supporting example for
tomatically learn a hierarchical representation exploiting jointly the motivations of this work.
all the available modalities, without the need for handcraft- • We favorably compare our approach with state-of-the-art
ing modality-specific and ad-hoc features for a certain ML ap- multitask DL traffic classifiers [15, 17, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26],
proach. showing Distiller achieves gains over all the TC tasks
 However, the sophisticated management required by next- considered, while having appreciably-lower complexity
generation networks relies on the accomplishment of a num- than the best performing baseline. Additionally, the outber of diversified network visibility tasks [20, 21]. This moti- come of an in-depth analysis concerning the fine-grained
vates the need for solving several traffic-analysis tasks, there in behavior of such classifiers highlight that our proposal reincluded a number of different TC tasks, each associated to a ports also improved per-class performance, a better softgiven visibility viewpoint. In order to meet the above desider- output behavior, and improved calibration in the associata, the aforementioned tasks need to be performed with a sat- ated classification confidence. Finally, an investigation of
isfactory accuracy and reasonable complexity. the tasks’ relationship and the degree of knowledge trans-
 Accordingly, in this paper, we broaden our exploration with ferred among them highlights the advantage in solving
multimodal approaches applied to TC, additionally investigat- multitask problems by means of multimodal approaches.
ing multitask learning. Multitask learning is an approach to
inductive transfer that improves learning for one task by using The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2 reviews
information in the training signals of other related tasks [22]. the literature on ET classification, including most relevant DL
This is accomplished by learning tasks in parallel while using a works, and details the paper contribution; Sec. 3 describes our
shared representation. On the one hand, compared with multi- Distiller encrypted-traffic classifier; the experimental setup is
ple single-task models, multitask learning can reduce computa- described in Sec. 4, while discussion of the results is reported in
tional overhead, because only one—comprehensive—model is Sec. 5; finally, Sec. 6 provides conclusions and future research
learned (resp. used) in the training (resp. testing) phase. This avenues.
has the benefit of limiting redundancy by sharing part of the
feature-learning architecture. On the other hand, this approach 2. Related Work and Contribution Positioning
promises improved generalization and better overall classification performance. Several recent works have faced the problem of TC by means
 More specifically, the main contributions provided by our of ML-based [33] and DL-based approaches [14, 17, 27]. Some
work are summarized as follows: works have leveraged DL approaches specialized for timeseries [17, 31]. Also, reflecting the modern nature of traffic,
 • We capitalize the joint and effective adoption of multitask
 most approaches have focused on ET [15, 30, 33, 34, 35]. We
 and multimodal deep learning to devise the Distiller (enreport relevant works in these lines of research in Tab. 1, that
 crypteD multItaSk Traffic classIfication via muLtimodaL
 summarizes the key aspects of each paper.
 dEep leaRning) classifier. The proposed classifier relies
 Notably, the vast majority of these works have adopted
 on a general DL architecture which provides the simultapublicly-available datasets (Open column) for validating and
 neous solution of multiple (related) ET classification tasks
 assessing the performance of their proposals, save from a few
 (multitask) via the effective exploitation of heterogeneous
 cases [14, 17, 29, 21]. With few exceptions [16, 21], the traffic
 (multimodal) inputs. Our proposal thus provides support
 object (TO column) usually considered—both for extracting into application scenarios with diversified network visibility
 put data and assigning classification labels—is the bidirectional
 by accomplishing automatic feature learning from heteroflow, or biflow. Additionally, the input data are mostly provided
 geneous and structured traffic input data.
 to the classifiers as Raw inputs, as opposed to the inefficient
 • We propose a learning procedure for Distiller classifier ad-hoc feature extraction [20, 25, 26, 28]. Indeed, this latter
 based on a wise two-step training phase, made of pre- procedure partially defeats a major advantage of DL methods,
 training and fine-tuning. Such procedure avoids conver- namely the automatic extraction of features from input data and
 gence of the learning process to suboptimal parameter the consequent reduced need of human-expert intervention in
 values, as a result of the overfitting toward the strongest this process.
 modality [13]. The reason for a pre-training phase is A great deal of variation can be found regarding the spethe need for correctly distilling discriminative information cific algorithms proposed for the classification task (DL Clasfrom each modality so as to later capitalize the advantage sifier column), including Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), dif-
 2
Table 1: Related and notable works adopting DL for TC. Papers are grouped based on the type of architecture adopted: the first group
encompasses single-modal/single-task architectures, the second group multimodal/single-task (or partially multitask) architectures,
the third group single-modal/multitask architectures. The last row summarizes the present paper. Within each group the works are
reported in chronological order. Columns and acronyms meaning is reported hereafter.
Open: publicly available dataset.
Traffic object (TO): biflow (BF), flow (F), HTTP session (H), packet (P), Transport Block Size aggregation (T).
Input Data: Raw data of PCAP trace (PCAP), Xth layer of ISO/OSI model (LX).
DL Classifier: AutoEncoder (AE), Auxiliary Classifier Generative Adversarial Network (AC-GAN), Bidirectional Gated Recurrent
Unit (BiGRU), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Deep Belief Network (DBN), Deep Neural Network (DNN), Hierarchical
Attention Network (HAN), Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP), Stacked AutoEncoder (SAE), Variational AutoEncoder (VAE); + symbol indicates hybrid architectures; & symbol indicates intermediate fusion of input data.
Multimodal (MM). Multitask (MT), Supervised Shared Representation (SSR), Training-Phase Specification (TPS).
 # partial, — not applicable.
 present, # lacking, G

MM MT Open TO Input Data Raw DL Classifier SSR TPS Research

 # # # BF TCP payload [1000 B] SAE — Z. Wang, 2015, Briefing Black Hat USA [14]
 # # # BF 6 fields [20 packets] 2D-CNN+LSTM — M. Lopez-Martin et al., 2017, IEEE Access [17]

 # # F/BF PCAP [784 B] 1D-CNN — W. Wang et al., 2017, Proc. IEEE ISI [15]
 L4 payload [784 B]
 # # H HTTP fields [28×36 B] VAE — D. Li et al., 2017, Proc. IEEE CIS [27]
 # # BF Flow-based statistics # AC-GAN — L. Vu et al., 2018, Proc. ACM SoICT [28]
 # # # BF IP packet lengths BiGRU — C. Liu et al., 2019, Proc. IEEE INFOCOM [29]

 # # BF PCAP [900 B]† 1D-CNN, — Y. Zeng et al., 2019, IEEE Access [30]
 LSTM, SAE

 # # BF L4 payload [10×1500B] Attention-based LSTM, — H. Yao et al., 2019, IEEE TBD [31]
 L2 payload [10×1500B] HAN
 # # P L2 payload [1500 B] SAE, 1D-CNN — M. Lotfollahi et al., 2020, Soft Computing [16]

 # G
 # BF L4 payload [516 B] 1D-CNN & BiGRU — G. Aceto et al., 2019, Elsevier ComNet [19]
 4 fields [12 packets]

 #
 G — ˚ L4 payload [Nb B] Generic Framework — # G. Aceto et al., 2020, Elsevier NEUCOM [32]
 Packet fields [N p packets]

 # BF PCAP [1024 B] 2D-CNN H. Huang et al., 2018, IAOE iJET [24]
 # BF Flow-based statistics # DNN H. Sun et al., 2019, IEEE Access [25]
 # BF Flow-based statistics # DNN Y. Zhao et al., 2019, Proc. ACM SoICT [26]
 Packet length, direction
 # BF Inter-arrival Time # 1D-CNN S. Rezaei and X. Liu, 2020, Proc. IEEE ICCCN [20]
 Flow-based statistics

 # # T Transport Block Size AE, # A. Rago et al., 2020, IEEE TVT [21]
 [#Bytes / 1 second] Seq2seq-AE w/ LSTM

 1D-CNN & BiGRU
 L4 payload [784 B]
 BF 1D-CNN? , 2D-CNN? This Paper
 4 fields [32 packets]
 MLP? , 2D-CNN+LSTM?
 † TCP/UDP headers and MAC addresses are removed.
  IP addresses are removed.
 ? Baselines for performance comparison.

 3
ferent variants of AutoEncoders (AEs), both one- and two- (quantized over 5 and 4 intervals with saturation at 1 Mbps
dimensional Convolutional Neural Networks (1D- and 2D- and 60 s, respectively). The traffic categories from the ISCX
CNNs), different types of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), VPN/non-VPN dataset are defined according to QoS characand Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). teristics. The performance has been evaluated in a transfer-
 Finally, regarding the proposed architectures, only few works learning setup, with one of the tasks (i.e. traffic-category clashave considered multimodal inputs (MM column) [19, 32], sification) limited by a scarce ground-truth.
with the lower layers being trained on specific subsets of the— A similar set of classification tasks (i.e. duration, flow rate,
heterogeneous—inputs. Relatively more works have devised and application) has been considered by Sun et al. [25]. For
multitask architectures (MT column) [24, 25, 20, 26, 21]: here- both duration and flow rate, a two-level quantization (binary
inafter we discuss them in detail. classification) has been applied. Conversely, for application-
 Before doing that, for completeness, we also briefly discuss traffic classification, the authors have considered between 11 ∼
the works [15, 17], providing single-task architectures (MT = 50 classes according to the specific dataset used. Like several
“#”) belonging to two relevant DL approaches, whose multi- others works on DL applied to TC, inefficient ad-hoc feature
task extensions are described (resp. evaluated) in later Sec. 4 engineering (e.g., feature selection and statistical preprocess-
(resp. Sec. 5) as baselines. In detail, Wang et al. [15] have ap- ing) has been performed referring to previous ML literature.
plied DL to malware-traffic classification, proposing a method In addition to this, transport-level ports have been used as inbased on 1D-CNN tailored for ET. The experimental evalu- put: a choice hardly in line with realistic traffic scenarios (e.g.,
ation has been conducted on a selection of the public ISCX mobile apps, encryption, tunneling, NAT). The above approach
VPN-nonVPN dataset [23] and is divided in four different TC has been evaluated in transfer-learning and one-shot learning
problems: (i) VPN/nonVPN, (ii) 6 encrypted traffic classes, schemes, leveraging the multitask approach to improve perfor-
(iii) 6 VPN-tunneled traffic classes, and (iv) 12 encrypted ap- mance in case of ground-truth scarcity for a single task.
plications. Different inputs have been considered, including Recently, Rago et al. [21] have devised a link-level multibiased ones [18]. Conversely, Lopez-Martin et al. [17] have task approach for application classification and prediction. The
proposed different hybrid DL architectures originating from the input data are extracted from the sequence of Transport Block
combination of Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and 2D- Size values (a field of the LTE downlink control channel) aggreconvolutional layers. The proposals, evaluated on real traffic gated on a 1-second interval. This traffic object can be equated
(from an academic backbone network, not publicly available) with a byte-rate measurement over fixed time intervals. The
have shown high performance, also highlighting a penalty as- dataset has been collected by the authors and it is not publicly
sociated to the use of inter-arrival times as input. Unluckily, available. The proposed method learns the shared features by
also in [17] biased inputs encompassing source and destination either (a) standard or (b) Seq2seq AEs (implemented via LSTM
ports have been used. layers). Specifically, this work has tailored a multitask model
 Recently, Huang et al. [24] have applied the multitask learn- running directly at the edge of the network to foresee the traffic
ing paradigm to solve the tasks of (i) malware (binary) detec- type to be served and the resource allocation pattern of each sertion, (ii) recognition of VPN-encapsulation (binary), and (iii) vice during its execution. Furthermore, the impact of the slid-
Trojan classification (9 classes). The proposed DL algorithm ing observation-window on classification and prediction perforis a 2D-CNN, tested on an assembled dataset obtained from mance, as well as complexity, has been also investigated.
the CTU-13 (malware) and ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic datasets. Notably, by looking at the above literature tackling diversi-
Also in this case, following the work in [15], biased input data fied TC tasks via multitask DL, it is apparent that almost all the
have been employed. works exploit the multitask concept with a supervised aim (col-
 Another multitask DL architecture has been proposed by umn SSR), except for [21]. In detail, in the supervised case, the
Zhao et al. [26] in the context of federated learning. This sce- set of layers constituting the shared representation is obtained
nario, mainly motivated by privacy concerns, performs model by enforcing the solution of the considered tasks, rather than in
learning in a distributed fashion, preventing local data (e.g., an unsupervised fashion. Hence, by doing so, better-performing
traffic traces) to be shared, and communicating and merging shared representations can be attained.
only the partial models learned locally. The considered tasks Unlike the above literature, in our previous work [32], we
are: anomaly detection (binary), VPN recognition (binary), and have discussed a general framework to effectively apply DL
TC (6 classes). Notably, a set of statistical features is defined to modern TC tasks, focusing only on the architectural view.
on the biflow, partially defying the feature learning capability While proposing a multimodal and multitask framework, in said
of DL algorithms. The performance has been compared with work we have investigated its effectiveness in a multimodal (excentralized (i.e. non federated-learning based) methods show- perimental) setup only, to tackle mobile-ET classification. Coning slight improvement (maximum +1.5% on accuracy or re- sequently, the aforementioned study (due to its more general
call), but a significant reduction in training time with respect to and architectural focus) is the only one not providing a rigorous
the baseline architecture (i.e. a single-task DNN). training-phase specification (TPS column) of the architecture.
 We also report for completeness a recent work by Rezaei Accordingly, based on the previous discussion, we position
and Liu [20], where a 1D-CNN architecture has been pro- our work against the state-of-the-art as detailed hereinafter:
posed for classifying the traffic (aggregated in 5 traffic categories) and also “predicting” biflow bandwidth and duration • This paper tackles classification of ET via sophisticated
 4
 DL architectures. Hence, our proposal avoids the re- Table 2: Chart of the mathematical symbols and notations used in
 dundant (and potentially-degrading) preliminary (manual) the definition the Distiller architecture. Symbols and notations are
 feature engineering phase (as opposed to e.g. [20, 26]) and grouped based on their context: input data, architecture, and loss functions & training.
 feeds the architecture with unbiased inputs (as opposed to
 e.g. [16]), strengthening both the significance and the gen-
 Symbol Definition
 eralization of the reported results.
 V Number of TC tasks

 Input Data
 • This paper investigates the joint and effective adoption M Number of training samples
 of multitask and multimodal learning to devise the Dis- Lv Number of classes of vth TC task
 x(m) mth sample of the training set
 tiller classifier. Indeed, on the one hand, Distiller gen- `v (m) Label (true class) of x(m) for vth TC task
 eralizes the adoption of multimodal architectures (previ- t v (m) One-hot representation of `v (m)
 ously conceived only for single-task TC [19]) to appli-
 P Number of different modalities
 cation scenarios with diversified network visibility. This Jp Number of single-modality layers of pth modality
 is achieved by automatic feature learning from heteroge-

 Architecture
 S Number of shared-representation layers
 neous and structured traffic data given as input. On the Uv Number of task-specific layers of vth TC task
 other hand, Distiller is able to overcome the limitations θp Parameters of the pth single-modality layer
 θstub Parameters of the pth “stub” layer
 of existing multitask architectures, based only on single- p
 θ0 Parameters of shared-representation and task-specific layers
 modal DL [20, 21, 24, 25, 26]. Also, the resulting ar- ↓
 θp Parameters optimized only in pre-training
 chitecture comes with the full specification of the (two- θ↑p Parameters optimized in pre-training and fine-tuning
 step) training phase (differently from [32]). As a result,
 L p (·) Loss function minimized in pre-training of pth modality
 Losses & Training
 we progress on both the nature of the classification goal(s), L(·) Loss function minimized in fine-tuning
 and the associated overall architecture. CE(t, c) Categorical cross-entropy between t and c
 cv (m) Predicted class confidences of x(m) for vth TC task
 • This paper employs the public dataset ISCX λv Preference level of vth task in multitask objective function
 VPN-nonVPN [23] to validate our proposal, collect- θ̂ p Pre-trained parameters of the pth single-modality layers
 ing traffic from activity of real human users. Such θ̂stub
 p Trained parameters of the pth “stub” layer
 well-known dataset naturally surfaces the multitask goals
 related to network monitoring, and provides a supporting
 example for the motivations of our work. observed [1], the vth TC problem (T v ) consists in assigning a
 label among Lv classes within the set {1, · · · , Lv }.
 • This paper experimentally compares a specific instance of
 the Distiller architecture with the best proposals from the As depicted in Fig. 1a, when performing TC, a necessary prestate-of-the-art [15, 17, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26]—for a total of requisite consists in segmenting the raw network traffic into eleight baselines—implementing all with the same technolo- ementary entities constituting the samples of the learning task.
 gies and feeding and evaluating all in fair conditions. Our Such a process is known as traffic object segmentation and
 comparison also includes an in-depth analysis of the fine- it is in charge of “packing” the raw traffic into distinct TC obgrained behavior of such classifiers, dissected along the jects [1], each constituting a subset of network packets sharing
 considered tasks. Also, we investigate the tasks’ relation- some common properties defined by the segmentation rule.
 ship and the degree of knowledge transferred among them. We remark that DL-based traffic classifiers learn the distinctive fingerprint of each traffic type/application via a training set.
 In a multitask TC context, we make the assumption that each
3. Multimodal Multitask Deep Learning–based Traffic traffic object of the above set is associated with as many labels
 Classification as the TC tasks to be solved. Hence, for notational convenience,
 we define the mth TC object of the training set (made of M sam-
 Herein, we describe the Distiller classifier, starting from
 ples) as x(m), while the corresponding label of the vth classifithe overall architecture specification in Sec. 3.1 (depicted via
 cation task as `v (m). The above label may belong to one out
Fig. 1a). We then focus, in Sec. 3.2, on the general procedure
 of Lv different classes, namely `v (m) ∈ {1, . . . , Lv }. The main
adopted for training it (see Figs. 1b and 1c). Finally, in Sec. 3.3,
 advantage of DL (as opposed to ML) approaches for TC is to
we describe the specific instance of Distiller (see Fig. 2) choovercome the little-adaptable feature design process [18]. This
sen for the considered multitask TC problem and evaluated in
 is due to their ability to learn traffic fingerprints in an end-to-end
later Sec. 5. For reader’s convenience, Tab. 2 summarizes the
 fashion, that is directly from the type of input selected. Still,
mathematical notations used in the following.
 traffic data are intrinsically highly-structured, as each sample
 x(m) contains information from the whole protocol stack. As a
3.1. Overall Architecture result, early fusion by a monolithic DL architecture taking the
 In this section, we describe the proposed methodology for whole input coming from a TC object in bulk, is likely to be
multipurpose ET classification via multimodal multitask DL. suboptimal. Indeed, the parameter set would overfit to one in-
In detail, we assume that we are required to solve v = 1, . . . , V put subset while underfitting the others. This often precludes
different TC problems (tasks). Formally, given each TC object reaping the true benefits of multi-modality. Conversely, late
 5
 1st TC task
 ( classes)
 (a) DISTILLER Architecture

 TSU1

 Max
 TS1

 Soft
 SMJ1
 Input-data1

 SM2
 SM1
 Extraction

 Merge Layer
 Trafﬁc

 SRS
 SR1
 Object
 Segmentation

 SMJP
 Input-dataP

 SM2
 SM1

 TSUV
 PCAP Traces

 Max
 Soft
 TS1
 Extraction

 Vth TC task
 (b) Pretraining Multi-task (c) Fine-tuning
 ( classes)
 Stub1
 Frozen

 Multi-task
 StubP
 Stubs

Figure 1: Architectural view of the Distiller framework. (a) depicts the architecture by highlighting single-modality representation layers,
differentiated as those that are only pre-trained (I M1 ) and those that are also fine-tuned (I M2 ), and shared representation-layers (MM-MT ), along
with the corresponding parameter set. (b) and (c) depict the proposed training procedure based on pre-training and fine-tuning.

fusion via the capitalization of score-results (viz. confidence The trainable parameters of the second part are collected in θ0 .
vectors) of DL-based traffic classifiers built on different modal- We recall that common choices for elementary DL layers are
ities, does not fully exploit the benefits of multi-modality (see dense, convolutional, pooling, and recurrent layers, which can
e.g. the results [19] pertaining to the single-task case). Ac- be jointly employed within a hybrid DL architecture1 capitalizcordingly, we foresee multimodal multitask DL as the appeal- ing the “connectionist” philosophy [13].
ing means toward a sophisticated form of information fusion,
termed intermediate fusion [36], overcoming these limitations
 3.2. Loss Function Definition and Training Procedure
by offering a flexible tool for practical ET classification, able to
solve multiple tasks by processing effectively the heterogeneous The training procedure proposed for our Distiller classiinputs available. fier consists of a two-stage phase: (i) pre-training and (ii) fine-
 The architecture of our Distiller classifier is depicted in tuning (Figs. 1b and 1c, respectively). The reason for a prelimi-
Fig. 1a at an abstract level and described hereinafter. Dis- nary pre-training procedure is to correctly distill discriminative
tiller is fed with P different inputs (modalities) for each TC information from each modality so as to capitalize the advanobject to be classified, with the pth modality provided from tage of the multimodal traffic representation. In other words,
Input-data p extraction block. The first part (I M1 +I M2 ) of pre-training allows the DL branch of each modality to be able
our deep network architecture consists of J p single-modality to acceptably solve—by itself—all the considered tasks [13].
(SM) layers, which are input-specific and allow to extract in Precisely, each single-modality stack is first (pre-)trained
an increasingly-abstract fashion the discriminative features per- independently (see Fig. 1b), that is without MM-MT (corretaining to the pth modality alone. The trainable parameters of sponding to SR and TS layers) and by topping each modalthe first part are collected in θ p . ity chain with V different softmax-layer “stubs”. The train-
 On top of these layers, the abstract features are joined via able parameters of the V stubs (for pth modality) are collected
a merge layer, which represents the first layer channeling the within θstub th
 p . Specifically, the p “stubbed” chain is trained to
modality-specific distilled information toward a joint multi- minimize the classification loss function L p (·) to promote pth
modal multitask (shared) representation [37]. Although the modality capability to solve the V different TC tasks alone. Acmost general choice is represented by a concatenation opera- cordingly, we aim to minimize a weighted sum of the categorition, other options may be pursued in case the features originat- cal Cross-Entropy (CE) of each TC task, namely:
ing from different modalities have the same size (e.g., average M 
and entry-wise maximum). V
 X  X 
 L p θ p , θstub λv  CE(t v (m), cv (m) [θ p , θstub
 ` ˘  
 ]) (1)
  
 Differently, the second part (MM-MT ) of the architecture p fi  p 
  
 v=1 m=1
consists of S shared-representation (SR) layers and Uv taskspecific (TS) layers. The former set of layers distills the fea- Such a distance is measured via the functional CE(t, c) fi
tures capturing inter-modality dependencies. Conversely, the
 P
 − `=1 t` log c` , denoting the CE distance for the generic
latter set of layers synthesizes the task-oriented features (of training sample. In Eq. (1), the vector cv (m) fi
the vth task) from the shared ones. Accordingly, Distiller “ v ‰ T
 c1 (m) · · · cvLv (m) collects the predicted class confidences
is based on a hard parameter sharing approach, based on of the DL classifier (which depend on DL network parameters)
the categorization in [22]. Finally, the architecture is completed with a softmax layer for each ET classification-task to
solve, namely returning
 “ the corresponding
 ‰ soft-output (predic- 1 Also, to promote regularization (to avoid overfitting), dropout between

tion) vector cv fi cv1 · · · cvLv (with cv ∈ [0, 1]Lv ) for task v. successive layers and early-stopping techniques are commonly adopted [13].

 6
for the label of the mth training sample on the vth task. Differ-
 “ ‰T
ently, t v (m) fi t1v (m) · · · tLv v (m) denotes the correspond-
 TS Encapulation TS Traffic Type TS Application
ing one-hot representation of the label for the vth learning task Layers (v=1) Layers (v=2) Layers (v=3)
`v (m). The aim of a high-performing traffic classifier on the vth SoftMax() SoftMax() SoftMax()
task is to have the confidence vector cv (m) as close as possible Dense(2) Dense(6) Dense(15)
to the (ground-truth originated) one-hot vector t v (m). Finally, Dropout(0.2) Dropout(0.2) Dropout(0.2)
 ReLU() ReLU() ReLU()
since our architecture is in charge of solving multiple learning Dense(128) Dense(128) Dense(128)
tasks at once, the weight λv represents the preference level of
the vth task in the multitask objective function to be optimized.
The learned parameters from the above optimization are indi-
 SR Layers
cated with (θ̂ p , θ̂stub
 p ).
 Then, during the fine-tuning (see Fig. 1c), the softmax stubs Dropout(0.2)
 ReLU()
are removed (i.e. θ̂1stub , · · · , θ̂stub
 P are discarded from the opti- Dense(128)
mization) and the whole Distiller classifier is trained (i.e. in- Dropout(0.2)
cluding both the parameter sets θ1 , · · · , θP and θ0 , associated
to the I M1 +I M2 and MM-MT blocks, respectively). However,
as a result of the pre-training, a share of SM layers (the “low” Concatenation
layers in DL hierarchy, named I M1 ) are typically frozen when
fine-tuning is performed: low-level layers refer indeed to intramodality
 “ automatic feature extraction. In other terms, within
θ p fi θ↓p θ↑p only the subset θ↑p is (further) optimized during
 ‰
 SM Layers
 Payload
fine-tuning (i.e. the parameters corresponding to I M2 ), while Modality (p=1)
θ↓p is kept fixed to the value learned during pre-training, i.e. ReLU()
 SM Layers
θ↓p = θ̂↓p . As a result, the following weighted form of the cate- Dense(128)
 Protocol Fields
 Dropout(0.2)
gorical CE is minimized: Modality (p=2)
 MaxPooling1D(3)
 ReLU() ReLU()
 ´ ¯ X V M
 X Conv1D(32,25) Dense(128)
 L θ1:P
 ↑
 , θ0 fi λv ↑
 CE(t v (m), cv (m)[θ1:P , θ0 ]) (2) MaxPooling1D(3) Dropout(0.2)
 ReLU() ReLU()
 v=1 m=1 BiGRU(64)
 Conv1D(16,25)

In the above equation, the weights λ1 , . . . , λV retain the same
interpretation as in the pre-training objective function reported
in Eq. (1). The loss functions concerning pre-training (single- bytes of Fields of first
modal multitask, L p (·)) and fine-tuning (multimodal multitask, L4 payload packets

L(·)) phases are minimized via standard first-order local opti- Figure 2: Proposed instance of the Distiller classifier. The
mizers (e.g., Adam, AdaGrad, etc.), resorting to the usual back- layer parameters represent: Conv1D(#filters, kernel_size),
propagation for gradient evaluation [13]. Hereinafter, we detail BiGRU(#units), Dense(#nodes), MaxPooling1D(pool_size),
the specific instance obtained from the general architecture of Dropout(rate). Background colors highlight the sets of layers
Distiller and used for the experimental evaluation in Sec. 5. that are pre-trained or fine-tuned: I M1 in cyan, I M2 in purple, and
 MM-MT in yellow.
3.3. Description of Proposed Instance
 Aiming at a consistent comparison with earlier works [15, 17,
18, 19], this particular implementation of the devised Distiller the TC object [14, 15]; (b) informative protocol header fields
architecture operates with biflow TC objects (see Sec. 4.1) and (HDR) of the first N p packets [17]. In the first case, the input
is made of P = 2 modalities. Furthermore, the considered is represented in binary format, arranged in a byte-wise fashmultitask TC scenario is composed of V = 3 TC tasks. These ion and normalized within [0, 1]. The second type of input data
correspond to (T 1 ) encapsulation identification (L1 = 2 classes), is constituted by: (i) number of bytes in transport-layer pay-
(T 2 ) traffic type recognition (L2 = 6 classes), and (T 3 ) applica- load, (ii) TCP window size (set to zero for UDP packets), (iii)
tion classification (L3 = 15 classes). inter-arrival time, and (iv) packet direction ∈ {0, 1}—of the first
 Fig. 2 depicts the detailed composition of the proposed Dis- N p packets [17]. We underline that, in both cases, longer (resp.
tiller instance. We observe that the present network is only one shorter) instances are truncated (resp. padded with zeros) to the
of the possible instances which may be (a) designed according designed length of bytes (Nb ) or packets (N p ). These specific into the general architecture described in Sec. 3.1 (represented put data derive from the necessity of avoiding biased inputs—a
graphically via Fig. 1) and (b) trained via the corresponding common pitfall in related works [15, 17]—included for instance
procedure reported in Sec. 3.2. in PCAP metadata, data-link layer, and some transport-layer
The input data fed to the Distiller classifier belong to two header fields (e.g., source and destination ports), as they may
types: (a) the first Nb bytes of transport-layer payload (PAY) of lead to inflated performance and lack of generalization [18].
 7
We notice that the two considered input types (viz. “traffic- 1( ) [T1] 1( ) [T2] 1( ) [T3] 1( )
originated” modalities) refer to different levels of abstraction 2( ) [T1] 2( ) [T2] 2( ) [T3] 2( )
(biflow vs. packet) and standpoints (encryption-dependent vs. ( ) [T1] ( ) [T2] ( ) [T3] ()
 1.75
encryption-independent) and thus are naturally conducive to the 1.5
multimodal approach. Also, they suit well “early” TC [38],
 1.25
namely taking a classification decision based only on the first
 1

 Loss
segments of the considered TC object.
The architecture implements2 the SM layers of the “payload” 0.75
modality (p = 1, grouped in green in Fig. 2) with two 1D con- 0.5
volutional layers (16 and 32 filters, respectively, with kernel 0.25
size of 25 and unit stride), each followed by a 1D max-pooling 0
 0 10 20 30 40 50 60
layer (with unit stride and spatial extent equal to 3) and, finally, Epoch
by one dense layer (128 nodes). On the other hand, the SM layers of the “protocol fields” modality (p = 2, grouped in red Figure 3: Loss function L p (·) of pth single-modality stack during prein Fig. 2) are, in order, a bidirectional GRU (BiGRU with 64 training (in light blue) and loss function L(·) during fine-tuning (in
units and return-sequences behavior) and one dense layer (128 salmon) of the Distiller classifier. Results pertain to a single fold.
 Per-task components of both L p (·) and L(·) are also shown. The prenodes).3 The intermediate features of the two branches are then
 training of single-modality stacks is performed in parallel. The number
merged via a concatenation layer and fed to a single (S = 1) of epochs of fine-tuning is less than that prescribed (i.e. 40 epochs)
SR dense layer (128 nodes). The latter is connected to V = 3 because of early-stopping.
layers, each constituting one TS dense layer (128 nodes) for
the vth task (Uv = 1), before the corresponding softmax layer
(i.e. a dense layer with Lv nodes and softmax activation). In and fine-tuning) are highlighted therein with different backall the layers, the outputs are obtained via Rectifier Linear Unit ground colors. First, during the pre-training phase the loss
(ReLU) activations. Finally, 20% dropout is applied after (a) L p (·) is measured for the pth modality stack at the output of the
each dense layer (including the concatenation layer) and (b) af- corresponding softmax stub. The two modalities are trained in
ter flattening the 2D representation of both the stack of convo- parallel for 30 epochs each. Then, during the fine-tuning phase,
lutional/pooling layers and BiGRU. the overall L(·) is measured up to the remaining 40 epochs (the
 The considered Distiller instance is trained via the two- training may terminate earlier because of early stopping). In the
stage phase previously described: during pre-training phase, above plot, for completeness, the corresponding (three) per-task
each single-modality stack is first (pre-)trained independently contributions of L p (·) (p = 1, 2) and L(·) are also reported (cf.
for 30 epochs each by topping V softmax layer stubs and by Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively). It is evident that the exploitation
minimizing the loss L p (·) in Eq. (1). Then, fine-tuning of the of multi-modality by the proposed two-stage training process is
whole architecture is performed for 40 epochs by minimizing able to achieve lower (multitask) loss functions as opposed to
the loss L(·) in Eq. (2), after freezing I M1 (corresponding to the the single-task cases.
two 1D convolutional and BiGRU layers, depicted with cyan
background in Fig. 2).
 For both phases, we employ the Adam optimizer [39] (with a 4. Experimental Setup
batch size of 50) and early-stopping technique (to prevent overfitting) with a patience of 10 epochs and a minimum delta of The classifier instance taken from the general architecture
0.01 measured on the training accuracy of the hardest TC task of Distiller is carefully evaluated and compared against sev-
(i.e. with the highest number of classes Lv ). The Adam op- eral multitask TC baselines on a real dataset. Accordingly,
timizer is set with a learning rate of 2 · 10−3 and 10−3 during the present section provides a complete description of the expre-training and fine-tuning, respectively. Also, the exponen- perimental setup considered. Specifically, we first provide the
tial decay rates for the estimates of the first-order and second- description of the human-generated (public) dataset we have
order moments are set to 0.9 and 0.999 (Keras default values), leveraged for this purpose and of the traffic segmentation we
respectively. Finally, when not otherwise specified, we reason- have performed to extract our classification samples from raw
ably set the preference weights λv = 1/V = 1/3, i.e. a uniform PCAP data (Sec. 4.1). Thereafter, we give details on the stateallocation. of-the-art multitask baselines taken into account (Sec. 4.2). Fi-
 An example of the corresponding evolution of the loss func- nally, we end the section (Sec. 4.3) with a description of the
tion vs. the number of epochs associated to Distiller is re- implementation details required for reproducibility of the conported in Fig. 3. Specifically, the two-phases (i.e. pre-training sidered setup.

 2 The choice of hyperparameters builds on our previous experience with

multimodal DL architectures for TC [19], extended with a set of experiments
 4.1. Dataset and TC Object Description
varying the parameters of the dense layers.
 3 1D convolutional layers aim at extracting spatially-invariant patterns from Our experimental setup employs the ISCX VPN-nonVPN
the payload, while (Bi)GRUs aim at capturing long-term dependencies pertain- dataset [23] collected at the Canadian Institute for Cybersecuing to the initial segments of the TC object. rity and provided in raw PCAP format with trace-level labels,
 8
Table 3: ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset tasks and classes. Classes are or- defined as a stream of packets having the following 5-tuple
dered by decreasing number of biflows. Categorical labels are reported in common: transport-layer protocol, source and destination
in round brackets. IP addresses, source and destination ports [1]. The difference between bidirectional and unidirectional flows is whether
Task Classes they take the direction of packets or not into consideration in
T 1 - Encapsulation nonVPN (1), VPN (2) their definition, respectively. For the sake of completeness,
 VoIP (1), FileTransfer (2), P2P (3), we touch upon other meaningful TC objects, however, adopted
T 2 - Traffic Type in the context of non-multitask encrypted TC such as the IP
 Streaming (4), Chat (5), Email (6)
 packet [16], HTTP session [27], and service burst [8]. Hence,
 Skype (1), Torrent (2), Hangouts (3),
 based on these considerations, we segment the raw traffic col-
 VoipBuster (4), Facebook (5), FTPS (6), SCP (7),
T 3 - Application
 Email (8), YouTube (9), Vimeo (10), Spotify (11),
 lected in the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset in biflows.
 Netflix (12), SFTP (13), Aim (14), ICQ (15)
 Pre-processing operations. We have found that ≈ 65% of biflows extracted from the raw traffic of the ISCX VPN-nonVPN
 Encapsulation Traﬃc Type Application
 dataset have only one UDP packet and destination (IP address,
 nonVPN
 VPN port) equal to (255.255.255.255, 10505). After further inspec-
 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 tion, we have found that these packets are network broadcasts
 # Biﬂows periodically sent—every two seconds by default—by BlueS-
 Chat
 Email
 tacks, an Android emulator for PCs. Therefore, as opposed
 FileTransfer to the other works leveraging the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset
 P2P
 Streaming [24, 20, 26], we have performed a pre-processing cleaning op-
 VoIP eration to remove this noisy traffic and thus make our results
 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 more meaningful. As a result, the final dataset contains 11.6k
 # Biﬂows
 Aim biflows whose distribution among the different classes for each
 Email task is shown in Fig. 4. We emphasize that, given the imbal-
 Facebook
 FTPS anced per-class share of biflows, the dataset thus obtained con-
 Hangouts
 ICQ
 stitutes a realistic and challenging evaluation benchmark for our
 Netﬂix Distiller classifier.
 SCP
 SFTP
 Skype
 Spotify 4.2. Description of Baselines Considered
 Torrent
 Vimeo We compare Distiller with several baselines proposed in
 VoipBuster
 YouTube most-related (recent) literature [15, 17, 20, 24, 25, 26] fed with
 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 the same input types (reported in brackets) whenever possible,
 # Biﬂows and considering N = 784 bytes and N p = 32 packets for PAY
 and HDR, respectively.4 Also, each baseline is trained for 100
 epochs corresponding to the total number of epochs summing
Figure 4: Number of per-class samples (i.e. biflows) for each ISCX up pre-training and fine-tuning of Distiller.
VPN-nonVPN dataset task.
 First of all, we highlight that we do not employ (i) biased input types (e.g., raw PCAP data and inputs comprising
that is the ground-truth is associated to the whole PCAP trace source/destination ports [18]) and (ii) manually-extracted feaand not to each TC object. tures (e.g., PL/IAT stats). On the one hand, the former choice
 It includes human-generated traffic encompassing dif- would prevent learning general (non-overfitted) patterns for disferent traffic types—with information also on the related crimination. On the other hand, the latter choice would nullify
applications—collected through both regular sessions and ses- a key benefit of DL: no need of human-expert intervention for
sions encapsulated over VPN. In view of this structure, we can extracting informative features. Accordingly, we have considassociate a three-view label (i.e. encapsulation, traffic type, and ered the following baselines, which have been carefully impleapplication) to whatever segmentation of raw network traffic mented and whose details are reported hereinafter:
(i.e. to a generic TC object). Such three-view label corresponds • Two multitask extensions of state-of-the-art DL-based
to just as many TC tasks to be tackled. Table 3 lists the ISCX single-task traffic classifiers, namely the 1D-CNN (PAY)
VPN-nonVPN classes associated to each task. and the HYBRID 2D-CNN + LSTM (HDR) proposed
TC Object. While the finest atomic TC object is the single in [15] and [17], respectively. Specifically, the original
packet/datagram [16], the vast majority of papers tackling (multitask) ET classification reasonably work with either unidirec- 4 These choices are based on common values suggested in state-of-the-art
tional or bidirectional flows (viz. biflows), attaining better per- works [15] and our past experience with (single-task) DL traffic classifiers [18],
formance with the latter TC object (see Sec. 2). A flow is and constitute a satisfactory trade-off between complexity and performance.

 9
 architecture in [15] is made of two 1D convolutional lay- GB of RAM, and Ubuntu 16.04 (64 bit) operating system, runers (with 32 and 64 filters, respectively)—each followed ning on a physical server with 2 × Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-4610v2
 by a 1D max-pooling—one dense layer (with 1024 nodes CPUs @ 8 × 2.30 GHz and 64 GB of RAM. We highlight that
 and ReLU activation), and terminated with one softmax all the execution times have been logged in the same load condilayer. Conversely, the original architecture in [17] is a tions (i.e. the DL classifier was the sole CPU-intensive running
 combination of two 2D convolutional layers (with 32 and process).
 64 filters, respectively, and batch normalization), where
 the output tensor of the second convolutional layer is
 reshaped into a matrix fed as input to an LSTM (with 5. Experimental Evaluation
 100 units). It is likewise terminated with a single softmax
 In the following analyses, the performance evaluation is
 layer. We extend both these single-task architectures by
 based on a stratified five-fold cross-validation, representing a
 replacing the last softmax with three separate softmax
 solid assessment setup as it keeps the sample ratio among
 layers, one for each task.
 classes for each fold. Since we are facing multiple TC tasks,
 • Five native multitask DL architectures proposed for TC, the stratification is performed herein on the hardest task, i.e.
 that is the 1D-CNN (HDR)5 proposed in [20] and two T 3 . Therefore, we report both the mean and the standard devidifferent (deep) MLP (PAY/HDR) architectures adopted ation of each performance measure as a result of the evaluation
 in [25, 26]. For the last two baselines, we have consid- on the five different folds.
 ered two variants each, fed with either input types, since Our experimental evaluation is organized as follows. First, in
 the original proposals had handcrafted PL/IAT stats as in- Sec. 5.1, we perform an overall comparison of Distiller with
 put. the considered baselines. Then, in Sec. 5.2, we explore the performance dependence of our approach with respect to a varying
 • A modified version—we named 2D-CNN (PAY)—of the weight-configuration {λ1 , . . . , λV } choice, namely a Pareto optimultitask architecture originally presented in [24]. Its mization. Further, Sec. 5.3 contains a fine-grained analysis of
 structure is made of two branches—the first shared by two the soft-outputs of Distiller and the best baselines identified.
 binary learning tasks and the second related to a multi- Finally, in Sec. 5.4, knowledge transfer among the considered
 class task—of 2D convolutional layers (with a number of tasks is investigated with reference to (a) reject option adoption
 filters ranging from 32 to 128), with the first two layers and (b) incoherence analysis.
 followed by a 2D max-pooling. Each branch is terminated
 with a dense layer (1024 nodes). Since the architecture is 5.1. Overall Comparison
 fed with biased inputs (i.e. raw PCAP data formatted as
 images) and characterized by an excessively ad-hoc struc- Hereinafter, we first provide an overall performance comture, we adapted it to our problem by (i) feeding it with parison of Distiller with the baselines introduced in Sec. 2
 the unbiased PAY input and (ii) considering a different task and detailed in Sec. 4.2. To this end, Tab. 4 compares their
 mapping to the two CNN-based branches, namely one bi- accuracy (the percentage of samples properly classified) and
 nary (T 1 ) and two multi-class learning tasks (T 2 and T 3 ) as macro (i.e. arithmetically-averaged over classes) F-measure on
 opposed to two binary and one multi-class, respectively. the three tasks. In detail, the latter is the harmonic mean of
 precision (the per-class fraction of decisions being correct) and
4.3. Implementation details recall (the class-conditional accuracy) accounting for both metrics at once.
 We leveraged the DL models provided by Keras (https: Additionally, for the sake of a fair comparison, we have em-
//keras.io) Python API running on top of TensorFlow ployed for all the classifiers a uniform weight configuration (i.e.
2 (https://www.tensorflow.org/) to implement and test λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 0.33 in Eqs. (1) and (2)). On the basis of the
the approaches described in this work. Also, data pre- results attained with this configuration, we sort them (including
and post-processing have been performed mainly by means Distiller) according to an average performance ranking, that
of numpy (https://numpy.org/) and pandas (https:// is by decreasing average between accuracy and F-measure, over
pandas.pydata.org/) libraries. Finally, the graphical data all the three tasks. Accordingly, we notice that Distiller ranks
representation has been obtained using matplotlib (https: first (i.e. it is the overall-best-performing classifier) and shows
//matplotlib.org/) and seaborn (https://seaborn. significant performance gains for all the metrics, for all the
pydata.org/) libraries, along with a customized version of tasks—ranging from +4.90% to +8.45%—with respect to the
the pySankey (https://pypi.org/project/pySankey/) overall-best-performing baseline (ranking II). The latter corremodule. sponds to the 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] classifier and is highlighted
 All the experiments refer to the same hardware architecture, in blue in Tab. 4. The last row of Tab. 4 (highlighted in green)
namely an OpenStack virtual machine with 16 vCPUs and 32 summarizes the performance gain of Distiller with respect to
 this overall-best-performing baseline. Finally, even considering
 5 For this baseline, to be as pertinent as possible to the original proposal, we the classification performance for each single task, Distiller
have used a subset of HDR encompassing signed PL (positive for upstream and always outperforms also the best-per-metric baseline (marked
negative for downstream) and IAT as input. with û in Tab. 4).
 10
Table 4: Comparison of Distiller Accuracy, F-measure, and Run-Time Per-Epoch (RTPE) with state-of-the-art baselines. Results are in the
format avg. (± std.) obtained over 5-folds. Rank is based on the average of all performance metrics on all the tasks. Last row shows Distiller
Gain [%] on the overall-best-baseline (ranking II, highlighted in blue). Marked values are: (3) overall best classifier and (û) best baseline, for
each metric.

 T1 - Encapsulation T2 - Traffic Type T3 - Application
Rank Multitask Classifier RTPE [s]
 Accuracy [%] F-measure [%] Accuracy [%] F-measure [%] Accuracy [%] F-measure [%]
 I Distiller 93.75 (± 0.73) 3 91.95 (± 0.67) 3 80.78 (± 0.95) 3 78.72 (± 1.05) 3 77.63 (± 0.66) 3 66.44 (± 1.76) 3 5.99 (± 0.13)
 II 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] 87.47 (± 0.29) 83.50 (± 0.75) 73.14 (± 0.79) û 71.14 (± 0.87) û 72.73 (± 0.77) û 61.35 (± 1.60) û 13.83 (± 1.67)
 III 2D-CNN (PAY) [24] 87.43 (± 0.66) 83.51 (± 0.46) 71.86 (± 0.95) 69.77 (± 0.96) 71.45 (± 1.13) 59.29 (± 2.06) 40.94 (± 3.57)
 IV MLP (PAY) [26] 86.95 (± 0.65) 82.38 (± 1.12) 70.67 (± 0.64) 68.14 (± 0.72) 69.50 (± 0.97) 56.44 (± 2.45) 2.58 (± 0.36)
 V MLP (HDR) [26] 88.71 (± 0.37) û 84.94 (± 0.48) û 68.57 (± 0.51) 65.87 (± 0.55) 63.97 (± 1.02) 51.14 (± 1.28) 2.24 (± 0.17)
 VI MLP (PAY) [25] 85.28 (± 0.66) 81.16 (± 0.55) 67.60 (± 1.10) 64.68 (± 1.36) 65.39 (± 1.06) 51.78 (± 1.31) 0.75 (± 0.10) û 3
 VII HYBRID (HDR) [17] 87.11 (± 1.88) 82.82 (± 1.28) 66.00 (± 2.61) 62.40 (± 4.34) 60.17 (± 3.70) 50.49 (± 2.40) 3.34 (± 0.38)
 VIII MLP (HDR) [25] 86.53 (± 0.65) 81.55 (± 1.03) 62.86 (± 0.92) 59.43 (± 1.40) 59.34 (± 0.88) 44.20 (± 1.22) 0.79 (± 0.02)
 IX 1D-CNN (HDR) [20] 82.95 (± 1.33) 76.24 (± 2.55) 59.09 (± 3.34) 54.75 (± 2.24) 56.54 (± 2.65) 40.87 (± 2.13) 1.70 (± 0.02)
 Distiller Gain + 6.28 (± 0.80) + 8.45 (± 1.13) + 7.65 (± 0.20) + 7.58 (± 0.95) + 4.90 (± 0.60) + 5.09 (± 1.17) - 7.84 (± 1.67)

Table 5: Run-Time Per-Epoch (RTPE in seconds) and Number of F-measure compared to Distiller on task T 3 .
Trainable Parameters (TP in millions) of Distiller and state-of-the- The complexity comparison among the considered multiart baselines. The RTPE is in the format avg. (± std.) obtained over
 task DL traffic classifiers is deepened in Tab. 5, where the
5-folds. The classifiers are sorted based on increasing RTPE. The
columns “C” and “R” denote the usage of convolutional and recur-
 RTPE of each architecture is paired with the corresponding
rent layers, respectively. The last column “Rank” refers to the ranking number of trainable parameters TP, related to the theoretical
based on the average of all TC performance metrics defined in Tab. 4. complexity of the training phase. Indeed, we highlight that
 an exact O(·) expression cannot be easily drawn for general
Multitask Classifier RTPE [s] TP [M] C R Rank DL architectures [40]. However, the complexity associated
 to the whole training process can be generically expressed as
MLP (PAY) [25] 0.75 (± 0.10) 0.03 # # VI O(Nepochs × M × Cbackprop (TP) ), where Nepochs denotes the num-
MLP (HDR) [25] 0.79 (± 0.02) 0.01 # # VIII ber of epochs, M the number of training samples, and the term
1D-CNN (HDR) [20] 1.70 (± 0.02) 0.20 # IX Cbackprop (TP) refers to evaluating the contribution of a single
MLP (HDR) [26] 2.24 (± 0.17) 1.55 # # V sample to the gradient via the well-known backpropagation al-
MLP (PAY) [26] 2.58 (± 0.36) 1.71 # # IV gorithm. The latter term is clearly a function of the specific
HYBRID (HDR) [17] 3.34 (± 0.38) 0.74 VII DL architecture (e.g., presence of convolutional/recurrent lay-
Distiller 5.99 (± 0.13) 0.97 I ers) and leads to cumbersome computations, even in case of
1D-CNN (PAY) [15] 13.83 (± 1.67) 5.84 # II (simpler) MLPs [41]. Still, in general, such function retains a
2D-CNN (PAY) [24] 40.94 (± 3.57) 22.65 # III monotonic behavior with the number of trainable parameters
 TP. Accordingly, TP represents the main relevant factor for
 comparing the considered DL traffic classifiers, since they are
 Moreover, we also investigate the computational complexity trained on the same dataset (same M) and for the same number
of the considered multitask DL-architectures evaluating their of iterations (same Nepochs ). For completeness, in the aforementraining phase runtime. This is a fundamental aspect in modern tioned table we also highlight whether the training parameters
network TC, where frequent re-training is required, due to the are associated with more involved layers than dense ones, such
aging of training data as a result of the fast-paced evolution in as convolutional (column “C”) and recurrent (column “R”) laynetwork usage. Since training is performed on multiple epochs, ers.
we report this outcome in a terse way, showing the Run-Time Specifically, a direct comparison between the number of
Per-Epoch (RTPE) in the last column of Tab. 4. trainable parameters of Distiller (i.e. 0.97M) and those of
 From the above viewpoint, Distiller attains a reduction in 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] (i.e. 5.84M) reveals that the RTPE strongly
the training time of −7.84 seconds per-epoch, thus exhibit- depends on the TP value, with Distiller having six times fewer
ing lower empirical computational complexity when compared parameters than the overall-best-performing baseline. Such a
with the overall-best-performing baseline. Accordingly, the general trend can be observed for almost all the considered
whole training time is more than halved, as a result of the RTPE multitask DL traffic classifiers. Still, the corresponding rankcut on all the considered training epochs. Indeed, the training ing between the RTPE and the TP value is influenced by the
time equals the RTPE multiplied by the total number of epochs, presence of convolutional layers, recurrent layers, or both. Acwhich is set to the same value for all the considered architec- cordingly, multitask DL architectures with a lower TP value
tures (Nepochs = 100, cf. Sec. 3.3 and 4.2). It is worth noting (e.g., our Distiller) may incur in higher RTPE with respect to
that the baseline with the shortest RTPE ranks VI in terms of the baselines based on a higher TP, because of the presence of conoverall TC performance metrics, with losses of up to 14.66% of volutional and recurrent operations.
 11
5.2. Pareto Optimization implies {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } = {0.2, 0.6, 0.2}—a uniform weight allocation is still able to globally outperform such per-task optimum.
 Multitask learning is a peculiar application of multi-objective Specifically, with the aforementioned T 2 -optimized weight conoptimization (a.k.a. Pareto optimization) which consists in the figuration, Distiller can obtain 91.97% and 63.30% F-measure
mathematical optimization (i.e. maximization or minimization) on T 1 and T 3 , respectively, against 91.95% and 66.44% attained
of a given variable vector with respect to more than one objec- with the uniform weight allocation.
tive function to be optimized simultaneously. Accordingly, the Summarizing, our Distiller outperforms the overall-best
loss functions employed in Eqs. (1) and (2)—for pre-training baseline according to all the three tasks. Additionally, the evaland fine-tuning, respectively—are the result of the so-called uation over the weight surface {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } generally highlights
scalarization of the original multi-objective problem, with the that learning multiple tasks simultaneously provides improved
weights λi assigning a given (a-priori) preference to the ith ob- TC performance with respect to single-task learning. Equally
jective (viz. task) in the tackled optimization problem. important, uniform task-weight allocation represents a reason-
 In this regard, we perform a sensitivity performance anal- able trade-off in terms of TC performance and simplicity in the
ysis, focusing on the Distiller classifier and the overall-best- choice. In view of these considerations, hereinafter we will emperforming baseline (i.e. 1D-CNN (PAY) [15], cf. Tab. 4) ploy a uniform weight allocation, unless explicitly stated otherwhose outcomes are shown at the top and bottom rows of wise.
Fig. 5, respectively. Such sensitivity analysis is obtained by
varying the weights {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } within both losses reported in
Eqs. (1) and (2) during the (two-step) training phase. The 5.3. Fine Grained Analysis of (Soft-)Outputs
same analysis is performed for the (one-step) training phase
 Delving into the performance of DL-based multitask TC, in
of the baseline. Specifically, Fig. 5 illustrates the TC perfor-
 Fig. 6, we report the Top-K accuracy of Distiller and all the
mance in terms of F-measure with respect to {λ1 , λ2 } only, as
 considered baseline traffic classifiers. In detail, the Top-K ac-
λ3 = 1 − (λ1 + λ2 ) is a dependent variable.
 curacy defines a correct classification event if the true class is
 Results highlight quite smooth performance trends on the
 within the top K predicted labels (K < Lv is a free paramethree tasks with respect to the weights, with the only exception
 ter). Of course, K = 1 coincides with the standard accuracy;
of cases associated to a zero-preference level for a given task
 hence, such metric has an informative interpretation only for
(i.e. λ1 = 0, λ2 = 0 and λ1 + λ2 = 1 for T 1 , T 2 , and T 3 , respectasks corresponding to multi-class problems (Lv > 2). Accordtively). Indeed, a zero preference implies that the architecture
 ingly, in what follows we focus only on T 2 (L2 = 6 classes) and
is not explicitly trained to solve the corresponding task.
 T 3 (L3 = 15 classes), since L1 = 2 classes for T 1 (i.e. it is a
 Comparing Distiller with 1D-CNN (PAY) [15], Fig. 5 highbinary TC task).
lights similar trends for both traffic classifiers. More specifi-
 Given the above definition of Top-K accuracy, the higher the
cally, 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] has slightly higher performance only
 value of K, the better the accuracy achieved (by construction).
in correspondence of some zero-preference configurations for
 Specifically, this metric allows to investigate the soft-output of
the specific task (also presenting the worst performance, i.e.
 a (multi-class) DL classifier and its fine-grained behavior. From
orange and red cells with dashed contour in Fig. 5). As an
 the inspection of the histograms depicted in Fig. 6, we can noexample, considering the T 2 -zero-preference weight configutice that Distiller outperforms all the baselines taken into acration {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } = {0.6, 0, 0.4}, 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] attains
 count for the considered (reasonable) range of K (in our analy-
16.29% F-measure (see Fig. 5e) compared to Distiller reachsis, K ∈ {1, . . . , 5}). In detail, considering the first two (K = 2)
ing 11.81% with the same weights (see Fig. 5b). Similar outmost confident soft-outputs, our Distiller classifier is able to
comes can be highlighted also for the other two tasks. Sumhit > 90% accuracy for task T 2 and almost 90% for task T 3 ,
marizing, Distiller can seldom attain lower performance for a
 with an improvement of +3.63% (resp. +2.85%) over the best
task, but only if the corresponding task contribution is ignored
 baseline MLP (HDR) [26] (resp. 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]) for the
during training (zero-preference level). Differently, Distiller
 specific task T 2 (resp. T 3 ). Moreover, Figs. 6a and 6b reveal
always outperforms 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] for all other (more senthat, even for higher values of K, there is a performance differsible) configurations of weights.
 ence between Distiller and all the baselines for both the task T 2
 Focusing on Distiller performance, the uniform weight aland T 3 . Especially for the latter (more complex) task, Distiller
location (i.e. λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 0.33) considered in Sec. 5.1
 is able to attain the most significant performance enhancement,
does not result in the best solution for each of the three tasks:
 reaching up to ≈ 97% accuracy with K = 5.
ad-hoc weight configurations should be employed to maximize
 To deepen the analysis of fine-grained behavior of multiper-task F-measure. However, a weight configuration optimal
 task traffic classifiers, Fig. 7 depicts the Sankey diagrams corfor a given task, in general implies a loss in performance for
 responding to tasks T 1 and T 2 .6 Specifically, these diagrams
the remaining two, and for the overall performance as well.
 show the per-class ratio of samples correctly and incorrectly
For instance, the optimal weight configuration for the hardest
task T 3 is {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } = {0.4, 0, 0.6}, obtaining an F-measure
for T 3 of 66.17%, but resulting in a zero-preference level for 6 Given the higher number of classes (L = 15) for the task T , the readabil-
 3 3
the task T 2 (dropping to 10.58% F-measure). Even when this ity of the related Sankey diagram is severely impaired and consequently it is
is not the case—for instance, the optimal configuration for T 2 replaced by an equivalent confusion matrix (Fig. 8).

 12
 100 80 70
 9.84 78.24 78.27 78.21 78.29 77.72 65.05 66.04 64.95 65.13 64.61 3.02

 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
 43.97 45.74 45.33 50.97 40.49 47.02 70
 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

 90 60
 91.76 91.78 91.76 91.97 91.71 7.69 78.58 78.23 78.60 77.34 60 65.72 65.64 65.24 63.30 4.33
 50
 80
 10.58 78.12 78.82 77.30 50 66.17 64.96 64.37 3.25
 92.55 92.29 92.73 92.21 70 40
 40

 1

 1
1

 92.58 92.72 92.35 60 11.81 78.47 77.61 65.13 64.62 2.59 30
 30
 92.28 92.74 50 12.60 76.99 20 65.59 3.31 20
 40 10 10
 91.84 8.41 2.89
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 30 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0
 2 2 2
 (a) Distiller T 1 -Encapsulation. (b) Distiller T 2 -Traffic Type. (c) Distiller T 3 -Application.

 100 80 70
 8.72 70.62 70.43 70.90 71.28 70.53 59.66 60.67 61.49 60.55 60.96 3.29
 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
 45.08 38.95 42.01 40.98 44.53 46.91 70
 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

 90 60
 83.42 83.94 83.16 83.72 83.43 9.84 70.97 70.06 71.08 70.80 60 59.43 60.95 61.63 61.67 5.05
 80 50
 13.05 70.56 71.06 71.43 50 60.15 60.05 60.85 4.14
 83.63 84.17 83.76 84.43 70 40
 40
 1

 1
1

 84.36 84.02 83.81 60 16.29 70.70 70.48 60.78 61.36 5.14 30
 30
 83.18 83.75 50 14.23 70.55 20 60.10 3.02 20
 40 10 10
 83.31 10.29 2.33
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 30 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0
 2 2 2
 (d) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 1 -Encapsulation. (e) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 2 -Traffic Type. (f) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 3 -Application.

Figure 5: F-measure of Distiller classifier (a-c) and best performing baseline (d-f) for different combinations of the weights associated to the
three tasks. The best per-task weight-configuration is highlighted in boldface. The zero-preference levels are highlighted in dashed boxes; the
performance is minimum for the task T v when the respective λv is set to 0 (note that λ3 = 0 on the anti-diagonal: λ1 + λ2 = 1).

classified, with a clear highlight on error patterns (quantita- Indeed, despite both classifiers show qualitatively-similar error
tively summarized by the recall values reported in square brack- patterns, Distiller presents less imbalance toward the Skype
ets for each class). By comparing the Distiller diagrams class (+3.41% in terms of recall). Overall, there is a recall
(Figs. 7a and 7b) with those of the overall-best-performing improvement for all the T 3 classes and the highest gain is atbaseline 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] (Figs. 7c and 7d), we can observe a tained for FTPS (class “6”) and YouTube (class “9”), reaching
substantial reduction of misclassified biflows for all the classes +14.40% and +10.02%, respectively.
and for both tasks. Particularly, even when the error patterns Finally, we complete the fine-grained investigation with a
are less severe (e.g., VoIP class), the recall improvement for T 2 calibration analysis, as reported in Fig. 9. In fact, the latis always higher than 5%. This results in a beneficial reduc- ter aims to assess whether the class-probability estimates (the
tion of systematic error patterns (e.g., VoIP traffic misclassi- soft-output values) match the actual-class posterior probabilified as FileTransfer). Besides general improvements of recall, ties (and thus their value can be exploited for more than just a
high impact gains are obtained for specific classes, the highest ranking, as in Top-K accuracy).
ones for VPN (task T 1 ) and Email (task T 2 ), with +15.02% and In detail, we depict the reliability diagrams, that show the
+12.95% recall, respectively. accuracy as a function of the confidence and are obtained by
 To complement the investigation of fine-grained behav- partitioning the predictions into equally-spaced bins and comior, Fig. 8 shows the confusion matrices of Distiller and puting the accuracy of each bin. Confidence values range in
1D-CNN (PAY) [15] for the task T 3 . Indeed, confusion matrices [1/Lv , 1], where Lv is the number of classes of TC task v. Acrepresent a complementary means to highlight misclassifica- cordingly, the starting-point 1/Lv of the confidence interval is
tion patterns, with a higher concentration toward the diagonal— pointed out with a dashed blue line in Fig. 9.
where predicted classes equal the actual ones—implying better Indeed, a miscalibrated classifier (on a given task) returns
performance of the generic classifier. Results highlight a gen- excessively optimistic (“Over” in Fig. 9) or pessimistic (“Uneral improvement of the confusion matrix of Distiller against der” in Fig. 9) confidence outputs associated to its decisions.
the (best) baseline classifier also for the hardest learning task. Conversely, a perfectly-calibrated classifier entails a reliability
 13
 DISTILLER MLP (PAY) [26] HYBRID (HDR) [17]
 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] MLP (HDR) [26] MLP (HDR) [25]
 2D-CNN (PAY) [24] MLP (PAY) [25] 1D-CNN (HDR) [20]
 100
 Top-K Accuracy

 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 K=1 DISTILLER K=2 K=3
 MLP (PAY) [26] K=4 HYBRID (HDR) [17]K=5
 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] MLP (HDR) [26]
 (a) T 2 -Traffic Type. MLP (HDR) [25]
 2D-CNN (PAY) [24] MLP (PAY) [25] 1D-CNN (HDR) [20]
 100
 Top-K Accuracy

 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 K=1 K=2 K=3 K=4 K=5
 (b) T 3 -Application.

Figure 6: Top-K accuracy of Distiller and baseline traffic classifiers. Results refer to T 2 (a) and T 3 (b). Error bars report average ± standard
deviation.

diagram corresponding to the identity function, that is, a clas- 1D-CNN (PAY) [15], showing an ECE reduction of 1.75 times
sifier having 80% confidence leads to 80% accuracy. To obtain on T 3 , 2.03 times on T 2 , and 3.64 times on T 1 .
a concise metric of the deviation from perfect calibration, we Summarizing, the multimodal nature of Distiller is able to
also integrate the above diagrams with the Expected Calibra- provide a more consistent soft-output TC behavior on the two
tion Error (ECE). The latter metric is defined as the weighted hardest tasks (i.e. T 2 and T 3 ) with respect to all the considmean—based on the number of samples and evaluated over all ered (single-modal) baselines, namely the true class belongs
the bins—of the difference between accuracy and confidence, to the set of most probable ones even when it is not the highand provides a synthetic comparison metric for classifiers. est. Moreover, our proposal is able to achieve a systematic er-
 Once more, we contrast our Distiller classifier (Figs. 9a, 9b, ror pattern reduction with respect to the overall-best baseline,
and 9c) with the overall-best baseline (Figs. 9d, 9e, and 9f) over as shown by Sankey diagrams (on T 1 and T 2 ) and confusion
all the three TC tasks. We recall that, since T 1 is a binary TC matrices (on T 3 ). Finally, the calibration analysis highlights
problem, the range of the corresponding reliability diagrams is that our Distiller (due to the successful capitalization of multishorter since the class prediction probability is always > 0.5. modality) significantly mitigates the overfitting phenomenon—
Conversely, the lower limit of the same range equals ≈ 0.167 leading to the usual over-confident (viz. optimistic) behavior of
and ≈ 0.067 for T 2 and T 3 , respectively. DL architectures—as shown by the ECE halving on each task
 Interestingly, both classifiers exhibit a miscalibration that compared to the overall-best baseline.
tends to be over-confident (viz. optimistic) in predictions for
all but one bin. Indeed, for the predictions on T 2 whose confi- 5.4. Transfer of Knowledge among Tasks
dence falls within [0.2, 0.3[, Distiller exhibits a more under- Hereinafter, we investigate the knowledge transfer among the
confident (pessimistic) behavior than 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]— tasks firstly testing the multitask classifiers when a reject opalso having an under-confident outcome in the same range. This tion (viz. a censoring policy of “unsure” outcomes) is adopted
effect, however, is associated with a very limited number of for all the tasks, that is the classification is performed only if
classified samples characterized by poor confidence values (i.e. the highest class prediction probability associated to the vth TC
corresponding to the lowest-admissible confidence-bin for T 2 ) task exceeds its related threshold γv , thus emitting a confident
and, consequently, with the least discriminative power. verdict on the corresponding task.
 In general, in each bin—except for predictions in [0.2, 0.3[ Its adoption has been justified in the context of encrypted
for T 2 —the confidence is higher than the accuracy for both traffic, e.g. for the TC of mobile apps [8] and anonymity
classifiers. This effect can be attributed to a slight overfit- tools [42]. Specifically, given the high number of (bi)flows
ting phenomenon and it is a distinctive characteristic of DL commonly generated by network applications and services,
architectures, although the calibration analysis shows that our there is an excellent chance of identifying these latter only
multimodal-multitask Distiller significantly mitigates it. In- considering the more characteristic biflows, namely those cordeed, overall Distiller is considerably better calibrated than responding to a classification confidence above γv . Hence, a
 14
 Actual Class FileT Actual Class Str
 nonV
 PN VPN VoIP rans
 fer P2P eaming Chat Email

 6] 3] 5.45
 ] 3] 6] 0] 8] 4]
 95.3 [ 89.2 [8 80.9 2P [83.4ng [84.6at [54a.i9l [73.0
 PN [ V PN VoIP nsfe
 r[ P ami Ch Em
 nonV Tr a
 Stre
 File
 Predicted Class Predicted Class
 (a) Distiller T 1 -Encapsulation. (b) Distiller T 2 -Traffic Type.

 Actual Class FileT Actual Class Str
 nonV
 PN VPN VoIP rans
 fer P2P eaming Chat Email

 19] ] ] .34] ] ] ] ]
 92. [7 4.21 [8 0.11 [68 78.82 [79.05t [48.i6l [060.09
 PN [ V PN VoIP sfer P [ g
 P2 amin Cha Ema
 nonV Tr an
 Stre
 File
 Predicted Class Predicted Class
 (c) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 1 -Encapsulation. (d) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 2 -Traffic Type.

Figure 7: Sankey diagrams of the Distiller classifier (a, b) and the overall-best-baseline (c, d) for the T 1 -Encapsulation (a, c) and T 2 -Traffic Type
(b, d) TC tasks. The classes are ordered by decreasing number of biflows. In square brackets per-class recalls [%] are reported.

 using different γv ).
 10015 100
 15
 13
 To this end, Fig. 10 shows the F-measure and the CR when
 13
 varying the censoring threshold γv for each of the three tasks.
 11 11
 Actual Class
Actual Class

 10 10
 The present analysis is carried out for both Distiller and the
 9 9
 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] baseline. Hence, by looking at the plots
 7 7
 1 1 row-wise (resp. column-wise) the performance depicts the ef-
 5 5
 fects of reject option on the two approaches (resp. the three
 3 3
 tasks). Within each plot, the F-measure on the vth task vs. the
 1 0.1 1 0.1 censoring threshold γv is depicted via bigger markers. For com-
 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15
 Predicted Class Predicted Class
 pleteness, to also truly exploit the related nature of the mul-
 (a) Distiller. (b) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15].
 tiple TC tasks considered (viz. the knowledge transfer among
Figure 8: Confusion matrices of the Distiller classifier (a) and the them), in each figure we also report the F-measure values correoverall-best baseline (b) for the T 3 -Application TC task. Note that the sponding to the other two tasks and resulting from censoring the
log scale is used to evidence small errors. The classes are ordered by samples based on the considered γv (e.g., in Figs. 10a and 10d
decreasing number of biflows. Categorical class-labels are reported in the F-measure values for the tasks T 2 and T 3 are obtained by
Tab. 3. censoring the biflows based on the predicted probability of T 1
 against γ1 ).
 Results highlight the gain of Distiller over the baseline
generic multitask classifier can improve its TC performance on even when a reject option is applied. For instance, referring
the vth TC task with γv at the price of a reduced percentage of to the task T 2 , ≈ 85% F-measure can be obtained by rejectclassified biflows, namely the classified ratio (CR). Indeed, the ing only 15% of the overall biflows with our Distiller classidecisions on the other biflows that are under the γv are censored. fier, whereas 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] achieves the same F-measure
Thus, tuning γv enables a fine-grained control of the classifier value by rejecting more than the double of samples (i.e. >
and further (useful) flexibility to encrypted TC [8] with also the 30%). Similarly, when considering T 3 (the hardest task), ≈ 75%
ability of a differentiated tuning for each vth task to tackle (i.e. F-measure can be obtained by rejecting 25% of the overall bi-
 15
 Ideal Actual Over Under Ideal Actual Over Under Ideal Actual Over Under
 1 1 1
 0.8 0.8 0.8
Accuracy

 Accuracy

 Accuracy
 0.6 0.6 0.6
 0.4 0.4 0.4
 0.2 0.2 0.2
 ECE=21.47 ECE=67.20 ECE=69.45
 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 Confidence Confidence Confidence
 (a) Distiller T 1 -Encapsulation. (b) Distiller T 2 -Traffic Type. (c) Distiller T 3 -Application.

 Ideal Actual Over Under Ideal Actual Over Under Ideal Actual Over Under
 1 1 1
 0.8 0.8 0.8
Accuracy

 Accuracy

 Accuracy
 0.6 0.6 0.6
 0.4 0.4 0.4
 0.2 0.2 0.2
 ECE=78.21 ECE=136.08 ECE=121.85
 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 Confidence Confidence Confidence
 (d) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 1 -Encapsulation. (e) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 2 -Traffic Type. (f) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 3 -Application.

Figure 9: Reliability diagrams of Distiller (a,c,e) and overall-best baseline (b,d,f) for the three TC tasks. Confidence is divided in 10 bins, and
is ≥ 1/Lv (vertical dashed line), with Lv being the number of classes for the vth task. Over and under gap represent an over-confident (optimistic)
and under-confident (pessimistic) miscalibration pattern, respectively. To ease the comparison, the non-percentage accuracy (i.e. within [0, 1]) is
shown. Concise ECE metric is reported for each case.

flows with Distiller, whereas the baseline can achieve a com- Table 6: incoherence analysis of Distiller and overall-bestparable F-measure score by rejecting 35% of biflows. Finally, performing baseline. incoherence for the multitask implementation
by looking at the F-measure obtained by censoring on different is reported in MT column, while Single-Task evaluation is reported
 in columns S T v . incoherence evaluated in the same space the task is
tasks, it is evident that the tasks T 2 and T 3 seem more related.
 defined on (i.e. v = v s ) is highlighted with green. Marked values are:
Indeed, a variation of γ2 (resp. γ3 ) significantly reflects on the overall best incoherence (3) and per-task best incoherence (û).
F-measure performance of the task T 3 (resp. T 2 ). Such effect is
quite general as it applies to both our Distiller and the baseline: incoherence(v, v) incoherence(v, v s )
hence, we can infer that these tasks share common features for MT ST1 [vs = 1] ST2 [vs = 2] ST3 [vs = 3]
their inference process. Distiller 3
 Finally, to complement our investigation on transfer of
 v = 1 13.82 (± 1.22) û 13.99 (± 1.80) 97.85 (± 0.47) 96.58 (± 0.67)
knowledge among tasks, we perform an incoherence analysis of
 v = 2 6.82 (± 0.27) û 18.93 (± 0.05) 7.16 (± 0.14) 13.84 (± 0.16)
our Distiller and the best-performing baseline. As described in v = 3 2.52 (± 0.06) û 6.44 (± 0.05) 3.18 (± 0.06) 2.56 (± 0.06)
Sun et al. [25], the incoherence measure7 is defined as follows:
 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]
 PLv P vs vs
 `v =1 n∈N`v d(c (n), c̄`v ) v=1 28.41 (± 0.75) 27.91 (± 2.32) û 98.75 (± 0.47) 97.13 (± 0.69)
incoherence(v, v s ) fi 100 · P P  v=2 9.14 (± 0.21) 18.95 (± 0.19) 9.05 (± 0.28) û 14.65 (± 0.24)
 L P vs vs
 `v 6=`v d(c (n), c̄` 0 ) v=3
 0 3.08 (± 0.07) û
 `v =1 n∈N`v
 v
 6.40 (± 0.16) 3.67 (± 0.09) 3.13 (± 0.05)

 (3)

where d(·, ·) denotes the Euclidean distance and N`v represents of its respective true label, the lower the incoherence. Hence,
the set of test samples whose true label for the vth task is `v . the lower the incoherence, the better the representation learned
Furthermore, cvs (n) is the soft-output vector associated to the (with implications on explainability [25]).
 vs
vth th
 s task for the n test sample, while c̄`v is the average of all the Based on the above definition, it is apparent that
soft-output vectors associated with the vth incoherence(v, v s ) can be evaluated on the same space the task
 s task whose true label
on the vth task is `v . The above measure can be interpreted as is defined (i.e. v = v s ) or on a different vector space (i.e. v 6= v s ).
a metric of incoherence among the soft-output vectors associ- In the latter case, the classification output distance is taken from
ated to the same label: the closer the vector is to the centroid the centroids of a different set of labels (with respect to another
 task v s ): a small incoherence means that the two tasks share
 7 In Sun et al. [25] the metric is named perplexity, but we avoid this term as it a significant common representation. Indeed, for the multitask
is widely adopted for a different concept in ML. Compared with that definition, architectures there is a soft-output vector corresponding to each
we normalize it to 100 instead of 1 for the sake of results readability. task and then v = v s for every task (all tasks are considered,
 16
 F-meas [T1] F-meas [T3] F-meas [T1] F-meas [T3] F-meas [T1] F-meas [T3]
 F-meas [T2] CR [T1] F-meas [T2] CR [T2] F-meas [T2] CR [T3]
 100 100 100
 90 90 90
Percentage

 Percentage

 Percentage
 80 80 80
 70 70 70
 60 60 60
 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 1 2 3
 F-meas [T
 (a) Distiller ] F-meas [T3]
 T 11-Encapsulation. Distiller[TT12]-Traffic Type.
 (b) F-meas F-meas [T3] Distiller[TT13]-Application.
 (c) F-meas F-meas [T3]
 F-meas [T2] CR [T1] F-meas [T2] CR [T2] F-meas [T2] CR [T3]
 100 100 100
 90 90 90
Percentage

 Percentage

 Percentage
 80 80 80
 70 70 70
 60 60 60
 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 50 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
 1 2 3
 (d) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 1 -Encapsulation. (e) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 2 -Traffic Type. (f) 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] T 3 -Application.

Figure 10: F-measure and ratio of classified samples (CR) [%] vs. censoring threshold γ of the Distiller classifier (a-c) and the overall-bestperforming baseline (d-f). The F-measure on the vth task vs. the censoring threshold γv is depicted via filled and bigger markers. Differently, the
corresponding F-measure score on tasks different from vth , as a function of γv , is highlighted with void and smaller markers.

there is no other task). Differently, this does not apply to single- multitask learning, as opposed to (separate) single-task countask architectures. In this case, the generality of the above def- terparts. Finally, by comparing the incoherence values of the
inition (Eq. (3)) allows also to analyze the incoherence proper- Distiller and baseline classifier, it is apparent that our proposal
ties of single-task classifiers on the other tasks, so as to consider achieves lower incoherence on all the three tasks. Notably, for
them as baselines to assess the incoherence gain (the lower the T 1 the incoherence reduction is more than two-fold (13.82 of
better) provided by the multitask version. To this aim, both a Distiller vs. 28.41 of 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]): this can be exmultitask instance of Distiller and 1D-CNN (PAY) [15] is con- plained by the presence of only two groups (i.e. two classes,
sidered, as well as their respective single-task versions. These since it is a binary task), emphasizing the improvement brought
are obtained by setting a zero-preference value8 for all but the by the Distiller architecture.
considered task (e.g., {λ1 , λ2 , λ3 } = {1, 0, 0} to obtain the single- In summary, the above analysis highlights the further imtask ST1 instance). Accordingly, Tab. 6 reports the results of the provement of TC effectiveness (in terms of F-measure) of Disincoherence analysis for both multitask and single-task variants tiller on all the three tasks, achievable by means of a per-task
of Distiller and 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]. From the results, it is ap- reject option. Furthermore, by looking at the incoherence meaparent that the incoherence is lower when the metric is evalu- sure, we observe that our Distiller approach (as opposed to
ated on the soft-output space that matches to the task consid- the overall-best baseline) ensures a better separation among difered (i.e. v = v s highlighted in green). While this is always the ferent classes with respect to its single-task counterparts. This
case for multitask architectures (MT in Tab. 6), for single-task confirms the effective capitalization of multitask learning by our
architectures (ST in Tab. 6) this is only achieved when the in- proposal, obtained via the fruitful transfer of knowledge among
coherence can be evaluated s.t. v s = v for a given task v, since the different tasks.
the other tasks are not considered in the training phase. Secondly, while Distiller always ensures lower incoherence with
respect to the corresponding value of its single task counter- 6. Conclusions and Future Directions
part, such claim is not always true for the 1D-CNN (PAY) [15]
 In this paper, we tackled multipurpose ET classification via
baseline. For instance, on both T 1 and T 2 the baseline is not
 a general multimodal multitask DL architecture (termed Disable to improve (viz. reduce) the incoherence with respect to
 tiller). Our aim was to provide an effective design basis for sothe single-task counterpart solely trained for T 1 and T 2 , respecphisticated network management requiring the solution of diftively. This confirms the effective capitalization by Distiller of
 ferent network visibility tasks. The proposed architecture was
the regularization (overfitting-avoidance) properties granted by
 based on a suitably-defined (two-step) training procedure which
 enforces information distillation from each modality and reaps
 8 See Sec. 5.2 on Pareto analysis. the regularization gains of multitask learning.
 17
 Our evaluation was performed on a dataset of human- Networking Experiments And Technologies (CoNEXT), 2019, pp. 123–
generated traffic (ISCX VPN-nonVPN) labeled according to 137.
 [6] Z. Chai, A. Ghafari, A. Houmansadr, On the importance of encryptedthree different TC tasks (i.e. encapsulation, traffic type, and ap- SNI (ESNI) to censorship circumvention, in: 9th USENIX Workshop on
plication recognition). For the above TC scenario, we defined Free and Open Communications on the Internet (FOCI), 2019.
a peculiar instance of Distiller, characterized by two com- [7] A. Jonas, J. Burrell, Friction, snake oil, and weird countries: Cyberseplementary input modalities (header vs. payload information) curity systems could deepen global inequality through regional blocking,
 Big Data & Society 6 (2019) 2053951719835238.
and providing the simultaneous solution to the aforementioned [8] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, Robust smartphone app
three TC tasks. identification via encrypted network traffic analysis, IEEE Transactions
 First, results from the overall comparison showed perfor- on Information Forensics and Security 13 (2018) 63–78.
mance gains by Distiller over state-of-the-art multitask archi- [9] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapè, Multi-classification approaches for classifying mobile app traffic, Journal of Network and Comtectures up to +8.45% (on T 1 ), +7.58% (on T 2 ), and +5.09% puter Applications 103 (2018) 131–145.
(on T 3 ) in terms of F-measure with respect to the overall-best [10] V. Carela-Español, P. Barlet-Ros, M. Solé-Simó, A. Dainotti, W. de Dobaseline. Equally important, Distiller exhibited very manage- nato, A. Pescapè, K-dimensional trees for continuous traffic classificaable training complexity and lower computational burden than tion, in: 2nd International Workshop on Traffic Monitoring and Analysis
 (TMA), volume 6003, 2010, pp. 141–154.
the overall-best-performing multitask baseline, namely −7.84 s [11] A. Dainotti, F. Gargiulo, L. I. Kuncheva, A. Pescapè, C. Sansone, Identiin terms of RTPE, whose total impact is magnified by two or- fication of traffic flows hiding behind TCP port 80, in: IEEE International
ders of magnitude according to the number of training epochs. Conference on Communications (ICC), 2010, pp. 1–6.
 [12] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Optimizing fea-
Therefore, a properly-structured multimodal-multitask archi- ture selection for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A systematic
tecture was shown to be effective in both raising TC perfor- approach, IEEE Network 34 (2020) 20–27.
mance and lowering computational complexity. [13] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep learning, MIT press, 2016.
 Second, the fine-grained analysis of the Distiller outputs [14] Z. Wang, The Applications of Deep Learning on Traffic Identification.,
 Black Hat USA, Las Vegas, 2015.
highlighted also the structural gain of our proposal in terms of [15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traf-
(a) more consistent soft-output behavior (e.g., > 90% Top-2 ac- fic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in:
curacy, with a +3.63% gain over the best baseline), (b) system- IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics
atic error pattern reduction, and (c) improved calibration (e.g., (ISI), 2017, pp. 43–48.
 [16] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, M. Saberian, Deep packet:
the ECE is at least halved on each task). A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,
 Third, Distiller advantages were confirmed by the measure Soft Computing 24 (2020) 1999–2012.
of relatedness among the considered tasks (showing effective [17] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, J. Lloret, Network
knowledge transfer), in terms of dependence among censored traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for Internet of Things, IEEE Access 5 (2017) 18042–18050.
outcomes, and by the better separation ensured, in terms of [18] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Mobile encrypted traflower incoherence, with positive impact on explainability as fic classification using deep learning: experimental evaluation, lessons
well. Accordingly, the whole experimental evaluation shown learned, and challenges, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
in Sec. 5 substantiates our claim that employing a principled Management 16 (2019) 445–458.
 [19] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapè, MIMETIC: mobile enapproach for designing a DL architecture for TC tasks allows crypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning, Elsevier
to better exploit DL potential, while simultaneously avoiding Computer Networks 165 (2019) 106944.
domain-specific pitfalls. [20] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Multitask learning for network traffic classification, in:
 29th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications and
 Our newly-proposed Distiller approach suggests the follow- Networks (ICCCN), 2020, pp. 1–9.
ing future directions of research: (i) use of advanced DL layers [21] A. Rago, G. Piro, G. Boggia, P. Dini, Multi-task learning at the mobile
(e.g., inception, residual, attention); (ii) semi-supervised mul- edge: an effective way to combine traffic classification and prediction,
titask learning; (iii) gray-box analysis of DL traffic classifiers IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technologies 69 (2020) 10362–10374.
 [22] S. Ruder, An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks,
with explainable AI tools [43]; (iv) open-set TC, i.e. ability to http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05098, 2017. arXiv:1706.05098.
handle classes not present in the training set; (v) sensible adop- [23] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. Mamun, A. A. Ghorbani, Characterition of the Big Data paradigm to (encrypted) traffic classifiers zation of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features, in: 2nd
drawn from Distiller. International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy
 (ICISSP), 2016, pp. 407–414.
 [24] H. Huang, H. Deng, J. Chen, L. Han, W. Wang, Automatic multi-task
References learning system for abnormal network traffic detection, International
 Journal of Emerging Technologies in Learning 13 (2018) 4–20.
 [1] A. Dainotti, A. Pescapè, K. C. Claffy, Issues and future directions in [25] H. Sun, Y. Xiao, J. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Qi, J. Liao, X. Liu, Common
 traffic classification, IEEE Network 26 (2012) 35–40. knowledge based and one-shot learning enabled multi-task traffic classi-
 [2] X. Wang, K. Xu, W. Chen, Q. Li, M. Shen, B. Wu, ID-Based SDN for the fication, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 39485–39495.
 Internet of Things, IEEE Network 34 (2020) 76–83. [26] Y. Zhao, J. Chen, D. Wu, J. Teng, S. Yu, Multi-task network anomaly
 [3] F. Jejdling, et al., Ericsson mobility report, Ericsson AB, Business Area detection using federated learning, in: ACM 10th International Sympo-
 Networks, Stockholm (SE), Tech. Rep. EAB-19 7381 (2019). sium on Information and Communication Technology (SoICT), 2019, pp.
 [4] H. Yao, G. Ranjan, A. Tongaonkar, Y. Liao, Z. M. Mao, SAMPLES: 273–279.
 Self adaptive mining of persistent lexical snippets for classifying mobile [27] D. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Lin, Traffic identification of mobile apps based on
 application traffic, in: ACM 21st International Conference on Mobile variational autoencoder network, in: 13th IEEE International Conference
 Computing and Networking (MobiCom), 2015, pp. 439–451. on Computational Intelligence and Security (CIS), 2017, pp. 287–291.
 [5] R. Houser, Z. Li, C. Cotton, H. Wang, An investigation on information [28] L. Vu, C. T. Bui, Q. U. Nguyen, A deep learning based method for hanleakage of DNS over TLS, in: 15th International Conference on Emerging dling imbalanced problem in network traffic classification, in: ACM 8th

 18
 International Symposium on Information and Communication Technol- tion, Elsevier Computer Networks 176 (2020) 107258.
 ogy (SoICT), 2017, pp. 333–339. [36] D. Ramachandram, G. W. Taylor, Deep multimodal learning: A survey on
[29] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, FS-Net: A flow sequence network recent advances and trends, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 34 (2017)
 for encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE Conference on Computer 96–108.
 Communications (INFOCOM), 2019, pp. 1171–1179. [37] J. Ngiam, A. Khosla, M. Kim, J. Nam, H. Lee, A. Y. Ng, Multimodal
[30] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, Y. Guo, Deep − Full − Range: a deep learn- deep learning, in: 28th International Conference on Machine Learning
 ing based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection (ICML), 2011, pp. 689–696.
 framework, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 45182–45190. [38] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, K. Salamatian, Early application identification,
[31] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, S. Yu, Identification of en- in: ACM CoNEXT conference, 2006, p. 6.
 crypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term mem- [39] D. P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, in:
 ory, IEEE Transactions on Big Data, in press (2019). 3rd International Conference for Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[32] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Toward effective mobile [40] H. Qi, E. R. Sparks, A. Talwalkar, PALEO: A performance model for
 encrypted traffic classification through deep learning, Neurocomputing deep neural networks, in: International Conference on Learning Repre-
 409 (2020) 306–315. sentations (ICLR), 2017.
[33] Z. Yao, J. Ge, Y. Wu, X. Lin, R. He, Y. Ma, Encrypted traffic classification [41] E. Mizutani, S. E. Dreyfus, On complexity analysis of supervised MLPbased on Gaussian mixture models and hidden Markov models, Journal learning for algorithmic comparisons, in: IEEE International Joint Conof Network and Computer Applications 166 (2020) 102711. ference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), volume 1, 2001, pp. 347–352.
[34] D. Li, W. Li, X. Wang, C.-T. Nguyen, S. Lu, App trajectory recognition [42] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, A. Pescape, Anonymity services Tor,
 over encrypted internet traffic based on deep neural network, Elsevier I2P, JonDonym: classifying in the dark (web), IEEE Transactions on
 Computer Networks 179 (2020) 107372. Dependable and Secure Computing 17 (2020) 662–675.
[35] C. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, B. Jiang, CETAnalytics: comprehen- [43] H. Hagras, Toward human-understandable, explainable AI, IEEE Comsive effective traffic information analytics for encrypted traffic classifica- puter 51 (2018) 28–36.

 19

 View publication stats