10452 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

 Embedding Blockchain Technology Into IoT for
 Security: A Survey
 Li Da Xu, Fellow, IEEE, Yang Lu , Member, IEEE, and Ling Li

 Abstract—In recent years, the Internet of Things (IoT) has technology and mechanisms to improve its overall security
made great progress. The interconnection between IoT and the level. With the rapid development of the blockchain, its secu-
Internet enables real-time information processing and transaction rity functions have been revealed, and they have become
implementation through heterogeneous intelligent devices. But
the security, the privacy, and the reliability of IoT are key chal- potential approaches for IoT security, with a special focus on
lenges that limit its development. The features of the blockchain, its decentralized and transparent system, as well as on its consuch as decentralization, consensus mechanism, data encryption, sensus mechanisms and privacy protocols, encrypted data and
and smart contracts, are suitable for building distributed IoT management, and smart contract agreement [1]–[4].
systems to prevent potential attacks and to reduce transaction The IoT refers to a real-time information-sharing system for
costs. As a decentralized and transparent database platform,
blockchain has the potential to raise the performance of IoT objects based, on Internet technology, using radio-frequency
security to a higher level. This article systematically analyzes identification (RFID) and product electronic coding. IoT has
state of the art of IoT security based on the blockchain, gradually developed into an information industry chain, intepaying special attention to the security features, issues, technolo- grating the Internet as well as information and communication
gies, approaches, and related scenarios in blockchain-embedded technologies, such as sensors and cloud computing. At this
IoT. The integration and interoperation of blockchain and IoT is
an important and foreseeable development in the computational point in time, IoT has penetrated into many aspects of human
communication system. life, such as Industry 4.0, the smart society, artificial intelligence (AI), and 6G. IoT is a network that connects as many
 Index Terms—Blockchain, decentralization, information communication technology (ICT), Internet of Things (IoT), security, things as possible, such as RFID, infrared sensors, global posismart contract. tioning systems, laser scanners, etc. The system connects all
 possible devices to the Internet for information exchange and
 communication, in order to intelligently identify, locate, track,
 I. I NTRODUCTION monitor, and manage the entire network [5]–[8].
 Blockchain is a peer-to-peer (P2P) distributed ledger tech-
 T PRESENT, the Internet of Things (IoT) is an enor-
A mous ecosystem. Its timeliness, convenience, inclusiveness, scalability, integration, and interoperability make IoT
 nology based on encryption algorithms and a shared database
 technology on the Internet. Blockchain technically solves
 trust-relevant issues. The secure transmission of the hash
an unparalleled prospect for further development. Its appli- chain-based encryption algorithm and the time stamp mechcations extend to a wide range of fields, such as agriculture anism of the certificate value ensure data traceability and
and food traceability, remote medicare and hospitality, location irreversible modification. Consistency algorithms are used to
and navigation, logistics and operations, manufacturing and ensure the relationship between the node and the block data.
automation, smart city and home use, etc. At the same time, Programmable smart contracts are guaranteed, based on the
more and more security vulnerabilities have arisen—urgent consistency of the automated script code and the Turing virtual
issues that need to be solved. During the first half of 2017, machine. The blockchain is a powerful security system based
the number of attacks on IoT devices increased by 280%. on cryptography, communication technology, and the consen-
By 2021, corporate spending on information security related sus mechanism. Blockchain is revolutionizing the IoT system,
to IoT is projected to increase from the current $83.5 bil- in a variety of aspects. The unique features of blockchain—its
lion to $119.9 billion. Based on the architecture of IoT itself, P2P decentralized network, its open and transparent multiparty
many effective paradigms and protocols have been used to consensus, and its untampered data—give IoT the ability to
prevent or to eliminate potential security risks. But these have achieve higher security standards [9]–[11].
not been enough. IoT requires the assistance of appropriate Blockchain technology can be applied to various systems,
 such as identity management, supply chain management, and
 Manuscript received September 14, 2020; revised November 15, 2020;
accepted February 8, 2021. Date of publication February 19, 2021; date of the IoT. Using a P2P network of computers will run the procurrent version June 23, 2021. (Corresponding author: Yang Lu.) tocols and will hold an encrypted and immutable copy of
 Li Da Xu is with the IT&DS, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, transactions on every node on the network. Blockchain and
VA 23529 USA.
 Yang Lu is with the Department of Information Systems and Operations the related technologies have the potential to resolve several
Management, University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK 73034 USA (e- of the key security issues of IoT.
mail: ziiyuu@gmail.com). 1) Blockchain ensures security of IoT through consensus
 Ling Li is with the Department of Information Technology & Decision
Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA 23529 USA. mechanisms. The reason for the security issues is the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3060508 lack of trust mechanisms between devices within the IoT
 2327-4662 
 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10453

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C ENTRALIZED AND D ECENTRALIZED S YSTEM

 system. Blockchain provides a mechanism that does not self-maintaining community. This fact renders IoT not
 require trust between nodes. obsolete, regardless whether it is in a product life cycle
 2) Blockchain solves the reliability of IoT. The distributed or beyond a life cycle, but this will save infrastructure
 network structure of blockchain guarantees that, even costs [12]–[18].
 if one or more nodes are attacked, the data of the IoT and blockchain are emerging technologies that are attractentire network system is still reliable and safe. When ing a lot of attention but, most importantly, security is a critical
 the system needs to prohibit a participant who behaves factor that affects the smooth and successful integration of
 inappropriately, the consensus mechanism can be used blockchain into IoT, in order to improve the performance of
 to identify the participant through the 51% nodes agree- IoT security. This article compares the extant survey (review)
 ment without affecting the overall performance. papers about IoT security. It is better to divide the selected
 3) Blockchain can significantly reduce equipment costs papers into two categories: 1) survey papers about IoT secuand increase the effectiveness of the entire IoT system. rity and 2) papers about blockchain-based IoT security. The
 Blockchain makes full use of P2P computing to pro- selected papers were culled from popular academic databases,
 cess hundreds of billions of transactions that occur such as IEEE Xplore, Web of Science (WoS), and Scopus.
 in IoT. Blockchain can reduce costs incurred during Based upon the recent five-year citation (Google Scholar),
 the establishment and the maintenance of a centralized 15 papers were selected (Table I). Seven papers are about
 database. Meanwhile, the blockchain can make full use IoT security and eight papers are about blockchain-based IoT
 of the computing, storage capacity, and broadband of security. Specifically, the papers about IoT security focus on
 idle devices distributed in IoT, reducing calculation and IoT security and the related challenges and future directions.
 storage costs. Most of the papers about blockchain-based IoT security dis-
 4) Blockchain can extend the life cycle of products cuss the way in which blockchain can be integrated into
 or services. IoT, under the blockchain model, trans- the IoT system for security and the relevant anti-measures
 fers the responsibility of maintaining equipment to a against potential attacks to IoT. However, only a few of the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10454 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Fig. 1. Roadmap of this article.

selected papers illustrate scenarios of attacks to IoT secu- In Section IV, readers learn about the taxonomy of
rity under blockchain. Based upon the foundation of these blockchain-based IoT security; structural security, such
papers, this article not only systematically illustrates the secu- as sensor layers, network layers, and application layers;
rity related issues in IoT, but it also highlights the way in and functional security, such as device safety upgrades,
which blockchain-based mechanisms handle security in the access control, identity authentication, data assurance, antientire IoT system, including features, functions, categories, Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack, and IoT network
measures, scenarios, challenges, future directions, etc. self-regulation.
 Our article is a relatively comprehensive survey of In Section V, readers become familiar with different types
blockchain-based IoT security. It aims to recognize and clarify of attacks of abandon: Denial of Service (DoS), DDoS,
IoT security issues under blockchain, from different perspec- equipment injection, falsifying, link, modifying, public block
tives. The goal of this article is to provide an in-depth survey modifying, and time interval destruction.
of the use of blockchain technology to provide and improve the In Section VI, readers recognize the three categories of
performance of IoT security and privacy. A detailed roadmap blockchain: 1) public; 2) private; and 3) consortium and
(Fig. 1) is offered, to provide readers with a clear view of the learn about the infrastructure of blockchain-based information
construct. sharing.
 In Section I, readers are offered a general idea about the In Section VII, readers are exposed to the thinking about
status of IoT development, a brief interpretation to IoT, the the framework of blockchain-based IoT security; the decenpotential integration of IoT and blockchain, and a summary tralized and disintermediated IoT platform; data processand comparison of survey papers about blockchain-based IoT ing and the provenance system; and public service, such
security. as the healthcare industry, the traffic management, and the
 In Section II, readers become familiar with the IoT risks in smart city.
data gathering, data transmission, embedded tags, data storing, In Section VIII, readers are exposed to two parts: 1) the
authentication and access control, and infrastructure. technical challenges, such as the performance of IoT data pro-
 In Section III, readers get information about the differences cessing, the consensus mechanism, network bandwidth, unrebetween the centralized and decentralized platforms, decen- liable data communication and 2) the inconsistency of block
tralization, consensus algorithm and trust, chronological and recording; and research trends, such as a new blockchaindistributed data, data encryption, and smart contracts. based business mode, the integration of the blockchain and

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10455

edge computing for IoT security, a double-chained IoT security D. Risks of Data Storing
scheme, the interoperability of IoT, blockchain, and 6G. The IoT collects a lot of data and will also retain many
 This article is outlined as follows: Section II addresses the users’ personal and private information, such as their passmajor security risks in IoT. Section III depicts blockchain- words, personal preferences, etc. Regarding the stored data,
embedded IoT characteristics. Section IV discusses different ways to prevent theft and destruction of data and ways to
categories of security issues in IoT. Section V briefly intro- prepare, in time, if the above situation occurs, all counduces blockchain-based IoT attacks. Section VI delineates termeasures should be considered. In addition, when stored
blockchain-based information sharing security mechanisms. data are maliciously mixed with “dirty” data, the IoT system
Section VII illustrates the IoT security framework and applica- will appear to misfunction. Therefore, it is also necestions. Section VIII discusses technical challenges and research sary to consider how to deal with data pollution and other
trends. The conclusion is found in Section IX. incidents [24], [27].

 II. M AJOR S ECURITY R ISKS IN I OT E. Risks of Authentication and Access Control
 The IoT technology connects various appliances, equipment, Network authentication is usually divided into identity
and tools implemented with sensors, truly realizing real-time authentication and message authentication. Identity authenmonitoring and intelligent management and operations. With tication requires a key to ensure reliability. However, in
the vigorous development of IoT, its security issues have grad- communication, if one of the secret keys is stolen, the data in
ually become prominent. Due to the structural deficits of IoT, the entire communication process can be stolen, causing
the current level of security technologies and measures do losses to the system. Message identification and authenticanot adapt well to the IoT ecosystem. In detail, the security tion, one of commonly used authentication methods in IoT,
issues in IoT are the risks of data gathering, data transmis- is a protection method to ensure the integrity and security of
sion, tags being embedded, data storing, authentication and information when exchanging information. However, in the
access control, and IoT infrastructure [32]–[34]. message authentication process, the message authentication
 code is usually static. The intruder can obtain the correct mes-
A. Risks of Data Gathering sage authentication code through exhaustive or surveillance
 The original data of IoT come from a terminal device methods, and then pretend to be the receiver and interact with
and are collected by sensors and other devices. Due to the the involved parties. This phenomenon can lead to the leakage
large number of sensing devices in the entire IoT system, of a large amount of data, in the IoT system [28], [29].
the entire sensing control system presents multisource heterogeneity. Generally, sensors are relatively simple and cannot F. Risks of IoT Infrastructure
be monitored effectively for a long time. This brings greater The current system architecture of IoT is a centralized and
security risks. In addition, terminal devices rarely take protec- supervised architecture. In this architecture, the establishment
tive measures; attackers can easily obtain key node passwords of a system trust mechanism is very simple and a reliable third
and other identity information and can use the information to party is required to uniformly manage all device information
publish and convey incorrect information. A DoS attack is one in the system. With the continuous development of IoT techcommon security attack that could affect the normal operation nology, the number of IoT terminal devices will reach tens
of the system [35], [36]. of billions. Such a huge quantity and data source will bring
 tremendous pressure to the third parties. Hence, IoT needs
B. Risks of Data Transmission a more advanced architecture to reduce its reliance on third
 Since the total amount of data collected by sensors and other parties and to establish a new trust mechanism in order to
devices is not large, the complicated protection measures are improve the overall performance of the system [30]–[32].
usually not taken during information transmission. This gives
attackers the opportunity to invade during data transmission. III. C HARACTERISTICS OF B LOCKCHAIN -E MBEDDED I OT
Once this happens, it will affect the IoT system, thereby dam-
 The terms “IoT” and “blockchain” both have the meaning
aging user rights and causing the system to fail to perform
 of “connection,” i.e., “net” and “chain.” IoT is a technology
certain functions [23]–[25].
 that connects people, devices, and platforms through various sensing terminals to achieve information transmission and
C. Risks of Tag Being Embedded service. Blockchain is a technology that integrates cryptogra-
 After data collection, IoT usually transmits information phy, consensus protocols, a P2P network, and smart contracts
directly to the control center, in a wireless format. However, for data exchange, processing, and storage. It can be seen
this procedure is directly exposed, without good protection. that IoT and blockchain are two different dimensions of the
Thus, if some tags are embedded in other substances, the information processing system: 1) IoT includes all of the entiterminal device will always be monitored. This will lead to ties with physical space and 2) aims to break through the
the monitoring of a large amount of basic information and information flow according to the communication protocol;
the leakage of personal and private information. It even raises blockchain focuses on safely managing the flow of information
social and public safety issues [22], [22]. in a timely manner. Therefore, the link between IoT and

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10456 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN C ENTRALIZED AND D ECENTRALIZED S YSTEMS

blockchain lies in information storage, encryption security, and the processes of data interaction, downloading, and verifivalue transfer [37], [38]. cation do not have a supervised central node but, rather,
 IoT connects hundreds of millions of devices. Ensuring the a decentralized structure composed of multiple nodes within
privacy and the security of each device and interconnection the system. Also, unlike the traditional structure, each node
between different devices is not easy to achieve. The P2P in the network does not rely on unified management, and
propagation has high network latency in the system. When the nodes’ functions and roles are identical. When data are
the number of nodes is too large, the order of transac- transmitted between different nodes, the receiving node will
tions observed by each node over a period of time may perform identity verification on the sending node. After the
not be identical. Hence, IoT needs a mechanism to allow verification is executed, the received data record will be
it to reach an agreement on the sequence of the transac- broadcast on the entire network. Blockchain, using mathtions that occur within similar time periods. The consensus ematical algorithms to implement a trust mechanism, can
mechanism improves the privacy and the security of data trans- effectively prevent the centralized structure of the IoT system
mitted between IoT devices. Blockchain is a powerful tool from paralyzing the entire network due to malicious security
that can be used to construct a more secure IoT network by attacks [14]–[16], [40]–[43].
employing blockchain’s major features: decentralization, con- This decentralization means that the flow of data between
sensus algorithm and trust, chronological and distributed data, nodes is not limited to a central point and is not dependent
data encryption, and smart contracts [39], [40]. on third parties. The blockchain-distributed nodes form a P2P
 Traditionally, all data, such as user account information and network, which consists of verification, propagation, and contransaction history, are stored and regulated in the centralized sensus mechanisms. Under the premise of security between
database. Security and privacy are poor; once the database nodes, the collection, verification, storage, and dissemination
is attacked, the damaged data are difficult to recover. Users of data can effectively avoid high-cost, high-risk, and inefhave only their own records and cannot know the transac- ficient problems in the centralized system. In a blockchain
tion records of other users; thus, the establishment of the system, there is no centralized node and no managerial strucmutual trust network is affected. In a blockchain system, each ture. Rather, many nodes constitute a distributed network.
node becomes an independent provider and receiver, and each The various methods of security maintenance in the network
entity is evenly dispersed. The form of the direct P2P plat- depend on all the nodes that have authorities and capaform has the potential to reduce unnecessary costs, such as bilities within the network. Each node is equal, and there
power loss and transaction costs. It is also possible to conduct is no hierarchical mechanism among the nodes [14]–[16],
an information exchange between nodes in different regions [40]–[43].
and to allocate transactions across regions. All information Each node has a complete data record. When a node
and nodes can be anonymous, in order to ensure the security receives data from another node, the node verifies the idenof the users. The decentralized system eliminates the need tity and data of the other node. If the verification passes, the
for a central supervision, improves data sharing and secu- data received by the node will be propagated to other nodes
rity, optimizes revenues and efficiency, and increases mutual and to the entire network. The verification, storage, maintrust between entities. The following table (Table II) briefly tenance, and transmission of data in a blockchain network
addresses the differences between the centralized and the are based on a distributed structure. The algorithm and prodecentralized platforms [12]–[16]. tocol of the trust consensus mechanism replace the mutual
 trust construct between the centralized authorities. Hence, the
A. Decentralization blockchain optimizes the centralized structure of IoT and
 The main feature of blockchain is decentralization. Unlike reduces the dependence of IoT on the centralized model.
the traditional network system, in the blockchain network, Blockchain has changed the way in which the IoT processes

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10457

data, preventing damage to the entire system caused by timestamp, as an important parameter of the Proof of Existence
a centralized IoT structure [14]–[16], [40]–[43]. (PoE), can confirm that some data must exist at a certain point.
 This ensures that the blockchain database is not tampered with.
B. Consensus Algorithm and Trust Time order is used to ensure the security of IoT data, preventing
 attackers from injecting a large amount of irrelevant data into
 The consensus mechanism solves the problem of how
 the data platform, in order to prevent data services from being
blockchain can achieve consistency in distributed scenarios.
 blocked [14]–[16], [44]–[47].
It is one of the key factors of the blockchain system. The con-
 In the blockchain system, the function of a block is like
sensus mechanism ensures the fairness of each node in the P2P
 a ledger. It can record all information exchanges on the entire
network. It is a part of the entire system and a unified agreeblockchain, and the information records can be checked by
ment that all nodes need to follow. The consensus mechanism
 other nodes at any time. Unlike the general recording method,
is a mechanism that motivates the system’s ability to screen
 the information records of a blockchain are scattered on all
honest nodes and merge them to form an unchanging record. It
 nodes without a center, forming a typical distributed database
depends on the distributed maintenance of each node to a comsystem. When some nodes are attacked or when data are dammon ledger database with unified content and it is difficult to
 aged, other nodes still have complete information, so this will
tamper with, in the blockchain system. The maintenance pronot affect the system. This feature will significantly improve
cess is not only a process in which each node in the blockchain
 the data and information storage security of IoT [45], [46].
competes to accept new transaction record, but it is also a process in which each node verifies the validity of the information
recorded in the blockchain system. The blockchain consen- D. Data Encryption
sus mechanisms include the Proof of Work (PoW), Proof of In the blockchain system, when transmitting information, an
Share (PoS), Delegated Proof of Sake (DPoS), and practical asymmetric encryption algorithm is used to ensure data secu-
Byzantine fault tolerance (PBFT) [24]–[27]. rity. The principle of the asymmetric encryption algorithm
 In the blockchain system, the address associated with the is that both sending and receiving nodes need to generate
public key in the asymmetric encryption algorithm is used a pair of public and private keys in advance for encrypto redistribute user identities, so the traditional PKI-based tion and decryption. Before the sending nodes transmit to the
certificate authority is no longer needed, thus avoiding the receiving nodes, both nodes will share a public key with each
problem of certificate authority. The blockchain uses a consen- other, then the sender uses the receiver’s public key to encrypt
sus algorithm to decompose and establish a trust mechanism the information, and the encrypted information can only be
in the entire network. In this mechanism, there is no need decrypted with the private key. Only the receiving node knows
to share identity information, just to replace the address to the private key, thus ensuring the reliability and security of the
interact; nodes can also change their addresses. The consen- transmitted information [14]–[16].
sus mechanism can resolve security issues in the information Blockchain uses asymmetric encryption, including
transmission of IoT and can protect the privacy of specific data encryption and digital signatures, to encrypt data.
devices or users [13]–[17]. Data encryption in a blockchain ensures the security of data
 Due to the decentralization of blockchain, data transmis- and reduces the risk of lost or corrupted data. In transaction
sion between nodes is secure, open, and transparent. The processing, the blockchain uses a timestamp mechanism to
mechanisms of the blockchain technically avoid the crucial generate an ID for each transaction. The user can query the
issue of trust between mutual parties; they implement algo- relevant transaction data according to the ID. When the new
rithms to autonomously identify and verify the authentic block is verified, the current block is added to the main
entities and transactions. Blockchain retains all the transaction block. Each block uses a hash of an algorithm to identify
data in each block. Blockchain users can get all the data in its uniqueness. If an attacker intends to tamper with the
blockchain without additional centralized processing. The fea- data, more than half of the nodes must confirm. For the
ture of blockchain trust can be applied to the trust mechanism system and the structure of blockchain, this possibility is
of IoT so that transactions between users can be implemented very small. Transaction data are transmitted over the network
autonomously, without a trusting mechanism. Additionally, the and is digitally signed, aiming to indicate the identity and
data recorded in the ledger of the block are more transparent approval of the data content. The digital signature algoand reliable [12], [14]–[16], [41]. rithm commonly used is the elliptic-curve digital signature
 algorithm (ECDSA) [14]–[16], [48]–[50].
C. Chronological and Distributed Data
 Blockchain uses timestamps to identify and to record E. Smart Contract
each transaction. A time dimension is added to the data, The IoT responds and executes the actions needed to meet
and the data have a time order. Sequential confirmation makes the established conditions and rules, and the process should
the data traceable. The timestamp method not only guarantees be performed step by step. Some operations rely on the
the originality of the data but it also reduces the traceability status parameter to determine whether to perform the next
cost of the transaction. Time order data enhance the irreversible step, making the operation complex and time consuming.
modification of information. The data of the common ledger Hence, multiple operations cannot be efficiently performed
are open and they are transparent to the involved parties. The automatically and continuously. A smart contract is a set

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10458 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Fig. 2. Taxonomy of blockchain-based IoT security.

of commitments defined in a digital form. From the user’s completes the value transfer in the process of information sharpoint of view, a smart contract is an automatic guarantee ing and exchange, fulfilling the requirements of information
program. When certain conditions are met, the smart con- availability and reliability [55]–[57].
tract automatically releases and transmits the corresponding IoT is a comprehensive system that, possibly, consists of
information. From a technical perspective, a smart contract everything. As an emerging technology, blockchain is capais a Web server. This server is not built on the Internet, but ble of changing the transaction process of IoT and can
runs specific contract programs on the blockchain. Smart con- improve security performance throughout the whole system.
tracts are programmable contracts. They convert transactions As indicated in Fig. 2, our review will illustrate IoT security
between users into a code that is stored in a blockchain and issues from both the structural and the functional perspectives.
is tagged with a unique blockchain address. The blockchain Specifically, the structural security focuses on three IoT layers:
platform enables smart contracts to self-manage and even 1) the sensor layer; 2) the network layer; and 3) the applicato have legal force. Smart contracts strengthen the mutual tion layer, as well as on IoT device surveillance; the functional
trust mechanism between Internet users and achieve mutual security includes device safety upgrade, privacy protection,
trust [14]–[16], [48]–[50]. access control, identity authentication, data assurance, anti-
 As long as the contract conditions are met, the chain code DDoS mechanism, and IoT network self-regulation.
of the smart contract can automatically perform multiple operations in succession. Smart contracts automate the business
logic, as well as legal rights and obligations, provide the B. Structural Security
foundation for security and privacy protection, and increase IoT applications have grown in various fields but, due to
the efficiency of IoT. According to each user’s requirement, the multiple-source heterogeneity, openness, and universalsmart contracts can automatically employ different protec- ity, the IoT and related objects still need to resolve security
tion mechanisms, according to their different levels of privacy issues. One critical challenge for IoT security comes from the
information [51]–[54]. underlying architecture of the IoT ecosystem; it is based on
 a centralized infrastructure interconnected with a server and
 a device. All devices are identified, authenticated, and connected by a centralized server that supports huge processing
 IV. C LASSIFICATION OF S ECURITY IN I OT
 and storage capacity.
A. Taxonomy of Blockchain-Based IoT Security According to their differing perspectives, scholars express
 Blockchain relies on the powerful computing power gen- various views on the IoT structure. Our study focuses on
erated by consensus algorithms, such as PoW for distributed the security issues that mainly involve three layers: 1) the
systems, to prevent external attacks and to ensure data security. sensor layer; 2) the network layer; and 3) the application
It solves the general problem of the Byzantine mechanisms layer [1], [2], [58]. The layers of IoT security are improved
and it establishes a decentralized and trustworthy system. It by the blockchain. Different types of attacks to these layers

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10459

 TABLE III
 S ECURITY I SSUES OF THE T HREE I OT L AYERS

are addressed in Table III. Associated with the three layers of 2) Security Issues in the Network Layer: The network layer
IoT, a blockchain can participate in the success of its security mainly accesses the information of the sensing layer through
by implementing diversified mechanisms and protocols. the network (such as the wireless communication network,
 1) Security Issues in the Sensor Layer: The sensor layer is Internet, and satellite network) and transmits data to the IoT
the basis for the development and the application of IoT. Its platform. It is completed in this manner since the collected
main function is to collect, identify, and control information. information needs to be transmitted in real time through
The sensing layer consists of malicious devices and gateways. various networks.
The sensing nodes have multisource heterogeneity, but the Since the amount of data transmitted by devices in IoT
function is simple and lacks effective monitoring. Terminal is small, there is no encryption algorithm to protect the
nodes are more vulnerable to attacks [4]. data. Data may be stolen, tampered with, attacked, and/or
 The attacker intercepts, forges, falsifies, and replays the destroyed during transmission. The IoT is an open network
data or the command transmitted in the sensor network in order in which multiple networks overlay. With the development
to obtain individual bits of sensitive information or to cause of network convergence and the increasing complexity of
information transmission errors. The attacker takes advantage network architectures, more and more communication proof the vulnerability of the IoT terminal to acquire the iden- tocols appear. When data are transferred from one network
tity and password. The attacker performs illegal or malicious to another, a variety of issues, such as authentication, key
attacks through the pseudo-identity, which communicates with negotiation, data confidentiality, and integrity protection, is
other nodes, issuing false information, replacing devices, and involved [15], [62], [63].
initiating a DDoS attack. The data collected through the sen- 3) Security Issues in the Application Layer: The applicasor layer are transmitted wirelessly. The data, or even the user, tion layer is the bridge between the IoT system and the user.
are under monitoring, which directly leads to the disclosure It provides customized services, authentication, privacy proor the destruction of information [3], [59]. tection, and user action instructions to the processing layer.
 As the weakest link in IoT security, IoT terminals can At the same time, the application layer also has information
improve security performance by integrating a security chip processing and resource management functions. The applicainto IoT devices to provide a reliable security hardware exe- tion layer is directly related to the external entities and holds
cution environment. To strengthen IoT terminal devices, the a large amount of private information [64]–[66].
devices can directly participate in the blockchain transac- The application layer stores large amounts of user data
tion as a blockchain node. For the weak terminal of IoT, and involves several questions: how to store data efficiently
the terminal uses the integrated blockchain software develop- to avoid data loss or corruption? how to isolate data for
ment kit (SDK) as the client and connects the IoT gateway multitenant applications? how to prevent data services from
in the blockchain. When the terminal node participates in being blocked? and how to quickly recover data errors?
blockchain transactions, the device’s unique identifier and pri- Each of these questions is related to IoT security. In addivate key information must be stored securely. The security chip tion, an attacker could inject a large amount of irrelevant
provides a chip-level trusted identifier, sensitive information data into the original data, causing system misjudgment and
secure storage, and an encrypted secure computing environ- data contamination. The authentication approach of the appliment for the terminal node. Blockchain generates the security cation layer is the message verification between the sender
and the reliability of transaction information [60], [61]. and the receiver code. However, during the communication

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10460 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

process, the authentication code is static and is easily used One of the most well-known studies in the IoT communiby others, resulting in incorrect authentication and security ties is privately and securely executing queries over sensed
issues [3], [16]. and prepared data on IoT devices, due to the devices’ limited
 4) IoT-Embedded Device Surveillance and Synchronization: and inefficient query processing abilities. A well-designed and
IoT devices operate in centralized systems in which the trust privacy-preserving blockchain-based scheme can protect the
mechanism is relatively easy to set up but requires a trusted privacy of IoT devices and can improve the overall commuthird party to monitor all devices. However, the trusted third nication efficiency within the network. Popular query service
party cannot handle the increasing large number of devices companies, such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, are eagerly
infinitely [18]. Decentralized operation systems reduce the seeking practical and effective anti-attack queries to protect
operational processes of the physical network. Meanwhile, it security and privacy throughout IoT [70], [71]. Meanwhile,
becomes necessary to establish a new mutual trust mechanism research is paying much attention to technical issues and to the
in order to maintain the consensus between devices and to feasibility of the queries. Blockchain has the potential to be
ensure the performance of the system [39]. Different devices implemented to solve these challenges. For example, Ethereum
are connected by layers within the infrastructure. A security has been proposed for auditing and privacy preserving in
layer, the security abstraction layer, is capable of detecting and database, cloud, and fog computing, and across the entire
separating malicious devices [63]. Although the extra layer IoT. Associated with blockchain and with the relevant techmakes the entire structure more complicated, the present tech- nologies, a reliable auditing system could be designed by the
nology and protocol can fulfill the configuration of finding extant queries, such as SQL, MapReduce, etc., [72], [73].
abnormal working devices and keeping system consistency. 2) Access Control: The data generated in IoT include
Another effective method integrates the blockchain network a large amount of personal information that is private. If this
with a software paradigm, aiming at limiting possible attacks privacy information is disclosed, it will bring huge losses
such as software-defined networking (SDN) [67], [68]. to users. As one of the basic technologies of data protec-
 The integration of IoT and blockchain is at the early tion, access control ensures that data can only be accessed
stage. With further development, the deficiency of the integra- by a user with permission. Access control is based on an
tion, such as insufficient computational and storage capacity authorization policy that controls access to certain resources
and limited communication resources, will become clear. in order to reduce illegitimate intrusions and to ensure autho-
Blockchain synchronization is an effective way to balance rized access to resources. The access control mechanism of
the traffic between the blockchain system and the IoT-related the system mainly consists of authentication, authority, and
devices. In other words, certain blockchain mechanisms can auditing [74], [75]. The blockchain-based IoT platform can
help each IoT device stay synchronized toward the protocol separate data and data access authority, and it can impleof smart contracts, thus guaranteeing the security of the IoT ment a decentralized personal data management system. An
network [40], [69]. application needs the authority of the owner to access the
 data. The system checks the signature and all of the records
 to verify that the application has access to the appropriate
 data. Blockchain fully records the activities of the application,
C. Functional Security and users in the system can change the access rights of the
 The accessing of large-scale IoT terminal devices estab- data at any time [76]. Since resource constraints exist in praclishes a crucial challenge to network capacity expansion and tice, access control balances the device implementation and the
to centralized platform performance. As a heterogeneous con- consumption of resources to secure the devices and the IoT
verged network, IoT not only has the same security issues network [77]. In addition, access control can be programmed
as sensor networks, mobile communication networks, and to update for IoT devices; this will help them to become availthe Internet but also has its particularities, such as a device able, accountable, agile, and adoptable among different nodes
safety upgrade and privacy protection, access control, identity within the network [78], [79].
authentication, data assurance, anti-DDoS mechanism, and IoT When the blockchain is combined with IoT, access connetwork self-regulation. trol is one of the key technologies for IoT data protection.
 1) Device Safety Upgrade and Privacy Protection: In the The combination has two main types. One type is the integranetwork, remotely updating the firmware of embedded devices tion of the blockchain and the existing access control model.
is one of the important means of protecting IoT. Through the Blockchain is the trusted entity of the existing access conblockchain network, the firmware vendor publishes the latest trol model; blockchain is combined with the role-based access
version of the firmware information to the distributed ledger control (RBAC) model, with the attributes-based access conof each verification node. The device node initiates a verifica- trol (ABAC) model, and with capability-based access control
tion request to the verification node or to another neighboring (CapBAC) model. The other type is based on the different
device node associated with the smart contract, consensus modes of blockchain. Blockchain is not only used as a trusted
mechanisms, and other methods, in order to confirm the latest entity, based upon the characteristics of blockchain, but it even
firmware and the firmware integrity of the device. An on-time includes a transaction or smart contract that is constructed for
upgrade ensures firmware upgrade security through encryp- access control, such as the Bitcoin-based access model and the
tion and signatures and helps minimize the impact of attacks Ethereum-based smart contract access control [28], [80], [81].
against firmware vulnerabilities [2], [3], [7]. The detailed features of each model are listed in Table IV.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10461

 TABLE IV
 B LOCKCHAIN R ELATED ACCESS C ONTROL M ODEL

 Since blockchain has the ability to enforce the integrity of 3) Identity Authentication: In the IoT, identity authentiall of its participants at the technical level, blockchain can cation technology is used to prevent illegal or unauthorized
play the role of a third party that provides a reliable envi- terminal devices from connecting to the IoT network or
ronment for access control in IoT. As a trusted platform in from launching malicious attacks, and to ensure the secu-
IoT access control, blockchain provides computing and stor- rity of the IoT. The authentication credentials are registered
age capabilities for IoT. Computing and storage are used as the to blockchain, and the device access rights can be set
major approaches. Some are focusing on the storage capacity through the smart contract. When an IoT device requires
of blockchain, some are focusing on the computational power access or authentication to the IoT platform, the blockchain
of blockchain, and more are focusing on both computing and system authenticates and manages the identity of the access
storage [82], [83]. device, based on the node consensus mechanism, to ensure
 Applying blockchain to IoT access control also requires that the device safely accesses IoT. Blockchain-based IoT
solving a series of problems caused by the terminal nodes. device authentication can avoid the single point of failure
There are a large number of terminal nodes in the network. risk of the centralized authentication technology and, thus,
How to effectively manage the nodes is a challenging task. can ensure the integrity and reliability of the IoT device’s
Second, it is necessary to consider that there is the storage identity [1], [2], [14].
pressure brought by the large number of nodes to blockchain. 4) Data Assurance: Traditional database systems manage
The third need to consider is the impact of the vast nodes on discrete data, while IoT platforms handle streaming data.
the access control and the related transactions. Since the pop- Streaming data are real-time and continuous, and, therefore,
ular blockchains, Bitcoin and Ethereum take a long time for have the potential to be attacked or tampered with. Under
transactions, they are difficult to use directly for IoT access the era of big data, the storage and the processing of mascontrol [76], [81]. sive amounts of data in IoT are vulnerable to attacks. IoT
 Blockchain can solve the dynamic problem of nodes in uses sensors to capture and store data through a centralized
IoT. Since the identity of the user in blockchain is proven database. Other unstructured data are stored in the cloud.
by its key, the node can be connected anytime, anywhere. The However, data need to be transmitted repeatedly during use,
blockchain network can operate as long as the node’s sig- causing the central server to become overloaded, and jeoparnature is correct. On the other hand, blockchain uses a P2P dizing data security. IoT applications need to cooperate with
network architecture. When a user node needs to access the security and the confidentiality of the data. Especially in
the network, it only needs to connect to other blockchain the wireless transmission of IoT, it is necessary to prevent
nodes in the network. It is not based on the geographic data leakage and illegal use. In an IoT system, data are stored
location between nodes; the node only needs to select and and managed by a central entity. Misconduct of data manageconnect to the blockchain nodes that exist in the network. ment or failure of accurate processing can result in a data loss
Hence, for the dynamics of the node movement, frequent or a leak. Blockchain-based data operation systems adopt
access, or exit, blockchain is able to deal with various access a decentralized architecture that eliminates the security risks
controls [75]–[79]. of centralization [84], [85].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10462 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

Fig. 3. Architecture of the anti-DDoS scheme.

 The traceability of blockchain can also be applied to manip- a distributed noncentralized structure. Each node of blockchain
ulate private data, in order to ensure data authenticity. The has a complete record that can verify the data of other nodes.
data manipulation process is transparent, and data are auditable Hence, blockchain can be applied to build database systems, as
to the user. Blockchain converts the complete information into well as to the domain name system (DNS), to eliminate singledifferent blocks. Each block contains only a small portion point failure, to effectively defend against DDoS attacks, and
of the complete information and is asymmetrically encrypted to ensure the security of the system [91].
using a hash function, with a chain structure of the Byzantine, Some IoT devices are infected by malware viruses, form-
Merkle Tree, and timestamp, in order to ensure data integrity ing a large-scale IoT botnet and posing a huge threat to
and consistency. Since it is difficult to attack even one block IoT services. In the system, most devices connect to the
of information, the complete information within the system is network through an IoT gateway. If the device that initiated
considerably less likely to be attacked [86], [87]. the DDoS attack can be disconnected from the IoT gateway,
 5) Anti-DDoS Attack: In December 2016, the Mirai virus the risk of the IoT service being attacked can be reduced.
ravaged the United States. The virus formed a botnet by A blockchain network can be established between the IoT
infecting IoT devices and launched a DDoS attack on the gateways and the deployed smart contracts to verify, log in
domain name resolution server, causing more than half of the to, and disconnect DDoS attacks. For example, if the home
U.S. network to crash. The main reason for the success of smart device is controlled and performs a DDoS attack on an
the IoT botnet attack is that the traditional network security IoT service, when the IoT service verifies the DDoS attack,
model is flawed. Due to the lack of reliable authentication it will notify the IoT gateway. The IoT gateway will broadand consensus mechanisms, a single point of nontrust may cast that it has been controlled and it will initiate a DDoS
spread to multiple nontrust points, infecting to the entire IoT attack. If the attack is verified, the attack information can be
system [88], [89]. written to the blockchain ledger. Then, all of the IoT gate-
 The distributed structure of blockchain is used to combat ways will disconnect all of the controlled smart parties to
DDoS attacks and to increase system throughput. The DDoS defend against the same DDoS attacks throughout the entire
attack sends a large number of requests to the central node network [3], [92]. We constructed the architecture for an antiof the target system, consuming the computing resources or DDoS scheme, which is described in Fig. 3. A plurality of
the network resources of the central node and causing the nodes forms a blockchain network that processes a detectarget system to crash [90]. The blockchain system can provide tion abnormal activity on the IoT devices that are targeted

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10463

Fig. 4. One example of applying the blockchain in IoT.

by suspicious DDoS abnormal connections initiated by the IoT the sharing of the analysis of preliminary detection results
device. Then, the node submits the preliminary detection result without using the cloud. There is the possibility of mutual
to blockchain to share information of suspected DDoS abnor- trust, as well as the existence of malicious nodes. In order to
mal connection. Based on the database’s sharing suspected achieve a secure and reliable sharing analysis between nodes,
DDoS abnormal connections, a smart contract is executed to the blockchain can guarantee the following points.
analyze some targeted IP associated with DDoS alert. The tar- 1) Consistency: When there are malicious nodes, each node
geted IP acknowledges the alert and sends the reward to the can still record other nodes correctly. The submitted
corresponding node. After receiving the reward, the node fil- data are consistent with the data stored in each node.
ters the DDoS connection by the IoT device, based on the 2) Cannot Be Modified: The records approved by each node
newly added DDoS alert. cannot easily be tampered with.
 To achieve the above proposal, there are three key issues 3) Anonymous: The attacker cannot speculate the
that need to be addressed. Problem 1 is the DDoS anomaly behavior of the node based on the submitted
detection. One method of detecting a DDoS is to analyze the information [89], [90].
data flow: it can directly determine the characteristics of the Problem 3 is how to ensure compliance with sourceprotocol (such as SYN FLOOD), and it can detect whether side deployment detection and prevention. Two methods are
the IoT device has completed the TCP connection initializa- the establishment of incentives to attract users to accept
tion with a three-time connection. If it has not completed the safety measures for their IoT devices and the establishment
connection by the third time, it is likely to be DDoS abnor- of a reward mechanism from the DDoS attack victim to
mal attack. The other kind of attack does not have obvious the abnormal result submitter. DDoS attack victims receive
protocol differences (such as UDP FLOOD). Thus, it is more a DDoS alert to avoid losses, so they offer rewards. The subdifficult to detect this type of DDoS attack. There is no differ- mitter will receive a reward for the anomalous result that
ence between the UDP communication of the controlled IoT corresponds to this alert. The reward process is open, transdevice and that of a normal IoT device. In general, IoT device parent, and verifiable. Blockchain writes reward rules into the
activity functions are stable and fixed, and the data packet con- smart contract, makes the whole process transparent to all the
tent is regular, as well. By clustering the contents of historical nodes, and verifies the reward distribution process [90]–[92].
UDP data packets to characterize several types of groups, real- 6) IoT Network Self-Regulation: In an untrusted Internet
time detection on a UDP connection to determine anomalies environment, how to build trust between IoT devices is a chalshows strong potential [88], [91]. Problem 2 is how to compre- lenge. Typically, a third party is required as an intermediary
hensively analyze the suspicious DDoS abnormal connections. between devices. Through the blockchain, an IoT device trust
In a traditional solution, data integration analysis still uses the relationship can be established without a third-party intercloud. The cloud serves as a summary of all the information. vention, and interaction between devices can be performed
In the analysis center, if a downtime occurs, the entire solu- directly. Blockchain creates an open and transparent rule
tion will fail. Under the existing centralized architecture, the through the algorithm and redefines how to generate credits
single-point attack problem cannot be solved. It is considered to create a mutual-trust network. In this system, all of the
that blockchain implements distributed ledger technology and rules are prerepresented in the form of an algorithm. Service

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10464 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

participants do not need to know the relevant information communicate with other devices by establishing a shared
of the other nodes, but mutual trust and transaction secu- key between nodes; 3) the authorization is required before
rity are guaranteed without centralized third-party intervention. information exchange between different private blockchain
Organizational trust can be identified, and only trust algorithms nodes; 4) using a double-chained structure, the information
can be used to establish mutual trust and to eliminate unified transaction in the data block chain is invalid, and vice versa;
account updates and verification processes. Activities can be and 5) the method of preventing DoS attacks is also useful for
recorded, transferred, and stored for service transactions, as preventing DDoS. There are different measures to take against
well [2], [4], [10]. DDoS, for different purposes and principles; an appropriate
 approach should be adopted [21]–[24], [93]–[95].
 V. B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I OT ATTACKS
 Just as the traditional IoT system has many drawbacks that D. Equipment Injection Attack
attacks can take advantage of, the blockchain-based IoT secu-
 Equipment injection is defined as when the attacker injects
rity system does, as well. Based on the features of blockchain,
 fake nodes into the network to gain access to private
attackers change their strategies and construct new attacks on
 information. The encryption keys are suitable to resolve this
the blockchain-based IoT system. In this section, we list popattack in the IoT network. The injected device will be isolated,
ular blockchain-based IoT security attacks (Table V), such as
 because local communication requires a shared key between
abandon, DoS, DDoS, equipment injection, falsifying, link,
 the private blockchain nodes.
modifying, public block modifying, and time interval destruction, among others. Blockchain-based IoT attack is a hot topic
in the disciplines of both IoT and blockchain. In this article, E. Falsify Attack
popular attacks of interpretation and potential anti-measures
 A falsify attack occurs when the attacker generates a block
are briefly addressed and discussed.
 by forging a transaction and creating a falsified consensus.
 The IoT node can detect the falsified block in the verification
A. Abandon Attack process by verifying the output and the owner of the ledger.
 Abandon refers to a node that holds auditing rights, discards In order to achieve this goal, different consensus mechanisms
its members’ transactions, and isolates the members in the are the key [26], [93]–[95].
blockchain system. When a node finds that its transaction has
not been processed, it can change its associated blockchain
and initiate a request to the neighboring blockchain. In the IoT F. Link Attack
network, terminal devices or nodes are vulnerable to the attack Link attack occurs when the attacker uses the same ID to
of abandon. A distributed block or node has the ability to deal link transactions in multiple transactions or blockchains in the
with abandon because of the features of decentralization and system to find real-world identifiers corresponding to anonyindependent of the blockchain [23]–[25], [93]–[95]. mous nodes. A well-designed defending mechanism occurs
 when the node uses a unique private key in the transaction
B. Denial-of-Service Attack and uses a partial blind signature algorithm and a one-time
 public-key address [27], [93]–[95].
 In a DoS attack, the attacker sends so many transactions
to the target node that it exceeds its processing capability,
leaving it with no resources to handle the transactions from G. Modify Attack
other nodes. A DoS attack is one of the popular attacks in
 A modify attack occurs when stored data are modified or
the blockchain and in IoT. We can construct effective logdeleted in the system. The stored transaction includes a hash of
ical algorithms to prevent IoT from the DoS attack. The
 the stored data, used as evidence to store the data, or last modanti-DoS measures are: 1) the IoT node does not send transified to ascertain whether the data were modified or deleted. It
actions to other nodes unless it matches the entities in its
 will not be recovered once it has been modified. A modificakey list and 2) the overlapping nodes between each private
 tion of the mechanism can prevent data from being modified
blockchain have a threshold of the maximum transaction rate.
 or deleted [28], [29], [93]–[95].
If the threshold is exceeded, the key list is updated to prevent
the node from continuously sending transactions to the target node. In practice, the algorithms and mechanisms still H. Public Block Modify Attack
need improvement to more effectively defend against the DoS
 A public block modify attack occurs when the attacker
attack [22], [23], [93]–[95].
 broadcasts a fake ledger and uses it as the longest ledger, causing other nodes to use the attacker’s ledger as a real ledger in
C. Distributed Denial of Service Attack the system. The consistency algorithm used limits the number
 In a DDoS attack, the attacker uses multiple nodes. The of blocks that can be generated in a time interval, which limits
anti-measures are: 1) infecting device nodes is very difficult the number of malicious blocks that can be added, preventing
due to the use of asymmetric encryption key management an attacker from generating the longest ledger or from using
mechanism; 2) in private blockchain, node devices can only it as an actual ledger [30], [31], [93]–[95].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10465

 TABLE V
 B LOCKCHAIN -BASED S ECURITY ATTACKS IN I OT

I. Time Interval Destruction Attack cycle in the system. Nodes can detect that the num-
 A time interval destruction attack occurs when a mali- ber of blocks they receive during the consensus period
cious ledger generates multiple blocks in a consensus exceed the number of allowed blocks, thereby reducing

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10466 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

 TABLE VI
 T HREE C ATEGORIZATIONS OF B LOCKCHAIN

the trust rate of the malicious node before it is is highly verifiable [101]. Combined with the chain structure
isolated [89]–[91]. of the blockchain, it meets the requirements of traceability.
 The newly generated data in the blockchain need to be ver-
 VI. B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I NFORMATION S HARING ified by all or most of the nodes to be written to the shared
 S ECURITY M ECHANISM FOR I OT ledger, and the ledger, then, is maintained by all blockchain
A. Potential Integration of Blockchain for IoT Security nodes. Hence, it is difficult to tamper with or to have forgery
 committed against it.
 The purpose of IoT information sharing security is to share
information while ensuring information security. Information
security includes confidentiality, integrity, availability, authen- B. Infrastructure of Blockchain-Based Information
ticity, traceability, and reliability. Sharing in IoT
 For the requirements of security, ownership, and confi- Blockchain is categorized into three classes (Table VI):
dentiality, algorithms, such as the Rivest–Shamir–Adleman 1) the public blockchain; 2) the consortium blockchain; and
(RSA), Elgamal, Rabin, Diffie–Hellman (DH), and elliptic- 3) the private blockchain. There are no centralized officurve cryptography (ECC) are integrated into blockchain to cial organizations or regulatory agencies in the public chain.
create mechanisms for asymmetry encryption and multisigna- Participating nodes are free to enter and to leave the network.
ture. The Merkle tree and its variants used in the blockchain The right to read and write data is not limited by the system.
system support simplified payment verification (SPV), which The number of participating nodes in the public chain is large,
verifies transactions without needing a complete blockchain and the trust degree of the nodes is the lowest among the
to meet integrity requirements. In addition, the Merkle tree three categories of blockchain. The consortium blockchain
improves the efficiency of blockchain operations by storing comprises institutions and other agencies. It applies only to
partial data. This is the potential that blockchain can be applied members. The permissions of participation, read, and write
to IoT devices and systems [96]–[100]. are based on specific rules. Compared with the public chain,
 Blockchain systems use encryption to protect data. All of the consortium chain has fewer nodes, with a certain degree of
the nodes need to verify the data before writing it to the trust among the nodes. Typical consensus algorithms are the
block. Once it is written, users can publicly query the nodes in Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) and PBFT. The private chain
the blockchain network, which helps to eliminate information is established by the private organization itself, and different
gains and to reduce trust costs. The node that has the author- nodes have different permissions. The private chain assumes
ity, in blockchain needs, to mark the timestamp in the current that the participating nodes do not attack and further relax
block header as the recorder of the data. Thus, the blocks the assumption of the consensus mechanism. Typical consenon the main chain are arranged in chronological order. As sus mechanisms are Paxos and Raft; these do not consider
a PoE, the timestamp adds a time dimension to the data and Byzantine failures [102], [103].

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10467

 TABLE VII
 S CENARIOS OF B LOCKCHAIN -BASED I OT S ECURITY

 Blockchain applications are primarily based on the public system. The node completes the encrypted recording and the
chain. Any node can freely join the blockchain network and storage of information to ensure the authenticity and integrity
can maintain ledger data. This makes the public chain more of the device domain information in IoT.
credible, but identification and data privacy can lack safety.
First, the public network is used for different scenarios of IoT, B. Decentralized and Disintermediated IoT Platform
such as smart traffic, smart healthcare, smart agriculture, etc. The integration of the blockchain and IoT will change
Second, the consortium chain is used for different areas of the the original relationship between the involved entities. IoT
scenario. Consortia are formed in different authorities of the has the potential to connect all the things, and blockchain
same industry. Only a member of the alliance can maintain can achieve value transfer and benefit sharing. On the basis
the blockchain data, while other nonauthorized nodes can- of the interconnections of people, things, and platform, the
not. Finally, the private chain is used between the nodes in blockchain establishes nodes, in a production relationship, that
the area. Only these nodes can maintain the data. This fun- automatically form a connection based on the programs and
damentally eliminates the possibility of unauthorized nodes protocols. This is a revolutionary change to the business model
accessing the data. Since the data block chain is mainly used based on a centralized platform. Although IoT implements the
for source data collection, the requirements of timeliness and decentralized communication of peer nodes, the relationship
security are higher than that of the transaction block chain. between nodes still depends on centralized third-party inter-
The private chain is more appropriate and secure; the transac- vention. Hence, the future business model may build a weak
tion blockchain can adopt the consortium or the public chain, centralized or decentralized paradigm. The impact of a third
according to the specific application scenario [11]–[15]. party on the entire platform ecosystem will be reduced [26].
 With the development of wireless communication technolo-
 VII. I OT S ECURITY S CENARIOS U NDER B LOCKCHAIN gies, more and more IoT application scenarios have been
 The challenge for IoT security is the existing ecosystem achieved. The intervention of a third party not only increases
of IoT servers and user terminals. Device connectivity and costs but it also reduces efficiency. User information may also
information processing on the central server cannot accom- be compromised. Blockchain enables P2P payments without
modate the rapidly evolving transactions. The adoption of third-party intervention. As a complementation, decentralizablockchain can improve the IoT system and can raise the tion and centralization will be complemented into a more
security level of the entire platform [28]. This section high- powerful and secure IoT system. Vehicle of Things is one
lights major applications of the blockchain-based IoT security of the rapidly developing fields [104].
(Table VII), such as a decentralized platform, data processing
and provenance, public services, the healthcare industry, traffic C. Data Processing & Provenance System
management, data provenance, and smart city and home use. Blockchain can be used to process private data, effectively
 preventing data loss and damage caused by malicious attacks.
A. Framework of Blockchain-Based IoT Security Application Blockchain protects information by data encryption. The out-
 Both blockchain and IoT are characterized by decentraliza- put hash is encrypted using the private key. For verification, the
tion and distribution. Security features, such as authentication receiver decrypts the hash string using the public key, and then
and data security storage, have the potential to address secu- recalculates the hash to validate integrity. Once the data are
rity issues. Blockchain is used to enhance the security of IoT stored in blockchain, users can access the data and can manage
and is classified into the physical untrusted domain and the their private information without having to access the original
blockchain domain (Fig. 4). The physical untrusted domain data. Users can also use blockchains to protect the copyright
contains different types of IoT terminal devices. The device and ownership of their property, such as patents, videos, music,
sends information possessed (e.g., device identity information, etc. [90]–[92], [105].
location information, transaction information, etc.) to the Blockchain records data in blocks associated with secure
network in the blockchain domain and in the blockchain protocols, thereby improving the security of the entire

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10468 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

blockchain network. Blockchain can monitor and manage system are related to the common development of people and
malicious IoT-related devices. Once the data or the device society. Blockchain is becoming more and more popular in
appears to be abnormal, the corresponding protection pro- practice, adopting encryption protocols and consensus mechagram will be immediately executed, in order to ensure the nisms to prevent any compromise to personal information, as
security and reliability of the system. For example, the inte- well as adopting a decentralized algorithm and a smart congration of food safety and IoT enables complete monitoring tract paradigm to construct a safe network and to guarantee
of the food production and transportation chains. Blockchain a higher performance smart city system. A blockchain embedguarantees the authenticity and integrity of a variety of food ded IoT platform will not only protect individual privacy and
manufacturing processes [106]–[108]. safety for a smart city system, but it will change the original operation process from centralization to at least partial
 decentralization [119]–[121].
D. Public Services
 The public services of IoT have been extended to all aspects
of people’s lives, such as the healthcare industry, traffic man- VIII. R ESEARCH C HALLENGES AND F UTURE T RENDS
agement, and smart cities. However, there are still many By adopting blockchain and related technologies, the IoT
security problems when using IoT in public services. The network can effectively solve data management, trust, secublockchain technology can provide protection to prevent pri- rity, and privacy issues. IoT can use the security mechanism
vacy leakage and the security of service data transmission in of blockchain to establish a trusted encryption system and
public services. to improve network security performance. However, unlike
 1) Healthcare Industry: A blockchain-based IoT healthcare general blockchain techniques that are typically applied to
system enables the processing of smart contract information a distributed system, the communication of IoT devices is
among different parties, such as the patient, doctor, insurance highly dependent on the underlying physical characteristics
company, and pharmaceutical supplier, in a safe, transpar- (e.g., the bandwidth and performance of communication).
ent, scalable environment. The medical data are stored in When the communication quality is poor, the communication
a common ledger and are processed smoothly. Specifically, between the nodes will be unequal. This will cause problems,
electronic medical records (EMRs) will be more convenient such as the inability to verify the block and waste computing
and more scalable to adopt through the use of the decen- resources, and it will destroy the consistency of the blockchain
tralized blockchain platform [109]–[113]. Moreover, smart system. On the other hand, due to the large number of IoT
wearable devices are increasingly being applied in the medical devices and data, the generation rate of blockchains and the
industry [114], [115]. For example, a smart bracelet can detect capacity of blocks are very high. Blockchain can enhance
an individual’s heart rate and can record the user’s movements the security of IoT, but the application of blockchain in IoT
and sleep conditions. This information can be recorded and runs contrary to the low block capacity of blockchain and the
transmitted to the terminal nodes connected to IoT. Blockchain channel propagation. Therefore, the application of blockchain
encrypts personal information to ensure the integrity and the enhances the security of IoT. However, there are still some
security of the information. technical issues in practice, including the performance of IoT
 2) Traffic Management: The inclusion of IoT has greatly data processing, consensus mechanisms, network bandwidth
improved the performance of transportation, but there are still and capacity limitations, unreliable data communication, and
great security risks. For instance, information obtained through the inconsistency of block recording.
electronic sensors needs to be shared with users through a traffic command center. There may be a delay in the information
distribution process; users may not get information on time. A. Technical Challenges
If the database is attacked, the entire transportation system 1) Performance of IoT Data Processing: The computing
will be stagnant. IoT traffic effectively uses sensors, commu- power and the storage capacity of IoT devices are, generally,
nication technologies, and AI and combines with blockchain to weak. This restricts the application of blockchain in IoT secubuild an open distributed network. Each user can receive traffic rity. Cryptography is the basis for ensuring the security and the
information directly and can share current traffic status. In the reliability of blockchains. Especially, in the consortium chain,
near future, driverless automatic driving can be achieved with it is necessary to use data signature technology for transaction
the use of the blockchain-based IoT platform [116]–[118]. identification and identity authentication and to protect privacy
 3) Smart City: The IoT is a powerful system that provides through data encryption technology. For some IoT devices, it is
residents with sufficient resources and convenient services in impossible to perform signature or encryption because of their
a smart city system, which consists of smart home, smart poor computing performance. Currently, hardware encryption
health, smart energy, smart traffic, smart parking, and smart engines, such as integrated security chips, can provide signacleaning. A smart city system is a comprehensive ecosys- ture/encryption computing capabilities and can improve device
tem in which individual information is stored and the related encryption computing power. In addition, the account data of
requested transactions occur. The answers to questions regard- the blockchain node needs to consume a large amount of storing how to keep personal information private and secure, how age space and, usually, IoT devices cannot meet the storage
to ensure the safe and effective use of available resources, requirements. Not all information is necessary to be recorded
and how to improve the smooth operation of the entire in the distributed ledger. It is better to distinguish which type

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10469

of data needs to be recorded and which type of data can be with large computing power and capacity. The lower subrecorded by other methods [38]–[40], [78]. blockchain manages data for some physical areas or device
 2) Consensus Mechanisms: In the public chain, the PoW components and blocks blockchain data for different layers
algorithm is used to implement the consensus mechanism. to perform block management. Record rates can vary, reduc-
Although the PoW mining algorithm solves the transaction ing the pressure to maintain consistency across large network
consistency problem, it causes a lot of wasted resources. In sizes [93], [107], [116].
addition, mining incentives can lead to highly concentrated
mining pools. The decentralized design has a long-term consensus period, with only seven transactions per second. In the B. Research Trends
consortium chain, the BFT algorithm is used to implement 1) New Blockchain-Based Business Mode: In the future,
the consensus mechanism, which solves the problem of low IoT will connect devices together to process data transactions.
efficiency and high resource consumption of the PoW algo- It is also desirable that devices connected to IoT will have
rithm. The BFT algorithm provides a large number of signature intelligent various applications and will work independently,
verifications for comprehensive P2P communication monitor- under given rule logic, to achieve commercial value. It is
ing anomalous behavior. But the communication complexity necessary to reliably record the transaction requests sent by
is high, which brings heavy system overhead and reduces smart devices, in order to ensure the validity of transactions.
the consensus efficiency and the node scalability. This is far For the IoT, under the current centralized architecture, it may
from meeting the blockchain requirements for IoT security be difficult to accomplish the above-mentioned autonomous
expectation. Hence, consensus algorithms need to be modi- collaboration and effective transactions because the parties
fied and improved in order to meet the development of IoT involved in such collaboration and transactions often belong
security [11], [15], [101]. to different stakeholders and have difficulty determining trust
 3) Network Bandwidth: The application of the blockchain relationships. Thus, the cooperation and the transactions of
has spread, and the number of nodes in the distributed ledger IoT devices can only be performed under the same trust
system has also increased. In the P2P architecture network, domain. This greatly reduces the actual commercial value of
only a small number of nodes are interconnected, and the cur- IoT applications.
rent network can fulfill its bandwidth requirements. In future Blockchain can provide direct transactions for trusted inter-
IoT applications, the number of nodes in blockchain will be mediaries. Autonomous distributed P2P telemetry (ADEPT) is
increasing sharply. The large number of interconnections and a joint authentication system developed by IBM and Samsung,
broadcasts between nodes can easily cause broadcast storms using blockchain. This technology builds a distributed network
and can consume too much network bandwidth. As a result, of smart devices and verifies the feasibility of a decentralthe performance of the IoT network could be degraded or even ized IoT architecture. ADEPT enables the devices connected
paralyzed. As one type of cloud computing, edge computing to it to communicate securely and efficiently and to implement
has the potential to deal with distributed nodes communication. complex business logic. For example, when its level of wash-
It is likely that the problem of network bandwidth require- ing powder is insufficient, the smart contract control of the
ments for large-scale deployment blockchains can be solved washing machine in a home can directly purchase the powin IoT [4], [7], [43]. der from the supplier, and blockchain will directly confirm the
 4) Unreliable Data Communication: Unlike computer order and complete the payment operation between the smart
nodes in the Internet, IoT devices are affected by the trans- devices connected to the ADEPT. The blockchain of things
mission of physical underlying information. IoT devices can has the potential to develop the smart of things [1]–[4], [122].
communicate via wireless access, such as by distributed drones 2) Integration of Blockchain and Edge Computing for IoT
and automotive network communications. If the quality of the Security: Edge computing is an open platform that integrates
wireless link is poor, the information transmission of the node network, computing, storage, and application core functions
will be unreliable, resulting in a change in the topology of on the side close to the source, in order to provide near-end
the blockchain network. The verification node would not be services. Its applications are launched at the edge, accelerating
able to receive the information of some devices normally, the responsiveness of Web services and meeting the industry’s
resulting in an incomplete data process in the blockchain basic needs for real-time business, application intelligence, and
system. Since the blocks are stored in a chronological order, security and privacy protection [123].
node communication is unreliable, and lost data cannot be Although edge computing reduces the security of IoT, the
recovered [44]–[47], [84]. coverage of edge computing is severely limited by the large
 5) Inconsistency of Block Recording: In the IoT, the amount number of terminal devices in IoT. Security issues continue to
of data generated varies by location and device due to com- be exposed, leading to unresolved security issues in IoT and to
puter, communication capabilities, and services. This causes many new security issues in edge computing. These can result
the node to synchronize the IoT data record and the block in no security measures for data in edge computing devices,
sequence, resulting in a network node. Incomplete or incon- data leakage, data tampering, data corruption, and a lack of
sistent records can result in inconsistent (forked) blockchains. privacy. From the perspective of edge computing, its security
The hierarchical blockchain architecture is one of the ways to systems fall into four categories: 1) data security; 2) identity
solve the inconsistency problem. The upper main blockchain authentication; 3) privacy protection; and 4) access control.
verifies and stores the entire network data by deploying nodes Blockchain can deal with trust issues, data security issues,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10470 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

identity permission issues, and privacy protection issues in Developing a security infrastructure for the IoT requires colnonsecure environments, as well as other issues [56], [124]. laboration, coordination, and integration for each IoT-related
 3) Double-Chained IoT Security Scheme: In view of the entity. Blockchain has the capability of stimulating seamless
lack of credit guarantee mechanisms and the information communication and the interaction of related devices within
safety problems in IoT, information sharing, data tampering, the IoT ecosystem. Based on the blockchain, the data in
and decentralization research have been carried out. Moreover, IoT can be converted into blocks with a decentralized struca lightweight information sharing security mechanism of IoT ture and can be constructed into a mutual trust mechanism
is another direction for growth. Based on the blockchain, the by smart contracts and by other blockchain-based protocols.
data blockchain and the transaction blockchain can be com- The blockchain consensus mechanism and decentralized platbined into a double-chain mode to protect data collection and form provide a secure and scalable environment for IoT to
information transactions. Specifically, the data blockchain uses achieve a truly distributed database and a consistent archithe consensus mechanism to form a data ledger to prevent tecture. Blockchain has the potential to implement advanced
tampering or destruction of the stored data; meanwhile, the performance paradigms for IoT, in order to prevent security
transaction blockchain provides decentralized, tamper-proof, attacks and privacy breaches.
traceable, and efficient ledger to support payment activities and behavioral records between the different nodes of
 R EFERENCES
IoT [1], [125].
 4) Interoperability of IoT, Blockchain, and 6G: Integrating [1] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of Things in industries: A survey,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–2243, Nov. 2014.
blockchain into IoT will enhance the effectiveness and improve [2] L. D. Xu and W. Viriyasitavat, “Application of blockchain
the overall performance of the entire IoT system. Both IoT and in collaborative Internet-of-Things services,” IEEE Trans.
blockchain have the potential to be employed for the develop- Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1295–1305, Dec. 2019,
 doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2019.2913165.
ment of the next generation of mobile communication 6G. 6G [3] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Blockchain
will be a more distributed network that will achieve seamless for IoT security and privacy: The case study of a smart home,” in Proc.
connection throughout space, sea, sky, and land. As a com- IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun. Workshops (PerCom
 Workshops), Kona, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 618–623.
prehensive network, IoT will assist to accomplish all potential [4] Y. Lu and L. D. Xu, “Internet of Things (IoT) cybersecurity research:
connections of 6G; as a distributed platform, blockchain will A review of current research topics,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6,
be used for each single terminal to guarantee the security and no. 2, pp. 2103–2115, Apr. 2019.
 [5] S. Li and L. Xu, Securing the Internet of Things. Cambridge, MA,
performance of 6G. How to adjust the infrastructures of IoT USA: Syngress Publ., 2017.
and the transaction procedure of the blockchain will be an [6] S. Li, L. Xu, and S. Zhao, “The Internet of Things: A survey,” Informat.
interesting question [1], [4], [8], [10]. Syst. Front., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 243–259, 2015.
 [7] A. Whitmore, A. Agarwal, and L. D. Xu, “The Internet of Things—
 A survey of topics and trends,” Informat. Syst. Front., vol. 17, no. 2,
 pp. 261–274, 2015.
 IX. C ONCLUSION [8] Y. Lu, “Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open
 The IoT will be increasingly combined with technologies, research issues,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 6, pp. 1–10, Jun. 2017.
 [9] Y. Lu, “Artificial intelligence: A survey on evolution, models, applisuch as AI, big data, cloud computing, and deep learn- cations and future trends,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–29,
ing. Security issues and the corresponding technologies will 2019.
become more and more abundant and advanced. In addition to [10] Y. Lu and X. Zheng, “6G: A survey on technologies, scenarios, challenges, and the related issues,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 19, Sep. 2020,
traditional security methods, the security of IoT will be inte- Art. no. 100158.
grated with the blockchain to make information and systems [11] M. Crosby, P. Pattanayak, S. Verma, and V. Kalyanaraman, Blockchain
more reliable and more stable. Technology: Beyond Bitcoin, vol. 2, Appl. Innovat. Inst., San Francisco,
 CA, USA, 2016, pp. 6–10.
 Both blockchain and IoT have the feature of decentral- [12] M. Pilkington, “Blockchain technology: Principles and applications,” in
ization, which makes integration more likely. Blockchain Handbook of Research on Digital Transformations. Cheltenham, U.K.:
offers reliable information interaction, complete data stor- Edward Elgar Publ., 2016, ch. 11.
 [13] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “An overview
age, trusted node authentication, and other security functions. of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and future
In IoT, the blockchain can provide access authentication, trends,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr. Big Data (BigData Congr.),
data protection, and anti-DDoS attacks on a large number Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 557–564. [Online]. Available:
 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8029379/
of devices, effectively providing privacy and anonymity pro- [14] Y. Yuan and F.-Y. Wang, “Blockchain and cryptocurrencies: Model,
tection for IoT devices, and reducing single points through techniques, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst.,
flexible data interaction and node consensus. The risk of fail- vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1421–1428, Sep. 2018.
ure may be exacerbated by malicious attacks, such as botnets. [15] F. R. Yu, J. Liu, Y. He, P. Si, and Y. Zhang, “Virtualization
 for distributed ledger technology (vDLT),” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
However, while on the one hand, block generation inconsis- pp. 25019–25028, 2018.
tency will occur due to the huge difference in the computing [16] Y. Lu, “The blockchain: State-of-the-art and research challenges,” J.
and communication capabilities of IoT devices, on the other Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 15, pp. 80–90, Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available:
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.04.002
hand, accessing large devices will result in a huge increase [17] Y. Lu, “Blockchain and the related issues: A review of current research
of data in the blockchain. This adds to the challenges for topics,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 231–255, 2018. [Online].
the data processing and storage capabilities of the blockchain Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/23270012.2018.1516523
 [18] Y. Lu, “Blockchain: A survey on functions, applications and open
system. In future applications, blockchain systems need to be issues,” J. Ind. Integr. Manag., vol. 3, no. 4, 2018, Art. no. 1850015.
further improved to support IoT security more effectively. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1142/ S242486221850015X

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10471

 [19] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security, [42] I.-C. Lin and T.-C. Liao, “A survey of blockchain security issues and
 privacy and trust in Internet of Things: The road ahead,” Comput. Netw., challenges,” IJ Netw. Security, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 653–659, 2017.
 vol. 76, pp. 146–164, Jan. 2015. [43] J. C. Song, M. A. Demir, J. J. Prevost, and P. Rad, “Blockchain design
 [20] Y. Yang, L. Wu, G. Yin, L. Li, and H. Zhao, “A survey on security and for trusted decentralized IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Annu. Conf.
 privacy issues in Internet-of-Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, Syst. Syst. Eng. (SoSE), Paris, France, Jun. 2018, pp. 169–174.
 no. 5, pp. 1250–1258, Oct. 2017. [44] Z. Huang, X. Su, Y. Zhang, C. Shi, H. Zhang, and L. Xie, “A decentral-
 [21] F. A. Alaba, M. Othman, I. A. T. Hashem, and F. Alotaibi, “Internet of ized solution for IoT data trusted exchange based-on blockchain,” in
 Things security: A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 88, pp. 10–28, Proc. IEEE 3rd Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. (ICCC), Chengdu, China,
 Jun. 2017. Dec. 2017, pp. 1180–1184.
 [22] M. Ammar, G. Russello, and B. Crispo, “Internet of Things: A survey [45] T. T. A. Dinh, R. Liu, M. Zhang, G. Chen, B. C. Ooi, and
 on the security of IoT frameworks,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 38, J. Wang, “Untangling blockchain: A data processing view of
 pp. 8–27, Feb. 2018. blockchain systems,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 30, no. 7,
 [23] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, D. Jain, P. Goyal, and B. Sikdar, “A pp. 1366–1385, Jul. 2018.
 survey on IoT security: Application areas, security threats, and solution [46] N. Rifi, E. Rachkidi, N. Agoulmine, and N. C. Taher, “Towards using
 architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82721–82743, 2019. blockchain technology for IoT data access protection,” in Proc. IEEE
 [24] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and smart contracts 17th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Wireless Broadband (ICUWB), Salamanca,
 for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2292–2303, 2016. Spain, Sep. 2017, pp. 1–5.
 [25] M. A. Khan and K. Salah, “IoT security: Review, blockchain solu- [47] G. Ayoade, V. Karande, L. Khan, and K. Hamlen, “Decentralized IoT
 tions, and open challenges,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 82, data management using blockchain and trusted execution environment,”
 pp. 395–411, May 2018. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Reuse Integr. (IRI), Salt Lake City, UT,
 [26] A. Reyna, C. Martín, J. Chen, E. Soler, and M. Díaz, “On blockchain USA, Jul. 2018, pp. 15–22.
 and its integration with IoT. Challenges and opportunities,” Future [48] Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, X. Chen, and H. Wang, “Blockchain
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 173–190, Nov. 2018. challenges and opportunities: A survey,” Int. J. Web Grid Serv., vol. 14,
 [27] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for no. 4, pp. 352–375, 2018.
 Internet of Things security: A position paper,” Digit. Commun. Netw., [49] Y. Rahulamathavan, R. C.-W. Phan, M. Rajarajan, S. Misra, and
 vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 149–160, 2018. A. Kondoz, “Privacy-preserving blockchain based IoT ecosystem using
 [28] M. Conoscenti, A. Vetrò, and J. C. De Martin, “Blockchain attribute-based encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Netw.
 for the Internet of Things: A systematic literature review,” Telecommun. Syst., Bhubaneswar, India, Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
 in Proc. IEEE/ACS Int. Conf. Comput. Syst. Appl. (AICCSA), [50] R. Agrawal et al., “Continuous security in IoT using blockchain,”
 Agadir, Morocco, Nov. 2017, pp. 1–6. [Online]. Available: in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP),
 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7945805/ Calgary, AB, Canada, Apr. 2018, pp. 6423–6427.
 [51] N. Szabo, The Idea of Smart Contracts, Nick Szabo’s Papers
 [29] T. M. Fernández-Caramés and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the
 Concise Tuts., Washington, DC, USA, Jun. 1997. [Online].
 use of blockchain for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 Available: http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/Information
 pp. 32979–33001, 2018.
 InSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.
 [30] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for Internet of Things:
 vwh.net/smart_contracts_idea.html
 A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–8094,
 [52] L. Luu, D.-H. Chu, H. Olickel, P. Saxena, and A. Hobor, “Making
 Oct. 2019.
 smart contracts smarter,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 [31] X. Wang et al., “Survey on blockchain for Internet of Things,” Comput.
 Commun. Security, 2016, pp. 254–269.
 Commun., vol. 136, pp. 10–29, Feb. 2019.
 [53] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. Papamanthou, “Hawk: The
 [32] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, S. Ramasubbareddy, M. Daneshmand, and blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart con-
 A. H. Gandomi, “Addressing security and privacy issues of IoT tracts,” IACR Cryptol. ePrint Archive, Lyon, France, Rep. 2015/675,
 using blockchain technology,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 2, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://eprint.iacr.org/2015/675.pdf
 pp. 881–888, Jan. 2021. [54] C. S. Kouzinopoulos et al., “Implementing a forms of consent smart
 [33] B. K. Mohanta, A. Sahoo, S. Patel, S. S. Panda, D. Jena, and contract on an IoT-based blockchain to promote user trust,” in Proc.
 D. Gountia, “DecAuth: Decentralized authentication scheme for IoT IEEE Innovat. Intell. Syst. Appl. (INISTA), Thessaloniki, Greece,
 device using ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conf. Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 (TENCON), Kochi, India, 2019, pp. 558–563. [55] W. Viriyasitavat, T. Anuphaptrirong, and D. Hoonsopon, “When
 [34] S. S. Panda, B. K. Mohanta, U. Satapathy, D. Jena, D. Gountia, and blockchain meets Internet of Things: Characteristics, challenges,
 T. K. Patra, “Study of blockchain based decentralized consensus algo- and business opportunities,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., vol. 15, pp. 21–28,
 rithms,” in Proc. IEEE Region 10 Conf. (TENCON), Kochi, India, 2019, Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.05.002
 pp. 908–913. [56] D. Xu, L. Xiao, L. Sun, and M. Lei, “Game theoretic
 [35] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, and S. Patnaik, “Survey on study on blockchain based secure edge networks,” in Proc.
 IoT security: Challenges and solution using machine learning, artifi- IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), Oct. 2017, pp. 1–5,
 cial intelligence and blockchain technology,” Internet Things, vol. 11, doi: 10.1109/ICCChina.2017.8330529.
 Sep. 2020, Art. no. 100227. [57] S. Biswas, K. Shaif, F. Li, B. Nour, and Y. Wang, “A scal-
 [36] A. Bahga and V. K. Madisetti, “Blockchain platform for industrial able blockchain framework for secure transactions in IoT,” IEEE
 Internet of Things,” J. Comput. Sci. Commun., vol. 9, pp. 533–546, Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4650–4659, Jun. 2019,
 Oct. 2016. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2874095.
 [37] O. Alphand et al., “IoTChain: A blockchain security architecture for [58] C. Li and L.-J. Zhang, “A blockchain based new secure multi-layer
 the Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. network model for Internet of Things,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Congr.
 (WCNC), Barcelona, Spain, 2018, pp. 1–6. Internet Things (ICIOT), Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 33–41.
 [38] P. Danzi, A. E. Kalor, C. Stefanovic, and P. Popovski, “Analysis of the [59] U. Banerjee, C. Juvekar, A. W. Arvind, and A. P. Chandrakasan, “An
 communication traffic for blockchain synchronization of IoT devices,” energy-efficient reconfigurable DTLS cryptographic engine for end-toin Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Kansas City, MO, USA, end security in IoT applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits
 May 2018, pp. 1–7. Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 42–44.
 [39] S. Huh, S. Cho, and S. Kim, “Managing IoT devices using blockchain [60] T. Faisal, N. Courtois, and A. Serguieva, “The evolution of embedding
 platform,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Adv. Commun. Technol. metadata in blockchain transactions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf.
 (ICACT), PyeongChang, South Korea, 2017, pp. 464–467. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2018, pp. 1–9.
 [40] K. R. Özyılmaz and A. Yurdakul, “Work-in-progress: Integrating low- [61] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, Q. Chen, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain-based
 power IoT devices to a blockchain-based infrastructure,” in Proc. IEEE security layer for identification and isolation of malicious things in
 Int. Conf. Embedded Softw. (EMSOFT), Seoul, South Korea, Oct. 2017, IoT: A conceptual design,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
 pp. 1–2. Netw. (ICCCN), Hangzhou, China, Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 [41] H. Yin, D. Guo, K. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Lyu, and J. Xing, [62] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The secure sockets layer (SSL)
 “Hyperconnected network: A decentralized trusted computing and protocol version 3.0,” IETF, RFC 6101, 2011.
 networking paradigm,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 112–117, [63] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol
 Jan./Feb. 2018. version 1.2,” IETF, RFC 5246, 2008.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10472 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 8, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2021

 [64] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify [87] B. Liu, X. L. Yu, S. Chen, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Blockchain based data
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., integrity service framework for IoT data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web
 Toronto, ON, Canada, 2014, pp. 781–789. Serv., Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2017, pp. 468–475.
 [65] P. K. Sharma, S. Singh, Y.-S. Jeong, and J. H. Park, “DistBlockNet: [88] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms
 A distributed blockchains-based secure SDN architecture for IoT against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE
 networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 78–85, Sep. 2017. Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart.,
 [66] C. Tselios, I. Politis, and S. Kotsopoulos, “Enhancing SDN secu- 2013.
 rity for IoT-related deployments through blockchain,” in Proc. Conf. [89] A. Sahi, D. Lai, Y. Li, and M. Diykh, “An efficient DDoS TCP flood
 Netw. Funct. Virtualization Softw. Defined Netw. (NFV-SDN), Berlin, attack detection and prevention system in a cloud environment,” IEEE
 Germany, Nov. 2017, pp. 303–308. Access, vol. 5, pp. 6036–6048, 2017.
 [67] K. Fan et al., “Blockchain-based secure time protection scheme in [90] S. Kumari, M. Karuppiah, A. K. Das, X. Li, F. Wu, and N. Kumar,
 IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4671–4679, Jun. 2019, “A secure authentication scheme based on elliptic curve cryptography
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2874222. for IoT and cloud servers,” J. Supercomput., vol. 74, pp. 6428–6453,
 [68] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. S. Pentland, “Decentralizing privacy: Apr. 2017.
 Using blockchain to protect personal data,” in Proc. Security Privacy [91] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Towards an optimized
 Workshops (SPW), San Jose, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 180–184. blockchain for IoT,” in Proc. ACM 2nd Int. Conf. Internet Things
 [69] L. Wu, X. Du, W. Wang, and B. Lin, “An out-of-band authentication Design Implement., Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2017, pp. 173–178.
 scheme for Internet of Things using blockchain technology,” in Proc. [92] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and J. Voas, “DDoS in the IoT:
 Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA, Mar. 2018, Mirai and other botnets,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 80–84, 2017.
 pp. 769–773. [93] R. H. Weber, “Internet of Things—New security and privacy chal-
 [70] R. Lu, “A new communication-efficient privacy-preserving range query lenges,” Comput. Law Security Rev., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–30, 2010.
 scheme in fog-enhanced IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, [94] B. Lee and J.-H. Lee, “Blockchain-based secure firmware update
 pp. 2497–2505, Apr. 2019. for embedded devices in an Internet of Things environment,” J.
 [71] H. Ren, H. Li, Y. Dai, K. Yang, and X. Lin, “Querying in Internet of Supercomput., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1152–1167, 2017.
 Things with privacy preserving: Challenges, solutions and opportuni- [95] A. Banafa, IoT and Blockchain Convergence: Benefits and
 ties,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 144–151, Nov./Dec. 2018. Challenges, IEEE Internet Things, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017.
 [72] S. Linoy, H. Mahdikhani, S. Ray, R. Lu, N. Stakhanova, [Online]. Available: https://iot.ieee.org/newsletter/january-2017/iotand A. Ghorbani, “Scalable privacy-preserving query processing and-blockchain-convergence-benefits-and-challenges.html
 over ethereum blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Blockchain [96] A. Al Hasib and A. A. M. M. Haque, “A comparative study of the
 (Blockchain), Atlanta, GA, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 398–404. performance and security issues of AES and RSA cryptography,” in
 [73] H. Mahdikhani, R. Lu, Y. Zheng, J. Shao, and A. A. Ghorbani, Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Converg. Hybrid Inf. Technol., vol. 2. Busan,
 “Achieving O (log3 n) communication-efficient privacy-preserving South Korea, 2008, pp. 505–510.
 range query in fog-based IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6, [97] T. ElGamal, “A public key cryptosystem and a signature scheme
 pp. 5220–5232, Jun. 2020. based on discrete logarithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 31, no. 4,
 pp. 469–472, Jul. 1985.
 [74] D. Li, W. Peng, W. Deng, and F. Gai, “A blockchain-based authentica-
 [98] M. Bellare and P. Rogaway, “The exact security of digital signaturestion and security mechanism for IoT,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput.
 how to sign with RSA and Rabin,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Theory Appl.
 Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Hangzhou, China, Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 Cryptograph. Techn., 1996, pp. 399–416.
 [75] S.-C. Cha and K.-H. Yeh, “An ISO/IEC 15408-2 compliant security
 [99] L. Harn, M. Mehta, and W.-J. Hsin, “Integrating Diffie-Hellman key
 auditing system with blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 exchange into the digital signature algorithm (DSA),” IEEE Commun.
 Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), Beijing, China, May 2018, pp. 1–2.
 Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 198–200, Mar. 2004.
 [76] W. Yin, Q. Wen, W. Li, H. Zhang, and Z. Jin, “An anti-quantum trans-
 [100] X. Du, M. Guizani, Y. Xiao, and H.-H. Chen, “Transactions papers
 action authentication approach in blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
 a routing-driven elliptic curve cryptography based key management
 pp. 5393–5401, 2018.
 scheme for heterogeneous sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
 [77] O. J. A. Pinno, A. R. A. Gregio, and L. C. E. De Bona, “ControlChain: Commun., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1223–1229, Mar. 2009.
 Blockchain as a central enabler for access control authorizations in the [101] L. S. Sankar, M. Sindhu, and M. Sethumadhavan, “Survey of consensus
 IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Singapore, Dec. 2017, protocols on blockchain applications,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Adv.
 pp. 1–6. Comput. Commun. Syst. (ICACCS), Coimbatore, India, 2017, pp. 1–5.
 [78] A. Boudguiga et al., “Towards better availability and accountability [102] M. Vukolić, “The quest for scalable blockchain fabric: Proof-of-work
 for IoT updates by means of a blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. vs. BFT replication,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Open Problems Netw.
 Secur. Privacy Workshops, Paris, France, Apr. 2017, pp. 50–58. Security, 2015, pp. 112–125.
 [79] D. W. Kravitz and J. Cooper, “Securing user identity and transactions [103] G. Liang, B. Sommer, and N. Vaidya, “Experimental performance comsymbiotically: IoT meets blockchain,” in Proc. Global Internet Things parison of Byzantine fault-tolerant protocols for data centers,” in Proc.
 Summit (GIoTS), Geneva, Switzerland, Jun. 2017, pp. 1–6. IEEE INFOCOM, Orlando, FL, USA, 2012, pp. 1422–1430.
 [80] Y. Zhang, S. Kasahara, Y. Shen, X. Jiang, and J. Wan, [104] W. He, G. Yan, and L. D. Xu, “Developing vehicular data cloud services
 “Smart Contract-Based Access Control for the Internet of Things,” in the IoT environment,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 2,
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1594–1605, Apr. 2019. pp. 1587–1595, May 2014.
 [81] D. Hussein, E. Bertin, and V. Frey, “A community-driven access con- [105] L. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Sun, and P. Lv, “BeeKeeper: A blockchain-based
 trol approach in distributed IoT environments,” IEEE Commun. Mag., IoT system with secure storage and homomorphic computation,” IEEE
 vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 146–153, Mar. 2017. Access, vol. 6, pp. 43472–43488, 2018.
 [82] V. Sivaraman, H. H. Gharakheili, A. Vishwanath, R. Boreli, and [106] T. Dey, S. Jaiswal, S. Sunderkrishnan, and N. Katre, “HealthSense: A
 O. Mehani, “Network-level security and privacy control for smart-home medical use case of Internet of Things and blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE
 IoT devices,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Wireless Mobile Comput. Int. Conf. Intell. Sustain. Syst. (ICISS), Palladam, India, Dec. 2017,
 Netw. Commun. (WiMob), Abu Dhabi, UAE, 2015, pp. 163–167. pp. 486–491.
 [83] M. Chiang and T. Zhang, “Fog and IoT: An overview of research [107] J. Cheney, L. Chiticariu, and W.-C. Tan, “Provenance in databases:
 opportunities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 854–864, Why, how, and where,” Found. Trends Databases, vol. 1, no. 4,
 Dec. 2016. pp. 379–474, 2009.
 [84] X. Liang, J. Zhao, S. Shetty, and D. Li, “Towards data assurance and [108] F. Tian, “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based
 resilience in IoT using blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. on RFID & blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Serv. Syst.
 (MILCOM), Baltimore, MD, USA, Oct. 2017, pp. 261–266. Serv. Manag., Kunming, China, Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6.
 [85] M. Singh, A. Singh, and S. Kim, “Blockchain: A game changer for [109] F. Tian, “A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on
 securing IoT data,” in Proc. IEEE 4th World Forum Internet Things HACCP, blockchain & Internet of Things,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Serv.
 (WF-IoT), Singapore, Feb. 2018, pp. 51–55. Syst. Serv. Manag. (ICSSSM), 2017, pp. 1–6.
 [86] E. Karafiloski and A. Mishev, “Blockchain solutions for big data chal- [110] R. Guo, H. Shi, Q. Zhao, and D. Zheng, “Secure attribute-based siglenges: A literature review,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Smart nature scheme with multiple authorities for blockchain in electronic
 Technol., Ohrid, Macedonia, Jul. 2017, pp. 763–768. health records systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 11676–11686, 2018.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
XU et al.: EMBEDDING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY INTO IoT FOR SECURITY: A SURVEY 10473

[111] Q. Xia, E. B. Sifah, K. O. Asamoah, J. Gao, X. Du, and M. Guizani, Li Da Xu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in information
 “MeDShare: Trust-less medical data sharing among cloud service science and engineering from the University of Science and Technology of
 providers via blockchain,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 14757–14767, China, Hefei, China, in 1978 and 1981, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
 2017. in systems science and engineering from Portland State University, Portland,
[112] M. Mettler, “Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolu- OR, USA, in 1986.
 tion starts here,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. e-Health Netw. He is an Academician of the European Academy of Sciences, the Russian
 Appl. Serv. (Healthcom), Munich, Germany, Sep. 2016, pp. 1–3, Academy of Engineering (formerly, USSR Academy of Engineering), and
 doi: 10.1109/HealthCom.2016.7749510. the Armenian Academy of Engineering. He is a 2016–2020 Highly Cited
[113] A. Ekblaw, A. Azaria, J. D. Halamka, and A. Lippman, “A case Researcher in the field of engineering named by Clarivate Analytics (formerly,
 study for blockchain in healthcare: ’MedRec’ prototype for elec- Thomson Reuters Intellectual Property & Science).
 tronic health records and medical research data,” in Proc. IEEE
 Open Big Data Conf., vol. 13, 2016, p. 13. [Online]. Available:
 https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/56e6/5b469cad2f3ebd560b3a∼
 10e7346780f4ab0a.pdf
[114] L. Catarinucci et al., “An IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 515–526,
 Dec. 2015.
[115] J. Wei, “How wearables intersect with the cloud and the Internet
 of Things: Considerations for the developers of wearables,” IEEE
 Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 53–56, Jul. 2014.
[116] Y. Yuan and F.-Y. Wang, “Towards blockchain-based intelligent transportation systems,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. Yang Lu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from Jilin University,
 (ITSC), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Nov. 2016, pp. 2663–2668. Changchun, China, in 2004, and the M.S. degree from the University of
[117] A. Lei, H. Cruickshank, Y. Cao, P. Asuquo, C. P. A. Ogah, and Z. Sun, Manchester, Manchester, U.K., in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree in information
 “Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous intel- and communication technology from Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA,
 ligent transportation systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6, USA, 2020.
 pp. 1832–1843, Dec. 2017. He has published research papers in refereed journals published by major
[118] Y. Gupta, R. Shorey, D. Kulkarni, and J. Tew, “The applicability of publishers, such as Elsevier, IEEE, Taylor & Francis, and World Scientific.
 blockchain in the Internet of Things,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun.
 Syst. Netw., Bengaluru, India, Jan. 2018, pp. 561–564.
[119] K. Biswas and V. Muthukkumarasamy, “Securing smart cities using
 blockchain technology,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. High Perform.
 Comput. Commun. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Smart City IEEE 2nd Int.
 Conf. Data Sci. Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Sydney, NSW, Australia,
 Dec. 2016, pp. 1392–1393.
[120] R. Rivera, J. G. Robledo, V. M. Larios, and J. M. Avalos, “How digital
 identity on blockchain can contribute in a smart city environment,” in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Smart Cities Conf. (ISC2), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–4.
[121] J. Branger and Z. Pang, “From automated home to sustainable, healthy
 and manufacturing home: A new story enabled by the Internet-of- Ling Li received the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the Ohio State University,
 Things and industry 4.0,” J. Manag. Anal., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 314–332, Columbus, OH, USA, in 1994 and 1996, respectively.
 2015. She is an Eminent Scholar and a University Professor with Old
[122] M. Samaniego and R. Deters, “Internet of Smart Things—IoST: Using Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA, where she is the Chair of the
 blockchain and clips to make things autonomous,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences. She has
 Conf. Cogn. Comput. (ICCC), Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017, pp. 9–16. published in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE
[123] P. K. Sharma, M.-Y. Chen, and J. H. Park, “A software defined fog T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS, IEEE
 node based distributed blockchain cloud architecture for IoT,” IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS ,
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 115–124, 2017. M AN , AND C YBERNETICS —PART C: A PPLICATIONS AND R EVIEWS, IEEE
[124] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang, “Blockchain-enabled security in elec- T RANSACTIONS OF I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY IN B IOMEDICINE, IEEE
 tric vehicles cloud and edge computing,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3, I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, IEEE S YSTEMS J OURNAL, and other
 pp. 78–83, May/Jun. 2018. journals.
[125] Y. Qian et al., “Towards decentralized IoT security enhancement: Dr. Li served as an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 A blockchain approach,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 72, pp. 266–273, I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS. She is a Certified Fellow of Association for
 Nov. 2018. Supply Chain Management.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:50:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.