FARE: Enabling Fine-grained Attack Categorization
 under Low-quality Labeled Data

 Junjie Liang1 § , Wenbo Guo1 § , Tongbo Luo2 , Vasant Honavar1 , Gang Wang3 , Xinyu Xing1
 1 The Pennsylvania State University 2 Robinhood, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

 {jul672, wzg13, vhonavar, xxing}@ist.psu.edu, irobert0126@gmail.com, gangw@illinois.edu
 Abstract—Supervised machine learning classifiers have been the defender knows the attack exists and has collected labeled
widely used for attack detection, but their training requires abun- data for training.
dant high-quality labels. Unfortunately, high-quality labels are
difficult to obtain in practice due to the high cost of data labeling Unfortunately, in practice, obtaining abundant high-quality
and the constant evolution of attackers. Without such labels, it labels is difficult. This is particularly true for security appliis challenging to train and deploy targeted countermeasures. cations, due to the high cost of data labeling and the evolving
 In this paper, we propose FARE, a clustering method to enable
 nature of attacks. Data labeling is expensive because it requires
fine-grained attack categorization under low-quality labels. We manual efforts. Unlike labeling images or text, investigating
focus on two common issues in data labels: 1) missing labels new attack samples (e.g., new malware families) requires
for certain attack classes or families; and 2) only having coarse- substantial expertise, and often takes a longer time. As such,
grained labels available for different attack types. The core idea only a small portion of data samples can be labeled manually.
of FARE is to take full advantage of the limited labels while Even for the labeled samples, the quality of the labels is often
using the underlying data distribution to consolidate the low- far from satisfying. There are two common issues faced by
quality labels. We design an ensemble model to fuse the results of different security applications:
multiple unsupervised learning algorithms with the given labels
to mitigate the negative impact of missing classes and coarse- The first common issue is the missing classes in the lagrained labels. We then train an input transformation network beled data. Take malware detection for example. The malware
to map the input data into a low-dimensional latent space for ecosystem is constantly evolving with new malware families
fine-grained clustering. Using two security datasets (Android appearing frequently over time [56]. As a result, the labeled
malware and network intrusion traces), we show that FARE dataset might miss certain malware families. Using a dataset
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art (semi-)supervised with missing classes, the trained classifiers would have a hard
learning methods in clustering quality/correctness. Further, we
 time detecting related malware.
perform an initial deployment of FARE by working with a large
e-commerce service to detect fraudulent accounts. With real- The second common issue is coarse-grained labels. Due
world A/B tests and manual investigation, we demonstrate the to the lack of time or expertise of the analysts, the provided
effectiveness of FARE to catch previously-unseen frauds. labels often lack specificity or contain errors. For example,
 for malware attribution, malware of different families may
 I. I NTRODUCTION be incorrectly labeled as the same family; For online abuse
 Machine learning is widely used to build security appli- classification, scrapers and trolls may be assigned to a generic
cations. Many security tasks such as malware detection and “abusive” label. In practice, coarse-grained labels pose a key
abuse/fraud identification can be formulated as a supervised challenge to deploying timely and targeted countermeasures.
classification problem [31], [45], [64], [10], [36], [19], [17]. For example, different malware has different kill chains, and
By collecting and labeling benign and malicious samples, scrapers and trolls should be given different penalties.
defenders can train supervised classifiers to distinguish attacks Proposed Solution. In this paper, we aim to enable finefrom benign data (or distinguish different attack types). grained attack categorization using low-quality labels. The
 A key challenge faced by these supervised classifiers is goal is to discover the clustering structures in the data to
that their training requires abundant high-quality labels. Many assist human analysts to derive high-quality labels. We propose
supervised models, especially deep-learning models, are data- FARE, a semi-supervised method to address the issues of
hungry, requiring a large quantity of labeled data to achieve both missing classes and coarse-grained labels in poorlya decent training outcome. In addition, the labels need to labeled datasets. At the high-level, FARE’s input is a dataset
have good coverage of all the attack types of interest. A where only a small portion of the data is labeled, and the
classifier cannot reliably detect a certain type of attack unless labels are of a low-quality. After running FARE, it outputs
 the clustering assignment for all the data samples. The data
 § Equal contribution. samples are expected to be either correctly clustered under the
 known labels or form new groups to represent the new labels.
 By correctly recovering the clustering structures in the input
Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium 2021 dataset, FARE provides the much-needed support for human
21-25 February 2021, Virtual analysts to generate high-quality labels.
ISBN 1-891562-66-5
https://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2021.24403 The core idea of FARE is to take full advantage of the
www.ndss-symposium.org limited labels while using the underlying data distribution to
consolidate the low-quality labels. More specifically, we design To facilitate future research, we release the code of FARE,
an ensemble model to fuse the results of multiple unsupervised and the malware and intrusion datasets used in this paper1 .
learning algorithms with the given labels. This helps to mitigate the negative impact of missing classes and coarse-grained II. BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S COPE
labels, and reduce the randomness of the learning outcome.
Based on the fused labels, we design an input transformation We start by describing the background of three key security
network by extending the basic idea of metric learning [26]. applications and the problems caused by missing-classes or
The network maps the input data into a low-dimensional latent coarse-grained labels. Then, we discuss our problem scope and
space, which makes it easier to identify fine-grained clusters. assumptions.

Experimental Evaluation. We evaluate FARE with two A. Security Applications
popular security applications: malware categorization and network intrusion detection. We use existing datasets of 270,000 Malware Identification and Classification. Researchers have
malware samples and 490,000 network events to perform used machine learning methods to identify malware from
controlled experiments. More specifically, by omitting different benign software (i.e., identification) and classifying malware
classes or merging data labels, we simulate different scenarios into specific families (i.e, attribution) [1], [81], [56], [82].
where only limited low-quality labels are available. We com- Most existing works focus on the supervised learning setting
pare FARE with the state-of-the-art semi-supervised learning (in which a fully and correctly labeled malware dataset is
algorithms as well as unsupervised algorithms. Our results available) and have demonstrated promising performance of
show that FARE significantly outperforms existing methods machine learning models. However, the problem becomes
when there are missing classes or coarse-grained labels in the more challenging in semi-supervised learning or unsupervised
data, and maintains a comparable performance when the data learning settings when labels are incomplete. Labels are inlabels are correct. We find that most existing methods have the complete for two main reasons. First, malware evolution: one
implicit assumption that the classes in the labels are complete, malware family could evolve into hundreds or even thousands
and thus perform poorly when this assumption is violated. In of malware variants in a short period of time [73]. Second,
addition, we show that FARE is less sensitive to the variations labeling malware usually requires manual efforts from domain
of datasets, and the ratio of available labels. This confirms experts, which is a time-consuming process.
the benefits of fusing unsupervised learning results with given Network Intrusion Detection. Existing network intrusion
labels to increase system stability. Finally, we show that the detection systems can be categorized into rule-based system
computational overhead of FARE is comparable to commonly- and anomaly-based system [65], [47], [51], [15], [38]. Ruleused clustering algorithms. based systems detect a known attack by matching the attack
Testing on a Real-world Service. We work with an industrial with the existing patterns stored in the knowledge base. These
partner to test FARE in their production environment to detect systems are usually accurate on well-studied intrusions but
fraudulent accounts in a large e-commerce service. As the ini- can fail to detect previously-unseen attacks. Anomaly-based
tial testing, we apply FARE to a sample of 200,000 active user systems rely on unsupervised machine learning to detect outaccounts. The dataset only has 0.5% of confirmed fraudulent of-distribution samples. In practice, security platforms often
account labels, and 0.1% of confirmed trusted account labels. combine both systems for a better outcome. However, it is still
Through an A/B test, we show that FARE helps to discover plausible for attackers to adapt their behaviors to evade such
previously-unseen fraudulent accounts. By initiating two-factor detection systems. Identifying and characterizing such evasion
re-authentication requests to the detected accounts, we find attacks requires manual investigations from domain experts,
0% of them can successfully re-authenticate themselves, con- which again is a time-consuming process.
firming a low false-positive rate. Further manual investigation Fraudulent Account Detection. Online service providers face
reveals new attack types such as accounts exploiting mistagged serious threats from fraudulent accounts that are created for
prices for bulk product purchasing. malicious activities (e.g., spam, scam, illegal content scraping,
 In summary, this paper makes three key contributions. and opinion manipulation) [14], [13], [68], [75], [71], [23],
 [33]. A recent report shows that fraudulent credit card accounts
 • We propose FARE to address the problem of low- affected more than 250,000 U.S. consumers [27]. Similarly,
 quality data labels, a common challenge faced by detecting fraudulent accounts has been a cat-mouse game. The
 learning-based security applications. We introduce a defenders are struggling with labeling new types of fraudulent
 series of new designs to enable fine-grained attack cat- accounts as they change their behaviors to evade detection.
 egorization when the labeled data has missing classes
 or coarse-grained labels. B. Problem Scope and Assumptions
 • Through experiments, we demonstrate existing semi- A common challenge faced by these security applications
 supervised and unsupervised methods are not capable is data labeling. While the data labeling problem also exists
 of handling such low-quality labels. We show that in other application domains (e.g., image analysis and natural
 FARE significantly outperforms existing methods in language processing), we argue that two characteristics of
 recovering the true clustering structure in the data. security applications make the problem more concerning. First,
 unlike labeling images, labeling security data requires domain
 • We tested FARE in a real-world online service system. expertise to perform in-depth manual analysis (and thus more
 We demonstrate the usefulness of FARE to analyze
 and categorize fraudulent accounts. 1 https://github.com/junjieliang672/FARE

 2
time consuming). Second, attacker behavior shift is a norm human analysts to discover the previously missing classes and
in the security domain, which puts higher pressure on labeling fine-grained sub-classes.
data in a timely fashion. In practice, security analysts can only
label a small subset of samples among a large volume of data. In this paper, we focus on recovering the true clustering
Below, we discuss two critical issues: structure. The human labeling part is out of the scope of this
 paper (i.e., potential user studies are future works).
Missing Classes. The first issue is that the labeling is often
incomplete, which means not all the incoming data samples Assumptions. We assume the given labels of the known
have a label. Even for the labeled samples, it is difficult to classes are correct (n − nc classes in the missing class setting,
guarantee that the labels perfectly cover all the attack cate- and n − ng + 1 classes in the coarse-grained label setting). In
gories. Take malware for example, it is unrealistic to assume other words, we assume a small number of samples for the
that the security analysts are aware of all the malware families well-known classes are labeled correctly in the input dataset.
in the wild. As such, a common practice is to conservatively
leave the previously unseen families as unlabeled data. With C. Possible Solutions and Limitations
unlabeled data and missing classes, the trained classifier will
have a bad performance when deployed in practice. Before introducing our system design, we first briefly
 discuss the possible directions and their limitations.
Coarse-grained Labels. Another common situation is that
analysts mistakenly group data from several classes into one The most straightforward direction is to ignore the lowclass, due to the lack of knowledge or time for in-depth quality labels and directly train a supervised classifier on the
analysis. For example, given several malware families under available labeled training data [1], [32], [44]. However, with
one parent family, an analyst who is only aware of the parent limited and low-quality labels, a supervised classifier faces
family could label all child families as the parent class. Worse, challenges to learn the accurate decision boundary of the
it is also possible for inexperienced analysts to assign two true classes. More importantly, supervised classifiers cannot
different malware families under the same family. Similarly, handle new classes that are not part of the labeled data. To
in online services, different attacks (scrapers, spammers, trolls) detect new classes, an augmentation method is to use the
may be assigned to the same generic “abuse” label. prediction probability (or confidence) of the classifier [34].
 Intuitively, a low prediction probability could indicate the input
 Fine-grained labels are the key to deploying effective sample is from a new class. However, this approach has major
countermeasures [21]. For example, different malware fam- limitations. First, confidence score is known to be unreliable
ilies usually have different kill chains (from malware de- on out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. A classifier could easily
livery to exploitation, command & control, and data exfil- misclassify OOD samples with high confidence [30], [34].
tration/encryption). Knowing the fine-grained malware label Second, confidence score cannot group on new samples, which
allows defenders to use targeted countermeasures to disrupt the is inconvenient for the subsequent labeling process.
kill chain before the damage is made. Similarly, in large online
services, different abusive accounts require different types of An opposite direction is to ignore any given labels and
penalties. For example, network throttling and CAPTCHA can apply unsupervised clustering [28], [20] or clustering ensembe effective against automated scrapers, but are ineffective ble methods [67] to the training data. This direction could
against trolls controlled by real users. avoid misleading information introduced by the low-quality
 labels. However, as is shown later in Section §IV, without the
Problem Definition. Given a dataset with n true classes, we guidance of any labels, unsupervised methods are less effective
define the two problems as the following. compared to those that can leverage the given labels.
 • Missing classes: labels are completely missing for nc A more promising direction is to apply a semi-supervised
 classes. For the remaining n−nc classes, only a small learning methods [59], [6]. Semi-supervised learning could
 portion of their samples have labels available. leverage both the given labels and unlabeled data to learn a
 • Coarse-grained labels: ng original classes are labeled more accurate clustering structure of the true classes. Unforas one union class. For these n − ng + 1 classes, only tunately, existing semi-supervised learning methods rely on a
 a small portion of their samples are labeled. strong assumption. That is, there are (at least) a few labeled
 samples available in all the classes in the training set. In other
 Our goal is to recover the true clustering structure of the words, they do not assume missing classes or coarse-grained
input data by leveraging the limited low-quality labels. After labels in the training set. As is shown later in Section §IV,
processing the input dataset, we aim to 1) determine there are their performances are significantly jeopardized when there is
n clusters in the dataset; and 2) correctly assign all the data a violation of this assumption.
samples (including the unlabeled samples) to the n clusters.
 Finally, a related direction is (generalized) zero-shot learn-
 Note that, our output is the clusters of data samples, but ing methods (GZSL/ZSL), which can be used to identify prethese clusters do not yet have “labels” (i.e., what type of attack viously unseen classes in the testing data [60]. These methods
each cluster represents). In practice, human analysts will then treat the training data as the first task and try to transfer the
inspect the output clusters to assign labels (i.e., determining learned model from the first task to the second task (i.e., testing
the attack type). This can be done by referencing the known data). GZSL/ZSL methods assume the testing data contains
labels or manually analyzing a small number of samples per unseen classes (that do not exist in the first task). However,
cluster (see Section §VI and Appendix-F for more details). By to enable successful knowledge transfer, GZSL/ZSL methods
recovering the correct clustering structures, we empower the require well-labeled training samples in the first task. Also,

 3
 !" !" !"
 !" !# !$ !% !. (1, 2) (1, 3) (1, 4) (1, 5) (2, 3) (2, 4) (2, 5) (3, 4) (3, 5) (4, 5)
 -"
 !# -" !# !#
 G. labels 1 1 2 - - G. labels 1 0 - - 0 - - - - - {!' } -# -#
 !$ K-means 3 2 1 4 1 K-means 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 K-means !$ !$
 {)'* } …
 -$ -$
 Clustering
 DBSCAN 2 1 1 1 3 DBSCAN 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 !% Human
 …
 !%
 …
 !% -% -% analyst
 DEC 2 3 2 2 1 DEC 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 {+, }
 !. Input Trans. Net -. -. !. !.
 Table A: Neighborhood models. Table B: Neighborhood relationships.{)'* }
 Clusters Classes

Fig. 1. The overview of FARE. The colors on the dots indicate the given labels (top) and the final clustering results (bottom). Dots of the same color have
the same label; the transparent dot represents an unlabeled sample. The numbers in Table A refer to the cluster indexes. The 0s and 1s in Table B represent the
neighborhood relationship. “-” stands for “not available”. “G. Labels” is short for “Given Labels”.

they need well-labeled side information (e.g., in image classi- produced by FARE could help human analysts identify missing
fication tasks, side information are shared and nameable visual classes and the fine-grained classes.
properties of objects). These requirements make GZSL/ZSL
methods not suitable to solve our problem: (1) we assume the Augmenting Labels with Unsupervised Learning Results.
training labels are limited; (2) most security applications do In step Ê, we consider the given labels untrustworthy due
not have well-defined notions for “side information”. We have to the missing classes and the coarse-grained labels. To
provided a brief supporting experiment in Appendix-B. consolidate the given labels, the only available information
 source is the data samples themselves. As such, we propose
 to use multiple unsupervised learning algorithms to extract
 III. M ETHODOLOGY OF FARE the underlying data distributions (manifolds) to mitigate the
 We design a system FARE to address the labeling problems uncertainty of the original labels.
mentioned above. FARE is short for “Fain-grained Attack
 More specifically, we fuse the labels from M different
Categorization through Representation Ensemble”. In the folsources. Among them, one source is the given labels, and
lowing, we first explain the intuitions behind the system
 the other M − 1 sources are different unsupervised clustering
design, followed by the technical details of each component.
 algorithms. The reason to use multiple clustering algorithms
Finally, we describe an unsupervised version of FARE.
 is to reduce biases. Existing clustering algorithms intrinsically
 make assumptions about the data distribution, and they work
A. Overview of System Design well only when such an assumption is satisfied (e.g., K-means
 In Figure 1, we provide an example to explain the work- assumes data are represented in Euclidean space). However,
flow. The input of FARE is a set of data samples (i.e., feature in practice, we cannot validate these assumptions without
vectors). Their labels are incomplete or contain errors. In this trial-and-error. For this reason, we apply multiple clustering
example, we have 5 data samples. We use different colors to methods and fuse their results. In this way, the system is
distinguish the given labels of these samples ( x1 and x2 have less sensitive to the assumption made by certain clustering
the same “red” label; x3 has the “blue” label; and x4 and x5 method (validated in Section §IV). In addition, clustering
are not labeled yet). algorithms can be sensitive to hyper-parameters. To minimize
 such influence, we apply each clustering algorithm multiple
 The given labels of the inputs contain errors. More specif- times with different hyper-parameters and each setting has its
ically, the true labels of the 5 samples are shown on the own row. After clustering, the results from each model2 are
rightmost side of Figure 1. There should be 4 ground-truth shown in Table A in Figure 1.
classes. Their true grouping is: {x1 }, {x2 }, {x3 , x4 }, {x5 }.
 To fuse the labels from the M sources, we need to find a
 Under this setting, x1 and x2 represent the coarse-grained uniform way to represent the clustering results. We solve this
label problem; x4 and x5 represent the missing class problem. problem by constructing a neighborhood relationship table,
After FARE processes the input data, our goal is to recover which is Table B in Figure 1. In this table, each column
the true grouping of the 5 samples. After that, human analysts represents a pair of input samples; each row represents either
could inspect the clusters and assign the labels accordingly. a clustering algorithm (row-2 to row-4) or the original given
In this example, x1 and x2 are correctly split into two fine- labels (row-1). This table describes the pair-wise relationship
grained classes (“red” and “yellow”). x3 and x4 are grouped between all pairs of input samples.
under the “blue” class. x5 then forms a new class “green”.
 Given a clustering algorithm, if a pair of input samples are
 To achieve this goal above, we design FARE to process grouped into the same cluster, we set their relationship value as
the datasets with three key steps. In step Ê, we mitigate the 1 (0 otherwise). Similarly, for the original given labels, if the
uncertainties of the labels using an ensemble method. The idea two samples share the same label, we set their relationship
is to fuse the results of multiple unsupervised algorithms with value as 1. If they have different labels, we set the value
the given labels, to use the underlying data distribution to to 0. If at least one sample in the pair is unlabeled, we set
consolidate the labels. In step Ë, we transform the input space their relationship as “not available” (“-”). The neighborhood
into a more compressed hidden space to represent the data relationship table makes it possible to fuse the results across
distribution. The low-dimensional space allows us to perform algorithms because we don’t need to align the specific clusters
accurate data clustering. In step Ì, we perform a K-means to the specific labels. Instead, all the algorithms share the same
clustering on the compressed data to identify the underline
cluster structures of the input data. Finally, we defer to human 2 For simplicity, in the example of Figure 1, we only apply each clustering
analysts to assign labels to the output clusters. The clusters algorithm once with one set of hyper-parameters.

 4
format that captures the pair-wised relationships of the input algorithms and the given labels. We define a set of M
data samples. For convenience, we refer to each row in this neighborhood models (denoted as M), and each model is
table as a neighborhood model. In Figure 1, we have M = 4 used to decide a set of pair-wise neighborhood relationships
neighborhood models. of samples in X . As shown in Figure 1 Table A, one of the
 neighborhood models is the given labels and the other M − 1
 To merge the results of M neighborhood models, we neighborhood models are the clustering algorithms.
introduce a hyper-parameter {πm }Mm=1 to represent the weight
of each model. A higher weight means the model is more For each neighborhood model in M, we then decide the
important. In Section §III-D, we describe how to calculate πm pair-wise neighborhood relationships for samples in X . Given
via a validation set. a pair of samples (xi , xj ), the neighborhood relationship
 captured by the mth model is denoted as yij m
 . As mentioned
Input Transformation. In the next step Ë, we transform m
 in Section §III-A, yij = 1 if the two samples are clustered
the input samples and labels into low-dimensional vectors as
an accurate representation of the input data space. This low- into the same cluster (0 otherwise) by the mth model . For the
dimensional space allows us to cluster the input data into fine- “given labels”, the same rule applies (but if either input is in
 m
grained clusters. Given the neighborhood relationship table the unlabeled set XU , yij is unavailable).
 m M
{yij }m=1 , and the model weights {πm }M m=1 , we train an input To aggregate the neighborhood relationships from all the
transformation network to transforms an input xi to a hidden models in M, we set weights πm on each neighborhood model.
representation hi . The network is trained to achieve two goals. To calculate this πm , we first define a priori pm for each model.
First, we want to transform the inputs into more separable This pm is also a hyper-parameter (configuration details are
representations while preserving the pair-wise neighborhood in Section §III-D). After deciding the value of {pm }, we then
relationships. In other words, the hidden representation still calculate {πpm } by normalizing {pm } using a softmax function:
reflects the original data distribution, but should make these m
 π m = P e ep m .
samples easier to cluster. Second, the transformation function m∈M

will project the high dimensional input to a lower-dimensional Input Transformation Network. The input transformation
Euclidean space. As mentioned in Section §VII, traditional network aims to transform the input samples into a lowclustering methods suffer from the curse of dimensionality. A dimensional hidden space to identify the underlying clusters.
low-dimensional space enables more efficient clustering. m
 Based on {yij } and {πm }, we want to learn a network
 f to map any input sample x from X to h in a hidden
 Note that this input transformation network is different
 space. As discussed in Section §III-A, the hidden space should
from traditional unsupervised auto-encoder [46] that are used
 (1) maintain an accurate representation of the neighborhood
to compress the original inputs. The key difference are tworelationships of the input samples, and (2) make it easier to
folds. First, auto-encoder is unsupervised, while FARE’s transperform clustering.
formation network utilizes both unlabeled and labeled samples.
Second, auto-encoder is trained for input reconstruction. FARE To achieve these goals, we first apply a metric learning
is trained to contrast different samples to learn a more sepa- loss to train the transformation network. Metric learning [79],
rable space, which benefits later clustering. [69] transforms the input samples into hidden representations
 while keeping the sample distance (i.e., the relative distance
Final Clustering. In the final step Ì, we simply apply the
 between pair-wise of samples) consistent with that in the
K-means algorithm on the hidden representations to generate
 input space. Mathematically, given a pair of samples xi , xj ,
more fine-grained clusters. We choose K-means with the
 and neighborhood relationship yij , a typical pair-wise metric
following considerations. First, K-means works particularly
 learning loss has the following form [26]:
well if Euclidean distance. The input transformation in the
previous step has mapped inputs to a Euclidean space. Second, L̃(xi , xj ) = yij d2ij + (1 − yij )(α − dij )2+ , (1)
other candidate algorithms such as DBSCAN are not suitable
because their assumptions do not match well with the hidden where (·)+ is short for max(0, ·) and dij is the distance of
representations or they do not rely on the notion of distance the hidden representations of xi and xj . This loss function
(e.g., density-based algorithms) for clustering. The main task ensures that the distance of xi and xj is minimized in the
in this step is to determine the final number of clusters K. In latent space if they are neighbors (i.e., belonging to the same
the following, we will discuss our method in detail. cluster). Oppositely, we maximize their distance up to a radius
 defined by α > 0, such that dissimilar pairs contribute to the
B. Technical Details loss function only when their distance is within this radius.

 In this section, we present the technical details of each With this metric learning loss, we learn the hidden reprecomponent in FARE. We start by defining key notations. Given sentation of the input samples such that inputs from the same
an input dataset X = {XY , XU }, where XY corresponds to class have a smaller distance than those from different classes.
the labeled samples set and XU denotes the set of unlabeled This makes the hidden representations from different classes
samples. Within the dataset, each sample x ∈ Rp×1 is a p more separable. Another benefit is that metric learning converts
dimensional vector. If the sample has a label, the label is the samples into representations in the Euclidean space, where
represented by an integer value, indicating the corresponding the Euclidean distance can be used as the distance function.
sample’s class. We use {·} as an abbreviation for {·}Mm=1 .
 To be specific, we define the distance function of xi , xj in the
 hidden space as follows:
Ensemble of Neighborhood Models. In Ê of Figure 1, we
compute the ensemble of labels from multiple unsupervised dij = d(xi , xj ) = khi − hj k2 . (2)

 5
Here, hi = f (xi ) is the hidden representation of xi . It should On the second step, let Sk denotes the set of data points
be noted that we only need to define distance function in in cluster k, then the cluster center sk is updated using:
the hidden space since the neighborhood relationships of the 1 X
original input samples have already been captured by yij . sk = hi . (6)
 |Sk |
 xi ∈Sk
 We can integrate the multiple sets of neighborhood relationships into the loss function in Equation (1). To be specific, Number of Clusters. The performance of K-means depends
 m
given a sample pair xi , xj , their neighborhood relations {yij }, on the choice of K. In this paper, we select K under the
and the model weights {πm }, the loss function of this sample guidance of silhouette coefficients, a popular unsupervised
pair is defined as follows: clustering evaluation metrics that is used to determine the
 X
 m
 degree of separation between clusters [61]. Formally, let ai be
 L(xi , xj ) = πm δij L̃(xi , xj |m) the mean distance between sample xi ∈ Sci and all other data
 m∈M
 X points in the same cluster ci and bi be the minimum value of
 m
  m 2 m
 )(α − dij )2+ . mean distance between xi and all other data points in cluster k
 
 = πm δij yij dij + (1 − yij
 m∈M (k 6= ci ) across all k = 1, ..., K. Then the silhouette coefficient
 (3) of sample xi is defined as:
 m bi − ai
This loss function also handles the special cases when yij is Sili = , if |Sci | > 1 . (7)
“unavailable” for (incomplete) given labels. We introduce an max{ai , bi }
 m m m
indicator δij : if yij is unavailable, we set δij = 0 (and 1 For cases where |Sci | = 1, we simply set Sili = 0. Given
otherwise). the Sili of each sample, the silhouette coefficient of a clus-
 The loss function in Equation (3) has the form of total tering results with K clusters (i.e., Sil(K)) is defined as the
 maximum value of Sil ˜ k is the
 ˜ k across all clusters, where Sil
probability [52], where πm can be taken as the priori of
each neighborhood model. The final loss can be calculated mean silhouette coefficients over the Sili of all samples within
by integrating the individual loss obtained from each set of cluster k. The final choice of K is then determined by the value
neighborhood relationships obtained from each neighborhood with the largest Sil(K).
model. In other words, this loss function only minimizes (or
maximizes) the distance between a pair of samples in the C. Unsupervised Extension of FARE
hidden space when most of the neighborhood models agree that While FARE is designed to take low-quality labels as
they are neighbors (or non-neighbors). The loss over the entire inputs, it can be extended to an unsupervised version (withdataset (i.e., X ) is computed by averaging the loss on each out taking any labels). Recall that FARE obtains M sets
sample pair plus a regularization term on model parameters: of neighborhood relationships (one from given labels and
 1 X M − 1 from clustering algorithms). When the “given labels”
 L= 2 L(xi , xj ) + λ kθk2 , (4) are completely unavailable, FARE can work with the M − 1
 |X | xi ,xj ∈X clustering algorithms to obtain the neighborhood relationships.
 In this way, we can use FARE as an unsupervised method.
where |X | is the number of samples in X , θ represents the
parameters of f , and λ controls the regularization strength. In comparison with the existing clustering methods, the
 advantage of FARE is it fuses the neighborhood relationships
 Our network is a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with multi- from multiple models. We expect FARE to be less sensitive to
ple hidden layers and one output layer. We set the output layer the variations in input data distribution and hyper-parameters,
to have a much lower dimensionality than the original input and thus produce more reliable results. We will validate this
(i.e., h ∈ Rq×1 , where q << p). We train this network by intuition in Section §IV.
minimizing the loss function in Equation (4) with the training
algorithm introduced in Section §III-D. Appendix-A lists the D. Training Strategy and Hyper-parameters
exact network architectures used in this paper.
 We apply Adam optimizer to minimize the loss function
Final Clustering with K-means. Given the latent represen- in Equation (4) and set its learning rate as 0.001. Technical
tations h, we apply K-means to categorize these samples into details of this optimization technique can be found in [41].
K different clusters. Technically, K-means has two steps: 1) Neighborhood Models. We select three different clusterinitializing the cluster centers and allocate each data point to its ing methods: K-means [28], DBSCAN [20], and DEC [78].
nearest center; 2) updating each cluster center using the mean The rationale behind these choices is as following: K-means,
feature vector of the data points in the corresponding cluster. DBSCAN, DEC, and DAGMM are four existing clustering
The update procedure iterates between these steps until the methods that have been applied to different security applicachange of cluster centers between two consecutive iterations tions. DAGMM is designed for anomaly detection but not for
is below a certain threshold. More formally, in the first step, multi-classes clustering tasks. As such, we use the other three
the cluster that a given point xi belongs to is solved by: methods for FARE. These methods are reasonably diversified
 2 to meet our needs. As mentioned before, we apply the selected
 ci = arg min khi − sk k2 , (5) methods with different hyper-parameters and form M − 1
 k
 neighborhood models in total. The choice of M and clustering
where sk is the feature vector for cluster center k. parameters is further discussed in Appendix-A.

 6
Hyper-parameters. We define the following hyper- with 9 classes, one of which has 97,278 normal network traffic
parameters in FARE: the distance radius α, the neighborhood and the rest 8 classes represent 8 types of intrusions.4 Our
model weight {pm }, and the regularization coefficients λ. In selected dataset has 493, 346 samples. Note that the selected
this paper, we fixed α = q, where q is the output dimension classes cover 99.8% of the samples in the dataset. We remove
of f , and set λ to a small value 0.01. The most important the remaining 0.2%, because they will be treated as noise by
hyper-parameter is the neighborhood model weights {pm }. most learning algorithms. We randomly split the dataset into
Empirically, we find that it is useful to use different weights for training and testing set with a ratio of 70:30, and randomly
the supervised neighborhood model (i.e., the “given labels”) pick 20% of the labeled training samples as the validation set.
and the unsupervised models. However, among the M − 1
 Evaluation Metric. The output of FARE is a set of clusters.
unsupervised models, we can simply use the same weight to
 To assess the clustering quality, we use a commonly used
reduce the complexity of parameter tuning while still getting
 metric called Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI) [74], which
comparable results. For simplicity, in this paper, we set pm = 1
 measures the correlation between a cluster assignment and the
for all the M − 1 clustering models, and only tune a single p1
 ground truth labels. In addition, we also consider the traditional
to adjust the weight for the “given labels”. To determine p1 ,
 accuracy metric to provide a different perspective.
we use a validation set during training. That is, we set the p1 as
the optimal value from [1, 10] that yields the highest adjusted Note that the accuracy metric has some known limitations
mutual information (AMI) on the labeled validation samples. to evaluate clustering algorithms. First, different clustering
AMI is our evaluation metric, explained in Section §IV-A. algorithms may produce different numbers of clusters. To
More details about the hyper-parameters are in Appendix-A. compute the accuracy, we need to align clusters to labels. In
 this paper, given a cluster, we assign the cluster’s label as the
Computational Overhead. Compared with existing clustermost prevalent ground-truth label within this cluster. Second,
ing algorithms, FARE has introduced a few additional steps.
 the accuracy metric is sensitive to data distribution across
However, the computational overhead of FARE is comparable
 classes [74]. For example, if one class is significantly bigger
to existing clustering algorithms. We will provide the empirthan all other classes (i.e., the benign class in network intrusion
ical evaluation in Section §IV-C, and discuss the asymptotic
 detection), then producing one big cluster may trivially get
complexity in Section §VI.
 high accuracy.
 IV. E VALUATION For this reason, we use AMI as the primary metric. We
 only report accuracy for selective experiments as reference
 We evaluate the effectiveness of FARE on two security (e.g., Table I). To compute AMI, the first step is to draw the
applications: malware categorization and network intrusion contingency table where each element represents the number of
detection. We focus on four key aspects: 1) validating our overlapped samples in each cluster and the ground truth class.
design choices, 2) comparing FARE with the state-of-the-art Then we can compute the mutual information [42] between
semi-supervised and unsupervised algorithms, 3) evaluating the clustering results and ground truth labels based on the
the computational overhead of FARE, and 4) evaluating the contingency table. Finally, the AMI is obtained by normalizing
sensitivity of FARE to label quality. Later in Section §V, we the mutual information. AMI takes values from [−1, 1], and A
will describe our experience deploying and testing FARE in a higher value indicates a better performance. The key advantage
real-world online service to detect fraudulent accounts. of AMI (compared to the accuracy metric) is AMI normalizes
 the results of different cluster sizes and is not easily biased
A. Experimental Setup by large clusters. The detailed explanation on how to calculate
Malware Categorization. We choose a malware dataset with AMI and its advantage over accuracy is in Appendix-C.
270,000 samples3 . The dataset contains 6 different classes, Baseline Methods. We mainly compare FARE with two
including one benign class of 150,000 samples and five mal- popular semi-supervised methods MixMatch [6] and Ladware classes of 120,000 samples. For malware classes, the der [59] that have been used for security applications. The two
number of samples per class ranges from 15,000 to 37,500. systems are proposed recently (in 2015 and 2019 respectively),
We construct the training set by randomly selecting 70% of and have been highly cited. We also include a supervised
samples and used the rest of the samples as the testing set. deep neural network (DNN) as the baseline. However, our
20% of labeled samples randomly selected from the training preliminary evaluation quickly reveals that these algorithms,
set are held out for validation. Note that we split data randomly when applied end-to-end, perform poorly under missing classes
instead of splitting temporally [56] because we are perform- or coarse-grained labels. We have presented the detailed results
ing data clustering to identify fine-grained malware families in Appendix-B. For example, most of their AMIs would fall
instead of performing prediction tasks. In this dataset, each under 0.6 when the training set misses the labels for 2+ classes
sample is represented as a vector of 100 features, indicating or has 2+ classes sharing a union label. The reason is that none
the sandbox behavior of the corresponding software. of these algorithms assume there are missing classes or coarse-
Network Intrusion Detection. We select the widely used grained labels in the training data. As a result, they all set the
KDDCUP dataset [37]. Each sample is a vector of 120 features, number of final classes as the number of given labels (or seen
representing the corresponding network traffic behaviors (See classes), and only classify samples to known classes.
[70] for the detailed feature description). While this dataset In order to fairly compare FARE with existing baseline
is not new, it provides an opportunity to evaluate FARE on
highly imbalanced data. In this paper, we selected a subset 4 We preserved the top-8 intrusion classes ranked by the number of samples:
 neptune (107,201), smurf (280,790), backscatter (2,203), satan (1,589), ip
 3 The dataset [2] is collected and shared by a security company. sweeping (1,247), port sweeping (1,040), warezclient (1,020), teardrop (979).

 7
algorithms, we need to adapt existing algorithms to work under Recall that FARE takes the ensemble of M neighborhood
missing classes and coarse-grained labels. More specifically, models. By default, we set M = 151 where one neighborhood
we slightly amend existing algorithms with the same last step model is the “given labels”, and the other 150 neighborhood
of FARE: the final clustering component and mechanism to models are contributed by three clustering algorithms (Kdetermine the number of clusters (step Ì in Figure 1). For each means, DBSCAN, and DEC). More specifically, by varying the
experiment setup, we first run the existing baseline algorithms hyper-parameters for each clustering algorithm, each algorithm
on the training data to train their networks. For all three contributes to 50 neighborhood models (150 in total). For
baseline algorithms, the last hidden layer of their networks can the unsupervised version of FARE (Section §III-C), we set
output a latent vector of the original input. Instead of using the M = 150 by excluding the model from the “given labels”.
latent vectors for classification, we run the same the K-means
clustering on these latent vectors (step Ì in FARE) to identify In this experiment, we first compare the unsupervised
the fine-grained clusters. In this way, these baseline algorithms version of FARE with the individual clustering algorithms and
can perform better under missing classes and coarse-grained the ensemble clustering methods CSPA and HGPA. Given an
labels. We denote the amended version of MixMatch, Ladder, evaluation dataset, we first remove the labels, and apply the
and DNN as MixMatch+, Ladder+, and DNN+, respectively, unsupervised version of FARE and the individual clustering
and use them as our baselines for evaluation. algorithms (i.e., K-means, DBSCAN, and DEC) to the dataset.
 We then apply CSPA and HGPA on top of the 150 neighbor-
 In addition to semi-supervised baselines, we also compare hood models. Note that both HGPA and CSPA encountered
the unsupervised version of FARE with the base clustering out-of-memory issues when being applied to the full datasets
algorithms (DBSCAN, Kmeans, and DEC) and existing en- (due to their O(n2 ) memory consumption). As such, we run
semble clustering algorithms (CSPA and HGPA [67]). both methods on 10% of randomly sampled data points. To
 ensure a fair comparison, we produce one set of result for
 Note that we did not include GZSL/ZSL methods as main Unsup. FARE on the same 10% of the training dataset.
baselines considering the different assumptions and problem
setups (see Section §II-C). We only presented a brief exper- Next, to explore the benefits of using (partial) labels, we
iment in Appendix-B to run our methods against two GZSL then use 1% of the original label to train FARE, and compare
methods (i.e., OSDN [4] and DEM [80]). The results confirm it with the unsupervised FARE. For each setting, we repeat
that GZSL methods do not work well in our setup. the experiment 50 times. Note that DBSCAN and ensemble
 clustering cannot be used to classify testing data. As such, for
Training, Validation, and Testing. At a high level, we use the this experiment, we report their training AMI and Accuracy.
training set to identify the final clusters and their centroids. We Finally, to evaluate the computational cost of FARE, we also
use the validation set for parameter turning during the training record the overall training time of each method.
process. The testing data is used to test the quality of the final
clusters: for each testing sample, we compute its latent vector Experiment II: Missing Classes. This experiment focuses on
and assign it to the nearest cluster based on its distance to the the end-to-end performance of FARE under the missing classes
cluster centroids. If not otherwise stated, AMIs/Accuracy are setting. More specifically, we construct training datasets that
calculated based on testing data for performance evaluation. mimic the scenarios where a certain number of classes are
 missing in the given labels. For each dataset, we randomly
 More specifically, for FARE, we use the training set to selected nc classes and marked all the training samples in these
construct the neighborhood models to form the ensemble, classes as “unlabeled samples”. For the rest of the classes, we
learn the parameters for the input transformation network, only keep 1% of labeled samples for each class and mark the
and identify the centroids for the final clusters. We use the remaining samples as “unlabeled”.
validation set to select the weight for the “ given labels”
(i.e., p1 ) and determine the number of final clusters K. For In this experiment, we vary nc to examine its influence
baseline algorithms (i.e., MixMatch+, Ladder+, and DNN+), upon the system performance. To make sure our results are not
we follow a similar process (but do not need to train the biased by the choice of missing classes, we randomly select
ensemble component). the classes to mark as “missing”. For a given nc , we randomly
 select nc classes as missing classes for 10 times. This generates
B. Experimental Design 10 training sets for each nc . In total, we have |nc | × 10
 training sets. On each training set, we run FARE, and our
 We design the four experiments to evaluate the effective- baselines (i.e., DNN+, MixMatch+, and Ladder+) and compute
ness of FARE from different aspects. First, we validate the the testing AMI. In addition, we also want to examine the
ensemble method used in FARE by comparing its performance capability of each algorithm in recovering the actual number
with the individual base clustering algorithms and existing of classes. We use K to denote the final number of clusters.
ensemble clustering methods. Second, we quantify the advan- Finally, we compute the mean and standard deviation of testing
tage of FARE over three baselines in the “missing classes” AMI and K under each nc setting (across 10 training datasets).
setting. Third, we run FARE and baselines in the “coarse- In addition to AMI, accuracy metric is also calculated (for
grained labels” setting. Finally, we evaluate the robustness of selective settings) in Appendix-C.
FARE to other factors such as the ratio of available labels and
the number of neighborhood models. Experiment III: Coarse-grained Labels. This experiment
 is an end-to-end evaluation of FARE under the coarse-grained
Experiment I: Comparing with Unsupervised Methods. label setting. Suppose a dataset originally contains n class,
In this experiment, we want to examine if the ensemble we randomly selected ng classes and merged their training
of multiple clustering algorithms indeed introduces benefits. samples into a union label. For the rest of the classes, we also

 8
 TABLE I. P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON BASED ON MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF AMI S , ACCURACY, AND RUNTIME . “Unsup. FARE”
REPRESENTS THE UNSUPERVISED VERSION OF FARE. S INCE NEITHER CSPA NOR HGPA SCALE TO THE FULL DATASET, WE REPORT THEIR RESULTS AND
 THAT OF Unsup. FARE ON 10% OF TRAINING SET.

 Dataset MALWARE Network Intrusion
 Metric AMI Accuracy Runtime (s) AMI Accuracy Runtime (s)
 FARE 0.87 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0 434.05 0.98 ± 0 1±0 8, 943.08
 Unsup. FARE 0.74 ± 0 0.81 ± 0.01 432.12 0.78 ± 0 0.99 ± 0 8, 942.52
 Full
 Kmeans 0.47 ± 0.12 0.51 ± 0.04 26.99 0.39 ± 0.18 0.64 ± 0.12 16.30
 Training set
 DBSCAN 0.69 ± 0.03 0.77 ± 0.02 174.63 0.38 ± 0.1 0.66 ± 0.04 8, 918.36
 DEC 0.37 ± 0.09 0.47 ± 0.07 342.42 0.64 ± 0.12 0.85 ± 0.04 725.58
 Unsup. FARE 0.72 ± 0.01 0.80 ± 0.01 77.33 0.76 ± 0 0.98 ± 0 1, 801.74
 10%
 CSPA 0.5 ± 0.04 0.61 ± 0.06 176.29 0.36 ± 0.11 0.64 ± 0.08 2, 013.77
 Training set
 HGPA 0.57 ± 0.03 0.69 ± 0.05 90.1 0.4 ± 0.09 0.79 ± 0.06 1, 804.82

only keep 1% of the labeled training samples in each class and well only when the data distribution matches the assumptions.
mark the remaining samples as “unlabeled”. With this setup, With the ensemble of multiple unsupervised models, Unsup.
the training set only has in total n − ng + 1 classes, and each FARE performs consistently better. Note that Unsup. FARE
class has 1% data labeled. has lower standard deviations, indicating its results are more
 stable across different training rounds. In addition, Unsup.
 We vary ng to examine its influence on the system perfor- FARE significantly outperforms K-means. This means, if we
mance. For each ng , we also randomly sample different classes apply K-means without the input transformation network, the
to merge into the union class for 10 times and construct 10 performance will suffer. Note that the DEC algorithm uses
training sets. In total, we have |ng | × 10 training sets. We then an auto-encoder to transform the inputs. The higher AMI of
run FARE and baselines on each training set and calculate unsupervised FARE over DEC confirms the advantage of our
the mean and standard deviation for the testing AMI and K. data transformation function over the state-of-art auto-encoder.
Similar to before, the accuracy metric is also reported (for
selective settings) in Appendix-C. Supervised FARE is performing better than unsupervised
 Note that here we only consider the setting where the FARE. For example, on the network intrusion dataset, the AMI
chosen classes are merged into one union label. In Appendix-E, is boosted from 0.68 to 0.98. Recall that in this experiment,
we have included additional experimental results for multiple supervised FARE only takes 1% of the labels. This confirms the
union labels. The overall conclusion is consistent, and thus the benefits of combining supervised learning (even with limited
results for multiple union labels are omitted here for brevity. labels) and unsupervised results.

Experiment IV: Algorithm Sensitivity. Finally, we examine FARE vs. Existing Clustering Ensemble Methods. As
the sensitivity of FARE and Unsup.FARE to the number of shown in Table I, FARE and Unsup. FARE both outperform
unsupervised neighborhood models M 0 = M − 1. For FARE, existing clustering ensemble methods CSPA and HGPA in
we fix nc = bn/2c or ng = bn/2c and labeled data ratio as terms of AMI and Accuracy. There are two possible reasons.
1%. We randomly select M 0 =10, 20, 50, and 100 from the First, FARE aggregates clustering ensembles with the given
pool of 150 neighborhood models (used in Experiment I–III) labels, and the labels bring in performance gains. Second,
to generate the ensemble. We run FARE and Unsup.FARE CSPA and HGPA struggle under high-dimensional input space.
10 times for each M 0 and record the mean AMIs. In comparison, FARE’s input transformation network projects
 the inputs into a lower-dimensional space with well-defined
 We also tested the algorithm sensitivity to other factors distance, which makes clustering more effective.
such as the ratio of available labels, the output dimension of
the transformation network q, and the number of true classes in Computational Overhead. Table I also shows the training
a dataset. By default, the ratio of available labels is 1% and time for each algorithm. We observe that both FARE and
q = 32. We experimentally tested different ratio and q, and Unsup.FARE adds only a small fraction of the runtime on
found the algorithm performance was not sensitive to neither top of the existing clustering algorithms. Since the different
factors. In addition, our security datasets only have up to 6 neighborhood models are independent, we can parallelize their
and 9 classes respectively. So we further tested FARE on an clustering process. As a result, the performance bottleneck is
image dataset with more classes (i.e., 43), and confirmed that introduced by the slowest clustering algorithm in the ensemble.
FARE still performed well. Due to space limit, we present the In our case, the slowest algorithm on the malware dataset is
detailed results in Appendix-G and Appendix-H. DEC, and the slowest algorithm on the intrusion dataset is
 DBSCAN. As shown in Table I, the added overhead by FARE
C. Experiment Results and Unsup.FARE is considerably small, while the gains on
 AMIs are significant, which is a worthy trade-off. Since all
FARE vs. Base Clustering Algorithms. Table I shows the of the base clustering algorithms are widely used in both
AMI and accuracy of FARE (both supervised and unsupervised academia and industry as benchmark clustering methods, we
versions) and other individual clustering algorithms. First, we argue that the computational cost introduced by our design
observe that the mean AMI and accuracy of the unsupervised does not jeopardize its usage in practice. Later in Section §VI,
FARE (i.e., Unsup. FARE) are consistently higher than all we have further discussions on the computational cost. Table I
other clustering methods on both datasets. The performance also shows Unsup.FARE are faster than CSPA and HGPA
of individual clustering methods varies on different datasets. on 10% of the training dataset. This is because our method
This validates our hypothesis that existing clustering methods avoids the expensive cluster alignment step in CSPA and
have different assumptions on the data distribution and work HGPA. Instead, we use pair-wise relationships to fuse the

 9
 FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+
 1.0 1.0
 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.0
 0.8 0.8
 0.8 0.7 0.8
 0.7

 AMI

 AMI
 0.6

 AMI
AMI

 0.6 0.6 0.6
 0.5 0.5
 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
 0.3 0.3
 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
 0 2 4 0 1 4 7 0 2 4 0 1 4 7
 nc nc ng ng
 (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection. (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection.

Fig. 2. The performances of FARE and the baselines in the missing classes Fig. 3. The performances of FARE and baselines in the coarse-grained
settings. We show the mean AMI and the standard deviation. nc is the number label setting. We show mean AMI and standard deviation. ng is the number
of missing classes. of classes in the union class.

base clustering results. In addition, we support batch-learning,
which further reduces the memory and computational cost. classes nc , we can see that the baseline algorithms are more
 likely to underestimate the true number of classes on both
Performance under the Missing Class Setting. As shown datasets. In contrast, FARE successfully recovers the true
in Figure 2, when there is no missing class in the training number of classes in the malware dataset regardless of the
data (i.e., nc = 0), the performance of all the systems are severity of missing classes. For the network intrusion dataset,
fairly comparable on both datasets. Recall that the training while not being able to identify the true number of classes,
dataset only has 1% of labeled samples. With limited labels, FARE has a lower estimation error. It should be noted that
the supervised learning method do not outperform the semi- even when nc = 0, none of the baseline methods can correctly
supervised methods. Then as the number of missing classes recover the true number classes for the intrusion dataset. We
nc increases, the baseline methods start to exhibit inconsistent suspect this is due to the class imbalance issue. In the intrusion
and degraded performances. For example, when nc = 4 in dataset, the top three classes take 98.5% of samples, which
Figure 2(a), and nc = 7 in Figure 2(b), it means 4 out of makes it difficult for the clustering methods to identify the
6 classes are missing in the malware datasets, and 7 out of minor classes. Interestingly, as the number of missing classes
9 classes are missing in the network intrusion dataset. The increases, FARE is approaching the true number of classes
average reduction of baseline performances is around 50.5%. (possibly because the given labels become less influential).
The worst AMI is even lower than 0.25. There are two possible Together with the results in Figure 2, we conclude that without
reasons. First, existing algorithms are highly dependent on the missing classes, FARE is comparable to the supervised and
assumption that the labeled classes are complete (i.e., at least semi-supervised baselines. When there are missing classes in
a few labeled samples are expected to be available in each the given labels, FARE demonstrates significant advantages.
class). When this assumption is no longer held in the training
data, their performances suffer. Another explanation is that Performance under the Coarse-grained Label Setting.
existing methods cannot correctly recover the data manifolds Figure 3 shows the performance of each method under the
of the unlabeled classes in the training set [24]. Without such coarse-grained label settings. We observe that the performance
information, they cannot make correct decisions on testing of baseline methods reduces dramatically as ng increases
samples from these unlabeled classes. As nc increases, we (i.e., lower AMI and higher standard deviation). This means
notice that the standard deviations of AMIs also increase for existing methods lack the capability in dealing with the coarsebaselines. This indicates that the choices of the missing classes grained labels. On the contrary, coarse-grained labels only have
also have an impact on the baseline methods’ performance. a minor impact on FARE. The average AMI reduction is only
 8.2% across all the settings. The standard deviations are low
 In comparison, FARE demonstrates a much higher AMI for FARE, indicating that FARE is robust to the choices of
across all the settings. As shown in Figure 2, the number classes in the union label.
of missing classes only have a small impact on FARE. For
example, in Figure 2(b), the AMI of FARE only decreases from Table II (the right half) presents the number of final classes
0.97 to 0.83 when nc increase from 0 to 7. On average, FARE identified by each method under the coarse-grained label sethas a reduction of 15.4% of AMI across the two datasets. The tings. For the malware dataset, we have the same observation
results confirm the benefits of using the ensemble of unsu- as before: FARE correctly recovers the true number of classes
pervised learning results when the given labels have missing regardless of the degree of coarse-grained labels while other
classes (i.e., low-quality labels). The ensemble component of baseline algorithms cannot. For the intrusion dataset, however,
FARE helps to extract useful information (i.e., data manifolds) the observation is quite different. On the one hand, neither
of the missing classes. The standard deviations of FARE are FARE nor the baseline methods can estimate the true number
also consistently lower than those of the baseline methods. of classes correctly. On the other hand, unlike the baseline
This again confirms the benefit of the ensemble in reducing methods that occasionally overestimate the true number of
FARE’s sensitivity to the choice of missing classes. classes, FARE consistently underestimates it. For example,
 when ng = 7, the number classes estimated by FARE is only
 Table II (the left half) shows the final number of classes 4. We speculate that this is caused by the compound effect
identified by FARE and other baselines. The ground-truth introduced by coarse-grained labels and the extreme class
number of classes is 6 and 9 for malware and intrusion imbalance. Recall that in the intrusion dataset, the top 3 classes
datasets, respectively. As we increase the number of missing count for 98.5% of the samples. The coarse-grained label

 10
TABLE II. T HE NUMBER OF CLUSTERS K DISCOVERED BY FARE AND THE BASELINE ALGORITHMS UNDER DIFFERENT SETTINGS . N REPRESENTS THE
 GROUND - TRUTH NUMBER OF CLASSES IN EACH DATASET.

 Num. of missing classes (nc ) Num. of mistaken grouped classes (ng )
 Methods Malware (N = 6) Intrusion (N = 9) Malware (N = 6) Intrusion (N = 9)
 0 2 4 0 1 4 7 2 4 1 4 7
 FARE 6±0 6±0 6±0 6±0 6±0 8 ± 1.25 10 ± 1.89 6±0 6±0 5±0 5 ± 0.47 4±0
 MixMatch+ 6±0 4±0 4±0 5 ± 0.47 4±0 6 ± 1.69 5 ± 1.41 5±0 4±0 5 ± 0.47 5 ± 0.47 7 ± 1.25
 Ladder+ 4±0 4±0 5±0 5±0 6 ± 2.44 6±0 7 ± 2.36 4±0 5 ± 0.47 5 ± 0.47 7 ± 2.05 16 ± 3.77
 DNN+ 6±0 5 ± 0.82 4±0 5 ± 0.92 6±0 6±0 4±0 5±0 5 ± 5.44 5 ± 0.47 6 ± 1.7 15 ± 2.49
 TABLE III. M EAN AMI S AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OBTAINED BY VARYING M 0 IN FARE AND Unsup.FARE.
 # Neighb. Models M 0 10 20 50 100 All (150) 10 20 50 100 All (150)
 Dataset Malware Intrusion
 FARE nc = bn/2c, 1% labels 0.68 ± 0.09 0.73 ± 0.01 0.76 ± 0.01 0.75 ± 0.01 0.75 ± 0 0.89 ± 0.10 0.88 ± 0.11 0.88 ± 0.08 0.89 ± 0.05 0.89 ± 0.05
 ng = bn/2c, 1% labels 0.74 ± 0.04 0.75 ± 0 0.74 ± 0 0.74 ± 0 0.74 ± 0 0.90 ± 0.05 0.90 ± 0.05 0.90 ± 0.05 0.90 ± 0.05 0.90 ± 0.05
 Unsup. Dataset Malware Intrusion
 FARE labels are not used 0.60 ± 0.08 0.71 ± 0.01 0.74 ± 0.01 0.74 ± 0.01 0.74 ± 0 0.83 ± 0.05 0.79 ± 0.02 0.79 ± 0.03 0.78 ± 0.00 0.78 ± 0.00

 TABLE IV. G ROUP -A REPRESENTS THE FRAUDULENT ACCOUNTS
can lead to misguided data manifold, and highly imbalanced IDENTIFIED BY FARE; G ROUP -B REPRESENTS THE CONFIRMED
classes undermine the effectiveness of the clustering ensemble. LEGITIMATE USERS . W E RECORD THE LOGIN ATTEMPT RATE (LAR) AND
When both issues are presented, FARE is less effective. In THE AUTHENTICATION PASS RATE (APR) FOR BOTH GROUPS .
summary, for the general coarse-grained label setting, FARE Group 1-day 1-week 1-month
significantly outperforms the baseline methods in terms of (LAR, APR) (LAR, APR) (LAR, APR)
 A: FARE-detected (20.9%, 0.0%) (25.3%, 0.0%) (39.3%, 0.0%)
clustering quality and estimating the number of classes. When B: Confirmed-legit. (22.1%, 100%) (27.9%, 100%) (30.9%, 100%)
the classes are extremely imbalanced, FARE and other baselines are less effective in estimating the true number of classes.
 users. The remaining 99.4% of users are unlabelled. First,
Sensitivity to the Number of Neighborhood Models. Ta- 0.5% of the accounts are labeled as “fraudulent”. This label
ble III shows the results of FARE and Unsup.FARE with is based on JD.com’s customer service department — they
different number of neighborhood models M under the missing have received complaints on these 0.5% accounts who were
class/coarse-grained label settings. We vary the M 0 = M − 1 conducting fraudulent activities in the last two months (with
neighborhood models from clustering algorithms. We can further confirmations from the security team). About 0.1% of
observe that the performance of FARE is robust with respect remaining users accounts are labeled as “trusted” since they are
to the number of neighborhood models. As we add more associated with company JD.com’s enterprise partners or VIP
neighborhood models to the ensemble, the mean AMI is customers. This dataset represents the common challenges we
increasing and the standard deviation is decreasing, but only by described before: only a small portion of labels are available
a small margin. This means with 20 or even 10 neighborhood and the labels are likely to be coarse-grained and biased.
models, the performance of FARE is already good. Similar to
 A/B Test Experiments. Using this dataset, our goal is to
FARE, Unsup.FARE is also not sensitive to M 0 .
 pinpoint the unlabeled users who also conducted fraudulent
 activities in the past two months but have not yet been
 V. R EAL - WORLD T EST: F RAUD D ETECTION
 complained by online retailers through the customer service.
 Following the controlled experiments, we next describe
 To validate whether FARE can truly identify those acour experience of the initial deployment and testing of FARE
 counts, we design an A/B test experiment for two groups of
in collaboration with a real-world online service JD.com.
 users. Group-A is the fraudulent accounts that FARE identified
Company JD.com is a large e-commerce service with hundreds
 from the unlabeled user sets, and Group-B is the labeled
of millions of active users. We work together to apply FARE
 trustworthy users. For both groups of users, we revoke their
to identify the fine-grained classes of fraudulent accounts,
 sign-in cookies, and force them to re-enter their passwords,
especially the previously-unknown types of fraud. As the initial
 and use their registered phone numbers to perform two-factor
testing effort, we apply FARE on an internal dataset of 200,000
 authentication through SMS code. Then, we keep monitoring
active users. Below, we describe our testing methodology, and
 the login activities of both groups of users for one month after
key observations and discoveries.
 the forced re-login. During the monitoring period, we record
Dataset from Company JD.com. The dataset contains the login attempt rate (LAR) as well as the authentication pass
200,000 active users randomly sampled from the e-commerce rate (APR). Here, the LAR indicates the percentage of the users
site database. Each user is represented as a 264-dimensional who have correctly entered their passwords when performing
feature vector. The feature vector is encoded using their log-in. The APR specifies, among users who attempted the
internal feature engineering method. As the specific details of log-in, the percentage of sign-in sessions with the correct twothe feature engineering process are not revealed to us (which is factor authentication code.
confidential information), we only provide a high-level descrip-
 The rationale behind the A/B experiment is that attackers
tion here. The features are extracted from three different types
 behind the fraud campaigns usually purchase a large corpus of
of information: 1) product information (e.g., product brand and
 fake accounts from third-party vendors to conduct malicious
product category), 2) shipping information (e.g., shipping adactivities. When the third-party vendors create these fake
dress and carrier information), and 3) purchasing information
 accounts for sale, they needed to register the accounts by
(e.g., price, amount, discounts, and time).
 using the phone numbers under their control. When selling
 The dataset has a very small portion of labels, including these accounts, the third-party vendors would provide the
0.5% of confirmed fraudulent users, and 0.1% of trustworthy account names and passwords so that the buyers can log in

 11
to these accounts. However, if JD.com forces a two-factor organized efforts to (automatically) collect coupons, purchase
authentication after the account delivery, the buyers would not products in bulk, and then resell them with higher prices.
be able to receive the SMS code tied to each of the accounts, Third, we also discover fraudulent clusters that regularly buy
and thus cannot use these accounts to continue their campaigns products from certain retailers and leave positive reviews. More
to snatch coupons, promote illegitimate products, or write fake importantly, after leaving the positive reviews, these accounts
reviews. It should be noticed that while re-authentication is a then file product returns and get a refund. We suspect these
powerful tool, it cannot be excessively used. When blindly accounts are colluding with the retailers for promoting their
triggering re-authentication to all users, it could jeopardize products. Fourth, by analyzing the historical activities of these
normal users’ experience and significantly increase the burden fraudulent accounts, we were surprised to discover that many
of the customer service department. This is because legitimate products have mistagged prices. For example, some products
users may sometimes change their phone numbers and forgot owned by the e-commerce site were mistagged with a low
to update their online profiles. Even if such normal users only price for weeks without being noticed by the product team.
take a small portion, considering the hundreds of millions of The fraudulent accounts have been exploiting these mistagged
active users in JD.com, the absolute number is still very large. prices to subside their purchases. These mistagged prices are
They can easily overwhelm the customer service if the re- previously unknown to JD.com. JD.com has started to actions
authentication is triggered at the same time. to perform systematic detection of mistagged prices.
A/B Experiment Results. While our controlled experiments
in Section IV-C have shown FARE’s good performance, we VI. D ISCUSSION
still want to stay conservative in this initial real-world testing. Post-clustering Processing. The goal of FARE is to cate-
Specifically, we want to suppress the potential false positives gorize the input dataset into fine-grained clusters, and help
of FARE since false positives disrupt the customer service’s the analysts to derive high-quality labels. After FARE is
daily operations. As a result, JD.com permitted us to initialize applied, the post-processing is to either align the obtained
SMS re-authentication for an entire cluster of users only if this clusters with the known classes in the “given labels” or
FARE-identified cluster contains at least 5% of the already- assign them with new labels. Two strategies can be applied
confirmed fraudulent accounts. While this approach may sig- to accomplish these tasks. The first strategy is to manually
nificantly under-report the fraudulent accounts identified by analyze samples in a given cluster to assign meaningful labels.
FARE, we believe it is the right trade-off for the initial testing. For example, the analysts can identify a small number of
For the other clusters (e.g., those that contain fraudulent labels representative samples (e.g., based on centrality) in a given
but do not meet the 5% threshold), they are still valuable for cluster for in-depth analysis. We argue that, by producing highfurther analysis, but are excluded from the A/B test. quality clusters, FARE saves analysts’ time who only need
 Under this guideline, FARE revoked 2,000 unlabeled sign- to investigate a smaller number of representative samples. To
in sessions and initialized the corresponding re-authentication further save manual efforts, analysts might take the second
through SMS. In Table IV, we show the LAR and APR strategy, which is to align clusters with the given labels. For
of each group across three different time windows – one each cluster that contains given labels, we can compute a
 # of matched samples
day, one week, and one month. We can observe that for matching score (i.e., # of total samples in the cluster ) and find the label
the confirmed trusted users (Group-B), the return sign-in rate with the highest matching score. The analyst can set a cut-off
across a month is 30% with a 100% of success rate for passing threshold (e.g., 0.9): if the highest matching score is above this
the SMS re-authentication. On the contrary, for the FARE- threshold, the cluster stays with the existing label. Appendix-F
detected fraudulent users (Group-A), the return rate is about shows a running example. The second strategy, while efficient,
10% higher, but the success rate of SMS re-authentication is should be applied carefully (e.g., to well-known classes only)
0%. This implies that the users FARE detected are highly likely since the given labels are not entirely trustworthy.
to be the fake accounts associated with fraudulent activities. Computational Complexity. In Section §IV, we show that
Manual Analysis and Observations. In addition to our A/B FARE only introduces a small computational overhead on top
experiment, we also devote efforts to manual examinations. of the clustering algorithms. Here, we compare the asymptotic
We focus on accounts that failed the SMS re-authentication complexity of FARE and with those of the (semi-)supervised
and analyzed their history logs. While we are not allowed to baselines. Specifically, the computational complexity of FARE
provide the precise numbers and statistics of the discovered is O(max{Id Bd |θd |K, pN 2 , Ii M Bi2 |θi |}), where N is the
fraudulent activities, we want to provide qualitative results number of samples. Id , Bd , and |θd | represents the number of
regarding our key findings. training iteration, batch size, and model parameters of DEC.
 Similar, Ii , Bi , and |θi | represents the number of training
 First, for many clusters of the newly identified fraudulent iteration, batch size, and parameters of input transformation
accounts, accounts in each cluster usually have the same login model (see Appendix-D for the derivation).
time and come from the same or similar sets of IP addresses.
This implies the user accounts in the same cluster are likely The computational cost of the (semi)-supervised baselines
conducted by a single entity using automated programs. Sec- are: MixMatch – O(IB 2 A |θ|), Ladder and DNN – O(IB |θ|),
ond, we find that certain groups of fraudulent users would where A is the number of data augmentation rounds in Mixheavily apply coupons on their purchases. For almost all of Match. When pN 2 < max{Id Bd |θd |K, Ii M Bi2 |θi |}, similar
their purchased items, they applied an abnormal amount of to MixMatch, the complexity of FARE is also quadratic to
coupons to significantly reduce the purchasing price. More im- the batch size B. A practical example is the malware dataset
portantly, users in the same group even share the same physical in Section §IV, where the average run time of MixMatch
shipping addresses. These clusters are likely to represent the (i.e., 400.33s) is similar to FARE (i.e., 434.05s). For a very

 12
large scale dataset with an ultra-high dimensionality, FARE supervised classifiers on the same problem/data share similar
may be slower than semi-supervised learning methods due decision boundaries. In our case, FARE is trained with both
to the high cost of DBSCAN. However, recent research has labeled and unlabeled data and uses the ensemble of multiple
proposed accelerate DBSCAN through parallel computing [29] algorithms, which may produce different cluster boundaries
or GPU [25]. These strategies can also be applied to further (compared with those of the classifier). In addition, generating
accelerate FARE for very large-scale datasets. With the above realizable adversarial malware example is a challenging task.
analysis, we can conclude that the computational cost of FARE It requires the adversarial example to be an executable binary
is acceptable. Our real-world deployment in Section §V also that preserves the original malicious functions. We leave the
confirms that practicality of running FARE in production. evaluation of FARE’s adversarial robustness to future research.
Hyperparameters. FARE has the following hyper-parameters: Corrupted Labels. In our current threat model, we assume
the number of neighborhood model M , the hyper-parameter the provided labels are either missing or coarse-grained. In
inherited from contrastive learning (the output dimension of Appendix-I, we further tested FARE under corrupted training
input transformation net q, the distance radius α and the labels (i.e., samples mislabeled to the wrong classes). The
regularization coefficients λ), the hyper-parameters inherited results show that FARE’s performance slightly drops as more
from base clustering algorithms, and the hyper-parameters labels are corrupted. In practice, there are potential ways to
introduced by our design (K and p1 ). As discussed in Sec- mitigate the negative effect of corrupted labels. For example,
tion §III-D, we set λ to a small value and select the K and p1 we could measure the discrepancy between the given labels and
based on the AMIs computed on a validation set. For M , as the unsupervised clustering results based on the neighborhood
shown in Section §IV, FARE can achieve a good performance relationship table. If the difference is unusually large, defendwith merely 10 unsupervised neighborhood models. Appendix- ers should further inspect the labels or conservatively apply the
G shows that FARE is also robust to the subtly changes in unsupervised version of FARE. We defer the implementation
the distance radius α and the output dimension q. For the and evaluation of this idea to future work.
hyper-parameters of clustering algorithms, existing works have
provided suggested default setting [11]. Limitations and Future Works. Our work has a few
 limitations. First, we mainly choose clustering algorithms that
Online Setup. While primarily designed for offline analysis, are already widely used in the security domain. Some of the
FARE can also be used in an online fashion. As is elaborated clustering algorithms indeed have drawbacks. For example, we
in Section §III-A, FARE processes a dataset with three steps. show that DBSCAN, in certain settings, becomes the computa-
After the first two steps, FARE could learn a transformation tional bottleneck for FARE. As future work, we want to explore
function. Using this function to map each data sample into alternative clustering algorithms that can further accelerate
a low-dimensional space, FARE then employs K-means to the system. Second, our system could still under-estimate the
assign data to the corresponding category. This clustering number of true classes when the data is extremely imbalanced.
step could be done incrementally. Therefore, it introduces Future work may investigate other solutions such as downonly lightweight computation and offers the possibility of sampling large clusters and then run FARE alternatively. Third,
performing online clustering. In our current design, the first we apply the same weight for all the unsupervised models in
two steps are more computationally intensive than the third the ensemble to simplify the parameter tuning. It is possible
step. Therefore, it is challenging to update the transformation to further improve FARE’s performance by designing a finefunction in an online fashion. However, this does not hinder tuning strategy for the weights of these unsupervised models.
the online usage of FARE. Fourth, we mainly evaluate the impact of missing classes and
 After learning a transformation function, even without coarse-grained labels in separate experiments. Due to the space
frequently updating it, FARE could still perform clustering limit, we have added a brief experiment (in Appendix-E) where
accurately. Take our current deployment in the real-world both labeling issues are present in the same training dataset.
online service J as an example. In order to capture the Finally, we tested and demonstrated FARE’s effectiveness on
distribution/covariate shift [58], [8], we retrain and update three security applications (and one image classification task
our transformation function weekly. We observe that this in Appendix-H). As part of future work, we will validate our
setup does not jeopardize FARE’s efficacy, which implies the system’s generalizability to other (non-)security applications.
feasibility of FARE’s online usage. However, we admit that the
retraining cycle could vary for different applications because VII. R ELATED WORK
of the variation in the data dynamics. This work will leave the
in-depth online usage exploration as part of future work. Supervised Learning Methods. Traditional supervised learning methods such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs) and
Adversarial Attacks. As an machine learning algorithm, random forests have long been used to classify malware [43],
FARE could be vulnerable to adversarial manipulations such as [64], [5], [22], [50], detect network intrusions [48], [39], [18],
poisoning attacks and adversarial evasion attacks. Researchers [63], and identify fraudulent accounts [7], [54], [72]. Recently,
have explored data poisoning attacks on unsupervised learning deep learning models have been used for similar purposes [1],
algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, existing attacks [32], [44]. As is shown in Section §IV, the effectiveness of
target a specific learning algorithm (e.g., hierarchical clus- these methods decreases significantly under low-quality labels.
tering [9] or graph-based clustering [16]), which are not
directly applicable to our algorithm yet. For adversarial eva- Semi-supervised Learning Methods. SSL can be trained
sion, attackers may leverage transferability and use adversarial with partially labeled data. They are usually composed of an
examples generated from a supervised classifier to attack our unsupervised component and a supervised component. The
method. However, transferability relies on the assumption that unsupervised component projects an input sample x to a

 13
hidden representation h and the supervised component predicts NSF grants CNS-2030521 and CNS-1717028.
its label y from the hidden representation h [24], [3]. Related
semi-supervised systems include Ladder [59], MixMatch [6], R EFERENCES
and ODDS [31]. ODDS uses data augmentation techniques to
train a bot detector with limited labels, but it primarily works in [1] D. Arp, M. Spreitzenbarth, M. Hubner, H. Gascon, K. Rieck, and
 C. Siemens, “Drebin: Effective and explainable detection of android
a binary classification setting (and thus does not meet our need malware in your pocket,” in Proc. of NDSS, 2014.
for attack categorization). Ladder [59] is applied for network
 [2] A. Authors, “Malware dataset,” 2019, https://1drv.ms/u/s!
intrusion detection, and MixMatch [6] has been tested mainly AgWFTItaV0h8jLAcx9dRzqIlMvUWtg?e=O3Gj5q.
on image datasets. As is shown in Section §IV, low-quality [3] S. Becker and G. E. Hinton, “Self-organizing neural network that
labels in the training data would significantly jeopardize the discovers surfaces in random-dot stereograms,” Nature, 1992.
performance of semi-supervised methods. [4] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in Proc.
 of CVPR, 2016.
Unsupervised Learning Methods. Clustering algorithms
 [5] K. Berlin, D. Slater, and J. Saxe, “Malicious behavior detection using
such as K-means [28] and DBSCAN [20] have been applied to windows audit logs,” in Proc. of AI & Security Workshop of CCS, 2015.
identity and group malware samples [76], [12], [40], network
 [6] D. Berthelot, N. Carlini, I. Goodfellow, N. Papernot, A. Oliver, and
intrusion events [49], [15], and fraudulent accounts [57], C. A. Raffel, “Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised
[62]. However, these methods are not good at handling high- learning,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2019.
dimensional inputs due to the “curse of dimensionality” [83]. [7] S. Bhattacharyya, S. Jha, K. Tharakunnel, and J. C. Westland, “Data
To overcome this challenge, more advanced techniques such as mining for credit card fraud: A comparative study,” Decision Support
DEC [78], [53] and DAGMM [84] use deep neural networks Systems, 2011.
to learn a desired low-dimensional representation of original [8] S. Bickel, M. Brückner, and T. Scheffer, “Discriminative learning under
inputs before applying the clustering method. To improve covariate shift.” Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2009.
the stability of clustering, clustering ensemble methods are [9] B. Biggio, S. R. Bulò, I. Pillai, M. Mura, E. Z. Mequanint, M. Pelillo,
 and F. Roli, “Poisoning complete-linkage hierarchical clustering,” in
proposed, which combine the clustering outputs from mul- Proc. of SPR and SSPR, 2014.
tiple (weak) base models using some consensus functions.
 [10] Y. Boshmaf, D. Logothetis, G. Siganos, J. Leria, J. Lorenzo, M. Ri-
For example, CSPA and HGPA [67], [77] are two popular peanu, and K. Beznosov, “Integro: Leveraging victim prediction for
clustering ensemble methods. CSPA utilizes the probability of robust fake account detection in osns,” in Proc. of NDSS, 2015.
two data points co-locating in the same cluster as the consensus [11] L. Buitinck, G. Louppe, M. Blondel, F. Pedregosa, A. Mueller,
measure; HGPA represents the outputs from the base clusters O. Grisel, V. Niculae, P. Prettenhofer, A. Gramfort, J. Grobler et al.,
as a hyper-graph and converts the clustering task into a hyper- “API design for machine learning software: experiences from the scikitgraph partitioning problem. Without the guidance of labels, learn project,” in ECML-PKDD Workshop: Languages for Data Mining
 and Machine Learning, 2013.
unsupervised learning methods are usually outperformed by
 [12] I. Burguera, U. Zurutuza, and S. Nadjm-Tehrani, “Crowdroid: behaviorsemi-supervised learning methods. based malware detection system for android,” in Proc. of ACM workshop
Zero-shot Learning Methods. ZSL and GZSL have been on Security and privacy in smartphones and mobile devices, 2011.
recently used in network intrusion detection tasks [60]. These [13] Q. Cao, M. Sirivianos, X. Yang, and T. Pregueiro, “Aiding the detection
 of fake accounts in large scale social online services,” in Proc. of
methods transfer the knowledge learned from one task to a USENIX NSDI, 2012.
second task [24] and can be used to classify previously unseen [14] Q. Cao, X. Yang, J. Yu, and C. Palow, “Uncovering large groups of
classes in the testing set. This is done by learning a feature active malicious accounts in online social networks,” in Proc. of CCS,
mapping function based on the well-labeled data of the first 2014.
task (training set), and transform the inputs of the second task [15] P. Casas, J. Mazel, and P. Owezarski, “Unsupervised network intrusion
(testing set) through the mapping function. As is discussed in detection systems: Detecting the unknown without knowledge,” Com-
Section §II-C, due to the need of rich training labels and “side puter Communications, 2012.
information” to construct the feature mapping, ZSL/GZSL [16] Y. Chen, Y. Nadji, A. Kountouras, F. Monrose, R. Perdisci, M. Anmethods are not suitable for our problem. tonakakis, and N. Vasiloglou, “Practical attacks against graph-based
 clustering,” in Proc. of CCS, 2017.
 [17] Y. Chen, S. Wang, D. She, and S. Jana, “On training robust pdf malware
 VIII. C ONCLUSION classifiers,” in Proc. of USENIX Security, 2020.
 This paper introduces FARE, a new method to derive [18] R. Chitrakar and C. Huang, “Selection of candidate support vectors in
accurate and robust clustering results for security applications incremental svm for network intrusion detection,” computers & security,
 2014.
under low-quality label data. By computing an ensemble of
 [19] Y. Duan, X. Li, J. Wang, and H. Yin, “Deepbindiff: Learning program-
“given labels” and multiple supervised learning results, we wide code representations for binary diffing,” in Proc. of NDSS, 2018.
use a transformation network to transform input samples
 [20] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu et al., “A density-based
into a low-dimensional space for fine-grained clustering. We algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
evaluate FARE with both controlled experiments (for malware in Proc. of KDD, 1996.
classification and network intrusion detection) and real-world [21] FireEye, “M-trends reports: Insights into today’s breaches and cyber
deployment and testing (for fraudulent account detection). attacks,” 2020, https://content.fireeye.com/m-trends/rpt-m-trends-2020.
We demonstrate the benefits of FARE over existing semi- [22] E. Gandotra, D. Bansal, and S. Sofat, “Malware analysis and classifisupervised methods and its usefulness in practice. cation: A survey,” Journal of Information Security, 2014.
 [23] N. Z. Gong, M. Frank, and P. Mittal, “Sybilbelief: A semi-supervised
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT learning approach for structure-based sybil detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2014.
 We thank anonymous reviewers for their constructive com- [24] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep learning. MIT press,
ments and suggestions. This work was supported in part by 2016.

 14
[25] M. Gowanlock, C. M. Rude, D. M. Blair et al., “Clustering throughput clustering using enhanced deep embedding method,” Concurrency and
 optimization on the gpu,” in Proc. of IPDPS, 2017. Computation: Practice and Experience, 2019.
[26] R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun, “Dimensionality reduction by [54] X. Niu, L. Wang, and X. Yang, “A comparison study of credit
 learning an invariant mapping,” in Proc. of CVPR, 2006. card fraud detection: Supervised versus unsupervised,” arXiv preprint
[27] B. Harkness, “Dealing with fraud and identity theft,” 2019, https://www. arXiv:1904.10604, 2019.
 creditcardinsider.com/learn/fraud-identity-theft/. [55] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, and G. Chanan, “Pytorch: Tensors
[28] J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong, “A k-means clustering algorithm,” and dynamic neural networks in python with strong gpu acceleration,”
 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C, 1979. PyTorch, 2017.
[29] Y. He, H. Tan, W. Luo, H. Mao, D. Ma, S. Feng, and J. Fan, “Mr- [56] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro,
 dbscan: an efficient parallel density-based clustering algorithm using “TESSERACT: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classification
 mapreduce,” in Proc. of ICPADS, 2011. across space and time,” in Proc. of USENIX Security, 2019.
 [57] C. Phua, V. Lee, K. Smith, and R. Gayler, “A comprehensive sur-
[30] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified
 vey of data mining-based fraud detection research,” arXiv preprint
 and out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. of ICLR,
 arXiv:1009.6119, 2010.
 2017.
 [58] J. Quionero-Candela, M. Sugiyama, A. Schwaighofer, and N. D.
[31] S. T. Jan, Q. Hao, T. Hu, J. Pu, S. Oswal, G. Wang, and B. Viswanath,
 Lawrence, Dataset shift in machine learning. The MIT Press, 2009.
 “Throwing darts in the dark? detecting bots with limited data using
 neural data augmentation,” in Proc. of IEEE S&P, 2020. [59] A. Rasmus, M. Berglund, M. Honkala, H. Valpola, and T. Raiko, “Semisupervised learning with ladder networks,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2015.
[32] A. Javaid, Q. Niyaz, W. Sun, and M. Alam, “A deep learning approach
 for network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. of BIONETICS, 2016. [60] J. Rivero, B. Ribeiro, N. Chen, and F. S. Leite, “A grassmannian
 approach to zero-shot learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc.
[33] J. Jia, B. Wang, and N. Z. Gong, “Random walk based fake account
 of ICONIP, 2017.
 detection in online social networks,” in Proc. of DSN, 2017.
 [61] P. J. Rousseeuw, “Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and
[34] H. Jiang, B. Kim, M. Guan, and M. Gupta, “To trust or not to trust a
 validation of cluster analysis,” Journal of computational and applied
 classifier,” in Proc. of NeurIPS, 2018.
 mathematics, 1987.
[35] L. Jiang, Z. Zhou, T. Leung, L.-J. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Mentornet: [62] A. S. Sabau, “Survey of clustering based financial fraud detection
 Learning data-driven curriculum for very deep neural networks on research,” Informatica Economica, 2012.
 corrupted labels,” in Proc. of ICML, 2018.
 [63] T. Shon, Y. Kim, C. Lee, and J. Moon, “A machine learning framework
[36] R. Jordaney, K. Sharad, S. K. Dash, Z. Wang, D. Papini, I. Nouretdinov, for network anomaly detection using svm and ga,” in Proc. of IEEE
 and L. Cavallaro, “Transcend: Detecting concept drift in malware SMC information assurance workshop, 2005.
 classification models,” in Proc. of USENIX Security, 2017.
 [64] C. Smutz and A. Stavrou, “Malicious pdf detection using metadata and
[37] KDDCup, “Network intrusion data,” 1999, https://www.kdd.org/ structural features,” in Proc. of ACSAC, 2012.
 kdd-cup/view/kdd-cup-1999/Data.
 [65] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
[38] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. of IEEE S&P, 2010.
 of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges,”
 Cybersecurity, 2019. [66] J. Stallkamp, M. Schlipsing, J. Salmen, and C. Igel, “The German
 Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark: A multi-class classification com-
[39] D. S. Kim, H.-N. Nguyen, and J. S. Park, “Genetic algorithm to improve petition,” in Proc. of IJCNN, 2011.
 svm based network intrusion detection system,” in Proc. of AINA, 2005.
 [67] A. Strehl and J. Ghosh, “Cluster ensembles—a knowledge reuse frame-
[40] J. Kinable and O. Kostakis, “Malware classification based on call graph work for combining multiple partitions,” Journal of machine learning
 clustering,” Journal in computer virology, 2011. research (JMLR), 2002.
[41] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” [68] G. Stringhini, P. Mourlanne, G. Jacob, M. Egele, C. Kruegel, and
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. G. Vigna, “Evilcohort: Detecting communities of malicious accounts
[42] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual on online services,” in Proc. of USENIX Security, 2015.
 information,” Physical review E, 2004. [69] J. L. Suárez, S. Garcı́a, and F. Herrera, “A tutorial on distance metric
[43] M. Kruczkowski and E. N. Szynkiewicz, “Support vector machine for learning: Mathematical foundations, algorithms and software,” arXiv
 malware analysis and classification,” in Proc. of WIIAT, 2014. preprint arXiv:1812.05944, 2018.
[44] S. Kudugunta and E. Ferrara, “Deep neural networks for bot detection,” [70] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
 Information Sciences, 2018. analysis of the kdd cup 99 data set,” in Proc. of CISDA, 2009.
[45] P. Laskov and N. Šrndić, “Static detection of malicious javascript- [71] K. Thomas, D. McCoy, C. Grier, A. Kolcz, and V. Paxson, “Trafficking
 bearing pdf documents,” in Proc. of ACSAC, 2011. fraudulent accounts: The role of the underground market in twitter spam
 and abuse,” in Proc. of USENIX Security, 2013.
[46] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, 2015.
 [72] O. Varol, E. Ferrara, C. A. Davis, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini, “Online
[47] W. Lee, S. J. Stolfo, and K. W. Mok, “A data mining framework for
 human-bot interactions: Detection, estimation, and characterization,” in
 building intrusion detection models,” in Proc. of IEEE S&P, 1999.
 Proc. of Weblogs and Social Media Workshop of AAAI, 2017.
[48] H. Li, X.-H. Guan, X. Zan, and C.-Z. HAN, “Network intrusion
 [73] P. Vibert, “The rapid evolution of the ransomware
 detection based on support vector machine,” Journal of Computer
 industry,” 2019, https://www.cybersecurity-review.com/articles/
 Research and Development, 2003.
 the-rapid-evolution-of-the-ransomware-industry/.
[49] Z. Li, Y. Li, and L. Xu, “Anomaly intrusion detection method based [74] N. X. Vinh, J. Epps, and J. Bailey, “Information theoretic measures
 on k-means clustering algorithm with particle swarm optimization,” in for clusterings comparison: Variants, properties, normalization and
 Proc. of ICM, 2011. correction for chance,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2010.
[50] N. Milosevic, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Machine learning [75] G. Wang, T. Wang, H. Zheng, and B. Y. Zhao, “Man vs. machine:
 aided android malware classification,” Computers & Electrical Engi- Practical adversarial detection of malicious crowdsourcing workers,” in
 neering, 2017. Proc. of USENIX Security, 2014.
[51] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: an [76] D.-J. Wu, C.-H. Mao, T.-E. Wei, H.-M. Lee, and K.-P. Wu, “Droidmat:
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Android malware detection through manifest and api calls tracing,” in
 Proc. of NDSS, 2018. Proc. of Asia Joint Conference on Information Security, 2012.
[52] K. P. Murphy, Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective. MIT [77] X. Wu, T. Ma, J. Cao, Y. Tian, and A. Alabdulkarim, “A comparative
 press, 2012. study of clustering ensemble algorithms,” Computers & Electrical
[53] C. K. Ng, F. Jiang, L. Y. Zhang, and W. Zhou, “Static malware Engineering, 2018.

 15
 TABLE V. M EAN AMI S AND S TANDARD D EVIATION OF FARE AND
 FARE MixMatch Ladder DNN FARE MixMatch Ladder DNN G ENERALIZED Z ERO - SHOT L EARNING METHODS (GZSL).
 0.9 1.0 Label Condition nc = bn/2c, 1% labels ng = bn/2c, 1% labels
 0.8 Dataset Malware Intrusion Malware Intrusion
 0.7 0.8 FARE 0.75 ± 0 0.89 ± 0.05 0.74 ± 0 0.90 ± 0.05
 0.6
 AMI

 AMI
 0.6 OSDN 0.64 ± 0.09 0.40 ± 0.35 0.63 ± 0.06 0.63 ± 0.39
 0.5 DEM 0.01 ± 0.01 0.00 ± 0 0.00 ± 0 0.00 ± 0
 0.4 0.4
 0.3
 0.2 0.2
 0 2 4 0 1 4 7 TABLE VI. D EMONSTRATION OF CONTINGENCY TABLE . C OLUMN 2-4
 nc nc REPRESENTS THE COUNTS OF OVERLAPPING SAMPLES BETWEEN EACH
 PREDICTED CLUSTER AND TRUE CLASS . C OLUMN 5 AND ROW 4 SUMS UP
 (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection.
 THE SAMPLES IN PREDICTED CLUSTERS AND TRUE CLASSS .
Fig. 4. FARE vs. baselines in missing classes.
 Labels
 FARE MixMatch Ladder DNN FARE MixMatch Ladder DNN Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Sums
 Predictions
 0.8 1.0 Cluster 1 960 18 2 980
 0.7 Cluster 2 20 0 0 20
 0.8
 0.6 Sums 980 18 2 1000
 AMI

 AMI

 0.5 0.6
 0.4 0.4
 0.3
 0.2 0.2
 0 2 4 0 1 4 7 Regarding the hyper-parameters of FARE, first, we ran
 ng ng
 DEC, k-means, and DBSCAN 50 times with the hyper-
 (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection. parameters introduced above. Together with the “given labels”,
Fig. 5. FARE vs. baselines in coarse-grained labels. we constructed in total M = 151 neighborhood models. Then
 we set the distance radius α = 32, and the regularization coef-
[78] J. Xie, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “Unsupervised deep embedding for ficients λ = 0.01. For the weight of the “given labels” p1 , we
 clustering analysis,” in Proc. of ICML, 2016.
 applied the selection mechanism introduced in Section §III-D
[79] E. P. Xing, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Russell, and A. Y. Ng, “Distance metric and set it as 10 in the malware dataset and {1, 7, 10} in the
 learning with application to clustering with side-information,” in Proc.
 of NeurIPS, 2003. network intrusion dataset (1 is used in ng /nc = 7, 7 is used
[80] L. Zhang, T. Xiang, and S. Gong, “Learning a deep embedding model for ng /nc = 4 and ng = 1, and the rest are 10). Finally,
 for zero-shot learning,” in Proc. of CVPR, 2017. for the input transformation network, we used the same set of
[81] M. Zhang, Y. Duan, H. Yin, and Z. Zhao, “Semantics-aware an- hyper-parameters as that of the semi-supervised baselines.
 droid malware classification using weighted contextual api dependency
 graphs,” in Proc. of CCS, 2014.
[82] Z. Zhu and T. Dumitraş, “Featuresmith: Automatically engineering
 features for malware detection by mining the security literature,” in A PPENDIX -B. BASELINES P ERFORMANCE .
 Proc. of CCS, 2016.
[83] A. Zimek, E. Schubert, and H.-P. Kriegel, “A survey on unsupervised FARE vs. Semi-supervised Baselines. Figure 4 and 5 shows
 outlier detection in high-dimensional numerical data,” Statistical Anal- the comparison between FARE and the baselines’ original imysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, 2012.
 plementations. The AMIs of the baselines decrease drastically
[84] B. Zong, Q. Song, M. R. Min, W. Cheng, C. Lumezanu, D. Cho, and as nc and ng increases. The worst AMI is even lower than 0.1.
 H. Chen, “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. of ICLR, 2018. The results indicate that, without further adaptation, none of
 the baselines can handle missing classes/coarse-grained labeled
A PPENDIX -A. I MPLEMENTATION AND H YPER - PARAMETER . data. As thus, we amended all baselines in our evaluation.

 We implemented FARE with the PyTorch [55] package. FARE vs. Generalized Zero-shot Learning. We compared
We implemented K-means and DBSCAN with the APIs in FARE with two representative GZSL methods OSDN [4] and
the scikit-learn package[11]. We adopted the hyper- DEM [80], under the low-quality label setups. For the missing
parameters suggested by scikit-learn package for K- class setting, we fixed nc = bn/2c for each dataset and
means and DBSCAN. The network architecture of DEC is the kept 1% labeled training sample in each known class. We
same as other DNNs, which are specificied as the following. ran FARE, OSDN, and DEM on the constructed training set
(1) Network Structure: we used an MLP with the architecture and compared their testing AMIs. For the coarse-grained label
of “input dimension-500-500-2000-32” with Tanh activation setting, we fixed ng = bn/2c for each dataset and followed the
for each layer. We also adopted a weight decay with the same procedure. In both experiments, we ran each method 10
strength of 0.01 as the regularization. (2) Minibatch size: times. Note that DEM requires side information (i.e., shared
we created two trunks of minibatch samplers sampling from semantic properties) about the connection between the training
unlabeled and labeled data. Supervised DNN only uses the and testing sets. Since our datasets do not provide such side
labeled sampler. MixMatch and Ladder utilize both samplers information, we set to provide random information to DEM.
to ensure each batch contains both unlabeled and labeled data. As shown in Table V, FARE significantly outperforms OSDN
The batch size of labeled and unlabeled sampler is 64 and 128 and DEM in both setups. This is because GZSL requires rich
respectively. (3) Training epochs: the maximum training epoch training samples from the known classes. However, in our
is 1000. We used an early-stopping mechanism: we stop when setting, we only have 1% of labels in known classes. We can
either the loss on the validation set increases in two consecutive also observe that without meaningful side information, DEM
epochs, or the loss decrease on the training set is below 0.01 completely fails in our task. This result shows that GZSL
in two consecutive epochs. These DNNs were trained with the methods are not suitable for our setup. As such, we do not
Adam optimizer, with the learning rate of 0.001. consider them as the baselines in our experiments.

 16
 TABLE VII. ACCURACY COMPARISON ON SELECTED MISSING TABLE IX. D ECISION MATRIX FOR LABEL ALIGNMENT.
 CLASSES AND COARSE - GRAINED LABEL SETTINGS . Matching Score Assignment
 Prediction Conf.
 Class1 Class2 (Conf.≥ 0.9)
 Dataset MALWARE Network Intrusion
 Label Setting nc = 2 ng = 2 nc = 4 ng = 4 Cluster1 0.9 0.1 0.9 Class1
 FARE 0.92 ± 0.03 0.88 ± 0.02 1±0 0.99 ± 0 Cluster2 0.4 0.6 0.6 New Class
 MixMatch+ 0.92 ± 0.03 0.89 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0.01 0.96 ± 0.01 Cluster3 0.05 0.95 0.95 Class2
 Ladder+ 0.86 ± 0.05 0.87 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0.02 0.95 ± 0.02 Cluster4 0.1 0.9 0.9 Class2
 DNN+ 0.88 ± 0.06 0.88 ± 0.02 0.98 ± 0 0.98 ± 0
 FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+
TABLE VIII. FARE VS . BASELINES IN TWO UNION CLASSES SETTING . 0.8 1.0
 0.7
 Dataset MALWARE (N = 6) Network Intrusion (N = 9)
 0.6 0.8
 Metric AMI K AMI K

 AMI

 AMI
 0.5 0.6
 FARE 0.74 ± 0 6±0 0.95 ± 0.01 7 ± 0.82
 0.4
 MixMatch+ 0.48 ± 0.05 4±0 0.56 ± 0.30 5.33 ± 0.47 0.4
 0.3
 Ladder+ 0.64 ± 0.08 4±0 0.55 ± 0.28 6.33 ± 0.47
 0.2 0.2
 DNN+ 0.45 ± 0.06 4±0 0.59 ± 0.42 4±0 1 10 25 60 1 10 25 50
 % of Label per Class % of Label per Class
 (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection.
 A PPENDIX -C. AMI VS . ACCURACY. Fig. 6. The performance of FARE and baselines under the missing class
 setting (i.e., nc = bn/2c) with different ratios of available labels.
 We use a concrete example to explain the AMI metric
and show its advantage over the accuracy metric. Given a
highly imbalanced dataset of 1000 samples of three classes, IK K << N in most cases, this complexity can be represented
class-1 has 980 samples, class-2 has 18 samples, and class- as O(max{Id Bd |θd |K, pN 2 }). The second part comes from
3 has 2 samples. Suppose a clustering method (denoted as computing the neighborhood relationship and training the
Method A.) categorized the samples into 2 clusters with the transformation network. In each iteration, FARE derives the
contingency table shown in Table VI. Method A. wrongly neighborhood relationship for each base method with a cost
categorized all the samples from class 2 and 3 into cluster-1, of O((Bi )2 ), and updates the network parameters with the
and mistakenly assigned 20 samples from class 1 into cluster- cost of O(|θi |). As such, the time complexity of this part is
2. Given this contingency table, we can compute the AMI by O(Ii M (Bi )2 |θi |), where Ii and Bi is the number of training
using the function API in scikit-learn [11], i.e., −0.003. iteration and batch size, |θi | is the number of parameters of
The mathematical details about AMI can be found in [74]. We the transformation network. The third part is introduced by
can also compute the accuracy as 960/1000 = 0.96. Despite the final k-means clustering. In total, FARE’s computational
making serious mistakes, Method A still has an extremely high complexity is O(max{Id Bd |θd |K, pN 2 , Ii M Bi2 |θi |}).
accuracy. In contrast, AMI is not biased towards the large
class and provides a more reasonable score (i.e., a negative A PPENDIX -E. A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS .
score). This is because AMI not only considers the clustering
correctness of samples in each class, but more importantly Multiple Union Classes. We compared FARE with the
adjusts the score based on the cluster size. amended baselines in a coarse-label setting with two union
 classes. Specifically, we randomly selected 6 classes from the
 Next, we use real experiment results to discuss the dif- malware and intrusion dataset and relabeled them into two
ference between AMI and Accuracy. Table VII shows the union classes. Together with the remain original classes, the
accuracy of different algorithms under missing-classes and training set has in total n − 4 classes. We still only used
coarse-grained labels. We have two observations. First, FARE 1% of the labels for each class. We ran each method 10
is still better than (or at least comparable with) the three times with different random seeds. As shown in Table VIII,
baselines under the accuracy metrics. Second, the accuracy FARE achieves significantly higher AMIs and lower standard
metric looks high for all the algorithms, especially for the deviations than all the amended baselines on both datasets. In
network intrusion dataset. The reason is that the network addition, FARE could identify the true number of classes on
intrusion dataset has a dominating benign class, and the highly the malware dataset and has lowest estimation errors on the
imbalanced classes lead to misleading accuracy results. For this intrusion dataset. This result demonstrates that FARE could
reason, we used AMI as the primary metric in the paper. generalize its effectiveness in multiple union class settings.
 A PPENDIX -D. T IME C OMPLEXITY OF FARE. Setup w/ both Missing Classes and Coarse-grained Labels.
 We tested FARE under a setting with both missing classes
 The computational cost of FARE comes from three aspects. and coarse-grained labels. Specifically, we randomly selected
The first part comes from the bases clustering methods. The 4 classes from both datasets, relabeled 2 of them as a union
base clustering algorithms are independent and thus can be class, and eliminated the labels of the rest. In this way, we
run in parallel. As such, the computation bottleneck is the constructed a training set with n − 3 classes. Similarly, we
slowest algorithm among DEC (O(Id Bd |θd |K) [78], k-means preserved 1% labels in each class and ran FARE 10 times.
(O(Ik KN p)) [28], and DBSCAN (O(pN 2 )) [20]. That is, The results AMI and K are: (0.76 ± 0, 6 ± 0) on the malware
max{O(Id Bd |θd |K), O(Ik KN p), O(pN 2 )}, where Id and Bd dataset, and (0.92 ± 0.06, 5.67 ± 2.36) on the intrusion dataset.
represents the number of training iterations, and the batch
size. |θd | is the number of parameters in the DEC model. A PPENDIX -F. C LASS - CLUSTER A LIGNMENT.
IK and K are the number of training iterations and the
number of clusters k-means. N is the total number of sam- We use an example to explain the strategy of postples, and p is the dimension of the input space. Given that clustering analysis introduced in Section §VI. Suppose we

 17
 TABLE X. M EAN AMI S AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OBTAINED BY VARYING THE α AND q IN FARE.
 Label Condition nc = bn/2c, 1% labels ng = bn/2c, 1% labels
 # q and α 8 16 32 (Our choice) 64 8 16 32 (Our choice) 64
 Malware 0.76 ± 0.05 0.78 ± 0.02 0.75 ± 0 0.74 ± 0.06 0.74 ± 0 0.75 ± 0 0.74 ± 0 0.74 ± 0
 Intrusion 0.89 ± 0.05 0.86 ± 0.02 0.89 ± 0.05 0.89 ± 0.06 0.87 ± 0 0.87 ± 0 0.90 ± 0.05 0.85 ± 0.04

 TABLE XI. T HE PERFORMANCE OF FARE UNDER DIFFERENT PERCENTAGES OF CORRUPTED LABELS .
 Noisty Label Percentage x
 Dataset 0 10 25 50 75
 AMI Accuracy AMI Accuracy AMI Accuracy AMI Accuracy AMI Accuracy
 Malware 0.87 ± 0.01 0.97 ± 0 0.83 ± 0.01 0.96 ± 0.01 0.81 ± 0.01 0.96 ± 0.01 0.79 ± 0.03 0.82 ± 0.05 0.73 ± 0.01 0.74 ± 0
 Network Intrusion 0.98 ± 0 1±0 0.94 ± 0.03 0.99 ± 0 0.84 ± 0.05 0.99 ± 0 0.75 ± 0.02 0.98 ± 0 0.75 ± 0.01 0.98 ± 0

 FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+ FARE MixMatch+ Ladder+ DNN+
 0.8 0.8
 0.8 1.0 0.7
 0.7 0.7
 0.8 0.6
 0.6 0.5 0.6
 AMI

 AMI

 AMI

 AMI
 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.5
 0.4 0.3
 0.4 0.4
 0.3 0.2
 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3
 1 10 25 60 1 10 25 50 0 10 20 30 0 10 20 30
 % of Label per Class % of Label per Class nc ng
 (a) Malware categorization. (b) Intrusion detection. (a) Missing class. (b) Coarse-grained label.
Fig. 7. The performance of FARE and baselines under the coarse-grained Fig. 8. Performance comparison of FARE and baselines under missing class
label setting (i.e., ng = bn/2c) with different ratios of available labels. and coarse-grained label settings on the GTSRB dataset.

 shown in Table X, subtly varying α and q in a certain range
have the clustering result of a dataset, we first compute the does not affect the performance of FARE.
matching score of between every cluster-class pair, constructed
a decision matrix in Table IX. Then, we obtain the confidence A PPENDIX -H. FARE ON DATASET WITH M ORE C LASSES .
score for each cluster (i.e., the maximum matching score In Section §IV, we demonstrated the effectiveness of FARE
among all known classes). Finally, we set the threshold as 0.9 on two security datasets with 6 and 9 classes, respectively.
and assigned the clusters to the known classes, accordingly. As Here, we further tested it on an image dataset with more
we can observe from the assignment (column 5 in Table IX), classes. we used a traffic sign recognition dataset called
we set cluster 2 as an unknown (possibly new) class, because GTSRB [66] which has 39,209 training samples and 12,630
its confidence is below the threshold. In addition, both cluster testing samples. The dataset has 43 classes, each of which
3 and 4 are assigned to class 2. This indicates that class 2 represents a type of traffic sign (e.g., stop sign, speed limit).
represents a coarse-grained label. We followed the same missing-class and coarse-grained label
 setups as other experiments. For each labeled class, we randomly selected 10% training samples as labeled data, and set
 A PPENDIX -G. H YPER - PARAMETER S ENSITIVITY
 nc and ng as 0, 10, 20, and 30. For each setup, we ran FARE
Sensitivity to Ratio of Available Labels. We evaluate the and the baselines (DNN+, MixMatch+, and Ladders+) 10 times
impact of the ratio of available labels: For the missing class and reported the testing AMIs. In Figure 8, we observe similar
settings, we fixed nc = bn/2c for each dataset, and then varied results as those on the malware and intrusion dataset. FARE
the ratio of labeled samples in the training data as 1%, 10%, is comparable with the baselines on the original dataset, and
25%, and 50% to construct 4 groups of training sets. We ran outperforms the baselines when handling low-quality labels.
each method by sampling the missing classes 10 times and This result confirms the advantage of FARE over other methods
reported testing AMIs. For the coarse-grained label settings, under a large number true classes.
we fixed ng = bn/2c for each dataset and followed the same
procedure. In both experiments, we set the number of clusters A PPENDIX -I. FARE UNDER C ORRUPTED L ABELS .
K to the corresponding ground-truth number. We tested FARE under corrupted labels (which can be
 Figure 6 and Figure 7 show the results. The performances caused by either random labeling errors or poisoning attacks).
of all the methods are quite consistent with respect to different Specifically, we considered a setup without missing classes
ratios of available labels. This result indicates that FARE is and coarse-grained labels. By following the setup in [35], we
not sensitive to the raito of labeled samples. Also, the results randomly sampled x% of the labeled samples and relabeled
show that 1% labeled data is enough for FARE to achieve a each sample with a wrong class randomly selected from the
high AMI — the extra information provided by the clustering known classes. Here, we set x =10, 25, 50, 75. For each x, we
ensemble has helped to boost the performance. ran FARE on the corrupted training data 10 times and reported
 the testing AMIs. As shown in Table XI, the performance of
Sensitivity to the Latent Dimensionality. We also tested the FARE is still reasonably good, even when x = 75. This is
sensitivity of FARE to the output dimension of the transfor- again because the clustering ensemble mitigates the negative
mation network q, and the distance radius α. As mentioned in influence of incorrect labels. However, compared to the clean
Section §III-D, α = q, and thus we changed them together. We label setting (Table I), the performance drops as more labels
used the above setups (i.e., nc = bn/2c and ng = bn/2c) with are corrupted. The corrupted labels indeed impose a negative
1% labels and 151 neighborhood models. We set the α (and influence upon FARE. In Section §VI, we have discussed the
q) as 8, 16, 32, and 64, and ran FARE 10 times per setting. As potential solutions to alleviate the negative impact.

 18