2021 17th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN)

 Flow Transformer: A Novel Anonymity Network
 Trafﬁc Classiﬁer with Attention Mechanism
2021 17th International Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN) | 978-1-6654-0668-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MSN53354.2021.00045

 Ruijie Zhao†¶ , Yiteng Huang†¶ , Xianwen Deng† , Zhi Xue† , Jiabin Li† , Zijing Huang‡ , and Yijun Wang†∗
 † School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
 ‡ School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
 ¶ Contributed Equally ∗ Corresponding Author

 Abstract—Supervising anonymity network is a critical issue in various network violations, which brings new challenges
 in the ﬁeld of network security, and traditional trafﬁc analysis to network supervision. Some studies [1], [2] analyzed the
 methods cannot cope with complex anonymity trafﬁc. In recent
 years, the trafﬁc analysis method based on deep learning has structure and content of Tor and I2P, which pointed out
 achieved good performance. However, most of the existing studies that there is a large amount of illegal content in anonymity
 do not consider the temporal-spatial correlation of the trafﬁc, networks. Thus, it is necessary to adopt effective methods to
 and only use a single ﬂow for classiﬁcation. A few works take supervise anonymity networks.
 continuous ﬂows as ﬂow sequence for trafﬁc classiﬁcation, but
 they do not distinguish the different importance of each ﬂow. To With the public release of anonymity network datasets
 tackle this issue, we propose a novel ﬂow-based trafﬁc classiﬁer ISCX2016 and Anon17 [3], [4], the classiﬁcation of anonymity
 called F LOW T RANSFORMER to classify anonymity network traf- network trafﬁc has also become a hot research ﬁeld. To
 ﬁc. F LOW T RANSFORMER uses multi-head attention mechanism to identify anonymity network services in massive and complex
 set higher weights for important ﬂows, and extracts ﬂow sequence
 trafﬁc data, many studies have used machine learning (ML)
 features according to the importance weights. Besides, the RFbased feature selection method is designed to select the optimal algorithms such as Naive Bayes (NB), Random Forest (RF),
 feature combination, which can effectively avoid the insigniﬁcant k-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) as classiﬁers and achieved good
 features from reducing the performance and efﬁciency of the performance [3]–[6]. However, the ML-based methods have
 classiﬁer. Experimental results on two real-world trafﬁc datasets some constraints, which have limited feature extraction capademonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-thebilities and require manual feature selection. Deep learning
 art methods with a large margin.
 Index Terms—Anonymity network, trafﬁc classiﬁcation, deep (DL) algorithms have better feature extraction capabilities and
 learning, transformer, attention mechanism. have been widely used in trafﬁc classiﬁcation tasks recently.
 For instance, the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [7]–
 I. I NTRODUCTION [9] and the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [10] have
 With the continuous development of Internet services, peo- better performance in classifying network trafﬁc, and the
 ple pay more attention to the privacy and security of the accuracy of classifying application trafﬁc is more than 80%.
 Internet, which can be well meet by anonymity networks. However, most of the aforementioned methods only consider
 In recent years, anonymity communication technology has the characteristics of a single ﬂow, i.e., do not consider the
 developed rapidly, and onion routing theory based on the MIX relationship between the ﬂows. Since each ﬂow is regarded as
 network has been widely used. Many anonymity networks (e.g. an isolated individual and is sequentially input into the neural
 Tor1 , I2P2 , JonDoNym3 , etc.) are implemented based on the network for feature extraction, the relationship between the
 MIX network. Based on the different anonymity characteristics ﬂows is not effectively utilized. According to the temporal
 of these networks, a variety of technologies (e.g. content and spatial correlation of the trafﬁc, there are usually some
 encryption, multi-hop mechanism, trafﬁc obfuscation) are used correlations among multiple continuous ﬂows generated in a
 to realize the hiding of communication relationships and short period of time. Although some works [11]–[14] regarded
 content. At present, the number of anonymity network users continuous multiple ﬂows as a ﬂow sequence for feature
 has reached millions. According to the statistics on Tor and extraction, they did not distinguish the importance of different
 I2P ofﬁcial websites, about 3 million users use Tor repeaters ﬂows. Real-world trafﬁc is often mixed with unimportant or
 to connect to the Internet, and 36,000 I2P network routing irrelevant ﬂows, which will adversely affect the identiﬁcation
 nodes are running. performance of such methods. To achieve an anonymity net-
 However, while the anonymity network brings privacy pro- work trafﬁc classiﬁer with excellent performance, we design
 tection and greater freedom to ordinary users, it also hides the our method from the following three key points:
 identity information of malicious users. Malicious users use
 • Use ﬂow sequence for classiﬁcation: The ﬂow sequence
 anonymity networks to evade network supervision and engage
 is composed of continuous ﬂows in time, which obviously
 1 https://www.torproject.org/ contains more information than a single ﬂow.
 2 https://geti2p.net/ • Distinguish the importance of ﬂows: To reduce the
 3 https://anonymous-proxy-servers.net/
 noise brought by irrelevant ﬂows and pay more attention

 978-1-6654-0668-0/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE 223
 DOI 10.1109/MSN53354.2021.00045
 Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 to important ﬂows, it is necessary to distinguish the detect Tor trafﬁc through time features. The experimental reimportance of different ﬂows in the ﬂow sequence. sults show that only 10 time features are needed to effectively
 • Select the optimal feature combination: Dozens of detect different applications in Tor trafﬁc. Elike et al. [16]
 features are parsed from the original trafﬁc, and feature proposed a Tor network off-line trafﬁc classiﬁcation system
 selection can avoid the insigniﬁcant features from reduc- using SVM classiﬁer to improve the performance of trafﬁc
 ing the performance and efﬁciency of the classiﬁer. classiﬁcation. Montieri et al. [17] proposed the classiﬁcation
 Based on the aforementioned ﬁrst two key design points, of different anonymous services at different granularity levels,
 we propose a novel ﬂow-based anonymity network trafﬁc which uses ﬁve ML algorithms to classify anonymity services
 classiﬁer with multi-head attention mechanism, called F LOW with a maximum accuracy of 85.8%.
 T RANSFORMER. Based on the third point, we adopt the RF- The above results show that these ML-based methods can
 based method to select the optimal feature combination. In our achieve good classiﬁcation accuracy in the face of uncompliproposed method, the ﬂow sequence is the input feature, which cated network trafﬁc. However, they cannot cope with increasis composed of multiple continuous ﬂows within a certain ingly complex network trafﬁc. Due to better robustness and
 time range. We represent the input ﬂow sequence as three feature extraction capabilities, DL-based method has become
 vectors of query (Q), key (K), and value (V), where Q and the most ideal trafﬁc classiﬁcation method. Wang et al. [7],
 K are used to extract representative features of the ﬂow, and [8] transformed the problem of trafﬁc classiﬁcation into an
 V is the information of the ﬂow itself. Through an effective end-to-end image classiﬁcation problem, and proposed an enmulti-head attention mechanism (i.e calculate Q · K), F LOW crypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation method based on 2D-CNN, which
 T RANSFORMER can distinguish the importance of different achieved good accuracy by classifying trafﬁc images. Chen et
 ﬂows in each ﬂow sequence. The major contributions of the al. [18] proposed a capsule neural network method to identify
 proposed work are three-fold: encrypted trafﬁc and achieved higher classiﬁcation accuracy.
 • We propose an anonymity network trafﬁc classiﬁer with Lotfollahi et al. [19] proposed a trafﬁc classiﬁcation model
 multi-head attention mechanism, which can pay more based on CNN combined with stacked autoencoder (SAE),
 attention to important ﬂows and extract ﬂow sequence which achieves more effective classiﬁcation by reconstructing
 features more effectively. To the best of our knowledge, the characteristics of raw trafﬁc data.
 this is the ﬁrst work to use the multi-head attention The aforementioned methods automatically extract the charmechanism to distinguish the importance of different acteristics of ﬂows, but ignore the temporal-spatial correlation
 ﬂows in each ﬂow sequence. of the trafﬁc or the different importance of the ﬂow. Thus, we
 • Insigniﬁcant features in the ﬂow can be characterized as explore the problem of anonymity network trafﬁc classiﬁcation
 noise under certain conditions, which can have a very from the perspective of ﬂow sequence. Our goal is to learn
 adverse effect on the identiﬁcation result. In addition, the importance of different ﬂows and apply it for feature
 too many features will bring more model parameters, extraction.
 which leads to slower training and classiﬁcation. Thus,
 III. P RELIMINARIES
 in order to improve the performance and efﬁciency of
 the classiﬁer, we adopt the RF-based method to select In this section, we introduce some background of anonymity
 the optimal feature combination. network trafﬁc classiﬁers, including the operating mechanism
 • To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness and gen- of anonymity networks and the overview of Transformer.
 erality of F LOW T RANSFORMER, we conducted experi-
 A. Anonymity Network
 ments on SJTU-AN21 and ISCXVPN2016 datasets. Experiments show that F LOW T RANSFORMER can achieve The three most popular anonymous networks are Tor, I2P
 better performance than other classiﬁers. and JonDonym. Tor is an anonymity communication network
 with the largest number of users. It is based on TCP and
 II. R ELATED W ORK uses a multi-hop mechanism to build communication links.
 The task of network trafﬁc classiﬁcation has been contin- In an established communication link, between the ingress
 uously concerned by researchers, but not all network trafﬁc node and the egress node, the Tor network will randomly
 analysis methods are suitable for anonymity network trafﬁc. select more than three relay nodes from the directory server.
 In this section, we will introduce the existing research status Each relay node only knows its previous and next nodes,
 of anonymity network or other encrypted network trafﬁc the selection of nodes is random, and the link is constantly
 classiﬁcation methods. changing. At the same time, the data in the Tor network
 The anonymity network uses encryption for communication link is hidden in multiple encryption layers, and all commuand transmission. Thus, methods such as deep packet inspec- nications are encrypted layer by layer. I2P is an improved
 tion (DPI) [15] that requires analysis of packet information anonymity network based on Tor, which removes the central
 cannot classify encrypted trafﬁc. Recently, researchers identify node and adopts a completely distributed structure to improve
 anonymity network trafﬁc by analyzing behavior and statistical the anonymity and stability of the network. It uses a multi-level
 characteristics, which are mainly based on ML or DL algo- encrypted tunnel mechanism to hide the identity information
 rithms. Lashkari et al. [3] proposed a ML-based method to and communication relationship of the communicating parties.

 224

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 j-th feature
 IMPOTRANCE High
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV uppQuartileIat
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV pktps

 Output
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV

 Input

 Units
 ipMinTTL

 MLP
 i-th flow GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV

 FT
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV ipMaxTTL
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV dsIqdIat
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV MaxIAT
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV Radom Forst

 Ă
 GLUSNWSVWFQWĂE\WSV
 Low

 Raw Traffic Data Flow Sequences Feature Selection Flow Transformer

 Fig. 1. Overview of proposed method for anonymity network trafﬁc classiﬁcation. The ﬂow sequence represents a set of continuous multiple ﬂows. The Flow
 Transformer Unit (FT Unit) is a ﬂow sequence feature extraction unit with multi-head attention mechanism.

 JonDonym provides users with anonymous services through ﬂow sequence, which realizes reasonable and effective feature
 multiple hybrid cascades. There is a set of two or three extraction of the ﬂow sequence.
 encrypted hybrid servers in each hybrid cascade. Unlike Tor,
 the link of the JonDonym network is ﬁxed. The user can select IV. S CHEME OF A NONYMITY N ETWORK T RAFFIC
 the link for data transmission, but cannot change the mix of C LASSIFICATION
 different nodes on the link. In this section, we introduce the scheme of anonymity
 Due to the application of encryption technology, the classi- network trafﬁc classiﬁcation. After data preprocessing and
 ﬁcation of anonymous network trafﬁc is more challenging. feature selection, F LOW T RANSFORMER is adopted to realize
 the anonymity services classiﬁcation. The overview of the
 B. Transformer with Multi-head Attention Mechanism proposed method is shown in Fig. 1 and the process of our
 approach is summarized in Algorithm 1.
 The Transformer was ﬁrst proposed by Vaswani et al. [20]
 in 2017 and has achieved great success in the ﬁeld of Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of the Proposed Method
 NLP [21] and CV [22]. The Transformer employs an encoder-
 Input: raw training dataset Dr , total epoch times n
 decoder structure. The self-attention layer is one of the most
 Output: F LOW T RANSFORMER for anonymity network trafimportant structures of the Transformer network, which uses
 ﬁc classiﬁcation
 residual connections followed by layer normalization. There-
 1: procedure Data Preprocessing (Dr )
 fore, the output of self-attention layer is LayerN orm(x +
 2: Compute the standardization result according to (4)
 Sublayer(x)).
 3: Take continuous multiple ﬂows as ﬂow sequences
 The self-attention layer employs h attention heads. The
 4: Use RF-based method to select feature combination
 results of different heads are concatenated together and a linear
 5: Dp ←− New training dataset after preprocessing
 transformation is used. As for attention head i, ﬁrst calculate
 6: return Dp
 Qi , Ki , Vi by using linear transformation, representing Query
 7: procedure Flow Transformer Model (Dp )
 Matrix, Key Matrix and Value Matrix respectively.
 8: while i ≤ n do
 Qi = xWiQ , Ki = xWiK , Vi = xWiV (1) 9: Load the proposed network
 10: Input Dp into the network for training
 dx ×dk
 WiQ , WiK , WiV ∈R are learnable parameters. Then the 11: Update the model according to cross entropy loss
 output of a single attention head is computed: 12: Save F low T ransf ormeri model
 Qi K T 13: end while
 Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) = sof tmax( √ i )Vi (2) 14: Save F low T ransf ormern as the ﬁnal model
 dk
 Matrix calculation can be parallelized and reduce calculation
 time. The essence is to use the similarity between the query A. Data Preprocessing
 vector and the key vector as the weight, and perform a
 Before the training dataset and the testing dataset are applied
 weighted summation on all value vectors.
 to the F LOW T RANSFORMER model, the data need to be
 Multi-head attention allows the model to jointly attend to preprocessed. This involves two steps.
 information from different head: 1) Standardization: Due to the large range of values with
 M ultiHead(x) = Concat(head1 , · · · , headn )W O (3) different characteristics in each ﬂow, directly using raw data
 for training will weaken the effect of characteristics with lower
 hdk ×dx
 where headi = Attention(Qi , Ki , Vi ) and W ∈ R O
 values. In addition, the convergence speed of the model will be
 is used for linear transformation. Through multi-headed atten- very slow. Therefore, it is necessary to use the standardization
 tion, information in different spaces can be extracted effec- algorithm to ensure the reliability of data. The algorithm is
 tively, and richer feature information can be captured. adopted to standardization the data as follows:
 The Transformer network with multi-head attention mechx−μ
 anism can assign different attention weights to ﬂows in the z= (4)
 σ

 225

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 where μ represents the mean of the original data, and σ the
 Output
 standard deviation of the original data.
 2) Flow Sequences Generation: The ﬂow sequence is

 3 Layers
 composed of multiple continuous ﬂows. As these ﬂows are
 MLP
 continuous in time, they can reﬂect user behavior during this
 period. Some studies have shown that trafﬁc classiﬁcation by
 the ﬂow sequence has better performance than by only one Feature Extraction Layer

 Flow Transformer Unit u6
 ﬂow [11]–[14]. Thus, in our method, we take 8 continuous Traffic Feature
 Extraction
 ﬂows as a sequence.
 B. RF-based Method for Feature Selection Add & Norm

 Feature selection is to remove insigniﬁcant features in Self-attention Layer
 Multi-Head
 the generated ﬂows, which can make the generated results Cal cul ate At tention W eight
 Attention

 Res
 better in line with effectiveness and timeliness. In terms
 Q K V
 of effectiveness, insigniﬁcant features in the ﬂow can be
 characterized as noise under certain conditions, which can
 have a very adverse effect on the identiﬁcation result. In terms
 of timeliness, the removal of these features can reduce the
 calculation of statistics in ﬂow generation process and speed
 up ﬂow generation. In addition, low-dimensional features will i-th flow
 also reduce the complexity and classiﬁcation time of the Features
 feature extraction network.
 RF algorithm is robust and easy to use, making it one of the
 Fig. 2. The structure of F LOW T RANSFORMER.
 most popular ML algorithms for classiﬁcation tasks. Moreover,
 RF algorithm can be employed to calculate the contribution of
 each feature, which is effective in feature selection. A total of reasonable and effective feature extraction of the ﬂow se-
 84 initial features are extracted from the raw trafﬁc data. We quence.
 use RF-based method to evaluate the importance of these 84 The input of F LOW T RANSFORMER is a ﬂow sequence
 features and perform feature selection. The calculation of the consisting of 8 continuous ﬂows after feature selection. Conj-th feature contribution based on the RF method is divided tinuous ﬂows can be regarded as a sequence input. The model
 into four steps. First, randomly sample the original training structure of F LOW T RANSFORMER is shown in Fig. 2. It
 set D as the in-bag data Din , and the unselected data as the consists of 6 Flow Transformer units and 3 fully connected
 out-of-bag data Dout ; Next, use the in-bag data Din to train layers. Two key sub-layers form a Flow Transformer unit,
 the RF model. For the i-th decision tree in RF model, use the namely self-attention layer and feature extraction layer.
 corresponding out-of-bag data Dout to calculate the data error, The self-attention layer is mainly used to distinguish the
 denoted as Erri1 ; Then, randomly add noise to all the sample importance of different ﬂows in each ﬂow sequence. Query
 features, and calculate the error of Dout again, denoted as Matrix, Key Matrix and Value Matrix are calculated by linear
 Erri2 ; Finally, the contribution of the j-th feature is calculated transformations, denoted as Q, K and V . Here, Q and K
 according to the following formula: represent key information of the ﬂows, while V represents
 
 N
 Erri2 − Erri1 the actual information of the ﬂows. The higher the similarity
 cj = (5) between Q and K, the higher the correlation between the
 N
 i=1 ﬂow corresponding to Q and the ﬂow corresponding to K,
 where N represents the number of trees in the RF model. It and therefore the higher the weight when V is weighted and
 can be seen that if the accuracy of Dout drops signiﬁcantly summed. The multi-head attention mechanism strengthens the
 after random noise is added, it means that this feature has a information interaction between related ﬂows and effectively
 great inﬂuence on the prediction results of the sample, i.e., the improves the feature extraction effect of the model on the ﬂow
 importance is relatively high. Based on this method, we sort sequence.
 the importance of the initial features and optimize the feature The feature extraction layer can strengthen the expressive
 combination. ability of the output. It is able to provide non-linear transformation functions that self-attention layer does not have.
 C. Flow Transformer Classiﬁer It ﬁrst uses a fully connected layer to map features to a
 Different from other methods, F LOW T RANSFORMER clas- larger dimensional feature space, then uses ReLU for nonlinear
 siﬁer can assign different attention weights to different ﬂows screening, and ﬁnally uses another fully connected layer to
 in the ﬂow sequence through the multi-head attention mech- restore the features to the original dimension.
 anism. The multi-head attention mechanism strengthens the Each sub-layer uses the residual structure, and added layer
 information interaction between related ﬂows, and can achieve normalization at the end. The residual structure can solve the

 226

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 degradation problem that occurs as the depth of the network TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF T HE DATASETS U SED FOR E VALUATION .
 increases, while layer normalization can ensure the stability
 of the data distribution and accelerate the convergence speed
 of the model.
 Dataset Category Train dataset Test dataset
 Finally, the output of Flow Transformer units is ﬂattened
 and a MLP with three fully connected layers is used for Eepsites 1,825 1,197
 classiﬁcation. The ﬁnal layer has 10 or 7 neurons, which is IRC 3,009 484
 equal to the number of network service categories. Snark 7,284 1,784
 Video 12,577 581
 V. E VALUATION JonDonym 1,254 967
 In this section, we present and discuss our experimental SJTU-AN21 Bittorrent 198 76
 results. Especially, we answer the following three research Chat 624 150
 questions: FTP 364 184
 • RQ1: How effective is the RF-based method in feature Streaming 949 598
 selection? Browsing 1,130 958
 • RQ2: How well does F LOW T RANSFORMER work on Total 29,214 6,979
 real-world anonymity network trafﬁc, identifying different
 Browsing 3,646 912
 anonymity services?
 FTP 4,446 1,112
 • RQ3: How well does F LOW T RANSFORMER perform com-
 P2P 736 184
 paring to the state of art of trafﬁc classiﬁcation methods?
 VoIP 8,464 2,117
 ISCXVPN2016
 A. Dataset for Evaluation Email 689 173
 Streaming 1,523 381
 The previous anonymity network datasets (i.e. ISCX-
 Chat 3,209 803
 Tor2016 and Anon17) have become invalid due to the update
 of the anonymity network version. The Tor network has Total 22,713 5,682
 been signiﬁcantly changed in version 0.4.1.5 in 2018, which
 adds circuit-level padding and SENDME units to prevent
 deanonymization through trafﬁc analysis. The I2P network has
 enabled the new protocol NTCP2 in version 0.9.36 in 2019. combination for subsequent experiments. To answer RQ2, we
 The NTCP2 uses the Noise protocol framework to improve analyze the training process of F LOW T RANSFORMER, and
 the ability to resist DPI attacks. However, the previous two discuss the confusion matrix of the classiﬁcation results on
 anonymity network datasets were released before 2017 [3], the test dataset. To answer RQ3, we compare the classiﬁcation
 [4]. To make the classiﬁer applicable to the current anonymity performance of F LOW T RANSFORMER and other state of art
 network trafﬁc analysis, in the latest version of the three most of trafﬁc classiﬁcation methods on the test dataset. It should be
 popular anonymity networks (i.e. Tor, I2P, JonDonym), we noted that both SJTU-AN21 and ISCXVPN2016 datasets are
 collected the trafﬁc data generated by 10 anonymity services. used to conduct the above evaluation experiments. To make the
 This latest anonymity network trafﬁc dataset SJTU-AN214 is experimental evaluation clearer, we introduce the experimental
 publicly available for researchers. environment and evaluation metrics as follows.
 In addition, encrypted trafﬁc has some similarities with 1) Experimental Environment: Our anonymity network
 anonymous network trafﬁc, so the public encrypted trafﬁc trafﬁc is collected by conﬁguring the mirror port of the switch
 dataset ISCXVPN2016 is used to evaluate the generality of and using the real-time trafﬁc capture tool tcpdump. The raw
 the proposed method. trafﬁc data of SJTU-AN21 and ISCXVPN2016 datasets are all
 Details of these two datasets are summarized in TABLE I. pcap ﬁles, which need to calculate statistical features to enrich
 In the SJTU-AN21 dataset, Eepsites, IRC, Snark, and Video feature information. Thus, we use Tranalyzer, a lightweight
 are the four main anonymity services in the I2P network, and packet analyzer, to calculate the statistical characteristics of the
 Bittorrent, Chat, FTP, Streaming, and Browsing are the ﬁve raw trafﬁc data. All the evaluations are conducted in Python
 main anonymity services in the Tor network. 3.7 with the PyTorch framework of version 1.8.1 and running
 on the PC with Intel® Core™ i7-10700@2.90 GHz, 16 GB
 B. Experiment Setup RAM, a 512G SSD, and an NIVIDIA GeForce RTX3060
 We design several experiments to evaluate the efﬁcacy of 12GB.
 our method for classifying anonymity network trafﬁc. To 2) Evaluation Metrics: The related evaluation metrics used
 answer RQ1, we evaluate the performance of the RF-based in the evaluation are as follows. There are two situations in
 feature selection method and the traditional PCA method on which the classiﬁer performs a correct classiﬁcation. One is the
 different number of features, and determine the optimal feature true positive Tp decision, which correctly classiﬁes the trafﬁc
 corresponding to the service. The other is true negative Tn
 4 https://github.com/iZRJ/The-SJTU-AN21-Dataset decision, i.e. the trafﬁc of other services is correctly classiﬁed.

 227

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 (a) (b)

 Fig. 3. Classiﬁcation accuracy with different numbers of features on (a) SJTU-AN21 dataset, (b) ISCXVPN2016 dataset. The shadow in the ﬁgure indicates
 the variation range of the top-3 accuracy, and the connection point represents the second highest accuracy using different number of features.

 Moreover, we can see that if the number of features is
 The corresponding erroneous output of the classiﬁer is false
 less than 20, satisfactory performance cannot be achieved on
 positive Fp decision and false negative Fn decision. Based on
 either the SJTU-AN21 dataset or the ISCXVPN2016 dataset.
 the above deﬁnition, Recall, Precision and Fn can be obtained:
 On the SJTU-AN21 dataset, when the number of features is
 Tp 50, the F LOW T RANSFORMER reaches the highest accuracy
 Recall = (6)
 Tp + Fn of 85.29%. On ISCXVPN2016, the highest accuracy of the
 classiﬁer is 95.29% when the number of features is 35. Due to
 Tp the use of more complex and up-to-date encryption technology,
 P recision = (7)
 T p + Fp the anonymity network requires more features to effectively
 classify trafﬁc than encrypted networks. We use the above
 (n2 + 1)P recision · Recall optimal feature combination on these two datasets to conduct
 Fn = (8)
 (n2 P recision + Recall) subsequent experiments.
 where n is a penalty factor to provide more weight to recall,
 and we choose F1 in this paper. D. Performance of Flow Transformer Classiﬁer (to RQ2)
 The train accuracy and loss using the F LOW T RANS -
 C. Efﬁcacy of RF-based Feature Selection Method (to RQ1) FORMER classiﬁer for SJTU-AN21 and ISCXVPN2016
 datasets are shown in Fig. 4. The loss of F LOW T RANS -
 As we mentioned before, insigniﬁcant features can ad-
 FORMER classiﬁer decreases rapidly and eventually converge
 versely affect the performance of the classiﬁer. At the same
 to near zero, which indicates that the classiﬁer has learned the
 time, more features mean longer training time and prediction
 feature information of the training dataset very well. Beneﬁting
 time. Thus, in order to obtain the optimal feature combination,
 from the excellent feature extraction ability of the F LOW
 we ﬁrst conduct the evaluation of feature selection.
 T RANSFORMER for network trafﬁc, its ﬁnal training accuracy
 In this stage, we choose another representative feature
 is very high.
 selection method, principal component analysis (PCA) algo-
 To comprehensively evaluate the classiﬁcation performance
 rithm to compare the performance of feature selection. As an
 of F LOW T RANSFORMER, we analyze the confusion matrix
 unsupervised method, the PCA algorithm is widely used for
 of the classiﬁcation results on the test datasets. As shown in
 data analysis. According to the RF-based and the PCA-based
 Fig. 5, our classiﬁer can effectively classify the trafﬁc generfeature selection methods, we investigate the performance of
 ated by different services. In Fig. 5(a), the trafﬁc of the three
 the classiﬁer with different number of features (i.e., the top
 types of anonymity networks (i.e., I2P, Tor, JonDoNym) are
 J features in the rank). The experimental results are shown
 correctly distinguished. Some of the Chat services of the Tor
 in Fig. 3. To avoid the contingency of the classiﬁer perfornetwork are misclassiﬁed as the Streaming service. Since some
 mance, we take top-3 accuracy during the training process.
 ﬁles are transferred during the Chat service, the corresponding
 The shadow in the ﬁgure indicates the variation range of
 trafﬁc is very similar to Streaming service. In Fig. 5(b), we can
 the top-3 accuracy, and the connection point represents the
 see that the classiﬁer has some classiﬁcation errors between
 second highest accuracy using different number of features.
 the FTP and Chat service trafﬁc. By referring to the ofﬁcial
 Obviously, the RF-based method for feature selection has
 description of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, we found that both
 better effectiveness and stability.

 228

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 (a) (a)

 (b)
 (b)

 Fig. 4. Train accuracy and loss of F LOW T RANSFORMER classiﬁer on (a) Fig. 5. Performance confusion matrices of F LOW T RANSFORMER classiﬁer
 SJTU-AN21 dataset, (b) ISCXVPN2016 dataset. on (a) SJTU-AN21 dataset, (b) ISCXVPN2016 dataset.

 services contain the trafﬁc generated by the Skype application, It can be seen from TABLE II that our F LOW T RANS -
 which is the main cause of misclassiﬁcation. FORMER achieves the best performance in both two datasets in
 terms of all evaluation metrics. We can observe that the clas-
 E. Comparison with Other Methods (to RQ3) siﬁcation results of traditional ML-based methods are usually
 not ideal, demonstrating the limited ability of these methods
 We compare our with the following nine baseline methods to classify complex network trafﬁc. The classiﬁcation perforon SJTU-AN21 and ISCXVPN2016. The ML models (i.e. NB, mance of the 2D-CNN and 3D-CNN models (i.e., directly
 RF, SVM, and C4.5) are implemented through the popular reading pcap ﬁles without calculating the statistical features)
 data mining tool Weka. CNN, LSTM, and LSTM+Attn mod- is very limited. CNN and LSTM models use statistical features
 els all use the structure similar to F LOW T RANSFORMER (i.e. and the ﬂow sequence to achieve signiﬁcant performance
 the same number of layers and input/output size), and use ﬂow improvements. However, due to the lack of mining the inherent
 sequences as input for classiﬁcation. In addition, LSTM+Attn information of the ﬂow sequence, it is still unable to achieve
 uses LSTM combined with a self-attention mechanism to pay high accuracy. We introduce a self-attention mechanism on
 attention to important ﬂows in the ﬂow sequence. 2D-CNN is the LSTM model, and the detection performance has been
 proposed by Wang et al. [7] that directly reads trafﬁc pcap ﬁles improved by about 3%, which shows that the attention mechand converts them into images for classiﬁcation. 3D-CNN is anism is very effective for the ﬂow sequence. Our F LOW
 an improved model of the 2D-CNN proposed by Zhang et al. T RANSFORMER uses the multi-head attention mechanism to
 [9], which uses multiple channels to enrich feature information distinguish the importance of ﬂows, and the feature extraction
 during image conversion. layer to fully extract ﬂow sequence features, which greatly

 229

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE II R EFERENCES
 T HE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON WITH OTHER M ETHODS .
 [1] N. P. Hoang, P. Kintis, M. Antonakakis and M. Polychronakis, “An
 empirical study of the i2p anonymity network and its censorship
 SJTU-AN21 ISCXVPN2016 resistance”, in Internet Measurement Conference 2018, Boston, MA,
 Model
 Acc. Prec. F1 Acc. Prec. F1 USA, Oct. 31– Nov. 2, 2018, pp. 379–392.
 [2] L. Liu, H. Zhang, J. Shi, X. Yu and H. Xu, “I2P Anonymous
 NB 34.0% 34.1% 27.0% 54.7% 68.1% 57.2% Communication Network Measurement and Analysis”, in International
 RF 67.9% 73.7% 67.1% 85.8% 88.0% 85.8% Conference on Smart Computing and Communication, Birmingham, UK,
 Oct. 11–13, 2019, pp. 105–115.
 SVM 46.8% 58.0% 42.8% 71.8% 75.2% 72.0% [3] A. H. Lashkari, et al., “Characterization of tor trafﬁc using time
 C4.5 48.4% 55.8% 48.7% 78.5% 78.0% 76.2% based features,” in 3rd International Conference on Information System
 Security and Privacy, Porto, Portugal, Feb. 19–21, 2017, pp. 253–262.
 CNN 78.3% 78.4% 77.0% 90.2% 90.7% 90.4% [4] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Packet momentum for identiﬁ-
 LSTM 79.1% 80.2% 77.9% 90.2% 90.8% 90.3% cation of anonymity networks,” Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility,
 vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27–56, 2017.
 2D-CNN 65.0% 70.8% 66.9% 86.2% 86.7% 86.1% [5] H. Yin and Y. He, “I2P anonymous trafﬁc detection and identiﬁcation”,
 3D-CNN 71.9% 75.6% 73.2% 87.6% 88.1% 87.9% in 5th International Conference on Advanced Computing & Communi-
 LSTM+Attn 81.5% 82.1% 81.1% 92.3% 92.9% 92.3% cation Systems, Coimbatore, India, Mar. 15–16, 2019, pp. 157–162.
 [6] A. Cuzzocrea, F. Martinelli, F. Mercaldo and G. Vercelli, “Tor trafﬁc
 Ours 86.0% 86.8% 85.5% 95.2% 95.3% 95.2% analysis and detection via machine learning techniques”, in 2017 IEEE
 International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Boston, MA, USA,
 Dec. 11–14, 2017, pp. 4474–4480.
 [7] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye and Y. Sheng, “Malware trafﬁc
 classiﬁcation using convolutional neural network for representation
 improves the classiﬁcation performance of anonymity network learning”, in 2017 International Conference on Information Networking
 (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam, Jan. 11–13, 2017, pp. 712–717.
 and encrypted network trafﬁc. Further, we also try to add [8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted
 CNN, LSTM or autoencoder network to the existing network trafﬁc classiﬁcation with one-dimensional convolution neural networks”,
 structure of F LOW T RANSFORMER for feature extraction. in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
 Informatics (ISI), Beijing, China, Jul. 22–24, 2017, pp. 43–48.
 Experimental results show that these methods will not improve [9] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
 the performance of the classiﬁer, and we do not want our ﬁltering and labeling for DL-based trafﬁc classiﬁer update,” in IEEE
 F LOW T RANSFORMER to be a highly complex model. Thus, INFOCOM 2020, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 6–9, 2020, pp. 397–405.
 [10] H. Yao, et al., “Identiﬁcation of encrypted trafﬁc through attention
 the multi-head attention mechanism and the feature extraction mechanism based long short term memory”, IEEE Transactions on Big
 layer of F LOW T RANSFORMER are all we need. Data, doi: 10.1109/TBDATA.2019.2940675, 2019.
 [11] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “Flowpic: Encrypted internet trafﬁc classiﬁ-
 cation is as easy as image recognition”, in IEEE INFOCOM WKSHPS
 2019, Paris, France, Apr 29 – May 2, 2019, pp. 680–687.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [12] Y. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Tu, L. Chen and Z. Dou, “Time-related network intrusion detection model: a deep learning method,” in IEEE GLOBECOM
 In this paper, a novel ﬂow-based trafﬁc classiﬁer called 2019, Waikoloa, USA, Dec. 9–13, 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [13] R. Zhao, et al., “An efﬁcient and lightweight approach for intrusion
 F LOW T RANSFORMER is proposed and successfully applied detection based on knowledge distillation,” in IEEE ICC 2021, Montreal,
 to classifying anonymity network and encrypted network traf- Canada, Jun. 14–23, 2021, pp. 1–6.
 ﬁc. The model uses the multi-head attention mechanism to [14] R. Zhao, J. Yin, Z. Xue, G. Gui, B. Adebisi, T. Ohtsuki, H.
 Gacanin and H. Sari, “An efﬁcient intrusion detection method based
 effectively distinguish the importance of the ﬂow in the ﬂow on dynamic autoencoder,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, doi:
 sequence, and the feature extraction layer to fully extract the 10.1109/LWC.2021.3077946.
 ﬂow sequence features. Besides, to avoid the insigniﬁcant [15] T. Bujlow, et al., “Independent comparison of popular DPI tools for
 trafﬁc classiﬁcation”, Computer Networks, vol. 76, pp. 75–89, 2015.
 features from reducing the performance and efﬁciency of the [16] E. Hodo, et al., “Machine learning approach for detection of nontor
 classiﬁer, we use the RF-based feature selection method to trafﬁc”, in 12th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and
 select the optimal feature combination. Experiments on two Security, Reggio Calabria, Italy, Aug. 29 – Sep. 1, 2017, pp. 1–6.
 [17] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto and A. Pescapé, “Anonymity services
 real-world trafﬁc datasets show that the classifying accuracy tor, i2p, jondonym: classifying in the dark (web)”, IEEE Transactions on
 of the proposed model is superior to existing models. In the Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 662–675, 2018.
 future, we will consider combining character features in trafﬁc [18] Z. Chen, et al., “Length matters: Fast internet encrypted trafﬁc service
 classiﬁcation based on multi-PDU lengths”, in 2020 16th International
 to further improve classiﬁcation performance. Since the F LOW Conference on Mobility, Sensing and Networking (MSN), Tokyo, Japan,
 T RANSFORMER is a general classiﬁer for network trafﬁc, we Dec. 17–19, 2020, pp. 531–538.
 can also apply it to other trafﬁc analysis tasks, such as network [19] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade and M. Saberian, “Deep
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted trafﬁc classiﬁcation using deep
 intrusion detection. learning”, Soft Computing, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999-2012, 2020.
 [20] A. Vaswani, et al., “Attention is all you need”, Advances in neural
 information processing systems (NIPS), pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [21] J. Devlin, MW. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding”, North
 American Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL), pp.
 This work was supported by the Foundation Item: Cy- 4171–4186, 2019.
 ber Security from the National Key Research and Develop- [22] A. Dosovitskiy, et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: transformers
 ment Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University under Grant for image recognition at scale”, in International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), Virtual, May 4–7, 2021, pp. 1–21.
 2019QY0703.

 230

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.