Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

MATEC: A lightweight neural network for online encrypted traffic
classification✩
Jin Cheng a,b , Yulei Wu c ,∗, Yuepeng E b ,∗, Junling You b , Tong Li b , Hui Li b , Jingguo Ge b
a
 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
b
 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
c
 College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Increased awareness of privacy protection has led to a surge in the volume of encrypted traffic, which creates a
Traffic classification heavy burden for efficient network management (e.g. quality-of-service guarantees). The opacity of encrypted
Multi-head attention traffic essentially requires high computational overheads to make traffic classification, which is even worse
Convolutional network
 when encrypted traffic surges. However, existing deep learning approaches sacrifice the efficiency to obtain
Lightweight model
 high-precision classification results, which are no longer suitable for scenarios with large volumes of encrypted
 traffic. In this paper, a lightweight and online approach implemented as MATEC is proposed. The way we
 optimize the classification process follows the ‘‘Maximizing the reuse of thin modules’’ design principle. The
 multi-head attention and the convolutional network are adopted in the thin module. Attributed to the one-step
 interaction of all packets and the parallel computing of the multi-head attention mechanism, a key advantage
 of our model is that the number of parameters and running time are significantly reduced. In addition, the
 effectiveness and efficiency of convolutional networks have been proved in traffic classification. Comparisons
 to the existing state-of-the-art models on three typical datasets demonstrate that the proposed MATEC model
 has higher accuracy and running efficiency. In addition, the number of parameters is reduced to 1.8% of the
 state-of-the-art models and the training time halves.

1. Introduction acts as a cost recovery mechanism and provides revenue generation for
 the Internet Service Providers (ISP) to compensate for their efforts in
 Traffic classification is a crucial tool for network management, such providing QoS and managing resource allocation. All QoS schemes have
as congestion control and quality-of-service (QoS) guarantees [1]. Due some traffic classification considerations in the design [3].
to growing concerns about the privacy and security of Internet users, Real-time traffic classification is the core component of many
an increasing number of Internet applications have adopted various emerging QoS-enabled products and automated QoS architectures [5,
encryption technologies [2]. According to the statistics of Firefox, the
 6]. With the explosive growth of encrypted traffic, the implementation
global usage of encrypted web pages increased from 32% in 2015
 of QoS policies requires more efficient traffic classification models
to 83% in 2020.1 Although encrypting transmitted data protects the
 with lower overheads [7]. Consequently, heavyweight models for enusers’ privacy and security, it brings significant challenges for network management in terms of security and QoS [3,4]. For example, crypted traffic classification cannot be applicable in real-time scenarios
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) applications encrypt the payload and high-speed networks. Nevertheless, existing traffic classification
and leverage different methods to bypass firewalls and proxies [4], approaches sacrifice efficiency to guarantee the high precision of
which challenges the intrusion detection systems. Besides, a pricing classification results. Most existing machine learning (ML) methods are
mechanism is needed to differentiate customers with different needs based on the extraction of the hand-crafted statistical features [8–10],
and charge according to the QoS that they have received [3]. It also such as mean packet length, flow duration, and the mean inter-arrival

 ✩ This work is supported by Special Project of Ministry of Science and Technology of China on Innovation Method (Grant No. 2019IM020100), Strategic
Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDC02070200), and the STS (Science and Technology Service Network) Plan of
Chinese Academy of Sciences under Grant No. KFJ-STS-QYZD-2021-11-001.
 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: chengjin@iie.ac.cn (J. Cheng), y.l.wu@exeter.ac.uk (Y. Wu), eyuepeng@iie.ac.cn (Y. E), youjunling@iie.ac.cn (J. You), litong@iie.ac.cn
(T. Li), lihui1@iie.ac.cn (H. Li), gejingguo@iie.ac.cn (J. Ge).
 1
 https://letsencrypt.org/stats/#percent-pageloads.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108472
Received 21 January 2021; Received in revised form 9 June 2021; Accepted 7 September 2021
Available online 15 September 2021
1389-1286/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

time of the packet. However, observing the entire or large part of a no single dataset that can contain all traffic types. Three datasets [11,
flow is necessary to obtain these statistical features, so the ML method 26,27] are utilized to simulate the real-world traffic, and each dataset
can only apply to the offline classification scenarios. Although traffic contains traffic types that the other datasets do not. Besides, more
classification methods based on deep learning (DL) can eliminate the baselines, and evaluation metrics are utilized to carry out a more
disadvantages of manually constructed features, some problems still comprehensive validation of the proposed model in terms of efficiency
exist. First, the features used are relatively homogenized [11,12]. In and stability.
other words, most existing studies either use statistical features or The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
packet byte features, which miss important information (i.e., these two
kinds of features are not used in combination). Second, most existing • A lightweight model called MATEC for online encrypted trafmodels lack the consideration of model efficiency, where they neither fic classification is designed. The proposed MATEC is an end-totake into account the time and space complexity nor fully evaluate the end model without feature engineering and subproblem partition,
efficiency [2,13,14]. For DL methods, the huge overhead of memory which guarantees the global optimality of the results. Only three
and runtime in the complex neural network leads to high energy consecutive packets at a random position are needed as input. Beconsumption [14–16]. sides, the model automatically extracts high-order flow-level and
 In this paper, to raise the online performance and efficiency of
 packet-level features in an efficient way. Comparisons to the existencrypted traffic classification, the time and space complexity are taken
 ing state-of-the-art models on three typical datasets demonstrate
into consideration. We propose a lightweight neural network called
 that the proposed MATEC model has higher accuracy and running
MATEC for online encrypted traffic classification, which takes three
 efficiency. In addition, the number of parameters is reduced to
consecutive packets at a random location in a flow as the input. On
 1.8% of the state-of-the-art models and the training time halves.
the basis of the principle ‘‘maximizing the reuse of thin modules’’,
 • A novel approach to extract high-order flow-level features is
the features at global (flow) and local (packet) levels are extracted
by using a thin module, which adopts multi-head attention [17] and proposed. Existing methods apply RNN (e.g., LSTM and GRU) to
1D convolutional networks (1D-CNN) [13]. Generally, global features extract the flow-level features, which is time-consuming and comcome from the interactions between packets in a flow, and local fea- putationally complex. To overcome these shortage, we explore
tures are included in the bytes from a few raw packets. At the global multi-head attention mechanism [17] to model the high-order
level, with the multi-head attention [17], each packet interacts with packet interactions at the flow level. To the best of the authors’
all the other packets in one step to calculate the packet weights knowledge, it is the first time the multi-head attention is used
by multiplying matrices, greatly reducing the number of parameters in the field of encrypted traffic classification, which enables each
and the running time. Additionally, through the multi-head attention packet to interact with all other packets in one step. Meanwhile,
mechanism, a packet is projected into multiple subspaces, and therefore different interactions in different subspaces are learned in pardifferent feature interactions in different subspaces can be captured in allel, reducing the number of parameters and shortening the
parallel. Therefore, the parameters of the multi-head attention mainly running time considerably. As the experimental results show, the
come from the projection matrix and is usually low. In contrast, in number of parameters in our model is reduced to 2.7% of CNN
many other methods [2,11], recurrent neural networks (RNN) [18] with the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model, and 19.8% of
are usually utilized to obtain global packet interactions by processing the Bi-directional Gated Recurrent Unit (Bi-GRU) model. Besides,
the packets in time series due to their ability in processing sequential the training time of our model only takes 6.8% and 35.8% of that
data tasks. Whereas, only two neighboring packets can interact at a of the above two RNN models.
clip, making it time-consuming and inefficient due to the extra time • A new embedding approach for packet representation is
overheads of waiting for the output from the previous interaction. used, which can facilitate the extraction of high-order features
At the local level, 1D-CNN [13] focuses on the packet bytes and is efficiently. Most existing studies either use statistical features
utilized to extract packet-level features, which has been proved with or packet byte features, which miss important information for
high effectiveness and efficiency in traffic classification [13,19,20]. encrypted traffic classification. In our work, both the statisti-
More details about the time and space complexity are presented in cal features (e.g. the packet length and packet position) and
Section 4.3.
 the packet byte features are embedded into a vector uniformly
 Moreover, the traffic from zero-day applications usually does not
 to represent a packet (see Section 4.2.1). Experimental results
exist in the training dataset [16]. For example, in a ground truth
 demonstrate that our embedding method improves the precision
dataset [21,22], the zero-day applications can make up to 60% of flows
 of encrypted traffic classification by 1.7%.
and 30% of bytes, which refers to the presence of lots of new traffic.
 • Given the similarities and differences of datasets, we employ
However, existing traditional methods [2,13,23] were trained on a
 transfer learning to MATEC. As more and more new types of
specific dataset so that the new traffic cannot be classified. With these
 traffic emerges, the traffic data outside of the dataset need to be
considerations in mind, we are inspired to use transfer learning [24]
to solve the problem. For newly coming traffic, the previously trained considered. We utilized three datasets to simulate real traffic data
model is fine-tuned based on a small amount of labeled data. The and each dataset contains traffic types that the other datasets do
experimental results show that for newly coming traffic data, the not. By transfer learning [24], for a new dataset, our previously
previously trained model only needs to adjust the last layer of the trained model only needs to adjust the last layer of the neural
neural network in structure to adapt to the new traffic and achieves network to adapt to the new dataset and achieves rapid model
rapid model convergence. convergence. Besides, even when the size of the new training data
 This work is based on our former conference paper [25]. However, is relatively small (i.e., 10% of the overall dataset), the accuracy
the previous work ignored the traffic data outside of the dataset and is still 8.04% higher than that of the model trained from scratch.
did not take the similarities and differences among different datasets Besides, the model has a better convergence speed.
consideration. The model training of previous work was trained based
on a specific dataset. Therefore, when new types of traffic data appear, The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces
the trained model cannot work and a new model need to be trained the related work of the traffic classification. The preliminaries of work
from scratch, which takes considerable time to converge. This journal are presented in Section 3, and the proposed model MATEC is elabversion addresses this issue and provides the solution with transfer orated in Section 4. Section 5 launches the analysis of experimental
learning [24]. Besides, as more and more new traffic emerges, there is results. Finally, Section 6 draws conclusion of this paper.

 2
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

2. Related work Table 1
 A summary of existing traffic classification methods.

 Our model involves three lines of works: (a) Encrypted traffic classi- Methods Ref.ID Classifiers Features

fication, (b) Flow-based methods, and (c) Packet-based methods, which [30] Stacked autoencoder (SAE) Packet payload
 Packetwill be introduced next in this section. Meanwhile, the differences and CNN
 Based
 [31] Reinforcement Learning (RL) Packet bytes
and improvements that are compared with the previous work will be [32] Generative Adversarial Deep embedding
summarized. Networks (GAN)
 [33] Autoencoder and K-Means Packet bytes
2.1. Encrypted traffic classification [34] Autoencoder Packet payload
 [35] Kiss, a novel classification Payload signatures
 engine
 Traffic classification aims to categorize the encrypted network traf-
 [36] Support vector machine (SVM) Packet length and TCP flags
fic into appropriate classes [16]. The common process of traffic clas-
 [37] Hidden Markov models Packet length and time delay
sification is shown in Fig. 1. First, the target of traffic classification Flow- (HMM)
should be defined clearly. The general goals include QoS provisioning, Based [23] Gaussian mixture models and Inner-packet time and packet
intrusion detection, malware detection, resource usage planning, and HMM size
so on [16]. To meet its target, the traffic classification is usually [11] Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) Sequence of packets
 [13] CNN and RNN Sequence of packets
carried out based on (1) protocols (e.g. HTTP, SSL, SMTP, DNS or
 [38] Naive Bayes Session duration and TCP port
QUIC), (2) traffic types (e.g. video, chat, or browsing), (3) applications [39] Expectation Maximum (EM) Packet sizes and inter-arrival
(e.g. Amazon, Apple, Microsoft or Google), and (4) websites. For all time
the above four cases, labeling each flow with corresponding traffic [40] Fuzzy C-Means Sequence of packets
classes is a necessity. In our work, we identify the application of the [41] K-means Attribute vectors
 [2] CNN and LSTM Sequence of packet
flow. Second, a large and representative dataset is required. Although
a few public datasets are available for research, there is no agreed
common dataset in the field of traffic classification [16]. In our work,
two public datasets [26,27] and one dataset collected by ourselves data, the information above the layer 4 header can be exploited for
from China Science and Technology Network (CSTNET) are utilized traffic classification. In work [30], after an initial pre-processing phase,
for model validation. Significantly, data in these datasets are raw and packets were fed into the model with stacked autoencoder and CNN to
we labeled them with the advanced method [28]. Then, the features classify network traffic. Liang et al. [31] proposed a deep reinforceare selected or extracted by predefined feature processing methods. At ment learning approach to solve the packet classification problem. The
last, the classification model will be trained, validated, and evaluated. method in [31] used succinct representations to encode state and action
Furthermore, traffic classification can also be categorized into two sub- space, and efficiently explored candidate decision trees to optimize
classes: online and offline. The method we proposed in this work is an a global objective. Finamore et al. [35] proposed a classification aponline method, which only takes three consecutive packets at a random proach that leveraged the statistical characterizations of the payload
position in a flow as the input. by extracting payload signatures. However, the packet-based methods
 Besides, two types of granularity are usually considered in the focus on the detailed information of a few packets and lack attention
field of traffic classification [16]: packet and flow, which will be to global characteristics. The packet-level features contain rich local
covered in detail in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. In our case, information from the header and payload of the packet. Flow-level
we choose the flow granularity, which is common in both industry features show global information, such as statistical information. In our
and academia [2]. A flow refers to all packets with the same values model, both packet-level and flow-level features are considered, and
of the quintuple (i.e., transport layer protocol, source IP, source port, through a combination of the two kinds of features, our model can
destination IP, destination port), where the source and the destination obtain richer feature information and achieve better performance, as
can be swapped [29]. For any flow 𝑓𝑖 in the flow set 𝐹 , we have demonstrated in Section 5.3.2.
𝐹 = {𝑓1 , 𝑓2 , …} (1)
 2.3. Flow-based methods

 As shown in Fig. 3, flow-based methods require the selection of flow
𝑓𝑖 = {𝑝𝑖1 , 𝑝𝑖2 , … , 𝑝𝑖𝑛 } (2)
 features, and these features are then fed into the classifier. In general,
where flow 𝑓𝑖 contains 𝑛 packets, and packet 𝑝𝑖𝑗 is the 𝑗th packet in there are two main classes: machine learning-based and deep learning-
𝑓𝑖 . We select 𝑁 consecutive packets 𝑃 = {𝑝𝑖𝑘 , … , 𝑝𝑖𝑘+𝑁−2 , 𝑝𝑖𝑘+𝑁−1 } in the based. Table 1 also shows a summary of the flow-based methods.
flow 𝑖 at a random location. That is, 𝑘 is an integer number in the range
[1, 𝑛 − 𝑁 + 1]. In our work, we set 𝑁 = 3, which indicates that three 2.3.1. Machine learning-based
consecutive packets are chosen to represent the flow 𝑓𝑖 . Formally, a Existing machine learning-based methods for traffic classification
classifier is trained to recognize the category to which a flow belongs at the flow level are mainly based on complex manual features that
(i.e., classifier: 𝑓𝑖 → class). rely on expert experience to design. For example, in work [43], Moore
 et al. designed about 250 flow features based on prior knowledge.
2.2. Packet-based methods Subsequent ML-based traffic classification works (e.g., [28,44,45]) are
 mostly based on these 250 features for feature extraction. These flow
 As shown in Fig. 2, the packet-based methods for traffic classifi- characteristics include, but are not limited to variance of packet bytes,
cation take the bytes of a packet as the input directly. The packet median of the total bytes in IP packets, and so on. Zhu and Zheng [36]
bytes include the information of the packet header and payload data. studied the application of support vector machine (SVM) to classify
Table 1 shows a summary of the packet-based methods. With respect the network traffic by using the packet length and TCP flags, which
to the packet header, the information in layer 3 and layer 4 are useful converted the actual problem into the high-dimensional feature space
for non-encrypted traffic [16]. Before the deep learning era, fields through the kernel function. Fu et al. [37] built hidden Markov models
including port number, protocol, and packet length were carefully (HMM) to classify the services of mobile messaging Apps by jointly
chosen by domain experts as representative features. In some recent modeling user behavioral patterns, network characteristics, and tempoapproaches [2,30,42], entire packets are taken as the input. For payload ral dependencies. Along this line, the authors in [37] first segmented

 3
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

 Fig. 1. A common process for traffic classification.

 Fig. 2. A common framework of packet-based methods for traffic classification.

 Fig. 3. A common framework of flow-based methods for traffic classification.

Internet traffic from traffic-flows into sessions with several dialogues of the dataset and did not take the differences among datasets into
in a hierarchical way, and two features including packet length and consideration. The model of previous work was trained on a specific
time delay are employed. According to the distribution of time and dataset and could not classify the newly coming traffic data. However,
packet size, the authors in [23] classified the obfuscated traffic with as more and more new types of traffic emerges, there is no single
Gaussian mixture models and HMM, which established the connection dataset that can contain all traffic types. In our work, we leverage
between inner-packet time and packet size to improve the accuracy three datasets [11,26,27] to simulate the real traffic data, and each
of the flow feature description. However, these classifiers have to dataset contains traffic types that the other datasets do not. If model
observe the whole flow or most of the packets in a flow to obtain these training in different datasets is completely independent of each other,
features, which are more appropriate for offline classification. In this it will be time-consuming and unstable. This journal version addresses
paper, with only a few consecutive packets as the input, the proposed this important issue and puts forward a transfer learning solution. With
model can meet the real-time requirements in the field of online traffic the help of transfer learning, when new traffic arrives, the model can
classification. achieve fast convergence based on a small amount of labeled data.
 To carry out a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed solution,
2.3.2. Deep learning-based different from the conference version, more datasets, more baseline
 Deep learning methods have been widely used in traffic classifica- models, and more evaluation metrics are utilized to verify the efficiency
tion. In [11], the bidirectional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU) was used and effectiveness of MATEC. First, three datasets are employed to
to extract the forward and backward features of the byte sequences in a validate the accuracy of MATEC. Two of these datasets [26,27] are
flow. Authors in [12] applied Bi-GRU to extract the hidden information open encrypted datasets, and the third is a dataset [11] collected by
in the packet length sequence. The study [13] took a few consecutive ourselves from the backbone of the China Science and Technology Netpackets as the input of 1D-CNN, which was the first work to apply the work (CSTNET) - an Internet service provider. Second, three advanced
end-to-end method on the traffic classification and achieved an accu- benchmark models [2,11,13] are compared with our model. Third, the
racy of 85.8%. To get spatial and temporal features, both CNN and RNN proposed model is evaluated in terms of the well-known effectiveness
were used in [46]. The study [46] first learned the spatial features of metrics including accuracy, F1-score, precision, and recall rate. Besides,
network traffic by using deep CNN and then learned temporal features the training time and testing time of the model are also measured.
by using the recurrent network. The authors in [2] proposed a model
with 2D-CNN and LSTM networks, which accepts a few consecutive 3. Problem definition
packets as the input. In [2], CNN was used to extract the packet features
for a single packet and the LSTM network was trained to pick out the 3.1. Packet interaction
flow features based on the inputs of the packet features in a flow. As
we can see above, pure CNN lacks the ability to extract interactive More efficient global information can be extracted with high-order
information, which leads to the fact that CNN often combines with interaction between packets [47]. Given 𝑁 packets as the input, the
RNN to extract the flow features. However, the dependencies between packet interaction can be defined as
units in RNN make it time-consuming to wait for the output of the
 𝑔(𝒙𝟏 , 𝒙𝟐 , … , 𝒙𝑵 ) (3)
previous unit. In our proposed method, interactions of all packets are
implemented directly by the application of multi-head attention [17]. where 𝑥𝑖 is the unified representation of packet 𝑝𝑖 , and 𝑔(⋅) is a
 non-additive interactive function, such as outer product [48,49] and
2.4. The difference with our previous work multiplication [50]. For instance, 𝒙𝟏 × 𝒙𝟐 is an interactive feature
 concerning packet 𝒙𝟏 and packet 𝒙𝟐 . Traditionally, the meaningful high-
 As mentioned, this work is based on our former conference pa- order interactive features are extracted by RNN. However, it is very
per [25]. However, the previous work ignored the traffic data outside time-consuming to wait for the pairwise interactions between the joint

 4
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Table 2 fed as the input. After preprocessing, 𝑁 consecutive packets in a flow
Classification targets of different datasets.
 are captured (Section 4.1). Then, the initial features of each packet are
 Dataset Applications, the classification targets
 extracted and embedded into several vectors that will be concatenated
 [26] nexus.ensighten.com, r.nexac.com, s.amazonaws.com, to represent the flow (Section 4.2.1). The attention encoder is employed
 pixel.quantserve.com, mc.yandex.ru, usu.openx.net,
 tpc.googlesyndication.com, bat.bing.com, t.co, www.google.fr,
 to extract the local and global features (Section 4.2.2). At last, a fully
 adserver.adtechus.com, ads.yahoo.com, pbs.twimg.com, d.adroll.com, connected layer with softmax is employed to output the probability disconnect.facebook.net, beacon.krxd.net, batr.msn.com, tribution of labels (Section 4.2.3). Recall from Section 3.2 that transfer
 www.google-analytics.com, tags.tiqcdn.com, www.googletagmanager.com, learning [24] is applied to optimize the training on new traffic data. In
 coupang.com, statsg.doubleclick.net, bam.nr-data.net, ascii.jp,
 fonts.googleapis.com, sb.scorecardresearch.com,
 transfer learning, the fully connected layer is the only part that needs to
 dnxstfruwz.cloudfront.net, fonts.gstatic.com, ib.adnxs.com, be changed architecturally, because different targets of datasets cause
 secure.adnxs.com, cdnjs.cloudflare.com, cdn.optimizely.com, the number of output layer units to be different. In other words, the
 www.facebook.com, optimizedby.rubiconproject.com, ssl.gstatic.com, structure of embedding and attention encoder layer is fixed in all tasks,
 s.adroll.com, www.livepartners.com, selfrepair.mozilla.org,
 googleadsg.doubleclick.net, ssl.google-analytics.com,
 and the structure of fully connected layer is variable. To enhance the
 www.vcommission.com, scontentxx.fbcdn.net, api.mixpanel.com, stability of the lightweight model, a series of training optimization
 assets.adobedtm.com, www.google.com, spanalytics.yahoo.com, methods are adopted, including ResNet [51], layer normalization [52],
 analytics.twitter.com and learning rate warmup [51]. In Section 4.3, we analyze the space
 [11] hpd.baidu.com, wx.sinaimg.cn, i.hdslb.com, sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com, and time complexity of our model.
 sdkxyajs-data.xycdn.com, tracker.wps.cn, ss.bdstatic.com,
 mp.weixin.qq.com, ss.baidu.com, long.open.weixin.qq.com,
 wenku.baidu.com, hm.baidu.com, s.qhupdate.com, 4.1. Preprocessing
 browserkernel.baidu.com, clients.google.com, dw-online.ksosoft.com
 [27] nexus.ensighten.com, abs.twimg.com, pixel.quantserve.com,
 The hypertext transfer protocol secure (HTTPS) is a crucial enmc.yandex.ru, bat.bing.com, platform.twitter.com, ads.yahoo.com,
 d.adroll.com, connect.facebook.net, beacon.krxd.net, cryption technology for network management, which is based on
 www.google-analytics.com, tags.tiqcdn.com, s.amazonaws.com, TCP [53]. In recent years, the number of applications using HTTPS
 ib.adnxs.com, secure.adnxs.com, www.facebook.com, ssl.gstatic.com, has exploded [11]. In this work, HTTPS traffic is classified. The threeassets.adobedtm.com, www.google.com
 way handshake in TCP connections is skipped because it contains less
 information that is useful for traffic classification [54].
 For the traffic data, we split the traffic into flows according to the
packets. Besides, the limited hidden unit structure in the RNN cannot quintuple of a flow. The 𝑁 consecutive raw packets in a flow are
efficiently show the interpretability of the high-order features. Hence, extracted as the only inputs for our model.
we propose to explore an approach that can efficiently discover the
meaningful high-order interactive features, and meanwhile, all packet
 4.2. The design of MATEC
features can be projected into many sub-spaces, where each packet can
interact with all packets in one step.
 4.2.1. Embedding
3.2. Transfer learning The embedding layer is used to extract the features of a packet at
 a shallow level. Unlike most other studies, our work utilizes both the
 In the real scenario, the traffic from zero-day applications usually statistical features and packet byte features. It is worth noting that the
does not exist in the training set [16]. The zero-day applications can statistical features used are readily accessible, such as packet length and
make up to 60% of flows in a network traffic dataset [21], which refers relative position, and can be obtained online.
to new traffic types. Therefore, as more and more new traffic emerges, As a result, the feature representations of packets are unified in the
there is no single dataset that can contain all traffic types. Existing same format, which includes multiple feature fields in our model. For
traditional methods were trained on a specific dataset so that the new packet 𝒙𝒊 , the shallow feature fields can be represented as:
traffic cannot be classified.
 In our work, three datasets [11,26,27] are utilized simulate the 𝒙𝒊 = {𝑥𝑖1 , 𝑥𝑖2 , … , 𝑥𝑖𝑀 } (4)
real-word traffic, and each dataset contains the traffic types that the
other datasets do not. As shown in Table 2, the classification targets where 𝑀 is the number of feature fields, and 𝑥𝑖𝑗 is the feature value of
(i.e., types of applications) of different datasets are different and the the 𝑗th field. For example, 𝑥𝑖1 represents the packet position (e.g., 1,2,
model trained on a single dataset may not work well for other datasets. . . . , 𝑁), 𝑥𝑖2 could denote the packet length, and 𝑥𝑖3 could be the first
To clarify, we treat the classification of different datasets as different 784 bytes after removing the Ethernet header. It is worth noting that
tasks. If the models are trained independently in different tasks, it will even for encrypted traffic, the information in the packet headers can
be time-consuming to train the model from scratch in all tasks. Given be exploited for traffic classification [16]. Not only do we leverage
that there are certain similarities between different datasets [11,26,27], the header of the packet, but a portion of the packet payload is also
we are inspired to use transfer learning [24] to solve the problem. In used. As shown in Fig. 5, the component of 784 bytes includes 20
our work, a new model for the new traffic data can be trained based bytes for the header of the IP layer (for IPv4 traffic only), 20 bytes for
on the previously trained model. First, only small changes in structure TCP/UDP header (where 12 zero bytes are used to complement the UDP
are made to the previously trained model as illustrated in Section 4.2.3. header for alignment with the 20-byte TCP header), and the remaining
Then, based on the new traffic data, all the parameters are fine-tuned 744 bytes for the packet payload (truncated if the payload exceeds
to make the model adapt to the new task. In this way, due to the prior 744 bytes, and conversely filled with zero bytes). For the number of
information in the previous model, the number of the required labeled packet bytes, a series of hyperparameter comparison experiments are
data and the training time are greatly reduced. conducted in Section 5. To speed up the data processing, the features
 are normalized to [0,1] by dividing by 255. Then, we unify these
4. MATEC: The proposed lightweight model features. For a vectorial feature 𝒙𝒊𝒋 , the dimension change can be
 expressed as
 The design of MATEC is presented in this section, as shown in Fig. 4.
First, either online or offline traffic traces captured on the router are 𝒆𝒊𝒋 = 𝑈𝑗 𝒙𝒊𝒋 (5)

 5
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Fig. 4. The preprocessing and architecture of MATEC. The structure of the embedding and attention encoder layers is fixed, and the structure of fully connected layer varies with
different tasks.

 Fig. 5. The feature field of the packet bytes.

where 𝑖 represents a packet and 𝑗 denotes a feature field. 𝑈𝑗 is an
embedding matrix for field 𝑗, which can be predefined or trained. Otherwise, for a scalar feature 𝑥𝑖𝑗 , the dimension change can be expressed
as

𝒆𝒊𝒋 = 𝒖𝒋 𝑥𝑖𝑗 (6)

where 𝒖𝒋 is an embedding vector for field 𝑗. The above processing
applies to all feature fields in each packet. It is worth noting that both
parameters 𝑈𝑗 and 𝒖𝒋 are trainable. Fig. 6. The construct of attention encoder.
 Then, the vectorial and scalar features are transformed into a unified
representation, and the packet vector 𝒆𝒊 (take packet 𝑖 as an example)
can be represented as
 flatten layer. In what follows, the detailed design of each component
𝒆𝒊 = 𝑊𝑚𝑎𝑝 [𝒆𝒊𝟏 , 𝒆𝒊𝟐 , … , 𝒆𝒊𝑴 ] (7) will be explained.
 (a) Multi-head Attention
where [𝒆𝒊𝟏 , 𝒆𝒊𝟐 , … , 𝒆𝒊𝑴 ] ∈ R𝑚 is the result of concatenating all feature The multi-head attention block is utilized to extract the flow-level
fields and 𝑊𝑚𝑎𝑝 ∈ R𝑑×𝑚 is the mapping matrix. Therefore, the packet features, as it can model the interactions between packets. In the field
can be expressed as a vector of 𝑑 dimensions. The flow can be repre- of traffic classification, multi-head attention has not been verified for
sented as a matrix with a shape of 𝑁 ×𝑑 by stacking the packet vectors, its effectiveness. We find that it can be one of the most effective and
where 𝑁 is the number of packets in a flow. efficient blocks to extract flow-level features, as shown by the exper-
 The position embedding is also carried out based on the method pro- imental results in Section 5.3. With the help of multi-head attention,
posed in [17]. With the position encoded by Sines and Cosines as shown each packet is allowed to interact with all the other packets in one step
in (8), the method performs well in an NLP scene, where 𝑝𝑜𝑠 represents as shown in (9), greatly reducing the number of parameters and shortthe location of the packet and 𝑖 is the dimension. However, it does not ening the running time. Moreover, a packet is projected into multiple
work well for traffic classification, where absolute position encoding is subspaces as illustrated by (10) and (11), and therefore the multimore indicative of position information than relative position encoding. head attention can capture different feature interactions in different
This can be solved by (6), i.e., multiplying the embedding vector 𝒖𝒋 and subspaces as shown in (12). By stacking the module with multi-head
position number 𝒙𝒊𝒋 . attention, we can model different orders of feature interactions.
 Take packet 𝑚 for an example, and we explain the extraction method
 𝑃 𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖) = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑝𝑜𝑠∕10 0002𝑖∕𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 ) ℎ between packet
 for high-order features. First, the attention weight 𝛼𝑚,𝑘
 (8)
𝑃 𝐸(𝑝𝑜𝑠,2𝑖+1) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑝𝑜𝑠∕10 0002𝑖∕𝑑𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 ) 𝑚 and 𝑘 is defined as
 𝜙ℎ (𝒆 , 𝒆 )
 ℎ
 𝛼𝑚,𝑘 = ∑𝑁 𝒎 𝒌 (9)
4.2.2. Attention encoder ℎ
 𝑖=1 𝜙 (𝒆𝒎 , 𝒆𝒊 )
 The attention encoder is designed to extract local and global features at a deeper level. Inspired by the literature [17], we take the ′
 𝜙ℎ (𝒆𝒎 , 𝒆𝒌 ) = ⟨𝑄ℎ 𝒆𝒎 , 𝐾 ℎ 𝒆𝒌 ⟩, 𝑄ℎ , 𝐾 ℎ ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 (10)
advantage of thin modules with multi-head attention [17] and 1D-
CNN feed-forward layers. Specifically, in our model, the thin module is where ℎ is the attention head, while 𝑄ℎ and 𝐾 ℎ are the transformation
 ′
reused 𝑇 times to model the 𝑇 -order interactions between the packets, matrices, mapping original embedding space R𝑑 into a new space R𝑑
and the number of parameters of the model is significantly reduced. in head ℎ. 𝜙ℎ (⋅, ⋅) defines the relationship between the two packets, and
 For the encoder, four lines of works are contained (see Fig. 6): (a) it can be realized by inner product ⟨⋅, ⋅⟩ or a neural network. Typically,
multi-head attention, (b) add & norm, (c) feed-forward layer and (d) we use inner product on account of the operation efficiency.

 6
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Table 3
Comparisons with other feature extraction methods, where 𝑛 is the sequence length, 𝑑
is the representation dimension, ℎ is the number of heads of multi-head attention, and
𝑘 is the kernel size of convolutions.
 Method Complexity per Sequential Maximum
 layer operations path length
 Multi-head attention 𝑂(ℎ ⋅ 𝑛2 ⋅ 𝑑) 𝑂(1) 𝑂(1)
 Recurrent network 𝑂(𝑛 ⋅ 𝑑 2 ) 𝑂(𝑛) 𝑂(𝑛)
 ( )
 Convolutional network 𝑂(𝑘 ⋅ 𝑛 ⋅ 𝑑 2 ) 𝑂(1) 𝑂 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑘 (𝑛)

 ′
 By mapping the initial embedding space R𝑑 into another space R𝑑 , Fig. 7. The construct of feed-forward part of MATEC. The red dashed lines represent
the temporary representation of packet 𝑚 is defined as the units that are involved in generating a target unit.

 ∑
 𝑁
 ′
𝒆̃ 𝒉𝒎 = ℎ
 𝛼𝑚,𝑖 (𝑉 ℎ 𝒆𝒊 ), 𝑉 ℎ ∈ R𝑑 ×𝑑 (11)
 𝑖=1 convolutional networks have been shown in Table 3, which demonwhere 𝑉 ℎ is the transformation matrix in head ℎ. strates the good performance of convolutional networks in terms of
 After splicing all the 𝑒̃ℎ𝑚 in all heads, the packet vector can be complexity per layer and sequential operations. In other words, the
expressed as convolutional networks run ( with)a constant number of sequentially executed operations and 𝑂 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑘 (𝑛) maximum path length, which proves
𝒆̃ 𝒎 = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(̃𝒆𝟏𝒎 , … , 𝒆̃ 𝑯
 𝒎) (12) the efficiency of 1D-CNN. In our work, a 1D-CNN layer with kernel
 size 1 is applied. For each packet, the inner products with each kernel
where 𝐻 is the number of heads. It is remarkable that the computation
 constitute the deeper representation of the packet.
of all the heads is parallelized, contributing to the efficiency of the
 The combination of the three modules above (i.e., multi-head attenmodel running speed.
 tion, add & norm, and feed-forward) makes up the loop block as shown
 Furthermore, we compare various aspects of multi-head attention
 in Fig. 6, with consistent dimensions of input and output.
to the recurrent and convolutional layers commonly used for feature
 (d) Flatten Layer
extraction [17], which maps one sequence of symbol representations
 The flatten layer integrates the final vector of the flows. All the
𝑥 = [𝑥1 , … , 𝑥𝑛 ] to another sequence of equal length 𝑧 = [𝑧1 , … , 𝑧𝑛 ]
 packet vectors (𝒆𝒊 ) of the flow 𝑓 are concatenated into a flatten vector
with 𝒙, 𝒛 ∈ R𝑑 . As noted in Table 3, the comparisons include total
 𝐸̃ 𝑓 to represent the flow 𝑓 , shown in (13).
computational complexity per layer, the amount of computation that
can be parallelized, as measured by the minimum number of sequential 𝐸𝑓 = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝒆𝟏 , … , 𝒆𝑵 ) (16)
operations required and the path length between long-range dependencies in the network. As shown in Table 3, a multi-head attention layer 4.2.3. Fully connected layer
connects all positions with a constant number of sequentially executed Fully connected layer converts the flow feature 𝐸𝑓 into the probaoperations, which can largely reduce the running time. However, a bility distribution of labels. The representation of the fully connected
recurrent layer requires 𝑂(𝑛) sequential operations due to the cell layer is shown as follows
unit dependence [11]. With respect to the computational complexity,
multi-head attention layers are faster than recurrent layers when ℎ × 𝐸̃ 𝑓 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑊𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 𝐸𝑓 ), 𝑊𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒 ∈ R𝑁𝑑×𝑅 (17)
𝑛 < 𝑑, which has been considered in our traffic classification tasks. where 𝑅 is the number of classification labels, and the output can be
 [ ]
Besides, convolutional networks also have good performance in terms represented as 𝑍 = 𝑧1 , 𝑧2 , … , 𝑧𝑅 . Then, the loss function of the model
of complexity per layer and sequential operations, which are used to uses the cross-entropy function and can be defined as shown in (18),
extract packet-level features in Section 4.2.2(c). ∑
 𝑒𝑧𝑖
 (b) Add & Norm 𝑝𝑖 = ∑ 𝑧 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = 𝑐𝑖 ⋅ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖 ) (18)
 𝑗𝑒
 𝑗

𝒆𝒎 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝒆̃𝑚 + 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝒆𝒎 ) (13) where 𝑐𝑖 is either 1 or 0, indicating whether the data label is 𝑐𝑖 or not.
where 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 ∈ R 𝑑 ′ 𝐻×𝑑
 (In our method, 𝑑 ′ 𝐻 = 𝑑), is a transformation The structure of the fully connected layer is variable as shown in
matrix and 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(0, 𝑧) is a non-linear activation function. Fig. 4. As mentioned in Section 3.2, transfer learning is applied to
 However, changes in the output of one layer will cause highly optimize the training on new traffic data, which can speed up the concorrelated changes in the summed inputs to the next layer, especially vergence of the model. To clarify, we treat the classification of different
with ReLU units which can significantly change the outputs [52], which datasets as different tasks. For different tasks, all fully connected layers
may cause ‘‘covariate shift’’ problem [55]. Therefore, we apply layer have the same input dimension (i.e., 𝑁𝑑), but the output dimension
normalization [52] to reduce the ‘‘covariate shift’’ problem [55] by is related to the number of classification targets, which varies with
fixing the mean and variance of the summed inputs within each layer. datasets. Due to the similarity between various datasets, the structure
Therefore, the layer normalization over all the hidden units in the same of embedding and attention encoder is fixed in all tasks, of which the
layer (i.e., 𝑌 𝑙 = [𝑦1 , 𝑦2 , … , 𝑦𝐻 ]) is computed as follows, parameters remain various common information. When trained on a
 √ new dataset, our model only needs to adjust the fully connected layer
 √
 1 ∑ 𝑙
 𝐻 √1 ∑ 𝐻
 ( 𝑙 ) (i.e. the red part in Fig. 4) in structure, and fine-tune the previous
 𝑙
𝜇 = 𝑦𝑖 𝜎 =√
 𝑙
 𝑦 − 𝜇𝑙 (14) parameters with few labeled data. In this way, the training time of the
 𝐻 𝑖=1 𝐻 𝑖=1 𝑖
 new tasks can be greatly reduced. It means that when new traffic data
 [ ] is available, the model can achieve rapid convergence with few labeled
 𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙 𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙 𝑦 − 𝑢𝑙
𝑌̃ 𝑙 = 1 𝑙 , 2 𝑙 , … , 𝐻 𝑙 (15) data. The effect of transfer learning is presented in Section 5.3.3.
 𝜎 𝜎 𝜎
where 𝐻 denotes the number of hidden units in a layer. 4.3. Space and space complexity analysis
 (c) Feed Forward Layer
 In the Feed Forward layer, the deployment of 1D-Convolutional 4.3.1. Space complexity
Neural Networks(1D-CNN) [13] helps to extract the packet-level fea- First of all, in the embedding layer, parameters are contained within
tures (see Fig. 7), as it focuses on a single packet. The details of the the embedding transformation matrix and transformation vector. The

 7
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Table 4 Table 6
Complexity of loop block of attention encoder. The parameters of MATEC.
 Layer Space complexity Time complexity Notation Parameter Value
 Multi-head Attention 𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑑 ′ ) 𝑂(𝑇 𝑁 2 𝑑𝑑 ′ ) Number of packets N 3
 Add & Norm 𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑟) 𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ ) Number of loop blocks T 2
 Feed Forward 𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ ) 𝑂(𝑇 𝑁𝑑 2 𝑟) Number of headers H 3
 All 𝑂(𝑇 𝐻𝑑𝑑 ′ + 𝑇 𝑑𝑟) 𝑂(𝑇 𝑑𝑑 ′ (𝑁 2 + 𝐻) + 𝑇 𝑁𝑑 2 𝑟) Number of packet bytes P 784
 Dimension of embedding d 432
 /Kernel size of 1D-CNN
Table 5 Kernel number of 1D-CNN r 432
The details of the experiment configurationl. Vector dimension of subspace d′ 144
 Item Configuration
 Hardware Dell EMC PowerEdge R730,Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2609
 Operating system Linux 5.0.0-32-generic # 18.04.2-Ubuntu
 Memory 69G 5.1.2. Evaluation metrics
 Python version Python 3.7.3 To evaluate the effectiveness of MATEC, we adopt four generally
 Tensorflow version Tensorflow 1.14.0 recognized metrics, namely accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
 Accuracy represents the proportion of correctly classified flows. With
 respect to the other three metrics, we obtain the true positive (TP), false
 positive (FP), and false negative (FN) by comparing the output classinumber of the parameters is 𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 + 𝑀2 𝑑3 + 𝑑𝑚, where 𝑀1 represents fication results with labeled ground truth. Take class 𝑖 as an example,
the number of vectorial features fields, and 𝑀2 denotes the number of the information above can be used to calculate the index of 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 ,
scalar features fields. 𝑑1 × 𝑑2 is the shape of the embedding transfor- 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖 , and 𝐹 1 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 as the following formula show. The Precimation matrix and 𝑑3 is the length of the embedding transformation sion, Recall, and F1-score are obtained by averaging the corresponding
vector of the scalar value. As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, 𝑑 is the metrics of each class.
final dimension of the packet vector and 𝑚 is the dimension of the 𝑇 𝑃𝑖
 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 = (19)
intermediate result. 𝑇 𝑃𝑖 + 𝐹 𝑃𝑖
 Second, for the attention encoder, the parameters mostly come
from the loop module, which contains multi-head attention, add & 𝑇 𝑃𝑖
 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖 = (20)
norm module, and the feed-forward layer. The loop block contains the 𝑇 𝑃𝑖 + 𝐹 𝑁𝑖
following weight matrices: 𝑇 × {𝑄ℎ , 𝐾 ℎ , 𝑉 ℎ , 𝑊𝑟𝑒𝑠 , 𝑊𝐶𝑁𝑁 }. Independent
of the packet number 𝑁, the complexity is listed in Table 4. Besides, 2 × 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖
 𝐹 1 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖 = (21)
the parameter values are usually small as shown in Section 5.1.1. 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖 × 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖
 Additionally, to evaluate the efficiency of MATEC, we measure the
4.3.2. Time complexity training time and testing time per 100 batches, and the batch size is set
 to 32.
 For the embedding layer, it takes 𝑂(𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 + 𝑀2 𝑑3 + 𝑑𝑚) to embed
the original features into the unified representation. For the vectorial 5.2. The overview of baselines and datasets
feature fields, the time complexity is 𝑂(𝑀1 𝑑1 𝑑2 ), and for scalar feature fields, the time complexity is 𝑂(𝑀2 𝑑3 ). The representation of the 5.2.1. Baselines
parameter is described in the part of space complexity. To confirm the effectiveness of our model, we compare the model
 For the attention encoder, we take the loop block into consideration. with the following baselines in terms of accuracy, precision, recall,
The details of the time complexity of the loop block are shown in and F1-score. For model efficiency, our model is compared with other
Table 4. In multi-head attention, it takes 𝑂(𝑁𝑑𝑑 ′ + 𝑁 2 𝑑 ′ ) time for each models in terms of average training time and average testing time.
head in the module to calculate the attention weight, and 𝑂(𝑁 2 𝑑𝑑 ′ )
 • 1D-CNN Model
time to form a combinatorial feature under one head. All the heads can This model was proposed in [13]. This method integrated feature
be calculated in parallel. Therefore, the network is also time-efficient, selection, feature extraction, and classifier into a unified end-tobecause 𝑁, 𝑇 , 𝑑 ′ and 𝑟 are usually small as shown in Section 5.1.1. end framework with 1D-CNN, intending to automatically learn
 the nonlinear relationship between raw input and expected output. To the best of our knowledge, it was the first time to apply an
5. Experiments and performance analysis
 end-to-end method in the encrypted traffic classification domain.
 • CNN with LSTM Model
5.1. Experiment setup This model was introduced in [2] and employed to compare the
 effectiveness of multi-head attention [17] and RNN for flow fea-
5.1.1. Experiment environment ture extraction. It should be noted that in [2], the convolutional
 The experiments are mainly performed on Dell EMC PowerEdge network was utilized to extract the packet features for a single
R730 with a Ubuntu operating system, and Table 5 shows the details packet. RNN (or LSTM) units were trained to extract the flow
 features, and the model also took three consecutive packets in a
of the experiment configuration. The hyperparameter settings of the
 flow as the input.
MATEC are displayed in Table 6, and the experiments of hyperpa-
 • Bi-GRU model with transfer learning
rameter comparisons are also conducted in this section. Besides, the
 The work was shown in [11], which also utilized RNN (Bi-GRU)
training procedure is implemented by minimizing the sum objectives
 to model the packet interactions. With respect to the input, the
of categorical cross-entropy and the L2 regularization with a penalty model selected three packets in a flow, where each packet conof 0.05. The learning rate is 0.01, and the training batch size is 32. tained 900 bytes. Besides, the attention mechanism was adopted
Moreover, we use Adam optimizer with 𝛽1 = 0.9 and 𝛽2 = 0.999. To to assign weights to features according to their contributions to
prevent the model from overfitting in the initial phase and ensure the the classification. The Bi-GRU network in [11] has been proved
model stability, warmup learning rate [51] is conducted. The number to be the state-of-art deep learning method for encrypted traffic
of warmup steps is set to be 4. classification.

 8
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Table 7
The details of Dataset B.
 Applications Flows Applications Flows
 hpd.baidu.com 2598 wx.sinaimg.cn 2114
 i.hdslb.com 1806 sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com 2558
 sdkxyajsdata.xycdn.com 6754 tracker.wps.cn 1992
 ss.bdstatic.com 2494 mp.weixin.qq.com 1724
 ss.baidu.com 2908 long.open.weixin.qq.com 11 056
 wenku.baidu.com 2160 hm.baidu.com 18 694
 s.qhupdate.com 2874 browserkernel.baidu.com 1666
 clients.google.com 1148 dwonline.ksosoft.com 2128

5.2.2. Datasets
 Three datasets are employed to validate the performance of MATEC.
Two of them (Dataset A and Dataset C) are public datasets, which
contain flows in all directions (i.e., from client to server and from
servers to clients). One dataset (Dataset B) only contains the flow from
clients to servers, which is collected by ourselves from China Science
and Technology Network (CSTNET). In our work, dataset A and B are
utilized to verify the effectiveness of the MATEC, and Dataset C is used
to verify the effectiveness of transfer learning. Detailed information
about these datasets has been shown in Table 2 in Section 3.2. The
datasets are briefly described as follows:
 Fig. 8. Dataset A: comparisons between MHCNET and the three baseline models on
 • Dataset A [27] was published by the University of Lorraine, accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score.

 constructed by crawling HTTPS websites over two weeks. The
 dataset contains PCAP files of crawling top 779 accessed HTTPS
 websites by Google Chrome and Mozilla Firefox Web browsers. To To validate the merits of MATEC, we compare MATEC with three
 simplify the training process, we removed the special characters well-known models as we described above (a) 1D-CNN [36], (b) CNN
 (e.g. dashes and numbers). At last, the applications with more (2D) with LSTM model [13], and (c) Bi-GRU [11]. We retrieve the three
 than 1000 flows were chosen to use in the experiment, which benchmark models with the same architectures in the works [13,36]
 contains 47 classes and 84 245 flows. and [11], and the batch size is uniformly set to 32.
 • Dataset B [11] was collected by ourselves from the backbone of As mentioned above, a new embedding approach for packet repre-
 CSTNET, an internet service provider in China. This dataset only sentation is explored, which can enhance the efficiency of extracting
 contains unidirectional traffic flows, from clients to servers. In the high-order features. Both the statistical features (e.g. the packet length
 end, the top 16 services with the most traffic flows were selected and packet position) and the packet byte features are embedded into
 as the experimental data, which contained more than 49K flows. a vector uniformly to represent the packet. While in the other three
 The details of Dataset B are shown in Table 7. works, packet bytes are the only original features that are input into
 • Dataset C [26] is exploited to verify the efficiency and effective- the model. As presented in Fig. 8, a comparative experiment of the two
 ness of transfer learning. The dataset was published by Strato- embedding methods is conducted on Dataset A. The experimental resphere Labs, supported by the CTU University of Prague in the sults are generated from 10-fold cross-validation. As shown in Fig. 8(a),
 Czech Republic. The Lab continuously publishes new network when the embedding method we illustrate in Section 4.2.1 is adopted,
 it is obvious that our model outperforms the baseline models on all
 traffic datasets of malicious, mixed, and normal traffic. In our
 metrics. The accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score rate reached
 work, ‘‘CTU-Normal-20’’ to ‘‘CTU-normal-32’’ normal captures are
 99.76%, 98.84%, 98.74%, and 98.79%, respectively. Improvements of
 used, including HTTPS raw traffic generated by Frantisek Strasak.
 15.01%, 2.89%, and 1.38% on F1-score compared to the 1D-CNN,
 Finally, the top 19 applications with the most traffic data were
 CNN with LSTM and Bi-GRU model demonstrate the great performance
 selected to verify the efficiency and effectiveness of the model.
 of our model. As shown in Fig. 8(b), when only the packet bytes
 It is important to note that all the original data is raw, and it are embedded as the original feature like the other three baseline
is necessary to label the data manually. To label the data, we adopt works, the performance of all models degrades due to less information
 available. The experimental results show that our embedding method
an advanced labeling method proposed in [28], and its effectiveness
 improves the precision of MATEC by 1.7%. To summarize, the model
has been verified in several works [11,12,28]. The proposed labeling
 performs better when the embedding method we propose is applied.
process can be summarized as (1) getting the value of server name
 The model which employs 1D-CNN to classify flows performs worst
indication (SNI), which is the domain’s substring of applications, (2)
 due to the oversimplified model structure, which focuses on extracting
comparing IP address resolution with the SNI field for the credibility
 packet-level features. However, this work inspires us to explore an endenhancement, and (3) discarding the flow if the SNI field is null or
 to-end approach for traffic classification. The second benchmark model
the IP cannot be parsed into a domain name. In theory, the accuracy
 utilizes both the packet features and flow features as considered in
of the label is doubly verified, including parsing the IP address to the
 our model, where CNN extracts the packet-level features and LSTM is
corresponding domain name and confirming the domain name with the
 used to obtain the flow-level features. Experimental results show that
SNI value, which can guarantee the validity of the label.
 LSTM is not as effective as multi-head attention in the extraction of
 flow features. This is because the multi-head attention is attributed to
5.3. Evaluation on three datasets the one-step interaction of all packets and the parallel computing of all
 subspaces. Owing to the use of multi-head attention, a key advantage
5.3.1. Evaluation on dataset A of our model is that the number of parameters and running time are
 • Effectiveness analysis significantly reduced. Therefore, the multi-head attention mechanism

 9
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Table 8
The comparison results of efficiency.
 Item MATEC 1D-CNN CNN with LSTM Bi-GRU
 Weights 102k 5779k 3754k 514k
 Average training time (ms) 24.9 50.1 434.5 69.5
 Average testing time (ms) 10.0 13.2 114.8 29.0

Table 9
Details of different devices.
 Number Operating systems CPU Memory
 1 Ubuntu 14.04 LTS 2 × Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2620 v3 69G
 2 Ubuntu 14.04 LTS 2 × Nvidia Teska K80 69G
 3 Mac 11.3.1 6 × Intel Core i7-9750H @ 2.60 GHz 32G
 4 Windows 10 Pro 6 × Intel Core i7-8700 @ 4300 MHz 16G
 Fig. 9. Online performance measured on different devices. The meaning of the number
 values is shown in Table 9.

is proved to be effective to extract features in high dimensions. Be- Table 10
sides, our model also can benefit from the application of ResNet, layer Dataset B: comparisons on F1-score with the three baseline models. The values 1–16
 are the same as the Fig. 12.
normalization, and learning rate warmup. The Bi-GRU model performs
 ID MATEC 1D-CNN CNN with LSTM Bi-GRU
better than the other two baselines, which utilizes an attention mechanism to assign greater attention to more important features. Same as 1 94.63% 78.90% 84.99% 93.47%
 2 90.07% 79.00% 83.33% 88.59%
the LSTM, the Bi-GRU model can only handle the interaction of two
 3 87.91% 58.85% 71.86% 88.07%
packets at a clip. As a result, it is time-consuming and inefficient to 4 99.98% 97.89% 98.87% 99.98%
wait for the output from the previous interaction in the RNN model 5 99.41% 95.50% 97.18% 99.40%
due to the extra time overheads required. 6 99.98% 93.12% 98.73% 99.98%
 7 90.47% 63.23% 82.76% 81.63%
 • Efficiency analysis 8 91.74% 71.10% 88.89% 87.36%
 9 90.59% 75.73% 85.86% 85.85%
 10 99.28% 95.60% 97.72% 98.47%
 To achieve the best lightweight performance, we adopt some prin-
 11 94.91% 90.38% 94.74% 94.44%
ciples, which can be summarized as (a) reuse of thin modules, (b) 12 97.45% 93.24% 95.60% 97.14%
paralleled computation in multiple heads (i.e., subspaces), and (c) mul- 13 96.89% 79.08% 93.78% 95.39%
tiple training optimization techniques, like ResNet, layer normalization, 14 99.70% 91.03% 96.53% 98.82%
and learning rate warmup. 15 100.00% 99.60% 99.98% 100.00%
 16 98.53% 96.79% 96.69% 99.01%
 First, the efficiency of the model is evaluated in terms of the model
weights, training time and testing time. As shown in Table 8, MATEC
benefits greatly from the principles mentioned above. The number of
parameters of MATEC is 1.8% of 1D-CNN, 2.7% of CNN with LSTM, and The main parameters include 𝑁, 𝑇 , 𝐻, and 𝑃 . 𝑁 denotes the number
19.8% of the Bi-GRU model. With respect to time efficiency, training of packets that are selected in a flow, 𝑇 represents the number of
and testing time of each 100 batches are considered as metrics. The the loop blocks (i.e., the attention encoder) in the model, 𝐻 is the
training time of MATEC is 49.7% of 1D-CNN, 6.8% of CNN with LSTM, number of the headers in the multi-head attention, and 𝑃 represents
and 35.8% of the Bi-GRU model. It should be noted that LSTM and the number of packet bytes. More detailed meanings of the parameters
Bi-GRU can also be conducted to extract flow-level features, but only have been illustrated in Section 4. We use the parameter values in
two adjacent packets can interact at a time in LSTM, which leads to Table 6 as default hyperparameters, where 𝑁 = 3, 𝑇 = 2, 𝐻 = 3
high time consumption. and 𝑃 = 784. For each experiment, we change only one parameter
 Second, we verify the online performance of the classifier. Online and keep the default values for the other parameters. As shown in
traffic classification systems mainly consist of two parts, traffic capture Fig. 10(a), the performance of our model is sensitive to the value of
part and traffic classification part [56]. However, the authors in [57] 𝑁. When 𝑁 is three, the model achieves an accuracy of 99.76%, and
indicated that traffic classifier is the bottleneck of the network traffic there is a dramatic increase in accuracy when the number of packets
classification system because traffic capture has already reached a very increases from one to two. As shown in Fig. 10(b), the accuracy of our
high speed due to the development of FPGA [56]. Therefore, we can model reaches 99%, when the parameter 𝑇 is 2. After increasing the
conclude that the online performance of the classifier is determined value of 𝑇 , the accuracy increases by 1%. This indicates that the model
by the throughput of the classifier, and we measure the throughput of with two loop blocks is good enough for extracting packet-level and
the models on different devices. The details of devices are shown in flow-level features. In Fig. 10(c), when the number of headers in multi-
Table 9, and the testing results are depicted in Fig. 9. In this figure, the head attention is three, the model shows the optimal performance. As
horizontal axis represents the different devices, and the vertical axis the number of heads increases, the model becomes less effective. This
denotes the number of flows that can be processed per second. As we is because the increase in the number of headers leads to a further
can see, our model has the highest processing efficiency on different refinement of feature granularity, which can undermine the integrity
devices. On device 3, the throughput of MATEC (our model), 1D-CNN,
 of the flow features. Fig. 10(d) indicates that the first 784 bytes of
CNN with LSTM, and BI-GRU models were 9568 flows/s, 5376 flows/s,
 the packet contain information that is effective enough for encrypted
768 flows/s, and 2912 flows/s, respectively. The throughput of our
 traffic classification, and the increase of bytes has little effect on the
model is about twice than that of the 1D-CNN model and 12 times than
 performance of the model. The first 784 bytes of a packet contain (a)
that of the CNN with LSTM model.
 20 bytes for the header of IP layer (for IPv4 traffic only), (b) 20 bytes
 • The comparisons on hyperparameters. for TCP/UDP header (where 12 zero bytes are used to complement the
 UDP header for alignment with the 20-byte TCP header), and (c) the
 Furthermore, we conduct experiments on Dataset A to explore the remaining 744 bytes for the packet payload (truncated if the payload
effects of different hyperparameters on the performance of MATEC. exceeds 744 bytes, and conversely filled with zero bytes).

 10
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

 Fig. 10. Effects of different hyperparameter values on experimental results.

 are made to the trained model as illustrated in Section 4.2.3 and we
 initialize the parameters of fully connected layer randomly. At last,
 based on dataset C, all the parameters are fine-tuned to make the model
 adapt to the new task. In this way, due to the prior information in
 the previous model, the number of the required labeled data and the
 training time are greatly reduced.
 We conduct a set of experiments with the training data accounting
 for 10%, 30%, 60%, 80%, 100% of the total data in dataset C. The
Fig. 11. Dataset B: comparisons between MATEC and the three baseline models on experimental results of Dataset C are presented in Figs. 13 and 14.
accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score. These figures demonstrate the effects of the number of training samples
 on the accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and training speed of
 MATEC. Overall, the model based on the transfer leaning performs
5.3.2. Evaluation on dataset B better in terms of the evaluation metrics mentioned above. When the
 To enhance the validation of MATEC, we also conduct an exper- proportion of training data is relatively small (i.e., 10%), the accuracy,
iment on Dataset B as we do on Dataset A, in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score is 8.04%, 13.97%, 7.81%, and 11.00%
precision, recall, and F1-score. As shown in Fig. 11, the accuracy, pre- higher than those of the model trained from scratch. This is because
cision, recall and F1-score of MATEC reach 96.84%, 95.98%, 95.53% when the number of training samples is small, the information in the
and 95.75%, respectively. Improvements of 10.22%, 3.85%, and 1.49% training data is insufficient to represent the real data distribution. The
on F1-score compared to the 1D-CNN, CNN with LSTM, and the Bi-GRU relevant prior knowledge from the source model can compensate for
models give more evidence that our model performs well for encrypted this shortcoming. Furthermore, for a new task, the convergence speed
traffic classification. of the model is significantly increased with the help of transfer learning.
 Fig. 12 contains three subgraphs, which display the precision, recall, As shown in Fig. 13, in the context of a small number of training
and F1-score values of 16 classes in Dataset B. In Fig. 12(a), the samples, the weak generalization ability of the model trained from
precision values for 10 classes are greater than 95%, and the average scratch results in lower accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. In
precision of MATEC is greater than that of the other three models by contrast, models that have been trained on a previous dataset can use
9.12%, 2.33%, and 1.56% respectively. As shown in Fig. 12(b), for prior knowledge to assist in improving accuracy significantly. When the
the class ‘‘s.qhupdate.com’’, MATEC achieves a recall of 96.89%, with proportion is relatively large, the gap between the two methods shrinks
improvements of 17.81%, 3.10%, and 1.50%, respectively, compared due to the increasing learning ability of the model trained from scratch.
to the other three. In Fig. 12(c) and Table 10, the F1-scores of 5 classes Moreover, Fig. 14 shows that, as the training set grows larger, training
are greater than 99%. However, all models perform poorly on the a completely new model takes much more time.
‘‘i.hdslb.com’’, because there are only 1806 flows in this class. Through
the experiment in this section, it can be concluded that for services from 5.4. Remarks
different providers, MATEC can achieve excellent performance.
 In this section, we compare MATEC with the other three base-
5.3.3. Effectiveness of transfer learning line models in terms of effectiveness and efficiency. For Dataset A,
 Dataset C is exploited to verify the effectiveness of transfer learning three groups of comparison experiments are conducted, including efalong with Dataset A. First, a source model is trained on Dataset A. fectiveness comparison, efficiency comparison, and hyperparameter
Then, only small changes (i.e. the fully connected layer) in structure comparison. According to the effectiveness analysis, improvements of

 11
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

Fig. 12. Dataset B: comparisons with the three baseline models. The values of 1 to 16 on the x axis represent the classes of ‘hpd.baidu.com’, ‘wx3.sinaimg.cn’, ‘i1.hdslb.com’,
‘sz.btfs.mail.ftn.qq.com’, ‘sdk1xyajs-data.xycdn.com’, ‘tracker3.wps.cn’, ‘ss0.bdstatic.com’, ‘mp.weixin.qq.com’, ‘ss0.baidu.com’, ‘long.open.weixin.qq.com’, ‘wenku.baidu.com’,
‘hm.baidu.com’, ‘s.qhupdate.com’, ‘browserkernel.baidu.com’, ‘clients1.google.com’, ‘dw-online.ksosoft.com’.

Fig. 13. Evaluation of transfer learning. Parts (a), (b), (c), and (d) represent the changes in accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and training time, respectively, with increasing
amounts of training data.

15.37%, 2.87%, and 1.77% on the F1-score rate compared to the other small, the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are higher than
three models demonstrate that our model performs well for encrypted those of the model trained from scratch. Furthermore, the convergence
traffic classification. For the efficiency analysis, the performance of speed of the model is significantly improved by the transfer learning.
our model achieves the optimal in terms of the number of parameters, In short, MATEC is excellent in terms of effectiveness and efficiency.
the training speed, and testing speed. More specifically, the number of
parameters of our model is 1.8% of 1D-CNN, 2.7% of CNN with LSTM,
 6. Conclusion
and 19.8% of the Bi-GRU model, and the training time of our model
is 49.7% of 1D-CNN, 6.8% of CNN with LSTM, and 35.8% of Bi-GRU
model. At last, the comparisons on hyperparameters check the optimum Burning requirements on the efficiency of traffic classification are
configuration of MATEC. Dataset B is utilized to enhance the validation put forward due to the widespread adoption of encrypted traffic. In
of the model’s effectiveness. As shown in Table 10 and Fig. 12, the this paper, a lightweight model called MATEC has been proposed to
precision values for 10 classes are greater than 95%, and the average reduce resource and time consumption. ‘‘Maximizing the reuse of thin
precision of MATEC is greater than that of the other three models modules’’ is our design principle. A thin module has been adopted the
by 9.11%, 2.33%, and 1.56%, respectively. Besides, the advantages of multi-head attention and the 1D convolutional network. Attributed to
transfer learning are tested on Dataset C. For the model trained with the the one-step interaction of all packets and the parallel computation
transfer learning, even when the proportion of training data is relatively of the multi-head attention mechanism, a key advantage of MATEC

 12
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

 [5] L. Stewart, G. Armitage, P. Branch, S. Zander, An architecture for automated
 network control of QoS over consumer broadband links, in: TENCON 2005-2005
 IEEE Region 10 Conference, IEEE, 2005, pp. 1–6.
 [6] J. But, N. Williams, S. Zander, L. Stewart, G. Armitage, Angel-automated network
 games enhancement layer, 2006.
 [7] M.F. Audah, T.S. Chin, Y. Zulfadzli, C.K. Lee, K. Rizaluddin, Towards efficient
 and scalable machine learning-based QoS traffic classification in software-defined
 network, in: International Conference on Mobile Web and Intelligent Information
 Systems, Springer, 2019, pp. 217–229.
 [8] W. Niu, Z. Zhuo, X. Zhang, X. Du, G. Yang, M. Guizani, A heuristic statistical
 testing based approach for encrypted network traffic identification, IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol. 68 (4) (2019) 3843–3853.
 [9] J. Meng, L. Yang, Y. Zhou, Z. Pan, Encrypted traffic identification based on sparse
 logistical regression and extreme learning machine, in: Proceedings of ELM-2014
 Volume 2, Springer, 2015, pp. 61–70.
 Fig. 14. Evaluation of transfer learning on training time.
 [10] R. Alshammari, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, Identification of VoIP encrypted traffic
 using a machine learning approach, J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inform. Sci. 27
 (1) (2015) 77–92.
 [11] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirectional
is that the number of parameters and the training and testing time
 gru networks for efficient https traffic classification, Inform. Sci. 541 (2020)
are significantly reduced. To improve the stability of the model, the 297–315.
designed network is trained with the aid of ResNet, layer normalization, [12] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, Fs-net: A flow sequence network for
and learning rate warmup. The proposed model outperformed the state- encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on
of-the-art works based on deep learning on three datasets. The results Computer Communications, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [13] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traffic
has shown that our model has higher accuracy and running efficiency,
 classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
while the number of parameters used is reduced to 1.8% of that in International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), IEEE,
the 1D convolutional network and the training time halves on the 2017, pp. 43–48.
single task. By transfer learning, for a new dataset, our trained model [14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Mobile encrypted traffic classifionly needs to adjust the last layer of the neural network to adapt cation using deep learning, in: 2018 Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis
 Conference (TMA), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
to the new dataset and achieves rapid model convergence. Besides, [15] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, A framework to classify heterogeneous
even when the size of the training data is relatively small (i.e., 10% internet traffic with machine learning and deep learning techniques for satellite
of the overall dataset), the accuracy is still 8.04% higher than that communications, Comput. Netw. (2020) 107213.
of the model trained from scratch. Besides, the model has a better [16] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,
 IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81.
convergence speed.
 [17] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser,
 In our work, a flow refers to all packets with the same values I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, in: Advances in Neural Information
of the quintuple [transport layer; source IP; source port; destination Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
IP; destination port]. However, during the mobile session, the port [18] L.R. Medsker, L. Jain, Recurrent neural networks, Des. Appl. 5 (2001).
number may change. In terms of packet information for classification, [19] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, Y. Geng, Seq2img: A sequence-to-image based approach tonew protocols such as HTTP2 and HTTP3 use a new flow identifier wards IP traffic classification using convolutional neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
 International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
(i.e., Globally Unique Identifier) [58] to identify user sessions. In the
 [20] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, How to achieve high classification accuracy with just a few
future work, we will consider using the Global Unique Identifier to labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets, 2018, arXiv preprint
identify flow instead of the quintuple. arXiv:1812.09761.
 [21] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, J. Wu, Robust network traffic
CRediT authorship contribution statement classification, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 23 (4) (2014) 1257–1270.
 [22] H. Kim, K.C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, K. Lee, Internet
 traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, and the best practices, in:
 Jin Cheng: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software. Yulei Wu: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conference, 2008, pp. 1–12.
Writing - original draft. Yuepeng E: Visualization, Investigation. Jun- [23] Z. Yao, J. Ge, Y. Wu, X. Lin, R. He, Y. Ma, Encrypted traffic classification based
ling You: Validation. Tong Li: Software. Hui Li: Data curation, Writing on Gaussian mixture models and Hidden Markov models, J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
 (2020) 102711.
- review & editing. Jingguo Ge: Supervision.
 [24] L. Torrey, J. Shavlik, Transfer learning, in: Handbook of Research on Machine
 Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods, and Techniques, IGI
Declaration of competing interest global, 2010, pp. 242–264.
 [25] J. Cheng, R. He, Y. E, Y. Wu, J. You, T. Li, Real-time encrypted traffic
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- classification via lightweight neural networks, in: IEEE Global Communications
 Conference, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
 [26] Stratosphere, Stratosphere laboratory datasets, 2015, Retrieved March 13, 2020,
influence the work reported in this paper. from https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview.
 [27] J.F. Wazen Shbair, T. Cholez, Https websites dataset, 2016, 4http://betternet.
References lhs.loria.fr/datasets/https/.
 [28] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, L. He, Mampf: Encrypted traffic
 [1] H.-N. Dai, R.C.-W. Wong, H. Wang, Z. Zheng, A.V. Vasilakos, Big data analytics classification based on multi-attribute Markov probability fingerprints, in: 2018
 for large-scale wireless networks: Challenges and opportunities, ACM Comput. IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), 2018,
 Surv. 52 (5) (2019) 1–36. pp. 1–10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWQoS.2018.8624124.
 [2] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, Z. Yao, Encrypted traffic classification [29] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, K.C. Claffy, Issues and future directions in traffic
 with a convolutional long short-term memory neural network, in: 2018 IEEE 20th classification, IEEE Netw. 26 (1) (2012) 35–40.
 International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; [30] M. Lotfollahi, M.J. Siavoshani, R.S.H. Zade, M. Saberian, Deep packet: A novel
 IEEE 16th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 4th International approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning, Soft Comput.
 Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), IEEE, 2018, 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
 pp. 329–334. [31] E. Liang, H. Zhu, X. Jin, I. Stoica, Neural packet classification, in: Proceedings
 [3] T.T. Nguyen, G. Armitage, A survey of techniques for internet traffic classification of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication, ACM, 2019, pp.
 using machine learning, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 10 (4) (2008) 56–76. 256–269.
 [4] A.S. Khatouni, N. Zincir-Heywood, Integrating machine learning with off-the- [32] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, Y. Sang, Towards unknown traffic identification using
 shelf traffic flow features for http/https traffic classification, in: 2019 IEEE deep auto-encoder and constrained clustering, in: International Conference on
 Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7. Computational Science, Springer, 2019, pp. 309–322.

 13
J. Cheng et al. Computer Networks 199 (2021) 108472

[33] S. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sang, Towards unknown traffic identification via em- Jin Cheng received a B.Eng degree in software engineerbeddings and deep autoencoders, in: 2019 26th International Conference on ing from Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, in 2019. She
 Telecommunications (ICT), IEEE, 2019, pp. 85–89. is currently an M.Sc student at Institute of Information
[34] Z. Wang, The applications of deep learning on traffic identification, BlackHat Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research
 USA 24 (11) (2015) 1–10. interests include future network architecture, network
[35] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, Kiss: Stochastic packet inspection management, and network security and privacy.
 classifier for udp traffic, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 18 (5) (2010) 1505–1515.
[36] Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, Traffic identification and traffic analysis based on support
 vector machine, Neural Comput. Appl. (2019) 1–9.
[37] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, C. Chen, Service usage classification with
 encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging apps, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. Yulei Wu is a Senior Lecturer with the Department of
 15 (11) (2016) 2851–2864. Computer Science, College of Engineering, Mathematics and
[38] A.W. Moore, D. Zuev, Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis tech- Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. He
 niques, in: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference received the B.Sc. degree (First Class Honors) in Computer
 on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, 2005, pp. 50–60. Science and the Ph.D. degree in Computing and Mathe-
[39] A. McGregor, M. Hall, P. Lorier, J. Brunskill, Flow clustering using machine matics from the University of Bradford, United Kingdom,
 learning techniques, in: International Workshop on Passive and Active Network in 2006 and 2010, respectively. His expertise is on intel-
 Measurement, Springer, 2004, pp. 205–214. ligent networking, and his main research interests include
 computer networks, networked systems, software defined
[40] D. Liu, C.-H. Lung, P2P traffic identification and optimization using fuzzy cnetworks and systems, network management, and network
 means clustering, in: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
 security and privacy. He serves as an Associate Editor for
 (FUZZ-IEEE 2011), IEEE, 2011, pp. 2245–2252.
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
[41] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, I. Cohen, C. Williamson, Semi-supervised IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering,
 network traffic classification, in: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMETRICS and IEEE Access, as well as an Area Editor for Computer
 International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems, Networks (Elsevier). He is a Senior Member of the IEEE
 2007, pp. 369–370. and the ACM, and a Fellow of the HEA (Higher Education
[42] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, S. Xia, Byte segment neural network for Academy).
 network traffic classification, in: 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium
 on Quality of Service (IWQoS), IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–10. Yuepeng E is an Associate Professor at Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS).
[43] A. Moore, D. Zuev, M. Crogan, Discriminators for use in flow-based classification,
 He received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Software and
 2013.
 Theory at the Graduate University of Chinese Academy
[44] Y. Okada, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, I. Oka, Comparisons of ma- of Sciences in 2012. His research interests include future
 chine learning algorithms for application identification of encrypted traffic, in: network architecture and network testbeds.
 2011 10th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications and
 Workshops, 2, IEEE, 2011, pp. 358–361.
[45] G.-L. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, C. Li, An novel hybrid method for effectively classifying encrypted traffic, in: 2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications
 Conference GLOBECOM 2010, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[46] W. Wang, Y. Sheng, J. Wang, X. Zeng, X. Ye, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Hast-IDS: Junling You is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
 Learning hierarchical spatial-temporal features using deep neural networks to Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her interests are
 improve intrusion detection, IEEE Access 6 (2017) 1792–1806. mainly in future network, network virtualization, and big
[47] X. He, T.-S. Chua, Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics, data processing.
 in: Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
 and Development in Information Retrieval, 2017, pp. 355–364.
[48] J. Lian, X. Zhou, F. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Xie, G. Sun, Xdeepfm: Combining explicit
 and implicit feature interactions for recommender systems, in: Proceedings of
 the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
 Mining, in: KDD ’18, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
 2018, pp. 1754–1763, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220023. Tong Li is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
[49] R. Wang, B. Fu, G. Fu, M. Wang, Deep & cross network for ad click predictions, Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He got a Ph.D.
 in: Proceedings of the ADKDD’17, ACM, 2017, pp. 1–7. degree from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
[50] S. Rendle, Factorization machines, in: IEEE International Conference on Data in 2015. His interests are mainly in network virtualization,
 Mining, IEEE, 2011, pp. 0–6. network measurement and big data stream processing.
[51] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, in:
 Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 2016, pp. 770–778.
[52] J.L. Ba, J.R. Kiros, G.E. Hinton, Layer normalization, 2016, arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1607.06450.
[53] D. Naylor, A. Finamore, I. Leontiadis, Y. Grunenberger, M. Mellia, M. Munafò,
 Hui Li is a Senior Engineer at Institute of Information
 K. Papagiannaki, P. Steenkiste, The cost of the ‘‘s’’ in https, in: Proceedings of
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He got an M.Eng
 the 10th ACM International on Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments
 degree from University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in
 and Technologies, 2014, pp. 133–140.
 2006. His work focuses on computer network architecture,
[54] A. Este, F. Gringoli, L. Salgarelli, Support vector machines for TCP traffic traffic analysis and cyber security.
 classification, Comput. Netw. 53 (14) (2009) 2476–2490.
[55] S. Ioffe, C. Szegedy, Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training
 by reducing internal covariate shift, in: International Conference on Machine
 Learning, PMLR, 2015, pp. 448–456.
[56] A. Monemi, R. Zarei, M.N. Marsono, Online netfpga decision tree statistical traffic
 Jingguo Ge received the Ph.D. degree in computer system
 classifier, Comput. Commun. (2013).
 architecture from the Institute of Computing Technology,
[57] H. Loo, S. Joseph, M.N. Marsono, Online incremental learning for high bandwidth Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2003. He is currently a Pronetwork traffic classification, Appl. Comput. Intell. Soft Comput. 2016 (2016) fessor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 1–13, http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2016/1465810. Academy of Sciences, and a Professor with the School of
[58] R.S.P. Leach, M. Mealling, A universally unique identifier (UUID) URN Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
 namespace, 2005, RFC 4122 https://www.hjp.at/doc/rfc/rfc4122.html. His research focuses on computer network architecture,
 software defined network (SDN), network virtualization,
 cyber security, and mobile communication networks.

 14