Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Expert Systems With Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa

Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network
traffic classification
Shi Dong a, b, *
a
 School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhoukou Normal University, Zhoukou 466001, China
b
 State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications), Beijing 100876, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: With the current massive amount of traffic that is going through the internet, internet service providers (ISPs)
Traffic classification and networking service providers (NSPs) are looking for various ways to accurately predict the application type
NETFLOW flow of flow that is going through the internet. Such prediction is critical for security and network monitoring ap­
Imbalance problem
 plications as they require application type to be known in prior. Traditional ways using port-based or payload-
Machine learning
SVM
 based analysis are not sufficient anymore as many applications start using dynamic unknown port numbers,
CMSVM masquerading, and encryption techniques to avoid being detected. Recently, machine learning has gained sig­
 nificant attention in many prediction applications including traffic classification from flow features or charac­
 teristics. However, such algorithms suffer from an imbalanced data problem where some applications have fewer
 flow data and hence difficult to predict. In this paper, we employ network flow-level characteristics to identify
 the application type of traffic. Furthermore, we propose the use of an improved support vector machine (SVM)
 algorithm, named cost-sensitive SVM (CMSVM), to solve the imbalance problem in network traffic identification.
 CMSVM adopts a multi-class SVM algorithm with active learning which dynamically assigns a weight for ap­
 plications. We examine the classification accuracy and performance of the CMSVM algorithm using two different
 datasets, namely MOORE_SET and NOC_SET datasets. Our results show that the CMSVM algorithm can reduce
 computation cost, improve classification accuracy and solve the imbalance problem when compared to other
 machine learning techniques.

1. Introduction the flow of the application and its network behavior can detect and
 possibly prevent such applications from affecting the network. Thus,
 Network traffic classification is a fundamental issue for various knowing the type of applications has been a major concern in both
network operations including security and network management. One research and industry.
fundamental issue in that field is to classify applications or know their Traditionally, port-based and payload based approach has been used
type from their network flow behavior. This is particularly important to to know the type of application by knowing its payload or port number.
internet service providers (ISPs) and networking service providers Applications in such approaches are mapped to specific well known and
(NSPs) where a vast amount of traffic passes with different applications defined ports and hence can be detected by looking at the port number
that have different requirements. In such large networks, it is critical to only. However, applications such as point to point (P2P) and ad hoc do
distinguish real-time traffic applications and give them a higher priority not adopt specific port and replace that dynamic unknown ports. Hence,
than those non-real-time applications. In addition to prioritization, only 50–60% of applications were correctly classified using port-based
application classification can help in designing and engineering the approaches, as was reported in 2005 Moore and Papagiannaki (2005).
network in terms of workload characterization, capacity planning, and In addition to port-based, deep packet inspection (DPI) techniques are
routing provisioning for future application needs. Moreover, such clas­ also used to classify applications in previous. However, such techniques
sification can help detect and analyze malicious traffic that affects the fail to identify the encrypted network traffic, which becomes a new
network which follows specific behavior that is known to be malicious challenge for traffic identification Kumar, Turner, and Williams (2006).
but can not be detected by simply looking at the endpoints. Looking at Hence, the use of such traditional techniques is not sufficient enough to

 * Address: School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhoukou Normal University, Zhoukou 466001, China.
 E-mail address: dongshi@zknu.edu.cn.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.114885
Received 16 October 2019; Received in revised form 11 February 2021; Accepted 6 March 2021
Available online 11 March 2021
0957-4174/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

classify applications that are going in today’s network. 2.1. Related works
 Nowadays, advances in machine learning have proven their effi­
ciency in prediction applications, especially in the networking field. Traffic identification using supervised machine learning techniques
Learning-based techniques can prove efficiency in the classification of started earlier in 2005 when Naïve and Kernel Bayesian classifiers were
various applications if they were trained to count for a large amount of used to classify internet traffic with different applications Moore and
ongoing and complex applications using sufficient datasets. It uses Zuev (2005). Such work showed a good accuracy compared to prior,
different probability theories and statistical-based behaviors to identify however, their accuracies for rare applications were bad which is a
the network traffic application with sufficient time, cost, and serious burden when applied to real-world scenarios. In addition, their
complexity. Montieri, Ciuonzo, Aceto, and Pescapé (2017) study on models were designed with their network-specific features, such as IP
whether anonymity networks (such as Tor, JonDonym, and I2P) can be addresses and port numbers, and hence can not be applied to the general
discerned. Experimental results show that the considered anonymity internet classification. Later work used the same dataset with SVM and
networks (Tor, I2P, JonDonym) can be easily identified. Giuseppe Aceto, non-network-specific features to build models and reached an accuracy
Ciuonzo, Montieri, and Pescapé (2018), Aceto, Ciuonzo, Montieri, of 99% which is a vast enhancement compared to the earlier work Zhu,
Pescapé (2019a), Aceto, Ciuonzo, Montieri, Pescapé (2019b) proposed a Yuan, and Guan (2007). Furthermore, a work presented in Williams,
series of multi-model fusion algorithms for mobile encrypted traffic. Zander, and Armitage (2006) used five different supervised machine
Experimental results indicate proposed algorithms can effectively learning algorithms to build multiple models and compare the perfor­
improve the identification performance. Hence, lots of machine learning mance of those different five algorithms in terms of complexity and
algorithms have been used to classify applications in various networks. accuracy. We urge the reader to refer to Dainotti et al. (2012) for a
Examples of that can be found in surveys such as Nguyen and Armitage detailed survey of such different algorithms and datasets used for
(2009), Dainotti, Pescape, and Claffy (2012). Despite that fact, a com­ identifying the application from some flow data.
mon burden in such approaches is the imbalance problem of some ap­ Supervised machine learning work mostly suffers from a common
plications in the datasets. Datasets are normally collected from the problem with datasets built for traffic identification which is the
network and hence some applications have only a limited number of imbalance problem. In most real-time networks in which datasets are
samples which made it difficult for learning algorithms to learn and collected, some applications dominate the dataset and hence affect the
classify such applications Buda, Maki, and Mazurowski (2018). Such a accuracy in predicting other applications. Applications with a low
problem sound to be persistent with most network datasets, except number of training samples become religiously difficult to detect and
datasets that were actually designed to have equally distributed samples hence end up in low clarification accuracy due to incorrect prediction
of different application traffics which makes them inapplicable and hard Moore and Zuev (2005). The imbalance problem was discussed further
to build datasets. Hence, the imbalance problem has become a challenge in Provost (2008) and showed a critical problem in the use of traditional
for traffic identification based on machine learning in the actual network machine learning techniques for such applications. Different solutions
application traffics. were proposed in the literature to solve the imbalance problem. For
 In this work, we propose an algorithm to solve the imbalance example, In Charte, Rivera, Jesus, and Herrera (2015), the authors
problem using imbalanced datasets and a modified version of the sup­ propose “artificial subclass sampling technology”, which makes use of
port vector machine (SVM) learning algorithm. In other words, we differences to generate a new class of positive samples between the
extend the work done in Shi, Zhou, Zhou, Wei, and Jian (2013) is positive class samples. This non-random sampling method in the data set
proposing the use of another learning algorithm that enhanced classi­ artificially adds new information, much time will significantly improve
fication accuracy with the reduction of cost and complexity. First, we the performance of the classification system. Of course, due to the added
present the new cost-sensitive SVM (CMSVM) learning algorithm and new sample may be wrong, at this time it will lead to a different effect of
compare it with the traditional SVM. CMSVM uses multi-class SVM with the subsequent classifier Han, Wang, and Mao (2005). Authors in Jap­
active learning algorithms to resolve the imbalance problem for kowicz and Stephen (2002) analyze the unbalanced nature of classifi­
different applications by adaptively learning weights. We applied the cation issues from four aspects including training sample size, the
proposed algorithm to two existing datasets, namely MOORE_SET number of samples the negative and positive sample ratio, complexity of
Moore and Papagiannaki (2005), and NOC_SET Shi, Zhou, Wei, and Jian hyperplane and classification algorithms. In He and Garcia (2009), au­
(2013), datasets. Then, we verified the performance of the proposed thors indicate the imbalanced distribution of the data is only a phe­
algorithm in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and effectiveness in nomenon; there may be two different reasons. The first possibility is
solving the imbalance problem. We compare our performance to other imbalanced data owning to the underlying data causing uneven distri­
highly used machine learning techniques to prove our efficiency in bution, which is called the intrinsic imbalance. Another imbalanced data
outperforming others and solving the imbalance problem with the used is not directly related to the nature of the data space, which is considered
dataset. as an extrinsic imbalance. Extrinsic imbalances are equally as interesting
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides the as their intrinsic counterparts since the dataspace from which an
related work about machine learning algorithms and traffic identifica­ extrinsic imbalanced data set is attained may not be imbalanced at all. In
tion models on NETFLOW sampled flow records. Section 3 discussed the addition, Cieslak, Hoens, Chawla, and Kegelmeyer (2012), Brefeld and
problem model and propose CMSVM. Section 4 highlights the datasets Scheffer (2005), Sun, Lim, and Liu (2010), Wang and Japkowicz (2010),
used later for the evaluation of the proposed model. Section 5 describes Zieba, Tomczak, Lubicz, and Witek (2014), Zieba and Tomczak (2015)
an evaluation method and analyzes experiment results. Finally, con­ proposed different methodologies for solving the imbalance problem in
clusions are drawn in Section 6. different datasets.

2. Background 2.2. Primarily definitions

 In this section, we present the state of the art in the domain of ma­ To build datasets from the network traffic, one can collect payloads
chine learning techniques for network traffic classification and appli­ of different packets and analyze them to build machine learning models.
cation identification. We highlight our contribution in comparison to However, such an approach suffers from computational power and
the prior work. In addition, we discuss some of the primary definitions storage requirements which are needed to analyze such information,
that are important to understand the later machine learning especially in recent network paradigms. Generally, network hardware is
approaches. not sufficient enough to store and process packets, and hence external
 storage units need to be used to save packet information. Alternatively,

 2
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Table 1 Furthermore, we discuss our proposed algorithm, CMSVM, which is
Proposed NETFLOW features. proposed to solve the imbalance problem in a cost-effective solution.
 Features Features Description
 3.1. SVM and weighted SVM algorithms
 Lport low port number
 Hport high port number
 duration flow duration SVM is a well-known machine learning algorithm that builds hy­
 transproto flow transport protocol used (TCP / UDP) perplanes to separate the data from multiple classes. To formulate the
 TCPflags1 TCP header flag, or(OR), transport layer protocol is UDP, problem, let x be inputs from NETFLOW data, y is the list of targetted
 the feature is 0 (one direction)
 TCPflags2 TCP header flag, or(OR), transport layer protocol is UDP,
 applications or class, then SVM would build a hyperplane H, which is
 the feature is 0 (the other direction) defined as follows:
 pps packets/duration (second)
 bps bytes/duration (second) H : aT ϕ(x) + b = 0 (1)
 mean packets arrived duration/packets
 time
 The assumption here is that the classes are linearly separable, a is a
 Bi-direction packets forward packets/ backward packets vector of the weights for each flow feature, b is the bias term and Ø(.) is
 ratio fixed feature-space transformation. Assuming that x and y are known
 Bi-direction bytes ratio forward bytes/ backward bytes from prior data or the training dataset, the problem is to find the hy­
 Bi-direction packet Bi-direction packets length ratio
 perplanes H that separate different classes. SVM can be formulated as
 length ratio
 Bi-direction packets forward packets + backward packets the following optimization problem:
 Bi-direction bytes forward bytes + backward bytes
 1 ∑ N
 tos bidirection tos OR from NETFLOW mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c
 mean packet length Bi-direction bytes/bi-direction packets 2 (n=1) (2)

 s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn
we used NETFLOW information to get the information needed for each
flow. Each flow record is composed of a sequence of network packets where c controls the trade-off between the volume and errors, and c > 0,
and an artificial logical equivalent to a call or connection Rajahalme, εn is the slack variable of the nth traffic object. Imbalanced classification
Amante, Jiang, and Carpenter (2011). Definition 1 formally defines a is also an important problem in traffic classification and identification,
NETFLOW flow record. while only the imbalanced classification problem of two-class SVM is
 discussed in biology and context classification, and the imbalanced
Definition 1. NETFLOW flow records:
 classification problem of multi-class SVM is not discussed. So we will
 A flow record X with t features can be represented as a vector of flow discuss the problem in this paper.
features x1 , x2 , …, xt . Each of those features characterizes one property First, we introduce the two-class SVM classification method to
of a flow record. Examples of those features can be duration, port resolve the imbalance problem which adopts the cost-sensitivity of
number, etc. A flow record can be represented as: classes from Zieba et al. (2014), parameter c is divided into two realvalue parameters c+ and c- which represent the sets of positive and
X = {x1 , x2 , x3 , ..., xt }
 negative examples. Thus the optimization problem in Eq. (2) can be
 In our analysis, we used NETFLOW features that are presented in expressed as follows Zieba et al. (2014):
Table 1. All the features are based on the packets exchanged between for all n = 1,…,N
the clients and services. For example, duration describes the duration
 ∑ N ∑ N
of a flow record. Applications like P2P use short-lived connections 1
 mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c+ εn + c− εn
which results in a short duration while others like HTTP and SSH 2 n∈N+ n∈N− (3)
require higher duration. The packets per second (pps) feature de­ T
 s.t.yn (a ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn
scribes the number of packets exchanged between the client and
server. Video streaming applications usually cause a large number of
 where N+ = n ∈ 1, ..., N yn = 1, and N− = n ∈ 1, ..., N yn = − 1, wn
packets exchange while other applications might have smaller packet
 which is introduced as the penalty parameters variables. Eq. (3) is
exchange.
 further defined as follows,
 An application type or class is the type of application to be predicted
 for all n = 1,…,N
by the machine learning models. Assuming that y is the application
category, X is the vector of netflow features and F is the machine 1 ∑N

learning classifier. The prediction can be made as follows: mina,b Q(a) = aT a + c ωn εn
 2 n=1 (4)
Y = F(X) = {y1 , y2 , y3 , ..., ym } T
 s.t.yn (a ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn
where y1,y2,…ym represent different application categories, by function for all n = 1,…,N
F(X), traffic identification can be completed.
 ∑
 N
 ωn = N
3. SVM and its extended versions (n=1)
 (5)
 ∑N
 In this section, we briefly discuss traditional SVM and introduce 1
 minQ(a) = aT a + c ωn εn
weighted SVM, which extends SVM to solve the imbalance problem. 2 n=1

 3
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

where weights wn meet the requirement of a probability distribution. 3.2. CMSVm
Just like the paper Zieba et al. (2014) assume wn = N1 , thus we will
 In this section, we propose a cost-sensitive SVM based on multi-class
modify the two-class problem as a multi-class problem. So we give out
 with active learning, CMSVM, which can solve the imbalanced data by
N1,…, Nm, where m indicates the type number of network traffic.
 misclassification costs estimation and sampling selection. The process of
Different type application has different weights because the different
 CMSVM is the iterative procedure, which iteratively updates w by
application has different proportion. Thus the optimization problem is
 optimizing the exponential error Zieba et al. (2014). The value of error
further expressed as Eq. (6).
 function ei can be modified based on ek in Zieba and Tomczak (2015),
 ( )
 1 T CN 2 1 ∑ N
 1 ∑ N
 1 ∑ N modified error function can be applied to the multi-class problem, which
 mina,b Q(a) = a a +
 2 2 N1 n=1
 wn ε n +
 N2 n=1
 wn εn + … +
 Nt n=1
 wn ε n is calculated by the following:

 ( ) N EI
 1 CN 2 1 1 1 ∑ ei = ∑N (i) ∑N (i) ∑N (i) (9)
 = aT a + + + ... + wn ε n 1
 N1
 1
 n=1 wn + N2
 1
 n=1 wn + ... + Nt n=1 wn
 2 2 N1 N2 Nm n=1

 s.t.yn (aT ∅(xn ) + b)⩾1 − εn where EI is expressed by Eq. (10).

 where all n = 1, …, N, m = 1, ..., T 1 ∑ N
 1 ∑ N
 ei = w(i)
 n I(hk (xn ) ∕
 = yn ) + w(i) I(hk (xn )
 (6) N1 n=1 N2 n=1 n
 1 ∑ N

maxλ q(λ) =
 ∑N
 λi −
 1∑N
 λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj ) = yn ) + ... +
 ∕ w(i) I(hk (xn ) ∕
 = yn ) (10)
 i=1 2 i,j=1 Nt n=1 n
 ∑N
s.t. λi yi = 0 where I(.) indicates the indicator function.
 (7)
 We consider weights wn as misclassification cost, then the weight
 i=1

0⩽λn ⩽Cwn SVM will be changed as the cost-sensitive SVM, in order to improve the
 training speed, reduce the number of training samples and time. We
for all n = 1, …N
 introduce the active learning mechanism into cost-sensitive multi-class
 SVM and call it CMSVM which includes two parts, one is cost-sensitive
where λ is the vector of Lagrange multipliers. k is the kernel function. Eq.
 SVM, the other is to select the optimal new sample to train by query
(7) is detailed derived in the Appendix section. Finally, the identification
 strategy. In this paper, Assume labeled network flow as L and unlabeled
model can be expressed as follows:
 network flow as U, we can adopt the query strategy to select the new
 ∑
h(xi ) = sign( yn λn k(xn , xi ) + b) (8) samples from U to the label.
 n∈sv Fig. 1 shows the procedure of CMSVM. Firstly, labeled network flow
 (L) and unlabeled network flow(U) are considered as the input samples.
where sv shows the support vectors, the sign is the signum function We train the cost-sensitive SVM adopting L data, then classify all U and
which is an odd mathematical function that extracts the sign of a real judge the maximum iteration number, if it meets the requirement for the
number. h(xi ) is the objective function. CMSVM algorithm, the algorithm should end. Or else we select the
 network flow samples close to the cost-sensitive SVM hyperplane which

 Fig. 1. CMSVM flow chart.

 4
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

Table 2 Table 3
MOORE_SET Dataset. NOC_SET Dataset.
 AppID Category Application Number of flows Proportion AppID Application Protocol Flow Proportion
 number
 1 WWW HTTP, HTTPS 328,091 86.91
 2 BULK FTP 11,539 3.056 1 WWW HTTP 4943 64.6
 3 MAIL POP3, IMAP, SMTP 28,567 7.567 2 Bulk FTP 39 0.5
 4 DB SQLnet, Oracle 2648 0.701 3 Mail IMAP, POP3, SMTP 91 1.19
 5 SERV DNS, NTP, LDAP 2099 0.556 4 P2P BitTorrent, eDonkey, 1414 18.5
 6 P2P Kazaa, Bittorrent, 2094 0.555 XunLei, etc.
 Gnutella 5 Service DNS, NTP 433 5.7
 7 ATTACK Worm and virus Attacks 1793 0.475 6 Interactive SSH, CVS, pc Anywhere 6 0.08
 8 MULT Media Player, Real 1152 0.305 7 Multimedia RTSP, Real 20 0.3
 9 INT SSH, klogin, Telnet 110 0.029 8 Voice SIP, Skype 276 3.6
 10 GAME Halflife 8 0.002 9 Others games, attacks 431 5.6

is a query strategy and label it. Those samples are inserted training costsensitive SVM to generate the new classifier. Table 4
 Confusion matrix.
 Algotithm: CMSVM
 Algorithm 1: CMSVM algorithm Predicted positive class Predicted negative class

 Input: Flow F include all features(L and U), I: Iteration Number Actual positive class TP FN
 ∑kfinal Actual negative class FP TN
 Output: Class label and Classifier for imbalance data H(x) = argmaxy∈Y k=1 ck I(hk (x)
 = y)
 1 Begin
 2 Initialize flow feature;
 will be used to prove the effectiveness of the machine learning models to
 3 Generate new Flow F; correctly predict the class of a flow and solve the imbalance problem.
 4 for k = 1 to I
 5 Train cost-sensitive SVM by solving(6) with values of w(k) (k) (k)
 n ,N1 , N2 ,…, Nt ;
 (k)

 6 while ek < 0.5 do 4.1. Dataset
 1 − ek
 7 ck ← ln
 ek
 8 compute Gmean value gk and Mauc value mk; In this work, we used two datasets, namely MOORE_SET, Moore and
 9
 ∑
 Hk (x) = argmaxy∈Y kl=l cl I(hl (x) = y) Papagiannaki (2005) dataset and NOC_SET dataset, Shi, Zhou, Wei et al.
 10 if gk > G then (2013) to build and test models using different machine learning algo­
 11 G ← gk, Select the network flow which is close to the cssvm hyperplane in cssvm; rithms. Those datasets are publicly available datasets that can be sum­
 12 Kfinal ← k ; marized as follows: MOORE-SET: as originally given by Moore and
 13 end if
 Papagiannaki (2005) MOORE-SET dataset generates flow data using
 14 Return H;
 15 end while random sampling over several different periods from one node on the
 16 End internet. It has 10 applications with a different number of samples as
 summarized in Table 2. This network traffic collection site is shared by
 about 1000 researchers, technicians, and management staff of three
Algorithm1 represents a cost-sensitive SVM method based on multi-class research institutions, and connected to the Internet through a fullwith active learning, the first step initializes network flow features and duplex Gigabit Ethernet link. All full-duplex traffic on this connection
generate new flow, those network flow samples include labeled network is captured in a full 24 h period, so the original traffic-set contained all
flow(L) and unlabeled network flow(U). Next, the cost-sensitive SVM full-duplex traffic connected to the node in both link directions. Since
classifier is built, and the classifier is increasingly optimal by ek. Gmean the original traffic-set is too large, Moore divides it into ten subsets by a
value and Mauc value are computed. When the error value is lower than random sampling method. The sampling times of each subset are almost
0.5, the value ck will be further computed. Finally, the classifier is the same (approximately 1680 s each) and the non-overlapping random
updated in the iteration procedure. samples are uniformly distributed over the 24-hour interval. The num­
 ber of flows and the proportion of the various types of network traffic are
3.3. Algorithm complexity analysis shown in Table 2.
 NOC-SET: NOC_SET Shi, Zhou, Wei et al. (2013) dataset is collected
 In this section, the computational complexity of CMSVM is analyzed. at Southeast University and each flow is labeled by modified L7_filter
The complexity depends on three parts. The first part is the initialization Levandoski (2008) software. It adopts packets collector to obtain 200G
process of flow feature with the complexity of O(1). The second part is packets data in 12 h. To suit for generating the flow label, we modified
the training phase with the complexity of O(I). The final part is the L7_filter software to label the packets and group the packets labeled
computing process of Gmean and Mauc value with the compexity of O into flows. A TCP/IP flow is uniquely identified by the five values:
(1). So the total computational complexity of CMSVM is 2O(1) + O(I) source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and protocol
and approximately equal to O(I). type. For TCP flow, we select semantically complete TCP flows in our
 experiments, which means that each TCP flow contains successful three-
4. Datasets and performance metrics way handshake packets and connection termination (FIN-ACK) packets.
 Table 3 summarizes the flow information of NOC_SET dataset. There are
 In this section, we describe the datasets used to evaluate the pro­ nine application classes, some of which contain multiple application
posed algorithm. In addition, we discuss the performance metrics that layer protocols.

 5
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

 Fig. 3. Precision results for different applications with the different used al­
 Fig. 2. Overall accuracy results for CMSVM algorithms with MOORE_SET.
 gorithms with MOORE_SET.

4.2. Performance metrics

 To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, we use
different standard evaluation metrics that are used in literature to
evaluate any learning algorithm. Namely, we calculate the overall ac­
curacy, precision and recall to check the correctness in predicting a
traffic fow in a particular class. In addition, to evaluate the effectiveness
of algorithms in solving the imbalance problem, we used the geometric
mean (Gmean) and the multi-class area under the curve (MAUC) Sun
et al. (2010) which are commonly used metrics to evaluate the solution
to the imbalance problem. Gmean is a type of mean or average, which
indicates the central tendency or typical value of a set of numbers by
using the product of their values. While MAUC is improved AUC method
to distinguish between multi classes.
 True positives (TP) represent flows in class A that are classified
correctly in that class. False negatives (FP) represent flows that are not in
class A but misclassified in that class. False negatives (FN) represent
flows in class A that are misclassified as some other category; in other
words, bot detected in their class. FN will result in identification accu­
racy loss. True negatives (TN) represent flows that are not in class A and
 Fig. 4. Recall results for different applications with the different used algo­
correctly not detected in class A. we can obtain the confusion matrix
 rithms with MOORE_SET.
presented in Table 4 after a classification process. Then, the calculation
of our metrics goes as follows:
 Precision: The percentage of samples classified in a particular class √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
 Gmean = TPR*TNR (15)
correctly compared to all samples classified in that class.
 TP where n is the number of samples.
Precision = (11)
 TP + FP MAUC: area under the curve (AUC) is a standard measure for a single
 class dataset where you distinguish between only two classes. However,
 Recall: The percentage of samples in a particular class A that are
 such metric can not be applied to a multi-class dataset where more than
correctly classified in that class
 two class is involved. Hence, the authors in Sun et al. (2010) proposed to
 TP transform AUC to MAUC in order to be applied to multi-class datasets.
Recall = TPR = (12)
 TP + FN MAUC can be defined as follows:
 The TN rate TNR or specificity Sp is defined as 2 ∑
 Mauc = AUC(ci , cj ) (16)
 TN q(q − 1) i<j
TNR = (13)
 TN + FP AUC(ci /cj )+AUC(cj /ci ) S − n (n +1)/2
 Where AUC(ci , cj ) = 2
 ;AUC(ci /cj ) = i cni c ncic
 Overall accuracy: The percentage of samples that are correctly i j

classified
 ∑n 5. Experimental results
 TPi
OverallAccuracy = ∑n i=1 (14)
 i=1 TPi + FPi In this section, we describe the performance evaluation of our al­
 gorithm, CMSVM, compared to different other algorithms that are
where n is where n is the number of samples. designed to solve the imbalance problem. More specifically, we
 G-mean: it is called the geometric mean. compare CMSVM to SVM, ROS, and RUC using recall, precision,

 6
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

 Fig. 5. Results for confusion matrix with the different used algorithms with MOORE_SET.

 Table 5
 Experiment results for MOORE_SET.
 Method Gmean Mauc

 SVM 0.583 0.625
 ROS 0.673 0.631
 RUS 0.684 0.646
 CMSVM 0.718 0.709

overall accuracy, Gmean, and MAUC performance metrics. We used
the WEKA Hall et al. (2009) machine learning suite to build an SVM
model. As discussed earlier, two datasets, namely MOORE_SET and
NOC_SET, are used to verify our models and calculate the performance
metrics from the results on those two datasets. Tenfold crossvalidation was used to cross-validate the data. The ten-fold crossvalidation method is a commonly used accuracy test method. Its basic
idea is to divide the data set into 10 parts, and take 9 parts as training
data and 1 part as test data, in turn, to carry out experiments. Each
experiment will get the corresponding accuracy, and the average of
the accuracy of 10 results is used as the estimation of the accuracy of Fig. 6. Overall accuracy results for CMSVM algorithms with NOC_SET.
the algorithm. Experimental results are shown in Figs. 2–5, and
Table 5 for MOORE_SET while they are shown in Figs. 6–9, and Table 6 overall accuracy reaches 0.942 which is the maximum. So we will
for NOC_SET. adopt the classifier to classify the network flow when the iteration
 number is 10. As can be seen in Figs. 3 and 4, CMSVM, ROS, and ROS
5.1. Performance analysis with MOORE_SET had a high precision and recall with all applications whereas SVM had
 a relatively bad recall and precision for most of the applications. Thus,
 Fig. 2 represents the overall accuracy for CMSVM in different SVM did not perform well due to the imbalance problem as applica­
iteration number. We find the CMSVM algorithm gets convergence and tions had a different ratio of the number of samples. As discussed in

 7
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

 5.2. Performance analysis with NOC_SET

 Fig. 6 represents the overall accuracy for CMSVM in different
 iteration number. We find the CMSVM algorithm gets convergence and
 overall accuracy reaches 0.945 which is the maximum. So we will
 adopt the classifier to classify the network flow when the iteration
 number is 10. NOC_SET results are shown in Figs. 7 and 8 and Table 5
 for precision, recall, and Gmean and MAUC. As can be seen, CMSVM
 outperforms all other algorithms in terms of precision and recall.
 Similar to MOORE_SET, SVM had the worst performance for a low
 number of sample applications which can be reasoned by the inability
 of SVM to solve the imbalance problem. On the other hand, CMSVM
 had a slightly better performance than ROS and RUS with more stable
 performance which proof their efficiency in predicting even a low
 number of sample applications. Results for the confusion matrix with
 the different used algorithms are depicted in Fig. 9. From Table 3, we
 know the network traffic with minimum proportion is Interactive,
 which only is 0.08. In Fig. 9(a), SVM algorithm’s TP value is 0.81.
Fig. 7. Precision results for different applications with the different used al­ From Fig. 9(b), (c), and (d), we can know ROS, RUS, and CMSVM al­
gorithms with NOC_SET. gorithm’s TP value is 0.835, 0.84, and 0.89. The experimental results
 show our proposed CMSVM algorithm can better improve the identi­
 fication performance. For Gmean and MAUC, as shown in Table 6,
 CMSVM performed better than other algorithms and could reach about
 77% Gmean and 75% MAUC. This can be due to the better learning
 ability of CMSVM using cost-sensitive than applying any of the
 resamplings.
 To summarize this section, our proposed algorithm, CMSVM, could
 achieve higher precisions and recall compared to the other three
 methods. It showed a better performance in Gmean and MAUC which is
 effective proof in solving the imbalance problem. By adding other fea­
 tures to the features mentioned in Table 1, better classification results
 can be achieved with better models and reasonably added complexity. In
 addition, the proposed multi-class solution can be applied to other
 machine learning algorithms to improve their efficiency in solving the
 imbalance problem.

 6. Conclusions

 Traffic identification is one of the critical issues for network traffic
 planning and management. While methods based on machine learning
Fig. 8. Recall results for different applications with the different used algo­ are getting popularity in solving such issues, imbalance problems in
rithms with NOC_SET. existing datasets is a burden against the efficiency of those algorithms.
 This paper proposed an improved SVM algorithm, CMSVM, which tries
Section 4.1, the Game application had a low number of samples and to solve the imbalance problem by introducing the weight values and
hence traditional SVM can not predict it. However, other algorithms active learning for each class of traffic. MOORE_SET and NOC_SET
performed well with all applications and CMSVM had the most stable datasets are used to build models of different learning algorithms and
and highest performance compared to the other algorithms. Fig. 5 compare their performances. SVM, ROS, and RUS algorithms are used
presents the confusion matrix of four algorithms. It is observed that in performance analysis to show the efficiency of the proposed algo­
network traffic with a large proportion has a high TP value in four rithm when compared to the other three algorithms. Experimental
algorithms. However, there is a big difference on TP for network traffic results showed that CMSVM can outperform others in terms of recall,
with a small proportion. In Fig. 5(a), the SVM has 0.61 TP value on precision, overall accuracy, MAUC, and Gmean. However, CMSVM
game category, ROS, RUS and CMSVM has 0.855, 0.845 and 0.86 TP still gets about 70% MAUC and Gmean which implies that it still
value. The results indicate that adopting the unbalanced strategy can needs improvements. Adding more features to the dataset or applying
improve the identification accuracy of network traffic with a small the proposed strategy to other machine learning algorithms can
proportion. Especially, our proposed CMSVM has 0.86 TP value. improve the performance and results in better solutions for the
For the network traffic www with a large proportion, it can achieve imbalance problem. In the future work, we will consider the joint
0.94 TP value. Moreover, MAUC and Gmean results, as presented in optimization of deep learning and migation stratege with imbalance
Table 5 showed the outperformance of CMSVM compared to other problem.
algorithms. CMSVM can reach 72% Gmean value while others had
lower values which can reach 58% with SVM. In addition, CMSVM Ethical approval
reaches around 70% MAUC while others reach 65% by maximum
which shows the better performance of our proposed algorithm This article does not contain any studies with human participants or
compared to the others. animals performed by any of the authors.

 8
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

 Fig. 9. Results for confusion matrix with the different used algorithms with NOC_SET.

 Declaration of Competing Interest
Table 6
Experiment results for NOC_SET. The all authors of the paper immediately below certify that they have
 Method Gmean Mauc no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with
 any financial interest.
 SVM 0.674 0.71125
 ROS 0.723 0.7231
 RUS 0.734 0.7256 Acknowledgments
 CMSVM 0.768 0.774
 This paper is supported by Project supported by Key Scientific and
 Technological Research Projects in Henan Province (Grand No.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
 192102210125), Open Foundation of State key Laboratory of
 Networking and Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and
 Shi Dong: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing -
 Telecommunications) (KLNST-2020-2-01). In addition, the authors also
original draft, Writing - review & editing.
 will thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments and
 suggestions.

Appendix A

 The prime problem is:
 1 ∑ ∑
mina,b .Q(a) = aT a + C+ ξn + C− ξn
 2 n∈N + n∈N −

s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − ξn (17)

for all n = 1, ..., N

 9
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

where N + = {n ∈ {1, ..., N} : yn = 1}, and N − = {n ∈ {1, ..., N} : yn = − 1}.
 Further, we generalize the problem 1 by introducing individual penalty parameters wn for each nth observation which yields:
 1 ∑n
mina,b .Q(a) = aT a + C w n ξn
 2 n=1

s.t.yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b)⩾1 − ξn (18)

for all n = 1, ..., N
 Because we have maintained the individual penalty parameter C, the penalty parameters wn have to fulfill the following condition:
∑
N
 wn = N (19)
n=1

 The introduction of w allows to diversify the costs of misclassification not only between classes but also within classes. Further, we will use the
penalty parameters w in the boosting procedure during the construction of the classifier. Then we want to get the dual optimization problem of the
primal optimization problem 2.
 Introduce the multipliers λ we get the Lagrange function:
 1 T ∑n
L(a, b, ξ, λ) = a a + C n=1 wn ξn + λ1 (y1 (aT ϕ(x1 ) + b) + 1 − ξ1 )
 2 (20)
 +λ2 (y2 (aT ϕ(x2 ) + b) + 1 − ξ2 ) + ⋯ + λn (yn (aT ϕ(xn ) + b) + 1 − ξn )

 Where λ = (λ1 , λ2 , ⋯, λN ) and ξ = (ξ1 , ξ2 , ⋯, ξN ). Let ∂∂La , ∂∂Lb and ∂∂ξLi equal to 0, we get

∂L
 = a − λ1 y1 ϕ(x1 ) − λ2 y2 ϕ(x2 ) − ⋯ − λN yN ϕ(xN ) = 0 (21)
∂a
∂L
 = λ1 y1 + λ2 y2 + ⋯ + λN yN = 0 (22)
∂b
∂L
 = Cwi − λi = 0 for all i = 1, 2, …, N (23)
∂ξi
 From Eq. (21) we have
 ∑
 N
a= λi yi ϕ(xi ) (24)
 i=1

 Put Eq. (24) into (20), we have the dual function
q(λ) = infa,b,ξ L(a, b, ξ, λ)

 1∑N ∑N ∑n ∑N
 = λi yi ϕ(xi )T λi yi ϕ(xi ) + C n=1 wn ξn + λ1 (y1 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(x1 ) + b) + 1 − ξ1 )
 2 i=1 i=1

 ∑N ∑N (25)
 +λ2 (y2 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(x2 ) + b) + 1 − ξ2 ) + ⋯ + λN (y2 ( i=1 λi yi ϕ(xi )T ϕ(xN ) + b) + 1 − ξN )

 1∑N ∑N ∑i ∑N ∑N ∑N
 =− λi yi ϕ(xi )T λi yi ϕ(xi ) + C i=1 wi ξn + λi − λi yi b + λi ξi
 2 i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1 i=1

 According to Eqs. (22) and (23), we have
 ∑N 1∑N
q(λ) = λi − λi λj yi yj ϕ(xi )T ϕ(xj )
 i=1 2 i,j=1
 (26)
 ∑N 1∑N
 = λi − λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj )
 i=1 2 i,j=1

where k(xi , xj ) is a kernel function. Therefore, we get the following dual optimization problem:
 ∑
 N
 1∑ N
maxλ q(λ) = λi − λi λj yi yj k(xi , xj ) (27)
 i=1
 2 i,j=1

 ∑
 N
s.t. λi yi = 0 (28)
 i=1

0⩽λn ⩽Cwn (29)

for all n = 1, …N (30)

 10
S. Dong Expert Systems With Applications 176 (2021) 114885

References Moore, A. W., & Zuev, D. (2005). Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis
 techniques. Acm Sigmetrics Performance Evaluation Review, 33(1), 50.
 Nguyen, T. T. T., & Armitage, G. J. (2009). A survey of techniques for internet traffic
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2018). Multi-classification
 classification using machine learning. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 10(4),
 approaches for classifying mobile app traffic. Journal of Network and Computer
 56–76.
 Applications, 131–145.
 Provost, F. (2008). Machine learning from imbalanced data sets 101 (extended abstract).
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2019a). MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted
 Soft Computing Pattern Recognition, International Conference of.
 traffic classification using multimodal deep learning. Computer Networks, 165
 Rajahalme, J., Amante, S., Jiang, S., Carpenter, B., 2011. Ipv6 flow label specification.
 (Dec.24), 106944.1-106944.12.
 Shi, D., Zhou, D., Wei, D., & Jian, G. (2013). Flow cluster algorithm based on improved k-
Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Montieri, A., & Pescapé, A. (2019b). Mobile encrypted traffic
 means method. Iete Journal of Research, 59(4), 326–333.
 classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, lessons learned, and
 Shi, D., Zhou, D. D., Zhou, W., Wei, D., & Jian, G. (2013). Research on network traffic
 challenges. IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 445–458.
 identification based on improved bp neural network. Applied Mathematics Information
Brefeld, U., & Scheffer, T. (2005). Auc maximizing support vector learning. Icml
 Sciences, 7(1), 389–398.
 Workshop on Roc Analysis in Machine Learning, 377–380.
 Sun, A., Lim, E. P., & Liu, Y. (2010). On strategies for imbalanced text classification using
Buda, M., Maki, A., & Mazurowski, M. A. (2018). A systematic study of the class
 svm: A comparative study. Decision Support Systems, 48(1), 191–201.
 imbalance problem in convolutional neural networks. Neural Networks, 106,
 Wang, B. X., & Japkowicz, N. (2010). Boosting support vector machines for imbalanced
 249–259.
 data sets. Knowledge Information Systems, 25(1), 1–20.
Charte, F., Rivera, A. J., Jesus, M. J. D., & Herrera, F. (2015). Addressing imbalance in
 Williams, N., Zander, S., & Armitage, G. J. (2006). A preliminary performance
 multilabel classification: Measures and random resampling algorithms.
 comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical ip traffic flow
 Neurocomputing, 163, 3–16.
 classification. Acm Sigcomm Computer Communication Review, 36(5), 5–16.
Cieslak, D. A., Hoens, T. R., Chawla, N. V., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2012). Hellinger
 Zhu, L., Yuan, R., & Guan, X. (2007). Accurate classification of the internet traffic based
 distancedecisiontreesarerobustandskew-insensitive.DataMining Knowledge.
 on the svm method. IEEE International Conference on Communications.
 Discovery, 24(1), 136–158.
 Zieba, M., & Tomczak, J. M. (2015). Boosted svm with active learning strategy for
Dainotti, A., Pescape, A., & Claffy, K. C. (2012). Issues and future directions in traffic
 imbalanced data. Soft Computing, 19(12), 3357–3368.
 classification. Network IEEE, 26(1), 35–40.
 Zieba, M., Tomczak, J. M., Lubicz, M., & Witek, J. (2014). Boosted svm for extracting
Hall, M., Frank, E., Holmes, G., Pfahringer, B., Reutemann, P., & Witten, I. H. (2009). The
 rules from imbalanced data in application to prediction of the post operative life
 weka data mining software: An update. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 11(1),
 expectancy in the lung cancer patients. Applied Soft Computing Journal, 14(1),
 10–18.
 99–108.
Han, H., Wang, W. Y., & Mao, B. H. (2005). Borderline-smote: A new oversampling
 method in imbalanced data sets learning. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3644(5),
 878–887.
He, H., & Garcia, E. A. (2009). Learning from imbalanced data. IEEE Transactionson Shi Dong received M.S in computer science from University of
 Knowledge Data Engineering, 21(9), 1263–1284. Electronic and Technology of China in 2009, Ph.D in computer
Japkowicz, N., & Stephen, S. (2002). The class imbalance problem: A systematic study. science from southeast university in 2013. He worked as post
 Intelligent Data Analysis, 6(5), 429–449. doctor researcher in Huazhong University of Science and
Kumar, S., Turner, J., & Williams, J. (2006). Advanced algorithms for fast and scalable Technology. He is a visiting scholar in Washington University in
 deep packet inspection. Architecture for Networking Communications Systems, Acm/ieee St.Louis. He is currently a Distinguished Professor with Zhou­
 Symposium. kou Normal University. His current research interests include
Levandoski, J., 2008. Application layer packet classifier for linux. http://l7-filter. network management and network security.
 sourceforge. net/.
Montieri, A., Ciuonzo, D., Aceto, G., & Pescapé, A. (2017). Anonymity Services Tor, I2P,
 JonDonym: Classifying in the Dark. In 29th International Teletraffic Congress (ITC 29)
 Genoa (pp. 81–89). https://doi.org/10.23919/ITC.2017.8064342
Moore, A. W., & Papagiannaki, K. (2005). Toward the accurate identification of network
 applications. International Conference on Passive Active Network Measurement.

 11