Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Knowledge-Based Systems
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/knosys

Open-CyKG: An Open Cyber Threat Intelligence Knowledge Graph
 ∗
Injy Sarhan a,b , , Marco Spruit b,c,d
a
 Department of Computer Engineering, Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime Transport (AAST), Alexandria, Egypt
b
 Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
c
 Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Leiden University Medical Center(LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands
d
 Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science (LIACS), Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands

article info a b s t r a c t

Article history: Instant analysis of cybersecurity reports is a fundamental challenge for security experts as an
Received 11 April 2021 immeasurable amount of cyber information is generated on a daily basis, which necessitates automated
Received in revised form 17 September 2021 information extraction tools to facilitate querying and retrieval of data. Hence, we present Open-CyKG:
Accepted 20 September 2021
 an Open Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) Knowledge Graph (KG) framework that is constructed using
Available online 21 September 2021
 an attention-based neural Open Information Extraction (OIE) model to extract valuable cyber threat
Keywords: information from unstructured Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) reports. More specifically, we first
Cyber Threat Intelligence identify relevant entities by developing a neural cybersecurity Named Entity Recognizer (NER) that
Knowledge Graph aids in labeling relation triples generated by the OIE model. Afterwards, the extracted structured
Named Entity Recognition data is canonicalized to build the KG by employing fusion techniques using word embeddings. As a
Open Information Extraction result, security professionals can execute queries to retrieve valuable information from the Open-CyKG
Attention network framework. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed components that build up Open-CyKG
 outperform state-of-the-art models.1
 © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

1. Introduction The absence of this kind of data structure will prevent security
 analysts to fully leverage the extracted information.
 Cyber threats are developing at a rapid pace, which is driving In this paper we introduce Open-CyKG: an open Cyber Threat
security analysts to dynamically utilize various Natural Language Intelligence (CTI)2 Knowledge Graph (KG) constructed from Open
Processing (NLP) techniques as means to defend, identify, analyze, Information Extraction (OIE) triples. Open-CyKG is a framework
and possibly mitigate various cybersecurity attacks. These include that is capable of efficiently extracting valuable information from
text memorization [1], information extraction [2,3] and Named unstructured Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) reports and rep-
Entity Recognition (NER) [4,5]. In order to understand the means resenting the retrieved data in a KG that offers efficient querying
and the consequence of different cyber-attacks, security profes- and retrieval of threat-related information. Open-CyKG is made
sionals rely on previous reports, such as security bulletins or up of two main components as shown in Fig. 1. First, an attentiononline reports, to get a better grasp of the threat at hand. Unfortu- based OIE architecture for extracting domain-independent relanately, such reports are often stored in an unstructured manner, tional triples from unstructured data. Second, a NER model for
making efficient information retrieval even more challenging. automatic labeling of cybersecurity terms. More precisely, we
 Currently, existing information extraction systems lack two
 start by extracting structural relation tuples from APT reports
essential components. First, a methodology that is capable of
 using OIE, which are later populated in the KG with the help of
extracting valuable information that does not necessitate either
 the NER task.
a pre-defined set of relations or an existing ontology [6], limiting
 Attention mechanisms have had notable success in several
extraction to a specified set of information, thus increasing the
 deep learning tasks [8–10]. The first building block is an attentionprobability of missing out on vital knowledge. Second, a data
 based OIE. We propose a novel attention mechanism that emstructure that supports storing extracted data efficiently to allow
successful information retrieval and knowledge understanding. phasizes the syntactic and semantic features of a given sentence,
 in a way that words are assigned different weights based on
 ∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Information and Computing their level of contribution to a sentence. We demonstrate that
Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
 E-mail addresses: i.a.a.sarhan@uu.nl, injy.sarhan@aast.edu (I. Sarhan). 2 CTI is the outcome of threat information once it has been compiled and
 1 Our implementation of Open-CyKG is publicly available at https://github. analyzed to provide actionable advice regarding previously known or emerging
com/IS5882/Open-CyKG. threats that helps with the mitigation process [7].

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2021.107524
0950-7051/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Fig. 1. Main building components of the proposed Open-CyKG framework. A more detailed version is shown in Fig. 2.

an attention-based approach improves the process of identifying 2.1. Open information extraction state-of-the-art
semantic relations. The extracted tuples are composed of a predicate and a set of attributes in the form of <Argument 1, Relation, OIE methodologies can be classified into three main cate-
Argument 2 >. gories [13]: machine-learning classifier approaches, hand-crafted
 The second component in Open-CyKG is NER, which acts as rules approaches, and neural network approaches. The first two
both a stand-alone NLP application and a pre-processing phase approaches can be further classified into two categories, either
for several NLP tasks including information extraction, question deploying shallow syntactic analyses or dependency parsing techanswering, and KG construction [11,12]. It has been significantly niques. In this section, we focus on neural network approaches
researched in different domains but only a few studies have tar- and previous work in the cybersecurity domain.
geted the cybersecurity domain. We demonstrate the importance
of a NER module in KG construction and refinement. 2.1.1. Neural network approaches
 One of the major challenges faced during the building process Deep neural network approaches have proven their reliability
of a KG is data redundancy and ambiguity. Consequently, to over- and success on a wide range of NLP tasks and recently made
come this challenge we employ refinement and canonicalization their way towards OIE systems as an alternative to feature-based
techniques to fuse information in the KG based on their contex- methods which are considered both time and effort-consuming
tualized word embeddings by using hierarchical agglomerative to correctly capture entities and linguistic features. In 2018, Cui
clustering for entity grouping. Various empirical analyses to valiet al. [14] developed a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) encoder–
date the components of Open-CyKG were carried out demonstratdecoder OIE framework that is constructed from a 3-layer Long
ing that OIE can highly support the development of knowledge
 Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [15]. By collecting training data from
bases. We address the above challenges by proposing a novel and
 high confidence state-of-the-art OIE systems, a variable-length
open cybersecurity KG model. The contributions presented in this
 sequence is inputted to the encoder. Subsequently, the resultwork involving different stages of Open-CyKG are as follows:
 ing compressed representation vector is used by the decoder
 • We contribute the first OIE-based KG in the cybersecurity to produce the output sequence. Additionally, in the same year,
 domain that does not limit extractions to a pre-specified set Stanovsky et al. [16] proposed a supervised OIE paradigm that utiof information. Our model integrates OIE and NER with KG lizes a Bidirectional LSTM (Bi-LSTM) transducer to train the neufusion techniques to produce an effective open cyber threat ral network for tuples extraction, authors also validate that OIE
 intelligence KG model: Open-CyKG. can immensely benefit from an automatic question answering-
 • We introduce an attention-based sequence-to-sequence OIE semantic role labeling extractor. In [17,18] a Bidirectional Gated
 model that outperforms state-of-the-art network architec- Recurrent Units (Bi-GRU) OIE model was introduced that levertures, hereby demonstrating its effectiveness in information ages contextualized word embeddings.
 extraction tasks. SpanOIE [19] is the first span OIE model that adapts the same
 • We develop a cybersecurity NER model to label promi- idea of modified span selection that is employed in co-reference
 nent words in this domain that achieves notable results resolution, syntactic parsing, and semantic role labeling. The span
 when compared against several baselines and state-of-the- model’s key benefit is visible when applied to token-based seart models. quence labeling models in which span-level syntactic information
 • We conduct a refinement and fusion process in Open-CyKG can be adequately exploited. Authors emphasize that features
 which uses the generated NER labels and contextualized of span level support better extraction quality. Cabral et al. inword embeddings to further enhance the quality of the troduced CrossOIE [20], a multilingual OIE model that deploys
 retrieved queries. convolution neural networks that support extractions in English,
 • We show that once Open-CyKG is created, information re- Spanish and Portuguese. The cross-language OIE model employs
 trieval can be performed efficiently using two sample a binary classifier that generates training features from crossqueries. language embeddings, hereby highlighting the importance of developing cross-lingual OIE systems as research is more focused on
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
 the English language only.
reviews previous work in OIE, NER, and KG, followed by our
proposed framework Open-CyKG in Section 3, while Section 4
 2.1.2. Information extraction in cybersecurity
presents results and evaluation of Open-CyKG. Finally, Section 5
concludes the paper along with future work discussion. To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has been performed that specifically explores OIE in the field of cybersecurity.
2. Related work However, several other information extraction techniques targeting the cybersecurity domain were recently proposed. In 2019,
 In this section, we review previous work performed on Open Gasmi et al. [4] proposed an LSTM-based Relation Extraction (RE)
Information Extraction (OIE), Named Entity Recognition (NER), system for mining predefined cybersecurity entities from text.
and Knowledge Graphs (KGs) in the literature with underlin- Contrasting to OIE, in RE task relations must be predetermined
ing previous work of the aforementioned tasks in the field of prior to extraction. The authors focus mostly on identifying relacybersecurity. tions that relate to vulnerabilities that link software with vendors
 2
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

or specific files. Another RE framework was introduced by Jones Kim et al. [25] built a NER system using a deep Bi-LSTM-CRF
et al. [3] that applies a bootstrapping pattern-based approach neural network to automatically extract named entities of cyber
for tuple extraction. Their model integrates active learning com- threats. The key idea is to incorporate several features in their
ponents that query the user to supply precise input into the proposed model, mainly characters based on Bag-Of-Character
system. Similar to Gasmi’s RE model, Jones et al. [3] use prede- (BOC) representations. Their predefined named entities consist
fined relations that correspond to attributes of vulnerability and of a diverse set of cybersecurity terms such as malware, hash,
software which are derived from a cybersecurity ontology, both and Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). Their model
RE models aim for a better understanding of vulnerability-related adapted character-level features, and additionally, GloVe [26] was
information. utilized to embed words.
 In addition to the cybersecurity RE model proposed by Gasmi
2.2. Named entity recognition state-of-the-art et al. [4] – discussed in Section 2.1.2 – they also introduced a
 NER system that exploits a Bi-LSTM-CRF neural network similar
 NER is a well-researched topic in several different domains, to the model proposed by [25] with the exception of adapting
where news and biomedical fields dominated the research in the word-level features instead of character-level ones. Alike [5], the
NER task compared to other less-popular fields like cybersecurity. NVD dataset was employed for training and testing purposes.
It is the task of identifying and locating named entities in un- Another deep learning approach that combines Bi-GRU with CNN
structured text corpora and classify them into a predetermined was designed by Simran et al. [27]. The Bi-GRU layer polishes the
set of categories like location, person, organization, date, and vectors prior to feeding them to the CNN layer, where features
time expressions. Over the last few years, Neural Network (NN) are fine-tuned before passing them to the CRF prediction layer.
techniques have taken over the lead in NER systems as they
minimize the need for human effort in constructing features and 2.3. Knowledge graph overview
rules necessary for achieving a decent level of accuracy. In this
section, we review the innovative NN approaches. With the arrival of the automatic information extraction and
 question answering era, KGs3 fulfilled the need of effectively mining structured knowledge from exhaustive texts. In this section,
2.2.1. Neural network approaches
 we start by briefly presenting the most popular KG applications
 Deep learning systems require minimal feature engineering
 and other NLP tasks that can benefit from KGs, followed by
without essentially requiring lexicons or ontologies, thereby makwalking through different methods to build KGs and different
ing them more domain independent. Amongst the first NN-based
 canonicalization techniques. Finally, we review previous KG work
NER systems introduced in 2008 is [21], where a single Conin the cybersecurity domain.
volutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture was utilized to
create a multi-tasking learning system that predicts named en-
 2.3.1. Knowledge graph applications
tities, POS tags, and semantically similar words. Additionally,
 The first KG was introduced by Google [28] in 2012, with
the authors demonstrated that simultaneous task-learning enthe main objective of enhancing query results and further enhances the model’s generalization. GRAM-CNN [22] is another
 riching the overall search experience of end-users. This was
NER approach that uses CNN for biomedical entity extraction.
 the start that ignited research in KG and the development of
The authors of [22] used character embeddings instead of word
 other KG-based applications. DBPedia [29] is a well-known multiembeddings to get a more informative representation of the
 lingual KG project that permits users to retrieve information
words, where labels are predicted via a Conditional Random Field
 through semantic queries; data in DBPedia is mainly acquired
(CRF) layer.
 from Wikipedia infoboxes. Freebase [30] is a collaborative knowl-
 RNNs paved their way to the NER task by either employedge base where community members compose the data, also
ing LSTM or GRU networks. CharNER [23] is a character-level
 described as‘‘an openly shared database of the world’s Knowledge’’.
tagger that exploits stacked Bi-LSTM for encoding patterns; a
 It is worth noting that Freebase powered a part of Google’s
decoder is then utilized to transform the generated character-
 KG, however, it went offline in 2016 and was succeeded by
level probability representation to word-level tags. Opposing to
 Wikidata [31].
the character-level model, in 2016, Yang et al. [24] introduced
 In addition to the aforementioned applications, KG also aided
a multi-tasking, language-independent NER model that concate- several NLP tasks, from information extraction [32,33] and quesnates both character-level and word-level features. To encode tion answering [34] to recommendation systems [35].
both of the aforementioned features, a hierarchical GRU is utilized
before passing its output to a CRF layer for sequence tagging 2.3.2. Knowledge graph construction and canonicalization
prediction. There are several manners to construct a KG. It can be curated
 from existing knowledge bases like YAGO [36] and Wikipedia,
2.2.2. Named entity recognition in cybersecurity where the latter was mainly used in building DBPedia [29], or the
 As the demand for automatic text processing and information KG can be populated and modified by users as in Freebase [30]
extraction relatively increased in all domains, NER found its way and Wikidata [31]. A third option is using information extraction
to the cybersecurity field. Nonetheless, from a technical perspec- techniques to obtain data from unstructured or semi-structured
tive, NER systems introduced for the cybersecurity domain are text to create the KG. As stated in [37], whichever of the three
highly comparable to the aforementioned systems. methods is utilized to build the KG, it will never be entirely
 Bridges et al. [5] implemented a maximum entropy model for correct or complete. As is the case in DBPedia, although it has
labeling named entities on three different cybersecurity datasets: almost 4.6 million entities, only half of them include fewer than
Microsoft Security Bulletin, National Vulnerability Database five relations. Hence, KG canonicalization is required to overcome
(NVD), and Metasploit Framework database, all of which were
made publicly available by the authors. Average perception is 3 Knowledge Graph can be defined as a form of a data structure, which
trained on a fragment of the datasets, while constantly mon- is composed of nodes and edges that are leveraged as a way to manage and
itoring successful entity classifications. Moreover, unigram and illustrate information in such manner that users can efficiently query and obtain
bigram features were also included. data on a specific topic.

 3
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

this challenge by employing fusion and refinement techniques to to a predefined set of labels, and a KG construction and fusion
improve the overall quality of the KG, which might result in a phase where extracted triples from the OIE phase are illustrated.
trade-off between accuracy and coverage of the KG [38]. The KG is constructed such that the extracted entities represent
 In [39], an attribute character embedding that is formed on the KG nodes and edges correspond to the extracted relations that
representation learning is created. The model uses the aforemen- couple the entities.
tioned embeddings to distinguish similarities between entities
in a KG. Additionally, transitivity rules are applied to further 3.1. Neural OIE model
enhance the attributes of an entity and assist in the entity linking
process. Another way to ensure that similar entities and relations Our OIE model is schematically presented in Fig. 3. It is an
in a KG lie in the same space is by using entity descriptors as upgrade on our previous OIE work described in [17] and [18]. We
deployed by Zhong et al. in [40]. The alignment model produced tackle OIE as a sequence labeling task using the BIO (Beginning,
by the authors of [40] does not require dependencies on specific Inside, and Outside) labeling scheme [48] in such a way that the
data sources, therefore it can be integrated into any KG as long as resulting outcome is a set of overlapping tuples for each sentence.
the entities are identified. Entity linking is another way of canon- Due to the fact that RNNs have the capacity of storing informaicalization, by mapping entities in the text to existing entities in tion in their hidden units, they are considered a suitable choice
a KG as in [41,42]. While entity disambiguation is deemed as a for handling sequential data when compared to feed-forward
sub-task of entity linking, it is the process of linking the identified artificial neural networks like CNNs that also struggle to capentity in a KG to a ground truth entity as in [43,44]. ture long-distance dependencies between words. Nevertheless,
 RNNs are harder to train with longer sequences owing to vanish-
2.3.3. Knowledge graphs in cybersecurity ing and exploding gradient descent complications, which leads
 Following the same trend of the two aforementioned NLP the performance to noticeably degrade. As RNNs are trained by
tasks, OIE and NER, KG in the cybersecurity domain is one of the back-propagation through time, the further we back-propagate
most under-researched domains compared to the more popular through several time steps, the smaller the gradient gets up
fields such as news and biomedical domains. Narayanan et al. [45] until it vanishes or explodes. As a solution, extended versions of
built a collaborative framework with the help of semantically RNNs were introduced – LSTMs and GRUs – to mitigate vanishing
rich knowledge representations. Their cognitive assistant system gradient issues by deploying appropriate gates to permit the
designated for early detection of cybersecurity attacks acquires gradient to flow effectively while maintaining long-term depenvulnerability-related data from recently published threat intel- dencies [15,49]. GRUs are regarded as a less complex variation
ligence reports from multiple sources such as online blogs and of LSTMs, both are built on the gating concept, where LSTM’s
CVE reports, whereas information is later illustrated in a pre- architecture is compiled of three gates; input, output and forget
constructed KG that is previously loaded with information such while GRUs couple the input and forget gates into a single update
as early detected threats, attack patterns, and tools required to gate. Our choice of deploying GRUs instead of LSTMs is also
carry out an attack. motivated by the fact that GRUs utilize fewer training parameters,
 As an alternative to constructing a KG from data about vul- resulting in quicker execution and training times in contrast to
nerabilities, Piplai et al. [12] populate a cybersecurity KG from LSTMs.
malware After Action Reports (AAR), as they enclose insightful In addition to embedding the word and its corresponding POS,
analyses of cybersecurity incidents, hereby delivering reliable and passing them as an input to our neural network, the feature
information to security analysts. As AARs provide crucial data vector is further enriched by passing the predicate of the phrase,
about detection and mitigation techniques of attacks, they can as predicates are regarded as the building block of any sentence.
also aid in dealing with new unidentified cybersecurity incidents The input feature vector (F .V ) is represented in Eq. (1).
by matching pattern similarities with a predefined incident. Addi-
 F .V = (Emb(w ) ⊕ Emb(POS(w )) ⊕ Emb(wPred ))|w ∈ S (1)
tionally, to ease the extraction phase, a traditional malware entity
extractor that is based on Stanford NER [46] was created, that was Where ⊕ represents the concatenation of the 3 inputs: word
trained on CVE and security blogs to label each word accordingly. denoted as w , its corresponding POS obtained using the NLTK
 A further cybersecurity KG that is constantly maintained is toolkit [50] POS(w ) and the predicate of the sentence wPred , where
SEPSES, introduced by Kiesling et al. [47]. SEPSES encapsulates each word belongs to a sentence S. All the prior mentioned inputs
and relates essential information ranging from vulnerabilities to are embedded Emb using contextualized word embeddings as
attack patterns and weaknesses. Data in the KG is populated discussed in Section 4.2.1.
from several sources and amendments are instantly incorporated The embedded feature vector is then passed to two Bi-GRU
in the real-word, for example, CVE data is continuously fed to layers. As shown in Fig. 3, Bi-GRU is composed of two GRUs
their model and updated every two hours, which is valuable in operating in a reverse direction, the significance in utilizing a
capturing alerts caused by intrusion detection systems in parallel Bi-GRU rather than a single direction GRU is that information is
with providing updated vulnerability assessments. captured in both directions, forward and backward during each
 Nevertheless, the aforementioned work in this section either time-step to efficiently perform sequence labeling.
depends on structured text to populate the KG or limits extrac- The outputted tensor from the Bi-GRU layer is then passed
tions to a predefined set of information. For the work of [12], through an attention layer [51] that is based on an additive attenthe authors employ RE while authors of [47] completely rely on tion module. Most of the proposed OIE neural models discussed
Apache Jena for the triple formulation of specific relations. This in Section 2.1.1 are formulated in a way such that all words
further demonstrates the strength of Open-CyKG, as it employs have the same level of importance, however, it is important to
OIE so it is not restricted to a predetermined set of relations or highlight that not all words in a sentence have an equivalent
an ontology to extract information from cybersecurity reports. level of contribution in the OIE task. To address this issue, we
 employ the attention mechanism in our network to learn the
3. Open-CyKG framework varying significance of words in each phrase and aggregate the
 output to the following double-layered Time Distributed Dense
 Our Open-CyKG framework is presented in Fig. 2. The pipeline (TDD) layer that employs a consistent dense layer to the passed
is composed of three main modules; a neural OIE system to ex- tensor at each time step. As a final point, the tensor produced by
tract relation triples from unstructured APT reports, a cybersecu- the TDD layers is fed into a SoftMax layer, where the output is an
rity NER model that identifies and classifies each word according individual probability distribution covering all possible tags.
 4
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

Fig. 2. The Open-CyKG pipeline is composed of three primary building blocks: OIE, NER modules, as well as fusion and KG refinement techniques that result in a
canonicalized open KG.

Fig. 3. Our OIE model takes the concatenation of all inputs and passes the input to the two Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units (Bi-GRU) layers, followed by an
attention layer, two Time Distributed Dense (TDD) layers, and finally, a SoftMax layer for prediction.

3.2. Cybersecurity-NER Initially, words are translated into their respective embeddings
 and are progressed directly to the following layer. Since long de-
 The task of classifying cybersecurity entities in our dataset
resembles the efforts of prior research discussed in Section 2.2.1, pendencies modeling in NER is essential we also opted to deploy
however, with a differently designed neural network as illus- an RNN. To capture both, backward and forward information,
trated in Fig. 4. In a similar manner to our OIE approach, we
formulate the NER task as a sequence labeling problem with BIO our proposed cybersecurity-NER deploys a Bi-GRU layer which
taggers, as it is considered the most suitable tagging module for outputs a tensor that is later passed to a TDD layer. Finally, a CRF
NER specifically in neural models employing CRF [52], where each
 prediction layer labels each word in our dataset by generating
word in the dataset is labeled according to a set of predefined
entities based on its position. likelihood distributions over every available tag.
 5
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Several sources of information are used when constructing
 a KG, which will possibly prompt duplication. As a result, it is
 essential to apply refinement and fusion techniques to address
 this matter. The leading step is triple refinement: this two stepprocess involves removing redundant and vague information, and
 entity blending where identical entities are merged together after
 identifying and removing non-essential words to preserve only
 informative entities. The filtration task also involves eliminating
 uninformative triples generated from the OIE phase, in which all
 words forming the three extracted components are not assigned
 any named entity labels from the cybersecurity NER phase.
 Another common setback in the construction process that
 is not captured in the previous step is entity disambiguation,
 which can be perceived in two contradictory ways, the first is
 ensuring that an entity represents the same semantic concept to
 all its connected nodes, while the second is unifying and merging
 entities that represent identical concepts. Entity disambiguation
 in KG is considered a research problem on its own that is out
 of the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we briefly attend to
 this issue by performing entity fusion using contextualized word
Fig. 4. Our implemented cybersecurity NER neural model architecture that is embeddings to capture the semantics of entities. In our work, we
composed of four main layers; Embedding, Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Units experiment with several word embeddings discussed in detail in
(Bi-GRU), Time Distributed Dense (TDD), and Conditional Random Field (CRF) Section 4.2.1.
for label prediction.
 The potential of using word embeddings in Open-KG canonicalization to address ambiguity in the generated knowledge graph
 has been demonstrated by the works of [38,54]. By first averaging
3.3. Knowledge graph construction and canonicalization the generated word embeddings of all subjects in an entity,
 we cluster entities by carrying out Hierarchical Agglomerative
 To produce Open-CyKG, relation triples extracted from the OIE Clustering (HAC) by employing cosine similarity as a distance
stage are processed and outlined in the KG as defined in Eq. (2): metric. Our choice behind HAC is motivated by the fact that it
 does not require predefining the number of clusters in advance.
KG = {(nh, e, nt)|nh, nt ∈ E , e ∈ R} (2) Additionally, it supports complete linkage clustering, similar to
 the concept of farthest neighbor clustering, where initially each
Where the set of the extracted OIE triples (nh, e, nt) are composed average embedding is a cluster on its own, and in each step
of a node head nh and a node tail nt in which both belong to the two clusters having the smallest maximum pairwise distance
the entities E, both nodes are linked together using an edge e are merged. The complete linkage clustering is fitting in KG
that represents the relation R that lies between the two entities. canonicalization as demonstrated in [38] as small-sized clusters
Additionally, named entity tags are allocated to each node as a are expected as opposed to single and average linkage clustering.
property. An uncanonicalized sample of the generated KG using Fig. 6 illustrates the canonicalized version of Fig. 5, where nodes
Neo4J [53] is illustrated in Fig. 5. are merged after the clustering process.

 Fig. 5. An uncanonicalized sample of the created KG using Neo4J.

 6
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Fig. 6. Canonicalized version of Fig. 5 using Neo4J.

 The final phase is determining a representative for each clus- 4.1. MalwareDB dataset
ter. In line with the work of [38] we calculate the mean of all
the generated elements’ embeddings weighted by the number of As the world is digitally growing, devices are more prone to
occurrences of each element in the input. The entity with the malware attacks which might lead to misfortunate events ranging
minimum distance to the weighted cluster mean is selected as from unauthorized access to personal data to device damage.
a representative. MalwareDB [60] is an annotated dataset based around Malware
 To further clarify the importance of canonicalization in ad- Attribute Enumeration and Characterization (MAEC) vocabulary
dressing ambiguity and redundancy, consider the following two that primarily outlines malware characteristics gathered from 39
triple extractions: <Barack Obama, born in, Hawaii> and <Obama, APT reports. Fig. 7 shows a sample from the aforementioned
served as, 44th U.S President>. In an uncanonicalized version of the dataset with the extracted triples from the OIE task.
KG, the two extractions would be included separately without any OIE is the primary building block in Open-CyKG to construct
connecting edges, as Barack Obama and Obama are perceived as the KG, so our main objective is to effectively identify relation
two distinct entities. This may lead to a remarkable impact when triples necessary for successful querying. Hence, training data
querying data from the KG as it will not return all information is crucial in our work. Unfortunately, one of the ongoing challinked with Barack Obama. Such KGs will also suffer from re- lenges is the lack of BIO-labeled data, specifically in understudied
dundant facts, which is undesired. Canonicalizing KGs using HAC domains such as cybersecurity. Although the 39 APT reports
clustering as described above guarantees relation transitivity, that that constitute the MalwareDB dataset originally contain 6,819
both entities —Barack Obama and Obama— are fused to represent sentences, we were only able to classify 1,910 sentences as infora single entity. Several other canonicalization approaches and mative sentences, which challengingly formed our training, test,
entity linking techniques are proposed in [55,56]. and validation sets. Uninformative sentences can be defined as:

 • Sentences that are composed of ‘O’: Outside labels only.
4. Results and evaluation • Phrases without any relationship labels.
 • Sentences that contain only a single entity.
 In this section, we report the utility of Open-CyKG. KG curation
is the task of assessing the value of the constructed KG, this Yet, currently there is no alternative dataset available in the
process is commonly fulfilled by experts in the field. However, cybersecurity domain with BIO labeling.
nowadays, it is deemed a tedious task to be done by humans,
especially with densely populated KGs, or even more compli- 4.2. Experimental results and analysis: OIE
cated ones incorporating several domains [57]. Nonetheless, KG
validation is still an open challenge, hence we address this mat- In this section we assess the outcome of our proposed
ter by evaluating each component in our model separately to attention-based OIE model, we follow the framework configurareflect the quality of Open-CyKG. We also present a set of aux- tion and dataset as discussed in Sections 3.1 and 4.1 respectively.
iliary experiments to further analyze our proposed OIE and NER
models. All our experiments were implemented using the Keras 4.2.1. Word embeddings
framework [58] with the TensorFlow backend [59]. We start by In recent years various types of embeddings have been prodescribing the dataset used to build the KG in detail along with posed, varying from character and word embeddings to sentence
its inherent constraints. and document embeddings. Nonetheless, they all provide the
 7
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Fig. 7. An example of OIE performed on a sentence from APT reports, where the Action tag represents the relation that links the two entities together.

 Table 1 Another interesting conclusion that can be drawn from our ab-
 Four embedding techniques and their respective dimensionality lation study is the adoption of an attention mechanism to fully
 employed in our OIE model.
 leverage the bidirectional context information as it is also elabo-
 Embedding technique Vector dimensionality
 rated by the authors of [66] and [8].
 GloVe [26] 100
 It should be emphasized that despite the fact that achieving
 BERT [62] 3072
 XLNet [63] 2048 a decent recall and precision would be the optimal situation,
 XLM-RoBERTa [64] 1024 precision is more crucial in our work as it reflects the certainty
 of the extracted information. In KG false positives are expensive
 to maintain, in a setting of a high-scoring recall and a lower
 precision, the KG would be populated with uninformative or
same function of mapping textual input to semantically meanfalse information which will result in a less-efficient querying
ingful vector representations. The innovative contextualized word
 experience. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the highest
embeddings are capable of capturing dense semantic and synprecision achieved by our model was 62.9% using BERT, tradingtactic features of a word, by incorporating context into the genoff to a lower recall of 54.7%, which resulted in a decrease of 0.9%
erated embeddings. In our OIE task, three inputs are embedin F-measure when compared to our highest achieving score of
ded and fed to the network, making the choice of embedding
 59.4% reported in Table 2.
fundamental, hereby we opted to experiment using different
 Our model’s results are sensitive to hyperparameter alternaword embedding techniques, by selecting one conventional nontions, thus a grid search was performed to single out the optimal
contextualized embedding – GloVe [26] – and three contextualnumber of training epochs and batch size. The hyperparameter
ized embeddings with varying dimensionality and trained on a
 configurations that realized the best results are reported in Tadiverse set of domains. In order to carry out our experiments, we
 ble 3. The hidden size of all Bi-GRU layers is set to 128, which
utilized Flair [61], a powerful open-source framework developed
 is also the same number of units used in the two TDD layers.
by Zalando Research that provides a unified interface for a wide
 For regularization reasons to prevent over-fitting, the dropout
range of state-of-the-art word, document, and sentence embedrate is adjusted to 0.1. Moreover, early stopping is employed to
dings. The employed embeddings along with their dimensionality
 terminate training based on the model’s performance on the deare shown in Table 1.
 velopment set. Furthermore, a linear activation function, Rectified
 Linear Unit (ReLU) [67] was applied in the two TDD layers, while
4.2.2. Experiment and evaluation on MalwareDB
 the Adam optimizer [68] was utilized to train our model.
 To assess the competence of our model we have analyzed it
 Additionally, as the limited size of the training set influences
rigorously with different experimental setups and word embeddings. As observed in Table 2, Bi-GRU achieves an overall higher the neural network’s performance, we were able to further evalscore than Bi-LSTM neural network models. More precisely, our uate our proposed attention-based OIE model by experimenting
Bi-GRU + Attention model scores an F-measure of 59.4% which is on a larger annotated news dataset [69], which is composed
2.2% higher than when using a Bi-LSTM + Attention network, both of 2906 training sentences. An increase of 3.2% in F-measure
achieved the highest score with XLM-RoBERTa embeddings. was achieved, emphasizing that the limited size of training data
 We performed an ablation study to measure the effectiveness indeed plays an important role.
of the attention mechanism by testing on a Bi-GRU network
which resembles the model introduced by Sarhan et al. [17] 4.3. Experimental results and analysis: NER
and [18]. By removing the attention component, the Bi-GRU
model achieved an F-measure score of 56.8%, verifying the impact As the MalwareDB dataset has no named entities annotaof deploying the attention mechanism as it contributed to a 2.6% tion we could not train or evaluate our model based on Malincrease in F-measure. Despite the fact that GRUs and LSTMs wareDB extractions. In this section, we will discuss the datasets
capture long-range dependencies better than traditional RNNs, used to train and validate our NER neural network described in
they do not have the ability to direct the focus to some of the Section 3.2.
input words to point out the words that are important to our
task, which further demonstrates the importance of deploying 4.3.1. Dataset
attention mechanisms in information extraction tasks. To perform NER, necessary for refinement and labeling of KG
 To further evaluate the potential of our attention-based OIE nodes, we used two different training sets, each containing a
model, we compare our model against yet another prior state- diverse set of labels. The output from the two-pass process is then
of-the-art neural OIE network that is composed of Bi-LSTM as merged to assign labels from the two datasets to named entities.
proposed by Stanovsky et al. [16]. Alike the comparison to the The first dataset Microsoft Security Bulletins, utilized in [5], is
previous state-of-the-art, our model was able to achieve a higher also annotated and made widely accessible by the authors. It
F-measure by 4.2%. BERT embeddings attained the highest results is composed of 5072 sentences discussing vulnerabilities and
in both networks, Bi-LSTM and Bi-GRU. security flaws in Microsoft’s software products along with various
 The rationale behind Bi-GRUs performing better than Bi-LSTMs patch and mitigation information. A random sample drawn from
is due to GRUs’ ability to expose the complete memory, unlike the Microsoft Security Bulletin dataset is shown in Fig. 8. The
LSTMs. Additionally, LSTMs have more gates than GRU, which second dataset employed in [25] is a malware-specific dataset
causes the gradients to flow through which leads to steady collected from various CTI reports resulting in a total of 3450
progress being more complex to maintain after many epochs [65]. sentences with predefined named entities that relate to malware,
 8
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Table 2
 Results of our Open-CyKG: OIE model (Open-CyKGBi-GRU+Att ). Recall, precision, and F-measure are used as evaluation
 metrics. Along with the deployed word embedding that resulted in the highest scores.
 Model Network architecture Word embedding Results
 Recall Precision F-Measure
 Sarhan et al. [17], [18] Bi-GRU BERT 54.9% 58.9% 56.8%
 Stanovsky et al. [16] Bi-LSTM BERT 53.0% 57.5% 55.2%
 Open-CyKGBi-LSTM+Att Bi-LSTM + Attention XLM-RoBERTa 55.7% 58.7% 57.2%
 Open-CyKGBi−GRU+Att Bi-GRU + Attention XLM-RoBERTa 57.2% 61.8% 59.4%

 Fig. 8. Sample from Microsoft Security Bulletin dataset with the named entity tags following the BIO tagging schema.

 Table 3 Table 4
 Hyperparameter settings used in our OIE model. Results of the Open-CyKG: NER model (Open-CyKGBi-GRU ). Both training and
 Hyperparameter Value testing are done on the Microsoft Security Bulletin dataset. Along with the
 original dataset baseline results as reported in [5] and Bi-LSTM + CRF network.
 Epochs 100 Recall, precision, and F-measure are used as evaluation metrics.
 Batches 50
 Bi-GRU 128 units Model Method Results
 TDD Activation Function ReLU Recall Precision F-Measure
 TDD units 128 units Bridges et al. [5] Hand-crafted Heuristic 75.3% 99.4% 77.8%
 Dropout Rate 0.1 Open-CyKGBi-LSTM Bi-LSTM + CRF 96.6% 97.4% 97.0%
 Optimizer Adam Open-CyKGBi−GRU Bi-GRU + CRF 98.7% 99.2% 98.9%

 Table 5
which are considered key elements in our malware-based APT Results of our Open-CyKG:NER model (Open-CyKGBi-GRU ). Both training and
reports. The predefined tags in both datasets with their respective testing are done on the CTI dataset, the original baseline results in [25] are
ratio in the training set are illustrated in Fig. 9. It is worth noting reported along with the CNN-based network. Recall, precision, and F-measure
 are used as evaluation metrics.
that when two labels are assigned to a single word, we select the
 Model Network Architecture Results
malware-specific CTI report label since it is more closely related
to our APT reports dataset. Recall Precision F-Measure
 Simran et al. BOC [25] BOC: Bi-LSTM + CRF 70.5% 80.3% 75.1%
4.3.2. Experiments and evaluation Simran et al. CNN [25] CNN + Bi-LSTM + CRF 71.0% 78.9% 75.0%
 Open-CyKGBi-LSTM Bi-LSTM + CRF 70.4% 71.9% 71.1%
 For both datasets, we split the corpus into two partitions, 80% Open-CyKGBi−GRU Bi-GRU + CRF 80.8% 78.9% 79.8%
for training and 20% for testing, with setting apart a fraction of
0.1 of the training set for validation purposes to assess the loss
at the end of each epoch. To certify the quality of our model,
we performed five-fold cross-validation. We opted for stratified out in this experiment; the first is the baseline model that orig-
K-fold as it takes the cross-validation process one step further inally annotated and constructed the CTI reports dataset which
by preserving the distribution of the class in both training and employed a BOC-based Bi-LSTM + CRF network architecture protest splits, to avoid unbalanced labels’ distribution. To validate posed by Simran et al. [25]. The second is a character-based
the efficiency of our NER network architecture, we compared our CNN that also uses a Bi-LSTM architecture. A pure Bi-LSTM +
model’s performance against the results of different baselines and CRF network is our third comparison that is trained with the
state-of-the-art models. same hyperparameters of our model. As it is observed when
 Table 4 shows the complete results of our NER model that comparing our model with the baseline, our model scored an
is employed in Open-CyKG on the Microsoft Security Bulletins F-measure of 79.8% which is 4.7% higher than that of Simran
dataset. We can clearly find that the proposed model outperforms et al. [25], the increase was mainly reflected by an increase in
 the recall of our model by 10.3%. In addition to reporting the
both the baselines and state-of-the-art model by scoring a 98.5%
 findings of their model on the CTI reports dataset, the authors
F-measure. More precisely, when comparing our Bi-GRU + CRF
 of [25] reported the score of using a CNN-based Bi-LSTM + CRF
results to the baseline reported by Bridges et al. [5] that employed
 network – the second comparison – which resulted in almost the
a traditional approach using hand-crafted rules, we can see that
 same score as the BOC system and 4.8% decrease in F-measure
our model outperforms by more than 20% of the F-measure score.
 when compared against the score of our model. Furthermore, in
In addition, there is an increase of 1.9% in the F-measure when line with the evaluation we carried out on the Microsoft Security
we compare our proposed Bi-GRU model to the Bi-LSTM network Bulletin dataset, we implemented a state-of-the-art Bi-LSTM+CRF
architecture with 50 batches and 30 epochs. network which achieved the lowest score among all other models
 It is observed that all models obtain decent precision, however reported in Table 5 by scoring an F-measure of 71.1% on 10
the overall performance of NN models significantly outperforms training epochs with a batch size of 50.
hand-crafted rules. The low recall achieved by Bridges et al. [5] In addition to the reasons mentioned in Section 4.2.2 on why
model contributed to this decrease, the rationale behind this is Bi-GRUs outperform Bi-LSTMs, in this experiment, we attribute
due to the large variation of expressions in natural language the increase to the nature of the CTI dataset used in this NER task,
specifically reflected in tasks such as NER and RE as it is also which is a small dataset with long sentences. This phenomenon
shown in the work of [70]. is also observed in the work of [71].
 The performance of our NER model on the second dataset – CTI Table 6 states our hyperparameter configurations that realized
reports – is presented in Table 5. Three comparisons are carried the reported scores in Tables 4 and 5 for both datasets. Bi-GRU
 9
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

Fig. 9. (a) Labels distribution in Microsoft Security Bulletin training dataset [5]. (b) Labels distribution in CTI training dataset [25]. Note that label ‘O’: Outside, takes
up the majority of the words’ labels but it is removed from the chart for better illustration of the distribution of informative tags.

Table 6 Table 7
Hyperparameter settings used in our NER model on both datasets. Canonicalization results.
 Hyperparameter Microsoft security bulletins CTI reports Metric Results
 Epochs 30 10 Recall Precision F-Measure
 Batches 50 30 Macro 86.5% 78.9% 82.6%
 Bi-GRU 50 units 50 units Micro 90.5% 74.4% 81.7%
 TDD Activation Function ReLU ReLU Pairwise 79.6% 54.7% 64.8%
 TDD units 50 units 50 units
 Dropout Rate 0.1 0.1
 Embedding Keras Keras
 Optimizer Adam Adam
 the input. In a similar manner, micro recall (Rmicro ) is the inverse
 of (Pmicro ) as shown in Eq. (6).
 1 ∑
layers and TDD layers have a mutual number of units – 50 – with Pmicro (C , G) = maxg ∈G |c ∩ g | (5)
ReLU selected as an activation function in the TDD layer. Similar N
 c ∈C
to our OIE network, the drop-out rate is set to 0.1 to prevent over- Rmicro (C , G) = Pmicro (G, C ) (6)
fitting and early stopping is utilized. All models are trained with
the Adam optimization algorithm. Pairwise: A hit in cluster C indicates that two mentions refer
 Although the MalwareDB dataset has no annotated named en- to the same gold entity. Pairwise precision (Ppair wise ) measures the
tity tags, the results indicate that our model can effectively label ratio of the number of hits (#hitsc ) in C to total possible pairs
cybersecurity-related terms. To further validate the performance (#pairsc ) in C [38], where #pairsc = |c |∗(|c |−1)/2. Eqs. (7) and (8)
of our NER model, a random sample of 10% was selected from the define pairwise precision (Ppair wise ) and pairwise recall (Rpair wise )
MalwareDB test set and manually annotated to compare against respectively.
the model’s predicted labels. When training on Microsoft Security ∑
 #hitsc
Bulletins dataset our model achieved a recall, precision, and F- Ppair wise (C , G) = ∑ c ∈C (7)
 #pairs c
measure of 85.5%, 87.7%, and 86.6% respectively. While training ∑c ∈C
on CTI reports resulted in a recall, precision, and F-measure of c ∈C #hitsc
 Rpair wise (C , G) = ∑ (8)
83.6%, 82.3%, and 82.9% respectively. g ∈G #pairsg

 In all cases, F-measure is defined as the harmonic mean of
4.4. Canonicalization evaluation
 the model’s precision and recall. The optimal threshold value
 chosen for HAC clustering was decided upon using a grid search
 To evaluate canonicalization using contextualized word emon the validation set. Due to the fact that XLM-RoBERTa was
beddings carried out in Open-CyKG, we manually construct a gold
 the highest-scoring language model in our OIE phase, we used
standard of clusters that represents the ground truth clusters of
 the generated embeddings to compute the distance metric. It
all extracted entities. We follow the work of [38,54,72] by using
 should be emphasized that the word embeddings used in the
macro, micro and pairwise metrics to evaluate canonicalization.
 clustering phase are generated based on the whole input sentence
We concisely explain these metrics below. Let C be the clusters
 to fully leverage the concept of contextual embeddings. Results
produced by Open-CyKG canonicalization, and G denotes the gold
 are shown in Table 7. We observe that the recall achieved in
standard clusters.
 all metrics is moderate to good, in line with canonicalization
 Macro: Macro precision (Pmacro ) can be defined as a fraction of
 results reported in related works [38,54,72]. Nonetheless, If we
pure clusters in C formed by our approach that are linked to the
 look at pairwise precision, we can notice it is relatively low, which
same gold standard G. While Macro recall (Rmacro ) is the inverse of
 indicates that not all pairs of entities in C refer to the same gold
(Pmacro ), by interchanging the roles of C and G as seen in Eqs. (3)
 entity.
and (4).
 |{c ∈ C : ∃g ∈ G : g ⊇ c }| 4.5. Demonstrating information retrieval using open-CyKG
Pmacro (C , G) = (3)
 |C |
Rmacro (C , G) = Pmacro (G, C ) (4) In this section, we present two sample queries, a general one
 targeting malware, while the other is a more specific query that
 Micro: Micro precision (Pmicro ) measures the purity of the focuses on watering hole attacks. To further illustrate the effect
clusters C under the assumption that the most frequent gold of the applied fusion technique, we perform an ablation analysis
entity of the mentions in a cluster is the correct entity [73], as by solely applying the first phase of our refinement process as
depicted in Eq. (5), where N denotes the number of mentions in explained in Section 3.3. The ablation analysis is supported by
 10
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

 Fig. 10. Two sample query results as retrieved from Open-CyKG..

analyzing the results of the queries to inspect the outcome of OIE framework, which we validated by performing an ablation
word embeddings in Open-CyKG canonicalization. study and compared against state-of-the-art OIE models. In both
 Cypher [74] is the official supported query language in Neo4j. cases, our attention-based model achieved the best results. An-
It is an SQL-inspired declarative querying language that per- other interesting option would be a transformer-based model. A
mits users to retrieve data from a graph database. The queries transformer-based model relies on self-attention, at each time
performed along with their Cypher translations are shown in step there is direct access to all other steps, which practically
Fig. 10.
 means that there is no room for information loss. However, most
 In the first query, Open-CyKG was able to retrieve diverse
 transformer-based models have a quadratic complexity, which
information as long as it is directly connected to a ‘malware’ node.
 limits the token length as a trade-off between performance and
The majority of the retrieved data captures valuable insights on
malware threats, whereas in some cases the extraction can be memory usage, resulting in truncating training sentences [75].
considered less informative such as‘Malware via e-mail’ , or unin- The authors of [76] introduced a transformer-based OIE model,
formative such as ’Malware sends data captured by the malware’. however, its performance was not evaluated against any state-
In the second query, the retrieved data had to relate to both ‘at- of-the-art neural network model. Thus as a future direction, we
tackers’ and ‘watering hole attacks’, since this query has a higher intend to further evaluate different neural OIE research trends
level of specificity it only results in two extractions, although including transformer-based models on benchmark datasets.
‘Attackers use watering hole attacks to infect their victims.’ might be Despite their value and practicality, KGs usually suffer from
interpreted as an uninformative extraction. Nevertheless, when incompleteness, redundancy, and ambiguity that might translate
the queries are performed on the canonicalized version of Open- to uninformative query results. First and foremost, we are in the
CyKG the KG was able to deliver more insights on the requested process of acquiring more cybersecurity data from AAR reports to
data. Additionally, as the generated named entity tags discussed
 carry out a large-scale experiment. In future work we will shift
in Section 4.3.1 are assigned as properties to nodes and edges,
 our attention to KG completion and link prediction to further
they can be leveraged to eliminate uninformative or ambiguous
 enhance the strength of the generated KG. Additionally, we would
extractions while querying.
 As observed, canonicalization using contextualized word em- like to explore the possibility of extending the KG model to
beddings aids in capturing more information, As a result, security include a dynamic reasoning component instead of completely
analysts can query Open-CyKG to retrieve data on a specific relying on static information to build the KG. A final interesting
cyber entity albeit being expressed differently among various APT addition would be to construct a multi-lingual or cross-lingual
reports. KG to support machine translation-based applications. All in all,
 we foresee that in the near future KGs will become sufficiently
5. Conclusion and future work mature to provide added value to daily practices in cybersecurity
 and beyond.
 We introduced Open-CyKG: a novel framework that combines
features from several components along with fusion techniques
using contextualized embeddings to generate a knowledge graph CRediT authorship contribution statement
from advanced persistent threat reports. Our proposed framework is developed from two core components, an attention-based
 Injy Sarhan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data
OIE and a cybersecurity NER system.
 curation, Writing – original draft. Marco Spruit: Conceptualiza-
 We validated the quality of the generated KG by evaluattion, Writing - review & editing, Validation, Funding acquisition,
ing each component separately. We evaluated our cybersecurity
NER model against several baselines and state-of-the-art mod- Investigation, Supervision.
els on two different datasets. Our model was able to deliver
the best performance. The attention mechanism is a revolution-
 Declaration of competing interest
ary theory that transformed the way researchers design neural
networks. Not only does it have an essential role in various
neural network-based NLP tasks to enhance performance, but it The authors declare that they have no known competing finanalso offers important insights on how the models are operat- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
ing. This has motivated the development of our attention-based to influence the work reported in this paper.
 11
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

Acknowledgments [21] R. Collobert, J. Weston, A unified architecture for natural language processing: Deep neural networks with multitask learning, in: Proceedings of the
 25th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2008, pp. 160–167.
 This work was made possible with funding from the European [22] Q. Zhu, X. Li, A. Conesa, C. Pereira, GRAM-CNN: a deep learning ap-
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under proach with local context for named entity recognition in biomedical text,
grant agreement no. 883588 (GEIGER). The opinions expressed Bioinformatics 34 (9) (2018) 1547–1554.
and arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the [23] O. Kuru, O.A. Can, D. Yuret, Charner: Character-level named entity recognition, in: Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference
official views of the funding body.
 on Computational Linguistics: Technical Papers, 2016, pp. 911–921.
 [24] Z. Yang, R. Salakhutdinov, W.W. Cohen, Multi-task cross-lingual sequence
References tagging from scratch, 2016, CoRR abs/1603.06270, 2016. arXiv:1603.06270,
 URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06270.
 [1] E.R. Russo, A. Di Sorbo, C.A. Visaggio, G. Canfora, Summarizing vulner- [25] G. Kim, C. Lee, J. Jo, H. Lim, Automatic extraction of named entities of cyber
 abilities’ descriptions to support experts during vulnerability assessment threats using a deep Bi-LSTM-CRF network, Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern. 11
 activities, J. Syst. Softw. 156 (2019) 84–99. (10) (2020) 2341–2355.
 [2] H. Gasmi, J. Laval, A. Bouras, Information extraction of cybersecurity [26] J. Pennington, R. Socher, C.D. Manning, Glove: Global vectors for word
 concepts: An LSTM approach, Appl. Sci. 9 (19) (2019) 3945. representation, in: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
 [3] C.L. Jones, R.A. Bridges, K.M. Huffer, J.R. Goodall, Towards a relation
 extraction framework for cyber-security concepts, in: Proceedings of the [27] K. Simran, S. Sriram, R. Vinayakumar, K. Soman, Deep learning approach
 10th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research Conference, 2015, for intelligent named entity recognition of cyber security, in: International
 pp. 1–4. Symposium on Signal Processing and Intelligent Recognition Systems,
 Springer, 2019, pp. 163–172.
 [4] T.-M. Georgescu, B. Iancu, A. Zamfiroiu, M. Doinea, C.E. Boja, C. Cartas, A
 [28] S. Amit, Introducing the knowledge graph: Things, not strings, Official Blog
 survey on named entity recognition solutions applied for cybersecurity-
 (of Google), 2012 (2012).
 related text processing, in: Proceedings of Fifth International Congress on
 [29] J. Lehmann, R. Isele, M. Jakob, A. Jentzsch, D. Kontokostas, P.N. Mendes, S.
 Information and Communication Technology, Springer, 2021, pp. 316–325.
 Hellmann, M. Morsey, P. Van Kleef, S. Auer, et al., Dbpedia–a large-scale,
 [5] R.A. Bridges, C.L. Jones, M.D. Iannacone, K.M. Testa, J.R. Goodall, Automatic
 multilingual knowledge base extracted from wikipedia, Semantic Web 6
 labeling for entity extraction in cyber security, URL https://www.osti.gov/
 (2) (2015) 167–195.
 biblio/1143555.
 [30] K. Bollacker, C. Evans, P. Paritosh, T. Sturge, J. Taylor, Freebase: A col-
 [6] I. Muhammad, A. Kearney, C. Gamble, F. Coenen, P. Williamson, Open
 laboratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge,
 information extraction for knowledge graph construction, in: International
 in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
 Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications, Springer, 2020,
 Management of Data, 2008, pp. 1247–1250.
 pp. 103–113.
 [31] T. Pellissier Tanon, D. Vrandečić, S. Schaffert, T. Steiner, L. Pintscher, From
 [7] R. McMillan, Open threat intelligence, 2013, Online; https://www.gartner.
 freebase to wikidata: The great migration, in: Proceedings of the 25th
 com/doc/2487216/definition-threat-intelligence/. (Accessed 19-February-
 International Conference on World Wide Web, 2016, pp. 1419–1428.
 2021).
 [32] R. Hoffmann, C. Zhang, X. Ling, L. Zettlemoyer, D.S. Weld, Knowledge-
 [8] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez,
 based weak supervision for information extraction of overlapping relations,
 L.u. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, in: I. Guyon, U.V.
 in: Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, R. Garnett
 Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, 2011, pp.
 (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, Curran
 541–550.
 Associates, Inc., 2017, URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
 [33] H. Fei, Y. Ren, Y. Zhang, D. Ji, X. Liang, Enriching contextualized lan-
 3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
 guage model from knowledge graph for biomedical information extraction,
 [9] S. Gao, M.T. Young, J.X. Qiu, H.-J. Yoon, J.B. Christian, P.A. Fearn, G.D.
 Briefings Bioinform (2020).
 Tourassi, A. Ramanthan, Hierarchical attention networks for information
 [34] A. Bordes, S. Chopra, J. Weston, Question answering with subgraph emextraction from cancer pathology reports, J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc 25
 beddings, in: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods
 (3) (2018) 321–330.
 in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 615–620.
[10] G.-H. Liu, J.-Y. Yang, Z. Li, Content-based image retrieval using com- [35] H. Wang, M. Zhao, X. Xie, W. Li, M. Guo, Knowledge graph convolutional
 putational visual attention model, Pattern Recognit. 48 (8) (2015) networks for recommender systems, in: The World Wide Web Conference,
 2554–2566. 2019, pp. 3307–3313.
[11] V. Yadav, S. Bethard, A survey on recent advances in named entity recogni- [36] M. Fabian, K. Gjergji, W. Gerhard, et al., Yago: A core of semantic
 tion from deep learning models, in: Proceedings of the 27th International knowledge unifying wordnet and wikipedia, in: 16th International World
 Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 2145–2158. Wide Web Conference, WWW, 2007, pp. 697–706.
[12] A. Piplai, S. Mittal, A. Joshi, T. Finin, J. Holt, R. Zak, Creating cybersecurity [37] A. Bordes, E. Gabrilovich, Constructing and mining web-scale knowledge
 knowledge graphs from malware after action reports, IEEE Access 8 (2020) graphs: KDD 2014 tutorial, in: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
 211691–211703. International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2014,
[13] I. Sarhan, M. Spruit, Uncovering algorithmic approaches in open infor- pp. 1967–1967.
 mation extraction: A literature review, in: 30th Benelux Conference on [38] S. Vashishth, P. Jain, P. Talukdar, Cesi: Canonicalizing open knowledge
 Artificial Intelligence, Springer CSAI/JADS, 2018, pp. 223–234. bases using embeddings and side information, in: Proceedings of the 2018
[14] L. Cui, F. Wei, M. Zhou, Neural open information extraction, in: Proceed- World Wide Web Conference, 2018, pp. 1317–1327.
 ings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational [39] B.D. Trisedya, J. Qi, R. Zhang, Entity alignment between knowledge graphs
 Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers), 2018, pp. 407–413. using attribute embeddings, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
[15] S. Hochreiter, J. Schmidhuber, Long short-term memory, Neural Comput. Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 33 (01), pp. 297–304.
 9 (8) (1997) 1735–1780. [40] H. Zhong, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, H. Wan, Z. Chen, Aligning knowledge and text
[16] G. Stanovsky, J. Michael, L. Zettlemoyer, I. Dagan, Supervised open infor- embeddings by entity descriptions, in: Proceedings of the 2015 Conference
 mation extraction, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2015, pp. 267–272.
 American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human [41] P. Radhakrishnan, P. Talukdar, V. Varma, Elden: Improved entity linking
 Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), 2018, pp. 885–895. using densified knowledge graphs, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
[17] I. Sarhan, M.R. Spruit, Contextualized word embeddings in a neural of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
 open information extraction model, in: Natural Language Processing and Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), 2018,
 Information Systems, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019, pp. pp. 1844–1853.
 359–367. [42] A. Thawani, M. Hu, E. Hu, H. Zafar, N.T. Divvala, A. Singh, E. Qasemi, P.A.
[18] I. Sarhan, M. Spruit, Can we survive without labelled data in NLP? Transfer Szekely, J. Pujara, Entity linking to knowledge graphs to infer column types
 learning for open information extraction, Appl. Sci. 10 (17) (2020) 5758. and properties, SemTab@ ISWC 2019 (2019) 25–32.
[19] J. Zhan, H. Zhao, Span model for open information extraction on accurate [43] H. Huang, L.P. Heck, H. Ji, Leveraging deep neural networks and knowledge
 corpus, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, graphs for entity disambiguation, CoRR abs/1504.07678, 2015 (2015) arXiv:
 Vol. 34 (05), 2020, pp. 9523–9530. 1504.07678, URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.07678.
[20] B.S. Cabral, R. Glauber, M. Souza, D.B. Claro, CrossOIE: Cross-lingual [44] I.O. Mulang’, K. Singh, C. Prabhu, A. Nadgeri, J. Hoffart, J. Lehmann, Evaluclassifier for open information extraction, in: International Conference on ating the impact of knowledge graph context on entity disambiguation
 Computational Processing of the Portuguese Language, Springer, 2020, pp. models, in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
 368–378. Information & Knowledge Management, 2020, pp. 2157–2160.

 12
I. Sarhan and M. Spruit Knowledge-Based Systems 233 (2021) 107524

[45] S.N. Narayanan, A. Ganesan, K. Joshi, T. Oates, A. Joshi, T. Finin, Early [62] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, BERT: Pre-training of deep
 detection of cybersecurity threats using collaborative cognition, in: 2018 bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: Proceedings of
 IEEE 4th International Conference on Collaboration and Internet Computing the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
 (CIC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 354–363. Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
[46] J.R. Finkel, T. Grenager, C.D. Manning, Incorporating non-local information and Short Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis,
 into information extraction systems by gibbs sampling, in: Proceedings of Minnesota, 2019, pp. 4171–4186, http://dx.doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423,
 the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1423.
 (ACL’05), 2005, pp. 363–370. [63] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, Q.V. Le, Xlnet:
[47] E. Kiesling, A. Ekelhart, K. Kurniawan, F. Ekaputra, The SEPSES knowledge Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding, 2019,
 graph: an integrated resource for cybersecurity, in: International Semantic pp. 5753–5763,
 Web Conference, Springer, 2019, pp. 198–214. [64] A. Conneau, K. Khandelwal, N. Goyal, V. Chaudhary, G. Wenzek, F.
[48] L.A. Ramshaw, M.P. Marcus, Text chunking using transformation-based Guzmán, E. Grave, M. Ott, L. Zettlemoyer, V. Stoyanov, Unsupervised
 learning, in: Natural Language Processing using Very Large Corpora, cross-lingual representation learning at scale, in: Proceedings of the 58th
 Springer, 1999, pp. 157–176. Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp.
[49] R. Pascanu, T. Mikolov, Y. Bengio, On the difficulty of training recurrent 8440–8451.
 neural networks, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, [65] R. Dey, F.M. Salem, Gate-variants of gated recurrent unit (GRU) neural
 2013, pp. 1310–1318. networks, in: 2017 IEEE 60th International Midwest Symposium on Circuits
[50] S. Bird, NLTK: the natural language toolkit, in: Proceedings of the and Systems (MWSCAS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1597–1600.
 COLING/ACL 2006 Interactive Presentation Sessions, 2006, pp. 69–72. [66] S. Bao, H. He, F. Wang, H. Wu, H. Wang, PLATO: Pre-trained dialogue
[51] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, Y. Bengio, Neural machine translation by jointly generation model with discrete latent variable, in: Proceedings of the 58th
 learning to align and translate, ICLR (2015). Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp.
[52] N. Reimers, I. Gurevych, Reporting score distributions makes a difference: 85–96.
 Performance Study of LSTM-networks for sequence tagging, in: Proceed- [67] V. Nair, G.E. Hinton, Rectified linear units improve restricted Boltzmann
 ings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language machines, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Interna-
 Processing, 2017, pp. 338–348. tional Conference on Machine Learning, in: ICML’10, Omni Press, Madison,
[53] J.J. Miller, Graph database applications and concepts with Neo4j, in: Pro- WI, USA, 2010, pp. 807–814.
 ceedings of the Southern Association for Information Systems Conference, [68] D.P. Kingma, J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, in: 3rd
 Atlanta, GA, USA, Vol. 2324 (36), 2013. International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, San Diego, CA,
[54] T.-H. Wu, B. Kao, Z. Wu, X. Feng, Q. Song, C. Chen, Mulce: Multi-level USA, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
 canonicalization with embeddings of open knowledge bases, in: Z. Huang, [69] G. Stanovsky, I. Dagan, Creating a large benchmark for open information
 W. Beek, H. Wang, R. Zhou, Y. Zhang (Eds.), Web Information Systems extraction, in: Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods
 Engineering – WISE 2020, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020, in Natural Language Processing, 2016, pp. 2300–2305.
 pp. 315–327. [70] D. Nadeau, S. Sekine, A survey of named entity recognition and
[55] B. Hachey, W. Radford, J. Nothman, M. Honnibal, J.R. Curran, Evaluating classification, Lingvist. Investig. 30 (1) (2007) 3–26.
 entity linking with wikipedia, Artificial Intelligence 194 (2013) 130–150. [71] S. Yang, X. Yu, Y. Zhou, Lstm and gru neural network performance
[56] D. Ceccarelli, C. Lucchese, S. Orlando, R. Perego, S. Trani, Dexter: an comparison study: Taking yelp review dataset as an example, in: 2020
 open source framework for entity linking, in: Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Electronic Communication and Artificial Intelli-
 International Workshop on Exploiting Semantic Annotations in Information gence (IWECAI), 2020, pp. 98–101, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWECAI50956.
 Retrieval, 2013, pp. 17–20. 2020.00027.
[57] D. Fensel, U. Şimşek, K. Angele, E. Huaman, E. Kärle, O. Panasiuk, I. Toma, [72] L. Galárraga, G. Heitz, K. Murphy, F.M. Suchanek, Canonicalizing open
 J. Umbrich, A. Wahler, Knowledge Graphs, Springer, 2020. knowledge bases, in: Proceedings of the 23rd Acm International Conference
[58] F. Chollet, Keras, 2015, Online; https://github.com/fchollet/keras/. (Ac- on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, 2014, pp.
 cessed 02-February-2021). 1679–1688.
[59] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. [73] H. Schütze, C.D. Manning, P. Raghavan, Introduction to information
 Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, R. Monga, S. Moore, retrieval, vol. 39, Cambridge University Press Cambridge, 2008.
 D.G. Murray, B. Steiner, P. Tucker, V. Vasudevan, P. Warden, M. Wicke, [74] N. Francis, A. Green, P. Guagliardo, L. Libkin, T. Lindaaker, V. Marsault, S.
 Y. Yu, X. Zheng, TensorFlow: A system for large-scale machine learning, Plantikow, M. Rydberg, P. Selmer, A. Taylor, Cypher: An evolving query
 in: Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems language for property graphs, in: Proceedings of the 2018 International
 Design and Implementation, in: OSDI’16, USENIX Association, USA, 2016, Conference on Management of Data, 2018, pp. 1433–1445.
 pp. 265–283. [75] A. Fan, T. Lavril, E. Grave, A. Joulin, S. Sukhbaatar, Addressing some
[60] S.K. Lim, A.O. Muis, W. Lu, C.H. Ong, Malwaretextdb: A database for limitations of transformers with feedback memory, 2020, ArXiv Preprint
 annotated malware articles, in: Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting ArXiv:2002.09402, 2020.
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), [76] J. Han, H. Wang, Transformer based network for open information
 2017, pp. 1557–1567. extraction, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 102 (2021) 104262.
[61] A. Akbik, T. Bergmann, D. Blythe, K. Rasul, S. Schweter, R. Vollgraf, FLAIR:
 An easy-to-use framework for state-of-the-art NLP, in: Proceedings of the
 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics (Demonstrations), 2019, pp. 54–59.

 13