SPPNet: An Approach For Real-Time Encrypted
 Traffic Classification Using Deep Learning
 Fabien Meslet-Millet Emmanuel Chaput Sandrine Mouysset
 IRIT/Toulouse INP-ENSEEIHT IRIT/Toulouse INP-ENSEEIHT IRIT/UPS
 University of Toulouse, France University of Toulouse, France University of Toulouse, France
 firstname.lastname@irit.fr firstname.lastname@toulouse-inp.fr firstname.lastname@irit.fr

 Abstract—Data flow management has become a key network Several techniques of packet level classification have been
GLOBECOM 2021 - 2021 IEEE Global Communications Conference | 978-1-7281-8104-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/GLOBECOM46510.2021.9686037

 activity, strengthening the need for efficient data flow classifi- implemented through decades for Internet Protocol (IP) netcation tools. However, pervasive encryption of communication works. Port-based techniques are not suitable anymore, behas dramatically jeopardised the legacy tools. Recent advances
 in Deep Learning offer a wide variety of architectures that cause of port obfuscation. Payload-based solutions, such as
 seem relevant for this purpose. These architectures are based Deep Packet Inspection (DPI), can be complex to maintain
 on different data representations as input of their classification and have proven to be effective as long as the data is not
 process. In this paper, we show the need for a deeper understand- encrypted [2], [3].
 ing of the features used by Deep Learning models to perform In order to cope with header obfuscation or even encryption
 such classification. Our objective is to exploit this knowledge for
 defining a better data processing so that the chosen architecture of data streams, Machine Learning techniques have been
 will significantly improve the classification process. We will show introduced such as K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [4] or Naives
 that some information carried by packet headers need to be Bayes (NB) [5]. However, the choice of features is important
 analyzed through a separate process. This analysis highlight that and can greatly impact the performance of the final model and
 current Deep Learning approaches in the literature fail to classify its ability to generalize. In addition, encryption can offend a
 encrypted flows in practice. We therefore propose a new modular
 Deep Learning architecture called Servername Protocol Packet number of features and thus reduce performance.
 Network (SPPNet) to overcome this drawback. We will show Deep Learning methods appear as a mean to automatically
 by a proof of concept that SPPNet allows to perform real-time and hierarchically extract the relevant features for classificanetwork flow classification at packet level. tion. They are now state-of-the-art methods for classification
 Index Terms—Deep Learning, Encrypted, Network traffic of encrypted network traffic. Among the methods based on
 classification
 the packet content, we find mainly convolution architectures
 [6]–[9]. Some use recurrent and convolution architectures to
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 exploit the sequential features existing within the packets of a
 From conception to exploitation, traffic characterization flow [10], [11]. Some use only recurrent architecture [12] or
 plays a fundamental part in the whole life of a network. convolution architecture derivatives such as text convolution
 Simulation models implemented to design network elements [13].
 could not be relevant without suitable traffic models based on The main challenge with such techniques is to understand
 such a characterization. The network setup heavily depends the impact of each feature in the data used by the Deep
 on a good traffic prediction leading to a suitable deployment, Learning model. As a consequence, the performance and the
 and Quality of Service (QoS) enforcement as well as traffic generalization capacities of a system cannot be assessed easily.
 engineering could be challenged by a weak knowledge of the The paper will be organize as follows. In section II, the
 streams actually transported. Intrusion Detection Systems can data collection, and pre-processing perform are presented.
 be based on traffic profiles to detect different types of attacks. In section III, different modeling hypotheses, Deep Learning
 Network operators need to be able to classify their traffic in architectures are presented in order to determine the biases
 order to implement traffic mitigation, prioritization, . . . in the classification and to select the best configuration. We
 Classification is the very first and most salient part of traffic believe that headers and payload should be treated separately
 characterization. It can be implemented on a stream basis or as they obviously carry different kinds of information. We will
 at the packet level. A stream based classification requires a show in this paper that the header removal will increase the
 state-full implementation. It can use global information, such classification performance. In section IV, from the study done
 as inter-arrival, to spot a whole stream and thus classify the in section III, we will keep in the headers pieces of information
 corresponding packets [1]. A packet level classification is a define as relevant (port numbers, protocols, . . . ). We will then
 sate-less process based only on the information carried by a use these two information sources separately (payload and
 single packet. In this paper, we will focus on the latter, as we headers fields) for an efficient packet classification throw a
 believe that only such a classification can be implemented in new architecture named Servername Protocol Packet Network
 real time. (SPPNet) which improves the performance of the state-of-the-

 978-1-7281-8104-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
 Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 art. Finally, the proposed model is implemented in order to TABLE I
 perform real-time classification. A PPLICATION LIST IN EACH CLASS FOR EACH GROUP OF BOTH DATA SET.

 II. DATA PROCESSING Our Reference
 Classes Groups data set data set
 This section describes the data and the processing done in TLS
 Facebook, Gmail, Hangout,
 order to perform state-less classification with Deep Learning Telegram Skype
 Chat Facebook,
 models. As already stated, our first aim is to determine the TOR qTox
 ICQ, AIM
 best representation of the data. For this, we need to perform Email
 TLS Outlook, Gmail
 Gmail
 multiple processing on the data set. TOR GMX Caramail
 SSH,
 TLS Facebook, Skype,
 A. Collection File transfer Google Drive
 FTP/SFTP Fillezilla
 TOR DropBox
 The data used for the experiments come from two distinct TLS Deluge
 P2P uTorrent
 sources. The first source includes two open access data sets TOR Vuze
 TLS Youtube, Vimeo, Youtube,
 used as reference in the field of classification of encrypted Streaming
 TOR Dailymotion Netflix
 network flows : ISCXVPN2016 [14] and ISCXTor2016 [15]. TLS Facebook Facebook, Hangout,
 VoIP
 These data sets present a diversity of applications with a TOR qTox Skype, VoIPBuster
 Web TLS Mozilla Firefox Firefox, Chrome
 large number of packets. We will use two subsets from these browsing TOR Tor Browser Tor Browser
 sources : a data-set collected in a TOR (The Onion Router)
 network, and a data-set of packets encrypted with TLS. The
 second source includes data collected in our laboratory using and formats has been made in the literature. We chose to
 the same configuration as for the ISCXVPN2016 [14] and jointly study two formats and two representations of the data
 ISCXTor2016 [15] data collection. listed in the table II. Stuffing bytes are used to get uniform
 Transport Layer Security (TLS) and The Onion Router sizes.
 (TOR) data come from ISCX data sets is called “reference
 data set” and is used for training and partial evaluation of TABLE II
 the realized models. The TLS and TOR data collected in our L IST OF DATA REPRESENTATION , FORMAT AND SHAPE STUDIED .
 laboratory form a data set called “our data set” and is used to Representations Formats Values range Shapes
 evaluate the models. This use of various sources allows us to Integer 0 - 255 40 × 40
 2D
 verify the generalisation capabilities of our classification tool. Bit 0-1 111 × 111
 Integer 0 - 255 1536 × 1
 1D
 B. Labellisation Bit 0-1 12288 × 1
 We define seven classes of packet : Chat, E-mail, File Transfer, Peer-To-Peer (P2P), Voice Over IP (VoIP), Streaming, Web For the last level of pre-processing, the reference data set is
 browsing. The purpose of a classification tool is thus to classify sub-sampled with equity between classes and applications to
 packet in one of these classes. Such a class definition leads to ensure representativeness. A total of 81003 different packets
 an application diversity within each class. This will challenge is used.
 the generalization capacity of the models ; more specifically The training data corresponds to 80% of the sub-sampled
 its ability to face new applications. Table I represents the list reference data. Validation and test data respectively share 10%
 of applications present in reference data and our data sets. of the sub-sampled reference data set. The smaller packets are
 removed in order to facilitate the training process. Obviously,
 C. Pre-processing such packets contain little or no data, so they could be
 Several levels of pre-processing are performed. A first level classified based on theirs headers only. This would make sense
 consisted in filtering the original data. A second level is in a state-full scheme, not in this study.
 focused on data representations and formats. Finally, the last The evaluation of the models is carried out on the test data
 level prepared the data for the learning step of Deep Learning and on 21000 packets under-sampled from our data set. These
 models. 21000 packets are of various sizes between 0 and 1536 bytes
 For the first level of pre-processing, filtering operations and use applications not present in training data.
 are used to removed information which can caused a bias.
 Connection initialization packets Transmission Control Pro- III. S TATE - LESS PACKET LEVEL CLASSIFICATION WITH
 tocol (TCP), TLS, Quick UDP Internet Connections (QUIC) D EEP L EARNING
 are deleted. As shown in [16] some fields in these packets This section describes the experiments performed in order
 headers can overly facilitate or bias the classification. Some to determine jointly the best representation of the data and
 works do not remove them [6]–[11], [13]. We will show during the best modeling hypothesis. Experiments will show the
 experiment that some headers fields can introduces a bias using limitations that exist in current Deep Learning approaches for
 a convolution hypothesis for encrypted data. state-less packet level classification. The conclusions of this
 The second level of pre-processing comes from the observa- analysis will lead us to the definition of a new architecture
 tion that no comparison between these different representations named SPPNet.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 A. Deep Learning architecture GradCAM [19] is applied on the last convolution layer after
 Three different hypotheses are defined on the features the non-linearity. This technique makes it possible to see where
 present in the packets allowing the classification. Each hypoth- the convolutional filter reacts to the input data in order to
 esis requires the implementation of different Deep Learning perform classification. Warm colors mean a strong reaction.
 architectures. The architectures used as well as their associated All the models focus on the headers for the classification.
 assumptions are as follows : (i) a convolution ResNet18 Nevertheless, there is a slight focus on the packet content
 architecture is focus in invariant translation features within which may explain the results slightly higher than the random
 data using learned convolution filters, (ii) a ResNet18 ar- and reference models. After removing the IP header the focus
 chitecture with attention [17] learns the invariant features in becomes more pronounced and more localized. On the other
 translation thanks to learned convolution filters as well as their hand, removing both the IP header and TCP/UDP allows a
 relative position between them. Indeed, a packet respects a more diffuse and less localized focus on the headers. This
 form of encapsulation that includes contextual information. focus shows a better ability to generate models. This is less
 This information is relevant for image classification [17]. noticeable on the TOR data and can be explained by the
 A reference model using a simple (iii) Euclidean distance use of stuffing bits which forces the model to focus on
 allows to verify the relevance of the obtained results with less noisy elements located at the beginning of the packets.
 Deep Learning approaches. Subsequently, for each validated The implementation of GradCAM [19] on seven packets of
 hypothesis the best modeling hypothesis will be studied on all different classes is visible in figure 1 for the TLS test data.
 types of data format and representation listed in table II. For the TOR data the implementation of GradCAM is visible
 in figure 2. GradCAM shows similar results on integer format.
 B. Results and analysis
 1) Accuracy: The classification performances of the different models in function of different parameters and data
 set are respectively listed in the table III for TLS data. We
 should notice that we have also considered a simple recursive
 architecture composed of Gated Recurrent Network (GRU)
 cells [18] by assuming that the features present in the data
 are sequential but this architecture does not converge. One
 explanation could be the length of the input data and the lack
 of a sequential pattern caused by the encryption.
 Models learned from the data without removing the headers Fig. 1. GradCAM [19] applied on seven packets in two dimensions reprehave good results on test data and are consistent with what sentation in bit format from TLS group on test data. Each lines represent a
 level of packet suppression and each columns a packet in class from left to
 is observed in the literature. The packet length has no effect right : Chat, E-mail, File Transfer, P2P, Streaming, VoIP, Web Browsing.
 on classification performance which is abnormal. There is a
 very large gap between test data and our data reflecting a lack
 of generalization, for all models, independently of the data
 representation. Applications that are not present in the training
 data are misclassified. For TOR data, the place where the data
 is taken has no influence on the classification performances.
 The difference of performances compared to TLS data can be
 explained by the effect of a more robust encryption and packet
 size obfuscation.
 After removing the header IP the findings remain similar.
 However, the removal of header TCP/UDP improves the
 generalization performance. On the data TOR there is no Fig. 2. GradCAM [19] applied on seven packets in two dimensions repreincrease in classification performance on our data (similar sentation in bit format from TOR group on test data. Each lines represent a
 level of packet suppression and each columns a packet in class from left to
 to random). As soon as the headers IP and TCP/UDP are right : Chat, E-mail, File Transfer, P2P, Streaming, VoIP, Web Browsing.
 removed, as the packet size on our data increases, so does
 the performance. In models using data TLS applications not Occlusion Map [20] are also applied with a 2×2 filter for
 present in the training data are correctly classified. Classes integer packets and 3×3 for binary packets. The goal is to hide
 containing few or no encrypted packets are not better classified each byte of a packet and see how the probability of the right
 than other classes. Models using an attention architecture are class associated with this packet assigned by the output model
 more prone to over fitting and lack of generalization despite evolves. Before removing headers, the models focus on bytes
 the removal of headers. belonging to the IP source, IP destination, port source, port
 2) Interpretation: An interpretation in the input space with destination and sometimes other fields like sequence number.
 Gradient Class Activation Map (GradCAM) [19] and the This focus explains the lack of generalization. After removing
 Occlusion Map [20] shows the limits of such models. the headers, the models focus on more global structure located

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE III
 ACCURACY OF MODELS ACCORDING TO FORMAT, REPRESENTATION AND LEVEL OF HEADER DELETION FOR TLS DATA : IP (L AYER 3), THEN IP AND
 U SER DATAGRAM P ROTOCOL (UDP)/TCP (L AYER 3/L AYER 4). B EST PERFORMANCE FOR EACH DATA SET AND HEADER REMOVAL ARE B OLDED .

 Data Models Type Test Our Test L3 Our L3 Test L3/L4 Our L3/L4
 Integer 0.999 0.381 0.975 0.422 0.589 0.502
 ResNet18 1D
 Bit 0.999 0.285 0.997 0.460 0.626 0.273
 Integer 0.991 0.278 0.945 0.341 0.636 0.405
 ResNet18 2D
 Bit 0.996 0.235 0.992 0.417 0.703 0.418
 TLS
 ResNet18 2D Integer - - - - 0.997 0.460
 Attention Bit - - - - - -
 Integer 0.466 0.231 0.413 0.233 0.397 0.267
 L2 Distance
 Bit 0.535 0.235 0.470 0.220 0.395 0.266

 inside the packet but which cannot be interpreted because it C. Conclusion
 is encrypted. The implementation of Occlusion Map on seven
 Our experiments have shown that one dimensional reppackets of different classes in test data from TLS data set
 resentation in integer format with a simple convolutional
 is shown in figure 3. The results are similar on the TOR data
 architecture offers the best classification performance. Headers
 but the focus remains slightly more pronounced on the headers
 cause a bias and make current approaches using convolutional
 after removing them unlike the TLS data.
 architectures [6]–[11], [13] not accurate in practice. Nevertheless, some information contained in the headers should
 be exploitable. To do so, it is necessary to define specific
 assumptions and processing for each exploited information.

 IV. SPPN ET A RCHITECTURE
 The previous study leads us to propose a new architecture,
 called SPPNet which stands for Servername Protocol Packet
 Network. Its approach aims at exploiting all the available
 features in the data sets, identified as generalizable :
 • The packet without headers IP and TCP/UDP.
 • The type of protocol used, UDP or TCP. The traffic
 UDP corresponds to a traffic linked to VoIP and possibly
 P2P.
 • The protocol encapsulated by UDP or TCP is identified
 from the ports. For example, knowing that a packet
 Fig. 3. Occlusion Map [20] applied on packets in two dimensions representation in integer format from TLS group. Each line represents a level of packet
 carries Post Office Protocol over SSL (POP3S) can help
 suppression and each column a random packet extracted from data. classification for Email packets.
 • The domain name associated with the source or
 destination IP address of the packets. For example,
 Removing headers prevents models from focusing on fea- “vesta.web.telegram.org” can help to determine if it is
 tures that cannot be generalized. Indeed, the convolution mod- a Chat class packet from the Telegram application.
 els assume the hypothesis of invariant patterns in translation • The server name present when initializing the
 present in the data. However, the packet structures of a TLS connection if it is present. For example, “outflow contain multiple pieces of information requiring different look.office365.com” can help the model to classify the
 modeling assumptions. For example, raw text cannot be treated packet in the Email class.
 as a simple pattern. This observation explains the improvement
 in the performance of models using the first packets of a flow The SPPNet architecture is divided into two parts, as shown
 [8], [11], [13]. Indeed, the initialization of a TLS connection in Figure 4: the extraction of semantic feature from each
 includes information such as the name of the server which is source (first part) and theirs combinations (second part).
 a pattern to determine the type of application. However, this The first part is composed of:
 pattern is not generalizable and is specific to the applications • ResNet18 which will take packets in 1D representation in
 present in the training data. For example, if we want to classify integer format as input for performance reasons observed
 application, if the field TLS server name change the models in table III. The output is a vector of 512 dimensions.
 will not be able to associate the packet to the right application. • Recurrent layer of type GRU [18], composed of projec-
 This may perhaps explains the improved performance obtained tion blocks that will take the name of the server or the
 with text convolution that is better able to detect this type of domain name as input. The output of the recurrent block
 structure [13]. projects the data in a five-dimensional vector.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 features. Contrary to the simple convolution product, we are
 interested in the structure of the server names and not in their
 simple presence or absence as in previous works where we use
 the concatenation of the first packets of a flow to initialize a
 connection [8], [11], [13].
 Learning is done in two stages. Each layer or architecture
 of the first part becomes an independently learned model in
 a supervised manner. Each layer or architecture is connected
 to a completely connected block during the learning process.
 After learning, each layer or architecture is retrieved with these
 weights and disconnected from their completely connected
 block. The outputs of the different architecture layer are
 then concatenated and connected to a new fully connected
 Fig. 4. SPPNet architecture diagram. layer common to all. During the second learning phase, only
 the fully connected block is learned so that it weights the
 importance of the outputs of each layer with respect to the
 • Embedding layer which will take as input the name final classification.
 of the protocol associated with the port. The embedding Two sets of data are used for training in each phase. They
 layer embeds the data into a two-dimensional vector. underwent the same division as in previous experiments and
 • Input layer which will take as input the type of transport include 81003 packets sampled in the same way. Their role is
 protocol used (TCP or UDP). The output is a value of as follows:
 one dimension. • “local” data set : used for training the models belonging
 The output dimension of the embedding layers is set to be to the first part of the architecture. It includes packets
 the fourth root of the corpus size [21]. The outputs of each ranging from 768 to 1536 bytes.
 layer and architecture are then concatenated and connected to • “global” data set : used for training the final model.
 a new fully connected layer common to all. It includes packets which not exist in “local” data set.
 1) Pre-processing: For packets, the Ethernet headers, IP Packet sizes ranging from 0 to 1536 bytes and follow an
 and TCP/UDP have been removed to avoid bad generalization. uniform distribution.
 On the other hand, all packet sizes have been kept for The advantage of using different data sets is to avoid that
 experiments. the final model layer focuses unfairly on the input models.
 For server names, they are extracted from the connec- Another interest is to allow the model to integrate the fact that
 tions TLS and QUIC by retrieving the server name field the ResNet18 model performs poorly on small packets but that
 when it is present. Recording Canonical NAME (CNAME) it should not focus entirely on the model integrating the server
 of Domain Name System (DNS) messages before setting up names. Indeed, the model may sometimes perform worse on
 a connection is also used. An association table server name, large packets compared to the ResNet18 model, and the final
 source/destination address, source/destination ports is used to model should also incorporate the lack of information for some
 associate a server name with all the concerned packets. In the packets. Some packets have no associated server names or no
 case where a packet has both a domain name and a server identified protocol. The “local” and “global” data sets are also
 name, the domain name is chosen in priority in order to designed to maximize this diversity. Each data set is divided
 guarantee a good generalization. into three subsets (learning, test and validation) as above. As
 Server names are pre-processed for learning step. In the case the classes are perfectly balanced the cross-entropy categorical
 of the server name “vesta.web.telegram.org”, the processing is loss function is used.
 done as follows: 3) Results: The results of the models based on the combi-
 • Step 1: The dots are deleted giving the input: “vesta web nation of test and our data input information on known and
 telegram org” unknown applications are listed in the table IV. Considering
 • Step 2: The order of the words is inverted giving the all the additional information improves the accuracy from
 input: “org telegram web vesta” 5.1% to 14.8% on our data set of TLS network according
 These operations remains considering server names as a to table III and perform state-of-art performance due to the
 sentence. Moreover, by reversing the order of the sentence, lack of generalization of others methods as shown in section
 we can encode the importance of each server in the hierarchy III. The low number of domain names (2000 different server
 of server names. The server name “org” being more important, names) has an impact on the generalization of the models.
 higher in the hierarchy, it is at the beginning of the sentence. Applications that are not present in the training data are less
 Another interest is to learn how to distinguish the different well classified when server names are present. Packet size
 traffic classes in the same application. has no influence on classification performance. On the other
 2) Experiments: The SPPNet architecture allows the extrac- hand, small packets are better classified with these additional
 tion of semantic features related to the combination of these information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE IV R EFERENCES
 R ESULT OF THE COMBINATION OF SEVERAL SOURCES OF INFORMATION
 IN SPPN ET . [1] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic Classification: An Overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
 Know Unk. May 2019.
 Combinations Test Our app. app. [2] S. H. Yeganeh, M. Eftekhar, Y. Ganjali, R. Keralapura, and A. Nucci,
 Packet/Name server 0.670 0.553 0.854 0.211 “CUTE: Traffic Classification Using TErms,” in 21st ICCCN. Munich,
 Packet/Port 0.589 0.596 0.675 0.581 Germany: IEEE, Jul. 2012, pp. 1–9.
 Packet/Protocol 0.356 0.310 0.318 0.344 [3] S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and D. Wang, “Accurate, scalable in-network
 Packet/Port/ identification of p2p traffic using application signatures,” in 13th WWW
 Protocol 0.638 0.622 0.761 0.570 ’04. New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2004, p. 512.
 [4] R. Bar Yanai, M. Langberg, D. Peleg, and L. Roditty, “Realtime Clas-
 Packet/Port/
 Protocol/Name server 0.857 0.650 0.880 0.484 sification for Encrypted Traffic,” in Experimental Algorithms. Berlin,
 Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, vol. 6049, pp. 373–385,
 Packet/Protocol/
 0.720 0.539 0.875 0.177 series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
 Nameserver
 [5] D. McGaughey, T. Semeniuk, R. Smith, and S. Knight, “A systematic approach of feature selection for encrypted network traffic classification,”
 in SysCon. Vancouver, BC: IEEE, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–8.
 However, these performances are about 10% lower on the [6] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and
 M. Saberian, “Deep packet: a novel approach for encrypted traffic
 test data than the state of the art approaches based on flow classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput, vol. 24, no. 3, pp.
 statistics [22] which cannot classify in real-time. Moreover, 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
 the evaluation of the models based on the flow statistics is not [7] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2Img: A sequence-to-image
 based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional
 performed on two different data sets, there is no guarantee neural networks,” in Big Data. Boston, MA: IEEE, Dec. 2017, pp.
 of generalization. Nevertheless, adding information about the 1271–1276.
 flow statistics to which the packet belongs as input to SPPNet [8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 could increase the classification performance. networks,” in ISI. Beijing, China: IEEE, Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48.
 [9] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, and M. Gineste, “A framework to classify
 A. Proof of concept heterogeneous Internet traffic with Machine Learning and Deep Learning
 techniques for satellite communications,” Computer Networks, vol. 173,
 SPPNet is trained using a total of 237,636 packets from p. 107213, May 2020.
 reference and our data sets. It is implemented on a laptop [10] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “Datanet: Deep Learning Based
 computer with Python 3. The source code is available 1 with Encrypted Network Traffic Classification in SDN Home Gateway,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 6, pp. 55 380–55 391, 2018.
 a visualization tool in Javascript to see the classification in [11] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, and Z. Yao, “Encrypted Traffic
 real-time. Classification with a Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory Neural
 Network,” in HPCC/SmartCity/DSS. Exeter, United Kingdom: IEEE,
 V. C ONCLUSION Jun. 2018, pp. 329–334.
 [12] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A Flow Sequence
 In this paper, we have studied Deep Learning architectures Network For Encrypted Traffic Classification,” in INFOCOM 2019.
 for state-less classification of encrypted traffic. We have shown Paris, France: IEEE, Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [13] M. Song, J. Ran, and S. Li, “Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on
 that, without any pre-processing, the models may focus on Text Convolution Neural Networks,” in ICCSNT. Dalian, China: IEEE,
 features that could not be generalized. Oct. 2019, pp. 432–436.
 To overcome this limitation, we first have processed headers [14] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related
 and data separately. Then, we have defined the different Features:,” in 2nd ICISSP. Rome, Italy: SCITEPRESS - Science and
 sources of information and studied them independently in and Technology Publications, 2016, pp. 407–414.
 order to allow good generalization performances. [15] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of Tor Traffic using Time based Features:,” in 3rd
 Finally, we have proposed a new modular architecture, ICISSP. Porto, Portugal: SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology
 called SPPNet, that implements this approach and allows, Publications, 2017, pp. 253–262.
 using packet-level classification, a real-time classification. Its [16] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-Scale Mobile App Identification Using Deep Learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
 implementation combined with a flow table has achieved [17] I. Bello, B. Zoph, Q. Le, A. Vaswani, and J. Shlens, “Attention
 better performance by taking into account the notion of flow. Augmented Convolutional Networks,” in CVF/ICCV. Seoul, Korea
 This approach offers modularity by defining new sources of (South): IEEE, Oct. 2019, pp. 3285–3294.
 [18] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical Evaluinformation as shown on an implemented proof of concept. ation of Gated Recurrent Neural Networks on Sequence Modeling,”
 A state-full version of SPPNet can now be considered. arXiv:1412.3555 [cs], Dec. 2014, arXiv: 1412.3555.
 Statistics such as correlations between packets could help in- [19] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
 D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via
 creasing performance. However, we need to determine whether Gradient-Based Localization,” in ICCV. Venice: IEEE, Oct. 2017, pp.
 this gain is worth the loss of real-time classification. 618–626.
 As a next step, we plan to study the impact of encryption [20] K. Heinrich, P. Zschech, T. Skouti, J. Griebenow, and S. Riechert, “Demystifying the Black Box: A Classification Scheme for Interpretation
 and features within the encrypted data. Whatever the infor- and Visualization of Deep Intelligent Systems,” p. 11.
 mation used by the Deep Learning architecture to carry on [21] T. Team. (2017) Introducing tensorflow feature columns.
 classification is, it could be used to implement side-channel [Online]. Available: https://developers.googleblog.com/2017/11/
 introducing-tensorflow-feature-columns.html
 attacks. [22] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Multitask Learning for Network Traffic Classi-
 1 Source code : https://github.com/fmeslet/SPPNet
 fication,” in ICCCN. Honolulu, HI, USA: IEEE, Aug. 2020, pp. 1–9.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.