tCLD-Net: A Transfer Learning Internet Encrypted
 Traffic Classification Scheme Based on Convolution
2021 International Conference on Communications, Computing, Cybersecurity, and Informatics (CCCI) | 978-1-6654-3208-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CCCI52664.2021.9583214

 Neural Network and Long Short-Term Memory
 Network
 Xinyi Hu1 ∗† , *Chunxiang Gu2 ∗† , Yihang Chen3 ∗ and Fushan Wei4 ∗† ∗ State Key Laboratory of Mathematical
 Engineering and Advanced Computing, Zhengzhou, China
 † Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou, China

 Email: 1 huxinyi.1994@foxmail.com, 2 gcx5209@126.com, 3 cyhpaper@163.com, 4 weifs831020@163.com

 Abstract—The Internet is about to enter the era of full encryp- directly affects the effect of the classifier. In order to reduce
 tion. Traditional traffic c lassification me thods on ly wo rk we ll in manual intervention, researchers use deep learning technology
 non-encrypted environments. How to identify the specific types of to automatically perform feature learning and classification. As
 network encrypted traffic i n a n e ncrypted e nvironment without
 decryption is one of the foundations for maintaining cyberspace the representative of deep learning technology, artificial neural
 security. Traffic c lassification ba sed on ma chine le arning relies network is regarded as an end-to-end model. Researchers
 heavily on the prior knowledge of experts to construct feature only need to input the raw flows, or simply process the raw
 sets. Although traffic c lassification ba sed on de ep le arning can flows, and then input them into the neural network, the neural
 reduce human intervention, it requires a large amount of labeled network will directly output the results that researchers want.
 data for parameter determination. This paper proposes a tCLD-
 Net model that combines transfer learning and deep learning. It However, deep learning models require a large amount
 can be trained on a small amount of labeled data to distinguish of high-quality labeled data, and in the real environment,
 network encrypted traffic w ith a h igh a ccuracy. I t p re-trains a there are often only a small amount of labeled data or even
 CLD-Net model in the source domain data set, and fixes the unlabeled data. A small amount of data cannot be solved by
 parameters of the convolutional neural network module in it, deep learning because there are too many parameters and the
 and trains and tests it in the target domain data set. In order to
 verify the effectiveness of the tCLD-Net model, we use the ISCX number of samples cannot support it to learn well, which can
 public data set to conduct experiments. The results show that easily lead to overfitting of the model. Transfer learning can
 our proposed model can complete 100 epoches training in 208 transfer knowledge from existing data to help future learning.
 seconds when the training set only occupies 20% of the target The goal of transfer learning is to use knowledge learned from
 domain. And achieve a classification a ccuracy r ate a bout 86%. one environment to help learning tasks in a new environment.
 This is 4% higher than the model without pre-training, and the
 training time is only one third of the model without pre-training. Considering that data or tasks are related, this paper combines
 deep learning and transfer learning to propose the tCLD-Net
 model for network encryption traffic classification. The model
 Index Terms—Deep Learning, Transfer Learning, Pre-training,
 Internet Traffic, E ncrypted Traffic, Tr affic Classification that has been trained on the source domain is used as a pretraining model and passed to the target domain for training and
 testing. This can speed up the optimization of the learning
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 efficiency of the model, reduce the amount of sample data
 Network traffic c lassification an d id entification is an im- required, and reduce training costs.
 portant foundation for network monitoring and management, The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
 and it is also one of the key technologies for maintaining cy- summarizes related work. Section 3 describes the problem
 berspace security. However, with the development of network definition and introduces the proposed model. Section 4 gives
 encryption, the existing port-based and deep packet inspection- the data set and experimental results. Section 5 summarizes
 based technologies are difficult to identify and classify network the paper and discusses future work.
 traffic, w hich c auses d ifficulties in tr affic rev iew. Researchers
 began to consider introducing machine learning technology
 into the field of traffic analysis. According to prior experience, II. R ELATED W ORK
 feature engineering is carried out, feature set is constructed, A. Traffic Analysis Using Deep Learning
 and then the feature set is input into the machine learning Researches on the use of deep learning for traffic analysis
 classifier f or c lassification an d identification. began to appear in 2015 [1], and has developed rapidly in
 Since traditional machine learning methods need to man- recent years [2]–[4], [6].
 ually construct feature sets, the quality of the feature set In 2018, Tong et al. [2] proposed a new technology of
 traffic classification based on convolutional neural network

 978-1-6654-3208-5/21/$31.00 © 2021 IEEE

 Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:31:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 for Google’s QUIC protocol (Quick UDP Internet Connection to the target domain with sparse availability. The experimental
 protocol). This method can distinguish Google Hangout Chat, results on the public dataset USNW-15 show that this method
 Google Hangout Voice Call, YouTube, File Transfer and can improve the overall effectiveness of the intrusion detection
 Google Play Music with a micro average F1-score of 99.24%. system (IDS) in the real environment.
 In 2019, Aceto et al. [3] proposed a multimode deep
 learning framework for encrypted traffic classification, which III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
 can utilize the heterogeneity of traffic data to overcome the Before the data is input to the model, the raw data must be
 existing single-mode deep learning-based traffic classification preprocessed. See Algorithm 1 for details. The preprocessing
 performance limitation, and verified it on the artificially gen- procedure mainly includes 5 steps:
 erated mobile encrypted traffic dataset. 1) Lines 2-4 are traffic split. According to the size of
 In 2020, Bu et al. [4] proposed a neural network model the flow, the raw data in the data set are randomly
 with a deeply parallel network-in-network (NIN) structure to spli into flow fragments containing 10 consecutive data
 classify encrypted network traffic. The experimental results packets, and the training set and the test set are divided
 on the public dataset ISCX VPN-nonVPN [5] (Virtual Private proportionally.
 Network) show that compared with the traditional Convolution 2) Line 7 is traffic cleaning, only read the payload part of
 Neural Network (CNN), the NIN model can achieve a better the packet, and the uniform length is 256 bytes.
 balance between classification accuracy and model complexity. 3) Lines 8-10 are traffic reorganization, where the 256-
 In 2021, Hu et al. [6] proposed a network encryption traffic byte payload is divided into different bytes and then
 classification model CLD-Net. The model combines CNN and reorganized.
 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to perform neural 4) Line 11 is traffic conversion. The 5 sequences after step
 network feature learning from both statistics and time series, 2 and step 3 are converted to decimal by byte to obtain
 and changes the number of channels to make the model more a grayscale image.
 suitable for the reorganized data structure, thereby improving 5) Lines 15-19 are insertion time interval. According to
 classification performance. CLD-Net has higher accuracy than the length of the arrival time interval of two adjacent
 other methods when encrypting traffic classification for public packets, with 1 second as the limit, a matrix of all 1s is
 network traffic data, and the average accuracy of the eight- selected as the time interval information.
 class is 92.89%.
 After the preprocessing, the obtained data packet matrices
 are input into the model. In this paper, we combine the CLD-
 B. Traffic Analysis Using Transfer Learning Net model [9] with transfer learning to obtain an improved
 Transfer learning can eliminate the assumption that the tCLD-Net model, as shown in Figure 1.
 training set and the test set must be independent and identically
 distributed. Therefore, as deep learning is developing in the
 field of traffic analysis, researchers have also begun to use
 transfer learning for traffic analysis [7], [9], [11]–[14].
 In 2018, Sun et al. [7] introduced transfer learning to the
 task of traffic classification. The maximum entropy model
 Maxent is used as the basic classifier, and TrAdaBoost [8]
 transfer learning model is selected. The comparison with
 traditional machine learning method shows that the proposed
 method can inprove overall performanced.
 In 2019, Niu et al. [11] proposed a network intrusion detection method based on transfer component analysis. Through
 domain adaptation, differently distributed data sets are mapped
 Fig. 1. The tCLD-Net model structure. The upper layer is the pre-training
 to the same subspace. The model uses the basic classifier in process, and the lower layer is the transfer process.
 the shared subspace for training and detects new traffic data
 generated from different domains. The pre-training process is performed in the source domain
 In 2020, Han et al. [12] transferred the pre-trained language using the CLD-Net model. The CLD-Net model includes a
 model with language data to the network traffic classification CNN module, an LSTM module, and a Dense module. The
 problem, then fine-tune the model with labeled network traffic. CNN module contains 10 1D-CNNs (one-dimensional CNNs),
 This method has faster convergence speed, higher accuracy each CNN contains 4 convolutional layers, and the last 3
 rate and lower false positive rate. convolutional layers are connected to a maximum pooling
 In 2021, Dhillon et al. [13], [14] used various deep learning layer. The LSTM module contains 10 LSTMs. The Dense
 methods to build a network intrusion detection system (NIDS), module contains 3 fully connected layers. After the source
 and used deep transfer learning technology to further improve domain data is preprocessed, it is converted into a graythe program to make it effective in the real environment. The scale image format, and the CNN’s ability to process image
 knowledge learned by the model in the source domain with a data is used to automatically learn features. After passing
 large number of computing and data resources is transferred through the LSTM module, the ability of LSTM to process

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:31:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Algorithm 1 Preprocessing Algorithm.
 Input: Raw dataset D; Number of traffic classes C;
 Output: Packet matrices set P;
 1: for each i ∈ [1, C] do
 2: Randomly select N consecutive 10 packets in D;
 3: 10 consecutive packets consist a flow F , that is, the number of F is N ;
 4: Randomly divide the F into a training set F train and a testing set F test in proportion;
 5: for each j ∈ [1, N ] do
 6: for each packet p ∈ F do
 7: Trim p and uniform length of 256 bytes, p → payload p256 = (b1 , b2 , · · · , b8×256 );
 8: 256 bytes are divided into 64 bytes, 32 bytes, 16 bytes and 8 bytes to get the packet sequence p256 → pα =
 (bα α α α
 1,1 , · · · , b1,α×8 , · · · , b 256 ,1 , · · · , b 256 ,8α );
 α α
 9: Separate 256 bytes by the length of 1 byte;
 10: Extract each group of the same bits in turn as the recombined part to obtain recombination sequence pα →
 p̂α = (bα α α α
 1,1 , · · · , b 256 ,1 , · · · , b1,8α , · · · , b 256 ,8α );
 α α
 11: Generate the grayscale image format to get the packet matrix, p̂α → P , P T = (p256 , p̂64 , p̂32 , p̂16 , p̂8 );
 12: end for;
 13: end for;
 14: for m = 1 to 10N − 1 do
 15: Count the time interval of Pm and Pm+1 ;
 16: if the time interval between Pm and Pm+1 < 1s then
 17: Input Pm+1 after Pm to the model;
 18: else  
 1 ··· 1
 Add P0 =  ... . . . ...  between Pm and Pm+1 ;
  
 19:
 1 ··· 1 5×256
 20: end if
 21: end for;
 22: end for;
 23: return Packet matrices set P;

 long stream data is used to continue the feature mapping. TABLE I
 Finally, through the Dense module, the fully connected layers DATA CLASSES AND DATA VOLUME OF THE SOURCE AND TARGET
 DOMAINS .
 are used to perform feature dimensionality reduction, and the
 final classification results are output. After pre-training for 100 Source Dataset Target Dataset
 epochs, the pre-trained model is obtained. See Algorithm 2 for facebook-audio,
 facebook-chat, hangout-chat,
 the specific pre-training algorithm. Data classes facebook-video, hangout-audio,
 Fix the parameters of the CNN module in the pre-trained vpn-facebook-audio, vpn-hangout-audio
 model, and transfer the model to the target domain to continue vpn-facebook-chat
 Number of flows 4059 6590
 training and testing. After the transfer, the intersection of the
 target domain data and the source domain data is an empty
 set, and the amount of target domain data is reduced. During
 The experiment uses a total of 8 classes of data, 5 classes
 the 100 epoches training process, fine-tune the parameters
 are selected as the source domain data, and the remaining 3
 of the LSTM module and the Dense module. Finally, the
 classes are used as the target domain data. See Table 1 for
 classification results are predicted in the test set of the target
 details. Among them, the target domain data randomly selects
 domain, and the results are evaluated.
 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% of the data as the training set, and the
 rest as the test set.
 IV. E XPERIMENT
 A. Dataset
 This paper uses the public data set ISCX VPN 2016 [5], and B. Experiment Results
 selects the traffic data of the two social software Facebook and The experiment selects 4 models for training and testing of
 Hangout as the experimental data. Facebook traffic includes the target domain. They are: model without pre-training, CLDthree applications: chat, audio, and video, Hangout traffic in- Net pre-training model with fixed CNN module parameters,
 cludes two applications: chat and audio. And the traffic of each CLD-Net pre-training model with fixed CNN module paramspecific application can use VPN for protocol-encapsulated eters and LSTM module parameters , CLD-Net pre-training
 network traffic, or just ordinary network traffic nonVPN. model without fixed parameters. The experiment chooses clas-

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:31:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Algorithm 2 Pre-training Algorithm.
 Input: Source dataset DS ; Number of traffic classes CS ; Number of epoches Epo;
 Output: Pre-trained model;
 1: Preprocess DS using Alogrithm 1 to obtain packet matrices set;
 2: for n ∈ [1, Epo] do
 3: for each P in Packet matrices set do
 4: Let P T = (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 );
 5: for each x ∈ P do
 6: 1
 Let W is the weight, B is the bias, the output of the first convolutional layer is Out1ij = Relu(Convij ), where
 1
 P 3 0 0 0
 Convij = m=1 Wm,j xi+m−1,j + Bj ;
 7: The output of the second convolutional layer is Out2ij = Relu(maxr≤3 (Convi×1+r,j 2
 )), where Convij2
 =
 PM 1 1 1
 m=1 W x
 m,j i+m−1,j + B j ;
 8: The third and forth layers are the same as the second layer, the output of CNN module output is Out4ij =
 4
 Relu(maxr≤3 (Convi×1+r,j )); // CNN module;
 9: end for;
 10: Let Xt (the input of LSTM at time t) pass through the forget gate F (t) = sigmoid(WfT St−1 + UfT Xt + Bf ) and
 output gate O(t) = sigmoid(WoT St−1 + UoT Xt + Bo ), where U is the weight matrix of hidden state, Ct−1 is the cell
 state at the previous time, St−1 is the hidden state;
 11: The cell state at time t is Ct = Ct−1 ∗ F (t) + I(t) ∗ R(t), the output of the LSTM module is the hidden state at
 time t, St = tanh(Ct ) ∗ O(t); // LSTM module;
 12: Set the output of the first fully connected layer to half of the input;
 13: Add a Dropout layer after the second Dense layer, and remove the training unit from the network according to a
 certain probability to prevent overfitting;
 14: Add a Softmax classifier after the third Dense layer, the data is divided into CS classes; // Dense module;
 15: end for;
 16: end for;
 17: return Pre-trained model;

 sification accuracy and training time as the basis for evaluating
 the model.

 Fig. 3. Accuracy of the 2 models with and without transfer learning based
 on 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% random samples for training on target domain.

 Fig. 2. Accuracy curve of 4 different models based on 20% random samples
 on target domain. Net pre-training model without fixed parameters has a high
 starting point, but the training speed is slow, and later all
 It can be seen from Figure 2 that when the training set is parameters are fine-tuned, which will overfit because of too
 20%, the training speed is slow, and the starting point accuracy small training set. The best effect is the CLD-Net pre-training
 is low. It is gradually improved by continuous iteration, and model with fixed CNN module parameters. The starting point
 the highest accuracy rate can reach 82%. The CLD-Net pre- is high, and because there are few parameters need to be finetraining model with fixed CNN module parameters and LSTM tuned, the training speed is fast, and accuracy rate 86% can
 module parameters has a high starting point, but it can hardly be quickly achieved.
 be improved because of too many fixed parameters. The CLD- It can be seen from Figure 3 that when the training set

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:31:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 is 20%, there is a large gap between the model without pre- ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 training and the CLD-Net pre-training model with fixed CNN This work was supported in part by the National Natural
 module parameters, which is about 4%. When the training Science Foundation of China under Grant 61772548.
 set is 40%, the gap is not much, about 1.6%. Eventually, as
 the size of the training set becomes larger, the advantages of R EFERENCES
 transfer learning will gradually disappear.
 [1] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,”
 BlackHat USA, vol. 24, pp. 1–10, 2015.
 [2] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, A. Mellouk, “A Novel QUIC Traffic
 Classifier Based on Convolutional Neural Networks,” IEEE Global
 Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1–6, 2018.
 [3] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, “MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Computer
 Networks, vol. 165, 2019.
 [4] Z. Bu, B. Zhou, P. Cheng, K. Zhang, Z. Ling, “Encrypted Network
 Traffic Classification Using Deep and Parallel Network-in-Network
 Models,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 132950–132959, 2020.
 [5] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic using Time-related
 Features,” Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), 2016.
 [6] X. Hu, C. Gu, F. Wei, “CLD-Net: A Network Combining CNN and
 LSTM for Internet Encrypted Traffic Classification,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2021, 2021.
 [7] G. Sun, L. Liang, T. Chen, F. Xiao, F. Lang, “Network traffic classification based on transfer learning,” Computers and Electrical Engineering,
 vol. 69, pp. 920–927, 2018.
 [8] W. Dai, Q. Yang, G. Xue, Y. Yu, “Boosting for transfer learning,”
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 193–200,
 2007.
 [9] S. Taheri, M. Salem, J. Yuan, “Leveraging Image Representation of
 Fig. 4. Training time of 3 different models based on 20% random samples Network Traffic Data and Transfer Learning in Botnet Detection,” Big
 on target domain. Data Cognitive Computing, vol. 2, pp. 37–52, 2018.
 [10] S. Garcı́a, M. Grill, J. Stiborek, A. Zunino, “An empirical comparison
 of botnet detection methods,” Computer Security, vol. 45, pp. 100–123,
 It can be seen from Figure 4 that the training time of model 2014.
 without pre-training is 584.1 seconds. The training time of the [11] J. Niu, Y. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Guo, Y. Teng, “Abnormal Network Traffic
 CLD-Net pre-training model without fixed parameters is 604.1 Detection Based on Transfer Component Analysis,” IEEE International
 Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), pp. 1–6,
 seconds. The training time of the CLD-Net pre-training model 2019.
 with fixed CNN module parameters is 208.4 seconds. [12] L. Han, X. Zeng, L. Song, “A Novel Transfer Learning Based on Albert
 Therefore, transfer learning can effectively improve the For Malicious Network Traffic Classification,” International Journal of
 Innovative Computing, Information and Control,vol. 16, pp. 2103–2119,
 classification accuracy and greatly reduce the amount of data 2020.
 required for training. When the training set is reduced to 20%, [13] H. Dhillon, A. Haque, “Towards Network Traffic Monitoring Using
 the CLD-Net pre-training model with fixed CNN module pa- Deep Transfer Learning,” IEEE 19th International Conference on Trust,
 Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom),
 rameters can not only achieve a higher classification accuracy, pp. 1089–1096, 2020.
 but also requires a shorter training time, which is the best [14] H. Dhillon, “Building Effective Network Security Frameworks using
 among the four models. Deep Transfer Learning Techniques,” Electronic Thesis and Dissertation
 Repository, 2021.

 V. C ONCLUSION

 In this paper, we propose a network encryption traffic
 classification model based on transfer learning and deep learning. Compared with the traffic classification method based
 solely on deep learning, this model does not require a large
 amount of labeled data for training. In this model, through
 pre-training and fixing the parameters of the CNN module,
 the classification accuracy can be effectively improved and
 the training time can be greatly reduced. The experimental
 results on the public data set show that when the training set
 only accounts for 20% of the data set, the performance of the
 tCLD-Net model is significantly improved compared to the
 model without pre-training.
 In future work, we can consider using the pre-trained model
 in the unlabeled data set to further fit the actual network
 environment. In addition, how to eliminate the impact of the
 unbalanced data set is also a future research direction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:31:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.