156 IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

 UTMobileNetTraffic2021: A Labeled Public Network Traffic Dataset
 Yuqiang Heng , Vikram Chandrasekhar, and Jeffrey G. Andrews , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—A high-quality network traffic dataset is essential to generated by both the automated platform and human users.
 the development of accurate network traffic classification algo- We also provide examples of application and activity classifirithms. In this work, we present a new labeled public network cation using the proposed dataset, where we train ML models
 traffic dataset with realistic mobile traffic from a wide range
 of popular applications. An automated platform is constructed using flow-based features extracted from packet headers. The
 to generate and collect data traffic from specified applications dataset and the classification example are published online.1
 in a controlled environment. The dataset contains over 21 mil- The rest of this letter is organized as follows. The related
 lion packets from more than 29 hours of mobile traffic with work and existing datasets are discussed in Section II. The
 application and activity-level labels. We provide an applica- experimental setup is explained in Section III. The data collection classification example using machine learning (ML) models
 trained on the proposed dataset. tion procedure and characteristics of the dataset are explained
 in Section IV. Example uses cases of the dataset are provided
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, network traffic in Section V. Finally, the conclusion and final remarks are
 dataset, machine learning.
 provided in Section VI.

 I. I NTRODUCTION
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 ETWORK traffic classification provides the foundation
 N for a wide range of services, such as dynamic scheduling, quality of service (QoS) assurance, content-based billing
 Network traffic classification is essential to various traffic engineering tasks. Early approaches relying on DPI and
 and abnormality detection. While network traffic classifica- packet port numbers have become less favorable since modern
 tion has been studied for over two decades, the explosion of network traffic is often encrypted. State-of-the-art approaches
 mobile data traffic along with increasing packet encryption, extract features from the packets and use ML models to clashave shifted the paradigm: traditional approaches that rely on sify the traffic. We refer to [1] and [2] for surveys on traffic
 deep packet inspection (DPI) or examining the port of packets classification techniques.
 have become less viable. High-quality datasets are essential to ML-based traffic clas-
 Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models sification. However, sharing user data can cause privacy
 extract meaningful patterns from the data and learn a mapping concerns, and labeling network traffic data is difficult and
 from the input features to the class labels. State-of-the-art ML can be expensive. As a result, public labeled network traffic
 and DL approaches can achieve high classification accuracy datasets are rare. In our previous work [3] where we proposed
 even with encrypted data traffic. Although ML and DL traffic ML-based traffic classification models, a major challenge was
 classification models often use different input features, they the lack of modern high-quality data. Some recent works such
 are both data-driven and heavily rely on high-quality train- as [4] use proprietary datasets, making it difficult for other
 ing data. While numerous recent works have proposed ML researchers to reproduce their results. On the other hand, the
 and DL based network traffic classifiers, there has been a lack datasets used in [5], [6] and [7] only contain service-level
 of public labeled datasets. In this work, we present a public labels, which limit the granularity of the classification algonetwork traffic dataset named UTMobileNetTraffic2021 with rithm. As summarized in Table I, there are only a few public
 application and activity level labels. With the assistance of 6 labeled datasets for application classification.
 undergraduate UT Austin students who undertook this effort • ISCXVPN2016: The ISCXVPN2016 dataset contains
 as a part of their senior design project, an automated platform labeled traffic data generated by 20 applications across
 was developed to generate and collect data traffic from a wide 7 different service categories [8]. It contains both norrange of popular mobile applications in a controlled environ- mal traffic and traffic over VPN. The dataset includes
 ment. The dataset consists of over 29 hours of data traffic categories such as browsing, email, chat, streaming, file
 transfer, VoIP and P2P, and popular applications such
 Manuscript received May 14, 2021; revised June 25, 2021; accepted as YouTube and Facebook. An updated ISCXTor2016
 July 10, 2021. Date of publication July 19, 2021; date of current version
 August 21, 2021. The associate editor coordinating the review of this arti- dataset is also published for Tor-encrypted traffic [9].
 cle and approving it for publication was H. H. Gharakheili. (Corresponding • USTC-TFC2016: The USTC-TFC2016 dataset contains
 author: Yuqiang Heng.) both malware traffic data and benign traffic data [10]. The
 Yuqiang Heng and Jeffrey G. Andrews are with the Department of Electrical
 and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, malware dataset contains various types of malware traf-
 TX 78712 USA (e-mail: yuqiang.heng@utexas.edu). fic collected from real network environments. The benign
 Vikram Chandrasekhar was with Standard and Mobility Innovation Lab,
 Samsung Research America, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA. He is now
 with Amazon, Mountain View, CA 94041 USA. 1 The dataset and code are available: https://github.com/YuqiangHeng/
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LNET.2021.3098455 UTMobileNetTraffic2021.
 2576-3156 
 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HENG et al.: UTMobileNetTraffic2021: LABELED PUBLIC NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASET 157

 traffic dataset contains traffic from 10 different appli- both the downlink and the uplink direction. Compared
 cations collected through a network simulator but lacks to the datasets in [11], [12] and [14] which provide either
 some of the modern popular applications. The size of the extracted features or processed data, the proposed dataset
 benign dataset is also limited. allows more flexible data analysis and feature engineering.
 • IMTD17: The IMTD17 dataset contains mobile traffic
 generated by 12 Android applications [11]. The dataset III. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 was collected on a campus gateway. The application-
 In order to construct an automated data collection platform,
 specific traffic are generated by smartphones connected
 a Linux laptop running Ubuntu is used as the central conto WiFi. The dataset contains transformed features but
 troller for application activity generation and packet capturing.
 not raw packet data from 1000 labeled traffic flows. The
 Data traffic is generated using 3 unlocked Samsung Galaxy S5
 dataset includes popular applications in China but lacks
 smartphones. The smartphones are manually rooted and the
 applications widely used worldwide.
 LineageOS Android distribution is installed so that the laptop
 • Unicauca18: The Unicauc dataset contains traffic genercan gain full access and control. The smartphones are conated by 75 applications captured in a network section in
 nected to the Internet through a WiFi access point (AP) and are
 a university environment [12]. It contains statistical feaconnected to the laptop through USB 2.0 wired connections.
 tures extracted from IP flows. The application labels are
 The laptop sends data collection commands such as launchobtained using DPI.
 ing applications on the smartphone and retrieving collected
 • MTD18: The MTD18 dataset contains raw traffic data
 data through the USB connection. Each experiment was congenerated by 12 Android applications [13]. During data
 ducted at one of three locations. Location 1 is the Engineering
 collection, a custom client software on a mobile device
 Education and Research Center on the UT Austin campus.
 routes traffic to a VPN server and reports the socket
 It is equipped with the Cisco Aironet 2800 series Wireless
 information associated with each application. The server
 Access Points (WAP) connected to the wired network with
 than obtains the ground truth labels by checking the
 1 Gigabit Ethernet connections. The WAPs support the IEEE
 socket information of collected traffic data. Similar to the
 802.11ac standard and use the 5 GHz band. Location 2 is the
 USTC-TFC2016 and the IMTD17 datasets, this dataset
 Prather Residence Hall (PRH), a student dormitory on the UT
 mostly considers popular applications in China.
 Austin campus. It is equipped with the Cisco Aironet 2702i
 • MIRAGE-2019: The MIRAGE-2019 dataset contains
 series WAPs with 1 Gigabit Ethernet connections to the wired
 mobile traffic data from 40 Android applications genernetwork. The WAPs support the IEEE 802.11a/g/n/ac stanated by human users [14]. The dataset includes per-packet
 dards and use the 2.4 GHz and the 5 GHz band. Location
 features from the first 32 packets of each bidirectional
 3 is a house in a residential area in Houston. It uses the 50
 flow, per-flow statistical features and the metadata of
 megabits per second (Mbps) wired Internet plan from AT&T
 each flow. The labels are generated using the socket
 and is equipped with an AT&T WiFi gateway supporting the
 information or according to a heuristic: assigning the
 IEEE 802.11b/g/n/ac standards. The overall experimental setup
 most common label.
 is illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Numerous public datasets have also been published for pur-
 The general workflow of the automated data collection platposes other than application classification, including a dataset
 form is shown in Fig. 2. From the laptop controller, the user
 for YouTube traffic analysis [15], a dataset for Netflix traffic
 specifies the application and the activity to perform on the
 analysis and user experience inference [16] and a dataset for
 application. The laptop then gains root access of the smart-
 Internet of Things (IoT) device classification [17].
 phone through Android debug bridge (ADB), which is an API
 The advantages of the proposed UTMobileNetTraffic2021
 for third parties to access and control Android devices. The
 dataset over these existing ones include:
 laptop launches TCPDUMP on the smartphone to start collect-
 • A wide range of modern applications: Compared to the
 ing data packets and then launches the specified application.
 datasets proposed in [10], [11] and [13] which only con-
 The smartphone executes a series of actions on the applicatains popular applications in China, the proposed dataset
 tion, which generates the corresponding network traffic. After
 includes more widely used modern applications, rangall specified actions have been completed, TCPDUMP and
 ing from social networking apps like Instagram, media
 the application are closed, and the collected data packets are
 consumption apps like YouTube and utility apps like
 transferred and stored on the laptop.
 Dropbox.
 • Accurate activity-level labels: An automated traffic generation and data collection platform was built. Instead IV. DATA C OLLECTION
 of relying on DPI or socket information to obtain the We select 16 of the most popular mobile applications listed
 labels, users can specify the activities to perform on on [18], so that the collected data is representative of the
 each application, allowing the data to be labeled with modern data consumption patterns. Typical user activities are
 both the application and the activity being performed. selected for each application, such as browsing and posting
 The proposed dataset provides accurate labels at a finer for Reddit and sending and opening emails for Gmail. For
 granularity compared to the existing datasets. each activity, a series of actions are implemented through
 • Flexible feature engineering: The proposed dataset cap- the Android API to emulate a sequence of user interactions
 tures TCP/IP packet headers and their timestamps in with the smartphone. Examples of actions include scrolling

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 158 IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF E XISTING P UBLIC DATASETS FOR A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION

 TABLE II
 S UMMARY OF R ECORDED DATA F EATURES

 Fig. 1. Data Collection Setup.

 packet payloads may still contain useful information such as
 the Transport Layer Security (TLS) handshake fields despite
 of the encryption, they are removed for ease of data storage and for privacy concerns. No user-specific information or
 meta data is included in the dataset for privacy reasons. The
 dataset includes features extracted from packet headers shown
 Fig. 2. Data Collection Workflow. in Table II for each individual packet. During the data collection stage, the packets are recorded as a raw time series instead
 of being grouped into flows, which are defined by sequences
 the smartphone screen, clicking on part of the displayed con- of packets sharing the same TCP/IP 5 tuple, i.e., the source
 tent to go to a different screen, and waiting for the displayed and destination IP addresses, the source and destination ports
 media to play for a certain time. and the protocol. One activity on one application is performed
 When collecting data, a BASH script launches the applica- during each data collection experiment. All packets captured
 tion on the smartphone through ADB, waits for the application in the same experiment are labeled with the corresponding
 to finish loading, then starts recording network packets through application and activity.
 TCPDUMP on the smartphone. Background tasks are cleared Three different sets of data were collected. In the deterbefore starting data collection for a new application, and each ministic automated dataset, the action parameters for each
 application is closed after data collection is complete. This activity are fixed. For instance, when performing the activminimizes the amount of background traffic in the collected ity of scrolling news feed on Facebook, the BASH script will
 data so that the majority of the traffic is generated by the target always scroll the feed 3 times, wait for 5 seconds, and repeat
 application. After packet recording is complete, the raw pcap for 5 times. Although the actions are fixed, the context and
 data files are transferred to the laptop, where they are pro- content displayed are up to the application. In the randomized
 cessed using TShark and converted to the csv format. Modern automated dataset, the action parameters for each activity are
 mobile traffic is often encrypted, which makes DPI infeasible randomized, such as the number of scrolls, the wait time and
 and traffic classification more challenging in general. While the number of repetitions for Facebook news feed scrolling.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HENG et al.: UTMobileNetTraffic2021: LABELED PUBLIC NETWORK TRAFFIC DATASET 159

 TABLE III
 S UMMARY OF DATA D ISTRIBUTION

 TABLE IV
 This makes the collected data more diverse and realistic. The A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY (%)
 third dataset is generated by human users and is the most
 realistic in terms of representing user activity. It includes two
 subsets: an application-specific dataset and an activity-specific
 dataset. In the former, human users perform each activity using
 applications in Table III. In the latter, human users use each
 application normally without constraints on the activities to two important metrics for classification problems. Let TPi ,
 perform. The total number of packets, number of flows and TNi , FPi and FNi denote the true positives, true negatives,
 duration of collected data for each application is shown in false positives and false negatives of class i, the accuracy is
 Table III. The entire dataset consists of over 29 hours of given by
 collected data for all applications. 
 accuracy =  i TPi + TNi . (1)
 i TP i + TNi + FPi + FNi
 V. E XAMPLE U SE C ASE : A PPLICATION AND ACTIVITY The F1 score of class i is given by
 C LASSIFICATION 2TPi
 The proposed dataset provides a meaningful tool to analyz- F1 score = . (2)
 2TPi + FPi + FNi
 ing modern mobile network traffic. In particular, the labeled
 dataset can be used to develop traffic classification algorithms. A. Application Classification
 Two example use cases on application classification and activ-
 The mean and standard deviation of the accuracy from 10-
 ity classification are presented. The purpose of this section is to
 fold cross-validation are shown in Table IV. The RFC and the
 provide a simple example and benchmark on how the proposed
 XGBoost classifier which are both ensemble models achieve
 dataset can be used rather than to achieve state-of-the-art
 an average accuracy of around 79% and outperform the KNN
 performance in the classification tasks.
 by a significant margin. The mean and standard deviation of
 Both examples use the randomized automated dataset which
 the F1 scores for each application are shown in Fig. 3. Again,
 contains 14 of the 16 applications shown in Table III, excludthe RFC and the XGBoost classifier outperform the KNN in
 ing Google Maps and Hangout. Per-flow features are extracted
 terms of the F1 score for most applications. The ML models
 from the TCP/IP headers of downlink packets, including the
 can classify applications such as YouTube, Spotify, Dropbox
 total number of packets, the total number of bytes, the miniand Pandora relatively well, achieving F1 scores of over 0.8
 mum, maximum, mean and standard deviation of packet sizes
 for these applications. On the other hand, the ML models can
 in a flow, the minimum, maximum, mean and standard devionly achieve F1 scores of less than 0.6 for applications such
 ation of the packet inter-arrival times (IAT) and the flow
 as Gmail and Messenger. This might be caused by a lack of
 duration. The same set of features is used for both applitraining data since these applications have fewer packets and
 cation and activity classification. The extracted dataset is
 flows in the dataset.
 preprocessed to remove the mean and scale to unit variance
 for each feature. Three ML models are considered: Random
 Forest Classifier (RFC), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classi- B. Activity Classification
 fier and XGBoost classifier. The ML models are implemented Assuming that the application is known, an activity clasusing the scikit-learn Python package and the default hyper- sifier is trained for each application to detect the activity
 parameters are used. The accuracy and the F1 score are performed. The applications with multiple types of captured

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 160 IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS, VOL. 3, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

 labeled with application and activity level labels. Examples on
 application and activity classification are provided, where ML
 models are trained using flow-based features extracted from
 the dataset.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The authors thank C. Gill, K. Chau, N. Charles, A.
 Ma, J. M. Noh and J. Poudel of UT Austin for their
 assistance in developing the data collection platform and
 collecting the dataset. The support of Samsung, including
 smartphone donations for the experiments, is also gratefully
 acknowledged.

 R EFERENCES
 Fig. 3. F1 score mean and standard deviation of application classification [1] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
 from 10-fold cross-validation. for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag.,
 vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
 TABLE V [2] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques for
 ACTIVITY C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY PER A PPLICATION (%) mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 54024–54033, 2019.
 [3] V. Chandrasekhar, Y. Heng, J. Cho, J. Lee, J. Zhang, and J. G. Andrews,
 “Experience-centric mobile video scheduling through machine learning,”
 IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 113017–113030, 2019.
 [4] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural
 networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
 2017.
 [5] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification
 of network applications,” in Proc. PAM, 2005, pp. 41–54.
 [6] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 GLOBECOM, 2018, pp. 1–6.
 [7] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
 identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
 Comput. Netw., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
 [8] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 features,” in Proc. ICISSP, 2016, pp. 407–414.
 [9] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 activities in the randomized automated dataset are consid- “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc.
 ICISSP, 2017, pp. 253–262.
 ered. The mean and standard deviation of the accuracy from [10] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classi-
 10-fold cross-validation of each application are shown in fication using convolutional neural network for representation learning,”
 Table V. The ML models can classify activities relatively in Proc. IEEE ICOIN, 2017, pp. 712–717.
 well for applications such as Instagram and Hulu but poorly [11] D. Li, Y. Zhu, and W. Lin, “Traffic identification of mobile apps
 based on variational autoencoder network,” in Proc. IEEE CIS, 2017,
 for Facebook and Twitter. Activities of an application like pp. 287–291.
 Instagram are intuitively easier to be distinguished from one [12] J. S. Rojas, Á. Rendón, and J. C. Corrales, “Consumption behavior
 another: browsing photos and videos generates heavy traffic analysis of over the top services: Incremental learning or traditional
 methods?” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 136581–136591, 2019.
 while sending messages does not. On the other hand, for an [13] R. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Cai, D. Tang, J. Yang, and Z. Yang, “Benchmark data
 application like Facebook, scrolling the news feed and search- for mobile app traffic research,” in Proc. EAI MobiQuitous, Nov. 2018,
 ing for Facebook pages generate more similar traffic patterns pp. 402–411.
 and are more difficult to classify using per-flow statistical [14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 “MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in
 features. Proc. IEEE ICCCS, Oct. 2019, pp. 1–8.
 [15] T. Karagkioules et al., “A public dataset for YouTube’s mobile streaming
 client,” in Proc. IEEE TMA, Jun. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [16] S. C. Madanapalli, H. H. Gharakhieli, and V. Sivaraman, “Inferring
 Netflix user experience from broadband network measurement,” in Proc.
 We present a public labeled dataset for network traffic clas- IEEE TMA, Jun. 2019, pp. 41–48.
 sification. An automated platform is constructed to generate [17] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments
 and collect mobile traffic data from specified applications in using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
 a controlled environment. The dataset consists of mobile data vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
 [18] Statista: Unique U.S. Visitors to Mobile Apps 2016. Accessed: Mar.
 from a wide range of 16 popular applications generated by 1, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://www.statista.com/statistics/250862/
 both the automated platform and human users. The dataset is unique-visitors-to-the-most-popular-mobile-apps-in-the-us/

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:17:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.