2022 2nd International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer Engineering (ICCECE)

 An Efficient Approach for Encrypted Traffic
 Classification using CNN and Bidirectional GRU
 ChengYuan Lin BaiHua Chen
 Department of Automation Department of Automation
2022 2nd International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer Engineering (ICCECE) | 978-1-6654-0886-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICCECE54139.2022.9712708

 Xiamen University Xiamen University
 Xiamen, China Xiamen, China
 18859272172@163.com bhchenxmu@hotmail.com

 WeiYao Lan*
 Department of Automation
 Xiamen University
 Xiamen, China
 wylan@xmu.edu.cn
 *Weiyao Lan is the corresponding author.

 Abstract—With the rapid development of the Internet, the In recent years, with the fast development in demand for
 amount and types of network traffic have increased dramatically protecting transmission data and user privacy, an increasing
 in tandem. Therefore, precise network traffic classification has number of apps and protocols have begun to send data using
 become an essential aspect of network management. Furthermore, encryption technologies, and the share of encrypted traffic in
 as user privacy and data encryption requirements have grown, the network has grown dramatically. Various encryption
 more encrypted traffic has evolved. Because of the wide variety of mechanisms are now in use on the network. SSH, IPsec, TLS,
 encryption techniques and methodologies, network traffic and other encryption protocols were introduced in [1]. It is
 categorization has become extremely challenging. Traditional
 challenging to create a generic categorization system due to the
 traffic classification methods have been unable to meet the
 variances in protocols and encryption techniques. The
 demand for classification accuracy. In this study, we propose a
 network structure that combines CNN and Bi-GRU to learn the
 categorization of traffic poses significant difficulties.
 temporal and spatial features of encrypted traffic data. We utilize Traditional traffic categorization approaches such as port-based
 the public dataset ISCX VPN-nonVPN to evaluate the effect of our and deep packet inspection can’t tackle this sort of problem well
 model, and we use accuracy, recall, and F1 score as criteria. Finally, since encrypted communication is no longer in plaintext. At the
 our model had a classification accuracy of 93.1%, with a recall rate moment, machine learning methods are primarily used to solve
 of 93.7% and an F1 score of 93.6%. We also discussed about the the problem of encrypted traffic classification, but this type of
 differences between Bi-GRU and LSTM in terms of model method requires the extraction of characteristics from network
 parameter scale and time efficiency. Experiments show that Bi- data streams, which means that developing an encrypted traffic
 GRU has the greatest classification effect and efficiency. classification system based on machine learning requires a
 significant amount of labor and domain knowledge. Migration
 Keywords: Deep Learning; Network Traffic Classification; CNN; and large-scale applications are tough to achieve. It is vital to
 Bi-GRU re-extract features and train classifiers as new traffic kinds
 occur. Furthermore, owing to the limits of the machine learning
 I. INTRODUCTION model, the quality of the picked features typically impacts the
 With the rapid development of Internet communication classifier's ultimate effect, resulting in low classification
 technology in recent years, the network has become an integral accuracy. Deep learning, on the other hand, has advanced
 element of people's work and lives. People's requirements have significantly in recent years, and an increasing number of
 gotten more diverse and varied as the Internet has grown, academics have successfully implemented it in their specialties.
 resulting in additional application situations and developmental This has also resulted in fresh concepts and solutions for the
 direction. The perception and monitoring of Internet traffic has problem of classified encrypted traffic.
 become increasingly critical in such an environment. In today's
 network management system, network traffic categorization is Therefore, this study provides a deep learning-based
 a critical responsibility. The main goal is to predict the network solution for encrypting traffic categorization. The network
 data flow protocol and application type. Traffic categorization employs a hybrid paradigm that combines CNN and Bi-GRU.
 activities are crucial to network management and service A bidirectional GRU network is known as Bi-GRU. The spatial
 quality with the fast development of high-throughput traffic features of data are learned using a one-dimensional CNN.
 demand. Hence, network traffic classification has aroused GRU, being a kind of recurrent neural network, inherits the
 significant interest in academia and industry, and an increasing benefits of LSTM while also having a simpler structure, making
 number of academics are paying attention to it. it more effective in network training. The network can learn the
 forward and backward features, and our model can learn the

 978-1-6654-0886-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
 368

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
spatial and temporal properties of the traffic data, by using Bi- efficient network is critical, this research offers a network
GRU to receive the output after convolution. model based on a CNN and Bi-GRU combination.
 The remainder of this article is structured in the following III. METHOLOGY
manner. Section II discusses related work. Section III describes
the design and implementation of the proposed method. Section A. Dataset
IV mainly convers evaluation methods and experimental results. Owing to the majority of the dataset utilized in the articles
Section V presents conclusions and future work. are inconsistent, they often employ private dataset for network
 traffic categorization tasks. As a result, utilizing universal
 II. RELATED WORK criteria to compare models and algorithms is problematic.
 The existing approaches for encrypted traffic classification Therefore, we used the publicly available ISCX VPN-nonVPN
are classified from several viewpoints of the characteristics and dataset, which was generated by the University of New
models. Machine learning-based approaches and deep learning- Brunswick team. This dataset includes 26GB of encrypted
based methods are the most often utilized methods nowadays. traffic data in pcap and pcapng formats. The flow features of
 the dataset may be split into 14 categories, according to their
A. Machine learning based methods paper's description, including Browse, Email, Chat and so on.
 Velen et al. [1] studied papers on the classification of However, due to the dataset's homogeneity, it's hard to tell the
encrypted traffic between 2005 and 2015, and the research difference between the Browser and Streaming categories.
shows that before deep learning is widely used, payload-based Finally, we used [8]'s approach to divide the traffic data into 12
and feature-based network classification methods are the main categories, six of which are VPN categories and others are not.
methods of encrypted traffic classification. Sun et al. [2] Table I lists the specific category and size information.
proposed an encrypted traffic classification method based on
the naive bayes method. They used a hybrid method based on TABLE I. ISCX VPN-NONVPN DATASET
signature and statistical analysis and achieved a classification
accuracy of more than 99%. Arndt [3] examined the impact of Traffic Type Content Size
C4.5, k-means, and a multi-objective genetic algorithm on Chat 29.5M
 ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook
network traffic categorization. According to the study, C4.5 and Hangouts
performs better in the categorization effect. In [4, 5], the support VPN-Chat 27.6M
vector machine is used to classify applications. Among these Email 13M
 Email, Gmail ( SMPT, POP3,
methods, the feature selection method requires manual IMAP )
extraction of features for each category. This method VPN-Email 7.8M
necessitates extensive prior knowledge of the area, resulting in File 17.3G
the model's weak generalization skills and inability to migrate Skype, FTPS and SFTP
 VPN-File 279M
to new settings.
 Streaming 1.53G
B. Deep learning based methods Vimeo, Youtube, Netflix,
 VPN-Streaming Spotify 1.37G
 With the rapid development of deep learning, researchers
have started to apply deep learning technology to implement VoIP 4.48G
 Facebook, Skype and
encrypted traffic classification. Rezaei et al. [6] summarized Hangouts voice calls
different models for network traffic classification, of which VPN-VoIP 360M
convolutional neural networks are the most widely used. Wang Torrent 96.8M
et al. [7] was the first to apply CNN to network traffic uTorrent, Bittorrent
classification. They proposed different traffic representation VPN-Torrent 358M
methods, among which session and all layers achieved the best
results. Besides, they proposed using one-dimensional B. CNN Model
convolution neural networks to create an end-to-end encrypted Convolutional neural networks have had a lot of success in
traffic classification method [8]. They have an accuracy rate of a variety of domains, including speech recognition, picture
86.6% in the public dataset ISCX VPN-nonVPN [9] traffic recognition, natural language processing and others. CNN
classification. They also proposed in [10] that the HAST-IDS extracts feature by convolution and then lowers the order of
algorithm combined with CNN and LSTM be used to the magnitude of network parameters through convolutional weight
DARPA1998 and ISCX2012 datasets, with 99 percent accuracy. sharing and pooling. CNN bypasses the difficult feature
Lotfollahi et al. [11] compares the classification results of one- extraction method since it can successfully learn features from
dimensional CNN and stacked auto-encoders (SAEs), and a large amount of data. Considering network traffic data is
experiments show that one-dimensional convolution is better. structured sequence data, we use CNN as part of our model to
In [12, 13], they all advocated using an attention mechanism learn the spatial properties of the traffic data. The CNN
and a recurrent neural network to achieve traffic categorization. hierarchy is as follows:
Although CNN is commonly used in these deep learning
 1) Input: Let 𝑥 be the L-dimensional data of one of the
approaches, but CNN may not be able to learn the data's
temporal properties. LSTM has succeeded with sequence data, session data including n packets, where ⨁ is the concatenation
however due to the complexity of the classification problem, it operator, and input data 𝑥 may be written in series as
may be restricted by memory. Therefore, a lightweight and 𝑥 ,𝑥 ,…,𝑥 .

 369

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 𝑥: 𝑥 ⨁𝑥 ⨁ … ⨁𝑥 1 𝑅 𝜎 𝑊 𝑥 𝑈 ℎ 6

 2) Convolution operation: The convolution operation The output will employ the reset gate to save important
actually applies the convolution kernel 𝑤 to the sequence data. information in the past, and its calculation expression is:
Where 𝑤 denotes the weight of the h-byte traffic data and 𝑏
denotes the deviation term. ℎ tanh 𝑊𝑥 𝑟 ⨀𝑈ℎ 7

 𝑐 𝑓 𝑤⋅𝑥: 𝑏 2 where ⨀ represents an element-wise multiplication symbol.
 The outputs of the update gate and the reset gate must be
 The final feature map formed after the convolution kernel mixed in the final phase.
passes through each flow data window is:
 ℎ 𝑧 ⨀ℎ 1 𝑧 ⨀ℎ 8
 𝑐 𝑐 ,𝑐 ,…,𝑐 3
 The state of a unidirectional neural network structure is
 3) Pooling operation: The pooling operation can minimize always output from front to back. Bidirectional GRU is a neural
the dimensionality of the feature map, reducing the amount of network model made up of unidirectional and opposing GRUs,
parameters ultimately transferred to the fully connected layer the output of which is dictated by the states of these two GRUs.
and increasing computation performance while avoiding A framework like this can collect more detailed and precise
overfitting. Finally, we use the maximum pooling approach. information. Therefore, our network employs a bidirectional
 GRU. Assuming ℎ ⃖ is the forward output of GRU and ℎ⃗ is
 𝑐̂ max 𝑐 4 the backward output of GRU, then BiGRU's output may be
 represented as:
C. GRU Model
 Recurrent neural networks are mostly used to learn the ℎ ⃖
 ℎ⃗ , ℎ 9
temporal properties of network traffic sequences. LSTM [14]
and GRU [15] are two extensively utilized recurrent neural D. Network Structure
networks. To simulate long-term context and other interactions,
LSTM employs a gating mechanism that allows the recurrent
neural network to not only recall prior information, but also to
selectively forget certain unimportant information. GRU may
be thought of as an LSTM. It is a version that addresses the issue
of disappearing gradients while preserving long-term sequence
information. More than that, the parameters are less and training
time of GRU during training are quicker than LSTM, which is
why we use GRU as part of our network.
 1) Update gate: The update gate assists the model in
determining how much information from the past should be
given to the future, or how much information from the previous
and current time steps should be passed on. This is quite
powerful since the model may choose to replicate all previous
information to minimise the danger of disappearing gradients.
 Figure 1. Network structure
 𝑍 𝜎 𝑊 𝑥 𝑈 ℎ 5
 Given that network traffic data is organized and has
 Where 𝑥 is the t-th time step's input vector, that is, the t-th temporal characteristics, we perform network traffic
component of the input sequence 𝑥 that will be linearly classification tasks using a framework that combines
transformed (multiply by the weight matrix 𝑊 ). ℎ convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks.
preserves information from the previous time step 𝑡 1 and Figure 1 depicts our neural network structure diagram.
also performs the linear transformation. The update gate
combines these two pieces of information and feeds them into As shown in Figure 1, the input data is initially sent through
the sigmoid activation function, compressing the activation a one-dimensional convolutional neural network. The
result to a value between 0 and 1. convolutional layer has 32 filters, a convolution kernel width of
 3, a step size of 1, and padding of 1. The next convolution layer
 2) Reset gate: The reset gate primarily decides how much has 64 filters, a convolution kernel with a step size of 2, and the
past information must be erased. rest is the same as the first layer of convolution. The ReLU
 activation function is present in all convolutional layers.

 370

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Because each data packet's dimensionality is quite high, each
convolution is followed by a maximum pooling operation with
a width of 2 and a step size of 2 to minimize the data
dimensionality. The spatial properties of the data are retrieved
after convolution. The network data is context-sensitive since it
has temporal properties. Bi-GRU is a network structure that
learns the timing characteristics of data packets in order to
determine the forward direction of network traffic as well as
backward information. Bi-GRU learns temporal characteristics,
transfers them to a fully connected network, and then outputs
the final category through a Softmax layer. It's worth
mentioning that after the convolution and recurrent neural
networks, a dropout layer is linked, with a dropout rate of 0.2.
This step prevents the network from being overfit.
 IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Data Preprocessing Figure 2. The number of different classes of data
 Data preprocessing is necessary for the ISCX VPN non-
VPN dataset since it comprises the actual flow data, which is 3) Data representation: The data packet is made up of a
kept in packets. The following are the particular steps: byte array with a data range of [0, 255] for each byte. As a result,
 we should first normalize these values and translate them to the
 1) Data segmentation: We separate the original flow data
 range [0, 1]. After finishing data normalization, we transform
and the huge data file into little files based on session in this
 the data into a N * L matrix format, where N indicates the
stage. The flow data is segmented by source port, source IP,
 number of data packets contained in each session, and L
destination port, destination IP, and transport layer protocol.
 represents each packet's first L bytes of data. If a data packet's
However, flow data is only in one direction., but flow data in
 length is less than L bytes, the data must be filled with 0 to L
both directions is included in the session. As a consequence, the
 bytes. If the data packet's length exceeds L bytes, the surplus
session has additional details about both persons involved in the
 data must be trimmed.
contact. The raw traffic data comprises 310457 session data
once data segmentation is done. B. Evaluation
 2) Remove useless information: Each data packet is made 1) Experiment environment: PyTorch was chosen as the
up of TCP/IP protocol, and the data link layer information isn't deep learning framework for our experiment since it enables
particularly useful for later categorization, thus the data link GPU execution and is easier to implement. As a result, PyTorch
layer data can be removed. HTTPS and QUIC are the most often is used for all of the training and testing in this experiment. The
used protocols for encrypted transmission. There are also other experimental environment is Windows 10 version 20H2 with an
irrelevant data packets that should be eliminated, such as DNS AMD Ryzen 5 3600 3.60GHz CPU, 16GB of RAM, and an
protocol and others. Furthermore, because the dataset will Nvidia GeForce GTX 1650 graphics card (4GB).
employ numerous fixed IP addresses or ports to gather related The ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset was utilized in the
category data during the collection process, it is extremely experiment. As previously stated, we have a total of 46,986
possible that one IP will collect a specific category of data, sample data. We randomly shuffle the data set and then divide
which will introduce additional information into the model that it into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1 ratio. The
must be deleted. The number of session data is shown in Figure training and validation sets are primarily utilized for model
2. After eliminating unnecessary data packets, there are training, whereas the test set is used to evaluate the model once
46,986 session data in total. model training is done.
 The model's parameters are as previously stated. The
 parameters that must be learned are primarily the CNN and Bi-
 GRU parameters, as well as the weight parameters of the fully
 connected layer and the output layer. The learning rate, the
 number of data packets contained in each sample N, the number
 of bytes contained in each data packet L, and the batch size of
 the model are all hyperparameters that must be specified. In the
 experiment, we set the starting learning rate to 0.001 and utilize
 the Adam optimization technique as the backpropagation
 optimization algorithm. According to [16], the first few data
 packets of each flow may be used to complete the classification,
 hence the experiment took N to be 5, 10, 20, and L to be 64,
 128, 256, 512, or 1024. The experimental results reveal that the
 test set has the greatest influence when N is 5 and L is 1024.

 371

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Therefore, the number of data packets N is 5 and the number of CNN + LSTM 0.934
bytes is 512. The batch size of the model is set to 64. Table II
depicts the model's detailed structure. CNN + Bi-LSTM 0.932

 CNN + GRU 0.928
 TABLE II. DETAILS OF DEEP LEARNING NETWORK MODELS
 CNN + Bi-GRU 0.931
 Model Architecture Detail
 Conv1d(5, 32, 3, 1, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)- The accuracy of the model integrated with CNN and RNN
 Conv1d(32, 64, 3, 2, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)-
 CNN + LSTM
 Dropout(0.2)-LSTM(256)-LSTM(128)- may be increased by roughly 2%, as shown in Table III. The
 Dropout(0.2)-FC(64)-FC(12) result of combining CNN and LSTM is the best, whereas CNN
 Conv1d(5, 32, 3, 1, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)- and Bi-GRU is just 0.3% less effective. According to the
 CNN + Bi-LSTM
 Conv1d(32, 64, 3, 2, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)- findings of the experiments, this combination approach can
 Dropout(0.2)-Bi-LSTM(128)-Dropout(0.2)-FC(64)- learn more information in encrypted traffic categorization,
 FC(12)
 Conv1d(5, 32, 3, 1, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)-
 making it a useful technique.
 Conv1d(32, 64, 3, 2, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)-
 CNN + GRU
 Dropout(0.2)-GRU(256)-GRU(128)-Dropout(0.2)-
 FC(64)-FC(12)
 Conv1d(5, 32, 3, 1, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)-
 Conv1d(32, 64, 3, 2, 1)-ReLU()-MaxPool(2, 2)-
 CNN + BiGRU
 Dropout(0.2)-Bi-GRU(128)-Dropout(0.2)-FC(64)-
 FC(12)

 2) Evaluation metrics: Network traffic classification is
fundamentally a multi-classification task, and there are an
increasing number of evaluation criteria of classification result,
the most frequent of which is accuracy. In addition to the
accuracy rate, this paper utilizes the precision rate, recall rate,
and F1 score as model evaluation indicators. Assuming N is the
total number of samples, 𝑇𝑃 is the number of original category Figure 3. The recall comparison of 4 models
c and predicted as c, 𝐹𝑃 is the number of actual categories that
are not category c but the predicted category is category c, 𝑇𝑁
means the actual category is not c and the predicted category is
not c, and 𝐹𝑁 means the actual category is c but the expected
category is the number of other categories. As a result, the four
evaluation indications listed above can be written as follows:

 ∑ 𝑇𝑃 𝑇𝑃
 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 ,𝑃 10
 𝑁 𝑇𝑃 𝐹𝑃

 𝑇𝑃 2∗𝑃 ∗𝑅
 𝑅 , 𝐹1 11
 𝑇𝑃 𝐹𝑁 𝑃 𝑅

C. Experimental Result Analysis Figure 4. The F1 score comparison of 4 models
 It is difficult to compare the algorithms in other articles due
to changes in the data collection and experimental setting TABLE IV. THE COMPARISON OF EFFICIENCY
applied in the study. As a consequence, we chose [8, 11, 12] for
comparison, which employed the same dataset as this paper, weights Training time(ms) Test time(ms)
and the results of the experiment are displayed in Table III. CNN + LSTM 4672k 212 40.6

 TABLE III. THE ACCURACY OF DIFFERENT MODELS CNN + Bi-LSTM 4468k 179 36.0

 CNN + GRU 3508k 185 36.3
 Accuracy
 CNN + BiGRU 3387k 166 35.0
 C4.5 0.800

 One-dim CNN 0.866
 The comparisons in Figures 3 and 4 are mostly between
 Deep Packet 0.898 different CNN and RNN combinations. GRU's recall and F1
 Attention Based LSTM 0.912
 score are tiny in comparison to LSTM, with the exception of the
 Torrent category, and the other categories are similar or even

 372

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
greater. Table IV shows that using a bidirectional RNN is International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI).
superior than using a unidirectional RNN in terms of model IEEE, 2017: 43-48.
parameters and operating efficiency, with Bi-GRU having the [9] Draper-Gil G, Lashkari A H, Mamun M S I, et al. Characterization of
 encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related[C]//Proceedings of the 2nd
shortest parameter scale and the best operational efficiency. The international conference on information systems security and privacy
accuracy of the Bi-GRU model is somewhat lower than that of (ICISSP). 2016: 407-414.
the LSTM model, but the network parameters are 27% lower [10] Wang W, Sheng Y, Wang J, et al. HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical
and the time efficiency is 13.8% quicker. Due to the vast spatial-temporal features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion
volume of network traffic data, this time benefit will be more detection[J]. IEEE access, 2017, 6: 1792-1806.
apparent in the real-world network environment. As a result, the [11] Lotfollahi M, Siavoshani M J, Zade R S H, et al. Deep packet: A novel
high criteria for precision in industrial production may be approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning[J]. Soft
 Computing, 2020, 24(3): 1999-2012.
relaxed, and the adoption of Bi-GRU instead of LSTM can
drastically cut manufacturing costs. [12] Yao H, Liu C, Zhang P, et al. Identification of encrypted traffic through
 attention mechanism based long short term memory[J]. IEEE
 Transactions on Big Data, 2019.
 V. CONCLUSION
 [13] Liu X, You J, Wu Y, et al. Attention-based bidirectional GRU networks
 In this research, we focus on the categorization of encrypted for efficient HTTPS traffic classification[J]. Information Sciences, 2020,
network traffic, and we suggest a network structure based on 541: 297-315.
CNN and RNN to accomplish the task. Taking into account the [14] Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory[J]. Neural
temporal and spatial characteristics of network traffic data, we computation, 1997, 9(8): 1735-1780.
extract the data of the first few packets in the data stream, and [15] Chung J, Gulcehre C, Cho K H, et al. Empirical evaluation of gated
 recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling[J]. arXiv preprint
then perform data preprocessing through operations such as arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
padding, truncation, and normalization. Convolution is used to
 [16] Vu L, Thuy H V, Nguyen Q U, et al. Time series analysis for encrypted
learn the spatial characteristics of the data, and Bi-GRU is used traffic classification: A deep learning approach[C]//2018 18th
to learn the temporal characteristics of the data, reducing the International Symposium on Communications and Information
parameter scale of the model while ensuring classification Technologies (ISCIT). IEEE, 2018: 121-126.
accuracy and increasing classification efficiency. The results of
the experiment reveal that CNN and Bi-GRU considerably
increased classification and classification efficiency, which is a
good notion for dealing with encrypted traffic classification.
 In the future, as RNN has some weaknesses in processing
network traffic, it will be restricted mostly by sequence length
and time efficiency. Our main focus will be on developing a
system that can take the place of RNN. Because the attention
mechanism and transformer are becoming increasingly
common in sequence data, including these structures into the
network may have a positive classification impact.
 REFERENCES
[1] Velan P, Čermák M, Čeleda P, et al. A survey of methods for encrypted
 traffic classification and analysis[J]. International Journal of Network
 Management, 2015, 25(5): 355-374.
[2] Sun G L, Xue Y, Dong Y, et al. An novel hybrid method for effectively
 classifying encrypted traffic[C]//2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications
 Conference GLOBECOM 2010. IEEE, 2010: 1-5.
[3] Arndt D J, Zincir-Heywood A N. A comparison of three machine learning
 techniques for encrypted network traffic analysis[C]//2011 IEEE
 Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense
 Applications (CISDA). IEEE, 2011: 107-114.
[4] Alshammari R, Zincir-Heywood A N. Machine learning based encrypted
 traffic classification: Identifying ssh and skype[C]//2009 IEEE
 symposium on computational intelligence for security and defense
 applications. IEEE, 2009: 1-8.
[5] Kumano Y, Ata S, Nakamura N, et al. Towards real-time processing for
 application identification of encrypted traffic[C]//2014 International
 Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC).
 IEEE, 2014: 136-140.
[6] Rezaei S, Liu X. Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An
 overview[J]. IEEE communications magazine, 2019, 57(5): 76-81.
[7] Wang W, Zhu M, Zeng X, et al. Malware traffic classification using
 convolutional neural network for representation learning[C]//2017
 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN). IEEE,
 2017: 712-717.
[8] Wang W, Zhu M, Wang J, et al. End-to-end encrypted traffic classification
 with one-dimensional convolution neural networks[C]//2017 IEEE

 373

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:22:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.