An encrypted traffic classification method based on contrastive
 learning
 siyuan tian Yating Gao Guoquan Yuan
 Beijing University of Posts and State Grid Information & Information & Telecommunication
 Telecommunications Telecommunication Branch, Beijing Branch, State Grid Jiangsu Electric
 100761, China Power Co. Ltd, Nanjing, China

 Ru ZHANG∗ Jinmeng Zhao Song Zhang
 Beijing University of Posts and State Grid Information & Information & Telecommunication
 Telecommunications Telecommunication Branch, Beijing Branch, State Grid Jiangsu Electric
 100761, China Power Co. Ltd, Nanjing, China

ABSTRACT on contrastive learning. In 2022 the 8th International Conference on Com-
Network traffic classification has become an important part of munication and Information Processing (ICCIP 2022), November 03–05, 2022,
 Beijing, China. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
network management, which is conducive to realizing intelligent
 3571662.3571678
network operation and maintenance, improving network quality
of service (QoS), and ensuring network security. With the rapid
development of various applications and protocols, more and more
encrypted traffic appears in the network. Due to the loss of semantic
information after traffic encryption, poor content intelligibility, and
difficulty in feature extraction, traditional detection methods are no
longer applicable. Existing solutions mainly rely on the powerful
feature self-learning ability of end-to-end deep neural networks to 1 INTRODUCTION
identify encrypted traffic. However, such methods are overly depen- Traffic classification is an essential task for traffic engineering, netdent on data size, and it has been experimentally proven that it is work management, quality of service (QoS), and network security.
often difficult to achieve satisfactory results when validating across Its purpose is to identify categories of traffic from various applidatasets. In order to solve this problem, this paper proposes an en- cations or web services. In recent years, with the popularization
crypted traffic identification method based on contrastive learning. of traffic encryption technology and the rapid growth of network
First, the clustering method is used to expand the labeled data set. throughput, traffic encryption has been widely used on the Internet.
When the encrypted traffic features are difficult to extract, it is only Numerous services and applications use encryption algorithms to
necessary to learn the feature space to achieve discrimination.more protect their information. It is becoming increasingly difficult to
suitable for encrypted traffic identification. When validating across accurately identify encrypted traffic in real time. The classification
datasets, only fine-tuning is required on a small amount of labeled and identification framework of encrypted traffic based on deep
data to achieve good recognition results. Compared with the end- learning meets the needs of end-to-end classification and identificato-end learning method, there is an improvement of about 5%. tion. Using the original traffic content as the model input, 1D-CNN,
 CCS CONCEPTS •Security and privacy •Network security 2D-CNN, etc. are used for feature extraction. Although validating
•Security protocols on a single dataset works well, it is often difficult to achieve ideal
 results when validating across datasets. Therefore, how to capture
KEYWORDS the implicit and robust patterns in various encrypted traffic and supencrypted traffic, contrastive learning, feature extraction port accurate and general traffic classification is the key to achieve
 high network security and effective network management.
ACM Reference Format:
siyuan tian, Yating Gao, Guoquan Yuan, Ru ZHANG, Jinmeng Zhao, Contrastive learning has demonstrated its advantages for feaand Song Zhang. 2022. An encrypted traffic classification method based ture extraction in a wide range of applications across domains,
 such as visual language and computer vision. Aiming at the above
∗ Corresponding Author email: zhangru@bupt.edu.cn
 problems, this paper designs a method for identifying encrypted
 traffic based on contrastive learning. After the encrypted traffic
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed data is preprocessed, in the case of only a small number of labeled
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation samples, first use the clustering method to expand the data volon the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM ume of the training set, and obtain a pre-trained model based on
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a supervised comparative learning training, and then use a small
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. number of samples for fine-tuning for downstream use. Task. The
ICCIP 2022, November 03–05, 2022, Beijing, China experimental results show that the generalization ability of this
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9710-0/22/11. . . $15.00 method is improved compared with the end-to-end encrypted traffic
https://doi.org/10.1145/3571662.3571678 identification method.

 101
ICCIP 2022, November 03–05, 2022, Beijing, China Siyuan Tian et al.

2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Identification of Encrypted Traffic
2.1.1 Payload-based approach. Bonfiglio et al. [1] utilize the unencrypted 4-byte header and the first 4 of the payload based on the
Pearson chi-square test and the Naive Bayes classifier. Chi-square
detection is performed on each byte to extract the fingerprint of
the protocol frame structure for Skype traffic identification. Bai Yu
[2] established a first-order homogeneous Markov chain by using Figure 1: Visualization of traffic preprocessing results
the secure socket protocol (SSL) and transport layer protocol (TLS)
message types as eigenvalues, and calculated the initial state and
end state by using the frequency statistics of state appearance and 3 ALGORITHM DESIGN
transition to build a Markov model (fingerprint model) of the data. 3.1 Granularity Selection
 The split granularity of network traffic includes TCP connections,
2.1.2 Statistical feature-based Methods. According to the unen- flows, sessions, services and hosts. A session is a collection of
crypted bit stream data of different lengths in the link layer, Xing flows, and a flow is defined as all packets with the same five-tuple.
Meng [3] et al. used four classical methods such as symbol frequency The five-tuple contains source IP, destination IP, source port, Desdetection in NIST detection to extract and identify its features. tination port and transport level protocols, sessions are bidirectional flows, covering both flows where source IP/port and des-
2.1.3 Machine-learning Based Methods. Sun et al. [4] proposed tination IP/port are interchangeable. To construct the set of sesa hybrid approach to classify encrypted traffic. In this approach, sions, we describe all packets in the original network traffic as a
the SSL/TLS protocol is first identified using a signature matching group 𝑃 = {𝑝 1, 𝑝 2, ·𝑠, 𝑝 |𝑝 | }, and each packet in the group is repremethod. A Naive Bayesian machine learning algorithm is then ap- sented as 𝑝 𝑖 = (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑏𝑖 , 𝑡 𝑖 ), 𝑖 = 1, 2, 3, ·𝑠. 𝑥 𝑖 represents a quintuple, 𝑏𝑖
plied to identify encrypted applications under the SSL/TLS protocol. represents the byte size of the corresponding packet, and 𝑡 𝑖 rep-
Alshammari [5] studied the performance of C5.0, AdaBoost, and resents the time when the packet starts to be sent. A group 𝑃 in
Genetic Programming (GP) algorithms for recognizing Voice over the original network traffic is divided into multiple subsets, each
IP (VoIP) traffic. Finally, it is concluded that applying suitable sam- subset represents a flow, and a subset is described in the form of
pling and machine learning methods is important for VoIP traffic 𝑓 = (𝑥, 𝑏, 𝑑, 𝑡). 𝑥 represents the same quintuple, 𝑏 represents the
classification. In addition, other feature-based methods are widely sum of the sizes of all packets in a stream, 𝑑𝑡 represents the duration
used in traffic classification[6, 7, 8]. of the stream, and 𝑡 represents the time when the first packet of the
 stream starts outputting. During a period of time, multiple flows
 with the same or opposite quintuple information form a session
2.1.4 Deep-learning Based Methods. Vinh et al. used neural net- 𝑆, and the original network traffic can be converted into a set of
works to classify news and proved the effectiveness of neural net- multiple sessions, that is, the flow 𝑇 = (𝑆 1, 𝑆 2, 𝑆 3, ·𝑠).
works in sequence classification[9].Wang et al. [10] first proposed a
classification and recognition framework based on one-dimensional 3.2 Unlabeled data processing
CNN, which overcomes the problem that traditional machine learning algorithms are difficult to obtain the global optimal value, and Supervised contrastive learning relies on deep features, which demeets the needs of end-to-end classification and recognition. Based pend on data size. In order to expand the amount of labeled data in
on this, the subsequent research designs different preprocessing the dataset, the PCA method is first used to reduce the dimension of
methods of encrypted traffic data using two-dimensional CNN or high-dimensional traffic data to obtain a low-dimensional represenone-dimensional CNN to design the recognition framework [11, 12]. tation of the data, so as to avoid the problem of dimension disaster
 caused by too high feature dimensions. Then, the labeled data and
 unlabeled data are clustered together by clustering method, and the
2.2 Contrastive Learning unlabeled data with higher confidence is determined according to
 the proportion of labeled data in different clusters to the data in the
This simple idea has been widely used in self-supervised learning of
 whole cluster, and pseudo-labels are added to expand the labeled
image features and pre-training of model parameters in recent years.
 data set.
Chen uses two augmentation mechanisms to generate two interrelated views for each example, making related views attract each
other while repelling other examples. Representations are learned
 3.3 Encrypted traffic identification method
by maximizing the consistency between different augmented views based on supervised contrastive learning
of the same data example through a contrastive loss in the latent This paper proposes an encrypted traffic identification method
space [13]. Based on the given label information, Khosla et al. make based on supervised contrastive learning. For the first time, the
the samples with the same label as positive samples and other sam- supervised contrastive learning method is used in the encrypted
ples as negative samples. Using the supervised contrastive learning traffic identification pre-training model. The pre-training model
method has achieved better results on the ImageNet dataset than consists of two neural networks, one of which is used for encrypted
the traditional model based on the cross-entropy loss function [14]. traffic feature extraction called encoding. The projector 𝐸, and the

 102
An encrypted traffic classification method based on contrastive learning ICCIP 2022, November 03–05, 2022, Beijing, China

 Table 1: ISCX VPN-nonVPN classification results

 Traffic type Content
 Chat Aim、Facebook、Hangouts、Icq、Skype
 E-mail Email
 File Ftps、Skype
 Streaming Spotify、Vimeo、Youtube
 Voip Facebook、Hangouts、Voipbuster

 Table 2: USTC-TFC2016 classification results

 Traffic type Content
 Chat Skype
 E-mail GEmail、Outlook
Figure 2: Dimensionality reduction visualization of en- File Ftp、SMB
crypted traffic features P2p BitTorrent
 Voip Facetime

 traffic. Consists of 15 apps such as Facebook, Youtube, Netflix. Selected applications are encrypted using various security protocols,
 including HTTPS, SSL, SSH, and proprietary protocols. The USTC-
 TFC2016 dataset contains encrypted traffic of 10 application types
 such as MySQL, Gmail, and Outlook. Both datasets are collected
 from real network environments.
 We manually label the two datasets, ISCX VPN-nonVPN and
 USTC-TFC2016, respectively, so that the two datasets are divided
 Figure 3: Internal composition of residual structure into five categories. Table 1 and Table 2 show our classification
 results.

other for converting high-dimensional features to low-dimensional
 4.2 Experimental results and analysis
features is called projector 𝑃. In terms of model selection, this paper
selects the resnet model proposed by He Yuming et al. of Microsoft In the TFC-2016 dataset, based on 9000 pieces of labeled data, we
Research in 2015 as the encoder architecture. first use PCA to reduce the dimension of the data and select five
 Suppose the input is 𝑥, and the mapping learned by two fully cluster centers for clustering using K-Means, adding pseudo-labels
connected layers is 𝐻 (𝑥). Assuming that the dimensions of 𝐻 (𝑥) to the unlabeled data, as Supervised contrastive learning prepares
and 𝑥 are the same, then fitting 𝐻 (𝑥) is equivalent to fitting residual data. PCA technology can achieve dimensionality reduction to simfunction 𝐻 (𝑥) −𝑥. Let residual function 𝐹 (𝑥) = 𝐻 (𝑥) −𝑥, then The plify the model, while maintaining the information of the original
original function becomes 𝐹 (𝑥) − 𝑥, so a cross-layer connection is data to the greatest extent.
added directly on the basis of the original network. In essence, the After clustering and adding pseudo-labels, 14,000 pieces of data
objective function 𝐻 (𝑥) is not changed, and the network structure with pseudo-labels are obtained. In order to verify the generalization
is split into two branches, one of which is the residual. To map ability of the model, we will use 23,000 pieces of data to use end-
𝐹 (𝑥), one branch is the identity map 𝑥, so the network only needs to-end and supervised comparative learning methods to train the
to learn the residual map 𝐹 (𝑥).Considering the small size of the feature extraction model. After the training is completed, a fully
dataset, this paper only uses the resnet18 model with the fewest connected layer is added, and a small amount of data is used for fineparameters for training. tuning in the ISCX dataset to finally verify the model’s encrypted
 traffic recognition effect across datasets.
4 EXPERIMENT In order to verify that the generalization ability of the pre-trained
 model after adding pseudo-labeled data is improved compared with
4.1 Dataset Selection before, this paper sets up a control experiment. In addition to the
We validate our method using two public encrypted traffic above set of experiments, only the labeled data is used for model
datasets, ISCX VPN-nonVPN (Draper-Gil et al., 2016)[15] and USTC- training, and cross-dataset verification is still performed.
TFC2016[16]. The ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset used for evalua- The above experimental results are organized as shown in the
tion includes 7 regular encrypted traffic and 7 protocol encapsulated following table.

 103
ICCIP 2022, November 03–05, 2022, Beijing, China Siyuan Tian et al.

 Table 3: TFC dataset clustering results

 cluster id Label_-1 Label0 Label1 Label2 Label3 Label4
 0 10812 109 190 1649 776 0
 1 9344 0 1806 159 1470 316
 2 3525 0 7 0 0 1585
 3 2933 405 0 0 0 0
 4 3905 266 85 260 196 40

 Table 4: Summary of experimental results (accuracy rate)

 Amount of training data methods
 end-to-end learning Supervised Contrastive Learning
 9000 79 86
 23000 84.5 90.55

Figure 4: End-to-end training cross-dataset validation results Figure 7: Contrastive learning cross-dataset validation results

 It can be seen from the above results that when the model converges, the model trained by comparative learning has better generalization ability than the end-to-end model, and can achieve better
 results in cross-dataset validation, and under the same conditions.
 In this case, the pre-training model based on contrastive learning
 can achieve the effect of end-to-end training in only 10 training
 rounds. In addition, under the same other conditions, in order to
 verify the validity of the pseudo-label data, adding pseudo-label
 data during the training process slightly improves the effect of the
 two training modes.
Figure 5: Contrastive learning cross-dataset validation results
 5 CONCLUSION
 After the traffic is encrypted, the intelligibility of the payload content is poor, and feature extraction is difficult. The traditional end-toend model is difficult to understand the true meaning of the payload
 content. Comparative learning only needs to learn the distinction
 in the feature space, without the need for a deep understanding
 of the encrypted content. It is suitable for feature extraction of
 encrypted traffic and can get better results in downstream tasks
 after fine-tuning. In addition, in order to solve the problem that a
 large amount of labeled data is needed for supervised comparative
 learning, this paper adopts the clustering method to select data with
Figure 6: End-to-end training cross-dataset validation results high confidence to expand the labeled data set. The experimental
 results show that after adding pseudo-labeled data, the generalization of the model The ability is slightly improved compared to

 104
An encrypted traffic classification method based on contrastive learning ICCIP 2022, November 03–05, 2022, Beijing, China

the previous one, which shows the effectiveness of this method for Advances in Information Technology, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 129-135, August,
feature extraction of encrypted traffic. 2013.doi:10.4304/jait.4.3.129-135.
 [8] Md. Badiuzzaman Pranto, Md. Hasibul Alam Ratul, Md. Mahidur Rahman, Ishrat
 Jahan Diya, and Zunayeed-Bin Zahir, "Performance of Machine Learning Tech-
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS niques in Anomaly Detection with Basic Feature Selection Strategy - A Network
 Intrusion Detection System," Journal of Advances in Information Technology,
The authors would like to thank the anonymous referees for their Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 36-44, February 2022.
valuable comments and helpful suggestions. The work is supported [9] To Nguyen Phuoc Vinh and Ha Hoang Kha, "Vietnamese News Articles Classification Using Neural Networks," Journal of Advances in Information Technology,
by Science and Technology Project of the Headquarters of State Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 363-369, November 2021. doi: 10.12720/jait.12.4.363-369.
Grid Corporation of China, “The research and technology for col- [10] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng and Z. Yang, "End-to-end encrypted traffic
laborative defense and linkage disposal in network security devices” classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks," 2017 IEEE
 International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2017, pp.
(5700-202152186A-0-0-00). 43-48.
 [11] WANG W, SHENG Y, WANG J, et al. HAST-IDS: Learning Hierarchical Spatial-
REFERENCES Temporal Features Using Deep Neural Networks to Improve Intrusion Detection[J]. IEEE Access, 2018,6(99): 1792-1806.
 [1] Dario Bonfiglio, Marco Mellia, Michela Meo, Dario Rossi, and Paolo Tofanelli. [12] Lotfollahi, M., Jafari Siavoshani, M., Shirali Hossein Zade, R. et al. Deep packet:
 2007. Revealing skype traffic: when randomness plays with you. SIGCOMM a novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning. Soft
 Comput. Commun. Rev. 37, 4 (October 2007), 37–48. Comput 24, 1999–2012 (2020).
 [2] Bai Yu. Research and Implementation of Encrypted Stream Recognition System [13] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple
 based on Markov Chain.2015. MA Thesis, Beijing Institute of Technology. framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. arXiv preprint
 [3] Xing Meng, Wang Tao, Wu Yang, et al. A new method to improve the recognition arXiv:2002.05709, 2020.
 rate of link layer encrypted bit stream[J]. Application Research of Comput- [14] Prannay Khosla, Piotr Teterwak, Chen Wang, Aaron Sarna, Yonglong Tian, Phillip
 ers,2015,000(11): 3443-3447. Isola, Aaron Maschinot, Ce Liu, & Dilip Krishnan (2020). Supervised Contrastive
 [4] G. Sun, Y. Xue, Y. Dong, D. Wang, C. Li.An novel hybrid method for effectively Learning neural information processing systems.
 classifying encrypted traffic.2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference [15] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun and A. A. Ghor-bani, "Characteri-
 GLOBECOM 2010 (2010), pp. 1-5. zation of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features", Proceedings of
 [5] Riyad Alshammari, A. Nur Zincir-Heywood.Identification of voip encrypted the 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy
 traffic using a machine learning approach J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci., (ICISSP), pp. 407-414, 2016.
 27 (1) (2015), pp. 77-92. [16] Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye and Y. Sheng, "Malware traffic classification using
 [6] Trung T. Nguyen, Amartya Hatua, and Andrew H. Sung, "School of Computing, convolutional neural network for representation learning", Proceedings of the
 the University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS, U.S.A.," Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 31st International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), pp. 712-717,
 141-147, May, 2017. doi: 10.12720/jait.8.2.141-147. 2017.
 [7] Dewan Md. Farid and Chowdhury Mofizur Rahman, "Mining Complex Data
 Streams: Discretization, Attribute Selection and Classification," Journal of

 105