AppClassNet: A commercial-grade dataset
 for application identification research
 Chao Wang Alessandro Finamore Lixuan Yang
 Huawei Technologies France SASU Huawei Technologies France SASU Huawei Technologies France SASU
 chao.wang@huawei.com alessandro.finamore@huawei.com lixuan.yang@huawei.com

 Kevin Fauvel Dario Rossi
 Huawei Technologies France SASU Huawei Technologies France SASU
 kevin.fauvel@huawei.com dario.rossi@huawei.com

 This article is an editorial note submitted to CCR. It has NOT been peer reviewed.
 The authors take full responsibility for this article’s technical content. Comments can be posted through CCR Online.

ABSTRACT advances have equally benefited from (𝑖) the ground-breaking the-
The recent success of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rooted into sev- oretical research, (𝑖𝑖) the availability of open-source software plateral concomitant factors, namely theoretical progress coupled with forms, (𝑖𝑖𝑖) the creation of efficient hardware accelerators and, last
abundance of data and computing power. Large companies can take but not least, (𝑖𝑣) the availability of large corpora training sets. For
advantage of a deluge of data, typically withhold from the research instance, crowdsourcing efforts in the CVPR field led to the wellcommunity due to privacy or business sensitivity concerns, and known ImageNet [1] which comprises tens of millions of image
this is particularly true for networking data. Therefore, the lack samples, each annotated with one among tens of thousands of class
of high quality data is often recognized as one of the main factors labels. Similarly, in the NLP field the Common Crawl [2] project
currently limiting networking research from fully leveraging AI gathered several hundreds of billions of text tokens.
methodologies potential. This is in stark contrast with the networking field where a com-
 Following numerous requests we received from the scientific monly identified limit to AI deployment is the lack of publicly
community, we release AppClassNet, a commercial-grade dataset available large scale datasets. We point out that, over the years,
for benchmarking traffic classification and management methodolo- several research groups have indeed made commendable effort to
gies. AppClassNet is significantly larger than the datasets generally release datasets for networking research. In the context of network
available to the academic community in terms of both the number operation and management (O&M) a quite fundamental building
of samples and classes, and reaches scales similar to the popular block is constituted by the ability to recognize the type of traffic, or
ImageNet dataset commonly used in computer vision literature. To specific application, that generated a particular stream of packets.
avoid leaking user- and business-sensitive information, we oppor- Different waves of research, in the early 2000s and late 2010s, have
tunely anonymized the dataset, while empirically showing that it tackled this use-case with Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learnstill represents a relevant benchmark for algorithmic research. In ing (DL) approaches respectively. As a side effect of the scientific
this paper, we describe the public dataset and our anonymization research, a number of datasets have been released (Sec.2). At the
process. We hope that AppClassNet can be instrumental for other same time, while these datasets are valuable to foster repeatability
researchers to address more complex commercial-grade problems and cross-comparison, academic groups generally lack (𝑖) access
in the broad field of traffic classification and management. to real operational networks environment, (𝑖𝑖) diverse operational
 environment (e.g., residential access vs enterprise campuses) and
 (𝑖𝑖𝑖) commercial-grade labeling tools.
CCS CONCEPTS To help tackling these limitations, we contribute to the research
• Networks → Network measurement; • Computing method- community AppClassNet, a commercial-grade dataset for the purologies → Machine learning. pose of application identification. We used the private version of
 such dataset in our previous work on federated training [69], zero-
KEYWORDS day application detection [70] and inference acceleration at line rate
 based on either hardware accelerators to speedup computation [32]
Open Dataset, Application Identification, Traffic Classification, Ma- or approximated-key caching to save computation altogether [31].
chine Learning, Supervised learning, Neural networks AppClassNet is obtained from 10 TB worth of real traffic and comprises over 10 M flows each of which is annotated by a commercial
 and proprietary DPI system supporting thousands of labels. The
1 INTRODUCTION public version that we release and describe in this document retains
 most of the richness of the original dataset (99% of the flows and
In recent times, Deep Learning (DL) techniques have attained sig- bytes) of the most popular applications, corresponding to 500 finenificant advances in the fields of Computer Vision and Pattern grained application labels. Roughly, AppClassNet is the networking
Recognition (CVPR) and Natural Language Processing (NLP). Such

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 19
 Corrected Version of Record. V.1.1. Published September 22, 2022.
equivalent of the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recogni- adoption of simple, yet effective, Time Series (TS) features based
tion Challenge (ILSVRC) [1], an ImageNet subset comprising 1,000 on properties of the first packets of a flow such as packet size
classes and nearly 1.5M images. As this sheer size is significantly and direction [17] (and seldom interarrival time [17, 28]). These
larger than what it is currently available to the academic commu- lightweight TS approaches are particularly appealing since they
nity, we hope that AppClassNet can be an instrumental benchmark (𝑖) operate “early” at the beginning of a flow, as opposite to “post
for the community and foster research exploration towards more mortem” techniques which compute FF after a flow ends, and as
realistic and ambitious challenges. such are suitable for traffic management and (𝑖𝑖) sustain line rate
 We point out that making publicly available (a subset of) any operation with limited computational costs [29].
private dataset is a delicate process, as opportune anonymization The second wave of traffic classification [48, 20] employs DL
is paramount to ensure that the data released is deprived of both techniques and essentially re-considers all inputs features previprivacy- and business-sensitive information. Likewise, we also need ously introduced — from PP [65, 63, 62, 42], to FF [57, 27, 61], to
to make sure that the public version of the dataset obtained through TS [41, 54], and hybrid FF+TS [27]. An independent comparison
such anonymization still fits the original purpose – ML/DL models of some of these recent works [57, 63, 62, 41] is carried out in [14],
created with the public and private version of the dataset offer by mean of a single dataset [13] that differs from the ones used
comparable performance. We point out that the goal of this paper by original authors, and the analysis reveals a different scenario
is not to propose a new technique for opportune anonymization. from the one pictured by the original publications: (𝑖) TS features
Rather, we discuss the pre-processing steps taken to deprive the confirm their interest, but the expected performance drops sigdataset from sensitive information as (𝑖) to avoid a flawed “security nificantly below <90% for any architecture; (𝑖𝑖) there is no clear
by obscurity” approach and (𝑖𝑖) to highlight the limitations of the winner, although 1d-CNN models have consistently better results
public datasets with respect to the original private one. We believe among the candidate approaches; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) 1d-CNN has a limited gain
that AppClassNet is a good enough compromise, as it allows re- against shallow Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) over the same input
searchers to focus on algorithms design in a challenging network (+6%) or against Random Forest (RF) over FF input (+3%). Under this
use-case, despite the anonymization deprives most of the common viewpoint, we argue that application identification is still quite an
networking domain knowledge from the dataset. active research area. As we shall see later, AppClassNet constitutes
 In the following, we first review the literature on datasets and an even more challenging benchmark with respect to the dataset
collection methodologies (Sec. 2). Then, we introduce AppClassNet, used in [14] or MIRAGE19 [13], and should empower researchers
covering both the anonymization methodology as well as contrast- to spend more time on algorithmic aspects rather than investing
ing the characteristic of the private and public version of the dataset effort in scattered data collection.
(Sec. 3). We next verify that the performance of state of the art ML
and DL techniques remains consistent between the private and public version of the dataset (Sec. 4). Finally, we discuss AppClassNet 2.2 Datasets viewpoint
limitations and term of use (Sec. 5) and conclude the paper (Sec. 6). Over the years, several datasets have been open-sourced for benchmarking of traffic classification algorithms, summarized in Table 1.
2 BACKGROUND We point out that other datasets have been released (see [13] for a
 comparison). Yet, many of those are collected in the context of In-
The early 2000’s witnessed a first wave of traffic classification
 trusion detection systems (IDS) (as surveyed in [52]). As such, they
with Machine Learning (ML) methodologies aiming to identify
 have a different purpose (distinguishing malicious from benign traffine-grained applications labels (e.g., YouTube, Skype, PokemonGo)
 fic) and a much less fine-grained labeling (few attack types). Some
or coarse-grained services (e.g., video streaming, video call, gamof these datasets became popular within the traffic classification
ing). Then, the late 2010 have seen an explosion of interest toward
 community, yet one can question their representativeness for traffic
Deep Learning (DL) methodologies, essentially solving the same
 classification commercial deployments. Conversely, AppClassNet
problem but with a different set of techniques (see Sec.2.1)
 explicitly aims to offer the larger and more diversified set of traffic
 The need for common benchmarks has pushed researchers totypical of commercial settings.
wards adoption of open-source datasets created to either address a
 Generally speaking, two methodologies for datasets collection
specific goal or as a side product of their research. In this section, we
 can be employed: (𝑖) Active collections gather traffic from a spereview the relevant datasets and methods for traffic classification
 cific set of applications, whereas (𝑖𝑖) Passive collections gather real
and management focusing more on the adopted input rather than
 environment traffic without a specific set of applications defined.
the ML/DL tested on such data.
 While both methods require instrumentation effort, active collections setup are typically more involved. For instance, they typically
2.1 Use-case viewpoint employ kernel-level modification [35] to annotate executable names
The goal of this paper is not to present a full background on the polled from kernel information along with packet traces or strace
application identification literature, but rather to discuss which kernel logs[13], which allow for more fine-grained ground truth
type of work could benefit from AppClassNet. The first wave of labels. This instrumentation effort coupled with the adoption of real
traffic classification, well surveyed in [47], employed “classic” ML users manually-driven procedures [13, 35, 3] limits the collections
techniques. As we overviewed in [70], such techniques adopted to relatively small scale experiments. Only rare exceptions reach
an input based on either engineered Flow Features (FF) [45] or large scale but rely on automated but synthetic collections rather
Packet Payload features (PP) [44, 18], and culminated with the than real users [39]. Conversely, passive collections benefit of large

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 20
 Table 1: Subset of publicly available datasets for traffic classification

 Dataset Year Classes Flows Flows/class Comment
 UniBS [35] 2009 7 78.9k 11.3k Pcap; Ground truth devised with kernel-level modification
 Bujlow et al.[24] 2015 25 559k 22k Cross-comparison of 4 open-source and 2 commercial DPI tools
 Mirage[13] 2019 40 100k 2.5k Active pcap traffic collection for 40 mobile apps from 380 participants
 Cross platform[3] 2012 411 102k 248 Active pcap collection of 411 apps from several students participants
 ReCon[51] 2015 512 (+5) 29k (+141 k) 56 (+28k) Automated collection for top-apps (+multiple versions for 5 apps)
 Andrubis[39] 2014 1 M 41M 41 Automated collection of startup traffic for apps from 15 market places
 AppClassNet 2022 200+300 9.7M+0.3M 48.3k+1.1k 200 popular + 300 unpopular applications, covering ≃99% of traffic volume

volumes of traffic and cover more diversified users behavior and timing (e.g., the time elapsed between two packets, the RTT). The
set of applications, but incur in an extra effort to get ground truth TS-related input features (e.g., raw packet size) previously described
label, e.g., labels can come from open-source [4, 5, 6] or commer- fall into this class of non-private information. We understand that
cial [7, 8, 9] DPI tools, as compared in [24]. AppClassNet falls in the from a network-expert viewpoint it would be desirable to employ
latter category and is obtained from a passive collections of 10 TB prefix-preserving IP anonymization techniques as well as to retain
worth of traffic labeled via a commercial DPI tool (see Sec. 3.4). exact timing information across flows [59], as they could assist the
 Complementary to [14] (that compares several DL architectures classification of multiple flows of the same endpoint, or multiple IP
on a single dataset), [59] offers a longitudinal analysis of feature addresses in the same range. However, IP addresses are considered
importance across datasets (including some of the ones reported in as private information according to both the European GDPR [10]
Table 1). The study confirms that (aside TLS-related and inter-flow and the Chinese PIPL [11] regulations. Hence, to minimize risks of
timing information), the packet size, direction and inter-arrival privacy leaks, IP addresses and absolute timing information are not
within a single flow are the features with the highest discriminative even available in our private version of the dataset.
power. Thus, both [14] and [59] confirm TS as relevant across
DL architectures and datasets, making it the “canonical” input for 3.1.2 Business-sensitive information. Business-sensitive data are
application identification tasks. As such, AppClassNet limits the orthogonal to users privacy but equally important. In fact, despite
available input to the TS data. In releasing AppClassNet, we point not being privacy-sensitive, early described TS-related input feaout that we do not believe it should be the one and only benchmark tures (e.g., raw packet size and direction) have business-sensitive
for traffic classification. Rather, we hope that it can become one of value. Indeed, if exact application signatures and application labels
the several benchmarks (e.g., those in Table.1 and beyond) that are were to be released, then a third-party could train (and sell) an
normally used in ablation studies, as commonly done in computer operationally useful model. This is of course delicate from a busivision research. ness viewpoint, for which it would be desirable that models created
 on public dataset have no operational/commercial (which is the
3 DATASET goal of this section). At the same time, to retain interest for the
 academic community, the public dataset should have comparable
As early outlined, the private dataset we used in [69, 70, 32, 31]
 performance with respect to models obtained using the private
needs to be deprived of business-sensitive information prior to
 dataset, i.e., working on the public dataset should provide a task of
public release. In this section we start discussing the goals for the
 roughly equal hardness as the one of the private dataset (Sec.4).
transformation process (Sec.3.1), next we outline the available and
selected anonymization method (Sec.3.2 and Sec.3.3) and finally
we contrast the characteristics of the original private against the 3.2 Anonymization background
publicly released dataset (Sec.3.4). As previously introduced our private dataset does not contain sensitive user-related information. While IP addresses anonymization
3.1 Private and business-sensitive information is a topic that has attracted historical [66] and recent interest [43]
We refer to anonymization as a transformation process that alters in reason of GDPR regulation, those techniques do not fit our needs.
a dataset for depriving it of both (i) private information as well as Similarly, as our input consists of TS data, at first sight work on
(ii) business-sensitive information time-series anonymization could appear more appropriate (e.g.,
 see [56] and references therein). However, those methods gener-
3.1.1 Private information. Privacy-sensitive information is data ally aim to protect user privacy (e.g., the input are GPS trace logs),
that can be traced back to a specific user and his/her behavior which is generally relevant, but orthogonal to our need.
and location. This includes information about exact timing, IP ad- Luckily, with the growing need to share data and code for redresses, protocol headers field values (e.g., HTTP URLs and header producibility in ML/DL, a series of work [40, 37, 67, 68] started to
options such as User-Agent) and packet-payload (e.g., the body of tackle general mechanisms for altering the data with the goal of
HTTP GET and POST messages). Non-private information instead privacy protection and resilience to de-identification, i.e. preventcomprises other data such as protocol headers field values (TCP ing an attacker from identifying matching pairs between raw and
flags and options, IP message size, IP header length) and relative encoded samples. These work have generally been applied on image

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 21
datasets aiming to limit the distortion of the shared dataset [40], very popular patterns. Thus, an attacker can easily guess the salt
possibly hiding private data using noise from very large available 𝑠 by brute force, by considering only the most common packet
image datasets [37] or through learned transformation [67, 68]. sizes. This would not be possible in case packet sizes were equally
Yet among the above works, only [68] attempts at estimating the distributed, but such condition is unrealistic from data collected
amount of guesswork that an attacker should spend to succeed a from real networks. For the same reason, it is unclear if this skew
re-identification attack — in our case, a successful re-identification can negatively impact the security of Syfer [68], which assumes
attack allows to uncover the true application labels of the dataset, balanced input distribution. Clearly, the adoption of multiple salts
hence breaking business privacy. More worrisome, [68] also shows (e.g., per application, or per position in the time-series) can increase
previous work to be [40, 37] easily breakable. security, with the downside of more severe modification to the
 Moreover, we observe that these techniques are very recent and, original data patterns and distribution.
in some cases, not even peer-reviewed yet: thus, the downside of
 3.3.2 Sequence-level techniques. Consider now a bijective permuusing any of these methods is that security flaws may just not have
 tation of the original time series 𝑥 as:
been uncovered yet. To make a couple of examples, data smashing
layers of Split Learning [60] (proposed in 2018, not peer-reviewed 𝑦 = 𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚(𝑥) (2)
but quite popular) were demonstrated to not be secure [49] (in 2021,
 which alters time series elements order. Moreover, we define such
published at ACM CCS but not yet popular at all). Similarly, Neutransformation to be “static”, i.e., the same reordering is applied
raCrypt [67] claims to be secure (in 2021, not yet peer reviewed),
 to all time series in the dataset. Whereas at first sight, selecting
while other research claims the opposite [25] (in 2021, not yet peer
 one out of the 𝑛! permutation of a 𝑛-component long sequence
reviewed). Finally, even the most promising method (Syfer [68]
 would protect the business sensitive data, the expected skew in the
that attempts at directly estimating the level of security) are based
 application popularity will again defeat the security of the approach.
on extremely simplifying assumptions (e.g., uniform data distribu-
 Indeed, permutation of the sequence does not alter the sequence
tion [68], while our dataset exhibit significant skew) – the actual
 unicity, so that the most frequent sequence is still easily identifiable.
level of privacy protection of these general mechanisms remains
 In this case, with a relatively low cost, an attacker could gather
unclear at this stage.
 by his/her own means (e.g., with active experiments) new sample
3.3 Methodology time series 𝑥 of the most popular applications (according to Cisco
 VNI, Sandvine, etc.) and next attempt at reverse engineering the
As per the above discussion, it appears that general and provably permutation.1 As in the previous case, this can be countered, e.g.,
secure methodologies are unfortunately not readily available. As by using several permutations (e.g., per group of applications, or
security is essentially a risk-vs-cost tradeoff, we ultimately settle on per individual application, etc.), which would further break the
a practical approach where we estimate the cost to reverse engineer temporal correlation in the sequence, and reduce the usefulness of
the released dataset exceeds the cost of performing a data collection the dataset for research purposes. As in the previous case, the impact
ex novo. In fact, if the data collection cost (i.e., engineering testbeds of the imbalance in the application-popularity might negatively
such as those listed in Table 1 as the community has done in the affect the strength of security provided by approaches such as [68].
last decades) is smaller than the cost of reverse engineering, then
there would be no business incentive in the latter. Reverse engi- 3.3.3 Combined Component and Sequence level. Clearly, combinneering would still remain an intellectual exercise but we forbid it ing permutation and hashing makes reverse engineering harder
in AppClassNet terms of use (Sec.5). to the point where it is may no longer be cost-effective (as the
 We argue that a good compromise is the joint use of (𝑖) tech- reverse engineering cost grows above the data collection cost), thus
niques that alter the amplitude of individual time series elements, rendering it a mere exercise intellectual exercise (that we prohibit
i.e., the size 𝑥𝑖 of the 𝑖-th packet as in 𝑦 = ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ(𝑥𝑖 ) combined in the terms of use described in Sec.5).
with (𝑖𝑖) techniques that shuffle the whole sequence, e.g., by swap- Trading off between scrambling the data to the point of being
ping 𝑖-th and 𝑗-th elements. We empirically show that neither of useless and the risk of sensitive information leak, we settle to:
the two techniques is sufficiently strong to avoid leakage of sensi- ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ 64 (𝑥 𝑗 + 𝑠𝑖 ) − 263
tive information if used in isolation, while the combination of the 𝑦𝑖 = (3)
two achieves the desired effect without completely destroying the 264
dataset usability. where the (𝑖, 𝑗) pair represents a generic pair of columns which
 are swapped once for the whole dataset (e.g., so that the first three
3.3.1 Component-level techniques. Consider the homomorphic en- 0-payload packets of a TCP application are not expected to be SYN,
cryption function: SYN-ACK, ACK). Additionally, a set of arbitrary parameters 𝑠𝑖 is
 𝑦 = ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ(𝑥 + 𝑠) (1) used to salt the 64-bit wide hash function ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ 64 (·) for hashing
where ℎ𝑎𝑠ℎ(·) is a cryptographic hash function, 𝑥 is a time series the 𝑖-th samples. Thus packets with the same sizes are hashed
element and and 𝑠 an arbitrary salt. Although the cryptographic to different values depending on their permuted positions in the
function cannot be inverted (unless it is compromised) it is not sequence. Finally, the output is normalized in [-1,1] for convenience.
stronger than a mono-alphabetic substitution cipher. Indeed, our
 1 Assuming that the packet size sequence is exactly the same, i.e., packet sizes do not
input time series are unbalanced due to an expected skew in the
 differ even a single byte, which is unlikely (but not impossible) for some time series:
packet size distribution – by leaving TCP ACK packets in the time in case attackers do not get the exact same sequence of packet sizes, a 1-bit input
series or simply checking full-payload packets one can identify difference flips on average 1/2 of the output bits due to hashing.

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 22
 Table 2: Commercial-grade dataset description Private Public
 1500 0.50
 1000
 Property Popular Unpopular Public Private 0.25
 Slice

 Nickname top-200 next-300 pub-500 all-3k 500
 Public release ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ 0 0.00
 App (#) 200 300 500 3,073 500
 App (%) 6.5% 9.8% 16.3% 100.0% 0.25
 Labels

 Flow/app (max) 1,000,864 3,050 1,000,864 1,000,864 1000
 Flow/app (avg) 48,299 1,071 19,963 3,272
 1500 0.50
 Flow/app (min) 3,080 382 382 1
 Flows (#) 9.7 M 0.3 M 10.0 M 10.1 M
 Volume

 Flows (%) 95.7% 3.2% 98.9% 100.0%
 Bytes (#) 10.0 TB 0.3 TB 10.4 TB 10.4 TB Figure 1: Violin plot of the first signature component in the
 Bytes (%) 96.4% 2.8% 99.2% 100.0%
 Private (left: packet size) vs Public datasets (right: permuted,
 salted and hashed value).
 The use of multiple salts makes reverse engineering cost higher.
Indeed, while in principle for SYN and SYN-ACK packets it still
possible to rely on the popularity skew to guess their likely positions
in the permuted sequence, and next brute-force the corresponding packets of a flow are commonly dominated by small packet sizes.
salt 𝑠𝑖 , however guessing a single 𝑠𝑖 is not informative to learn 𝑠 𝑗 for For instance, in TCP traffic, those are 0-payload SYN packets due
the other sequence positions. As such, even finding the top-most to TCP three-way handshakes, where variability is also due to the
popular sequence is more complex, which we estimate to be good presence/absence of IP and TCP options, as well as the presence of
enough from our practical purpose. UDP traffic in the traffic mixture. In the public dataset (Fig. 1 right
 chart), the first component has been chosen by permutation (so that
3.4 Private vs Public dataset characteristics it can be any of the 20 elements of the time series) and additionally has been transformed via homomorphic encryption: while the
3.4.1 At a glance. As mentioned before, the original dataset corre- normalized packet size distribution still exhibits clear modes, any
sponds to about 10 TB of per-flow logs enriched with labels obtained domain expertise in this case is meaningless — there is no way to
from a commercial and private DPI tool. Such data comprises both tell whether the modes tie to full-payload segments, 0-payload ac-
TCP and UDP traffic, and for each flow a time series is collected knowledgements, or other dynamics. Otherwise stated, networking
with first 20 packets size and direction (for TCP, ACK packets are domain knowledge is no longer relevant for AppClassNet.
preserved). In other words, the dataset has a 20 (features) + 1 (label) Additionally, permutations may affect other typical ablation
tabular schema (i.e., direction is encoded as sign for packet sizes). studies, such as the sensitivity of classification performance to
 Table 2 breakdowns the public-vs-private datasets composition. time series length as investigated by many works in the literature.
While the private dataset comprises 3,073 applications, the public However, due to the permutation, the first 𝑘 components of the
AppClassNet includes only the top-500 (16.3% of all labels) which time series no longer correspond to the first 𝑘 packets of a flow, so
account for 98.9% of flows and 99.2% of bytes. Out of the public extrapolate networking-domain conclusions should be avoided (e.g.,
dataset, we further identify two subsets: the top-200 most popu- “fewer packets suffice for successful classification”). For instance,
lar applications correspond to 95.7% (96.4%) of flows (bytes) with mutual information between the first component and the class label
48,299 samples/app on average (well suited for classic supervised is higher in the public dataset, since the first element of the time
training), complemented by the set of next-300 (and thus less) pop- series is not (confidently) a TCP SYN anymore.
ular application, with 1,071 samples/app on average (well fit for
zero-day traffic classification, or few shot learning).
 Notice the high class imbalance in both top-200 and next-300 4 BASELINE
dataset slices: the top-1 application comprises over 1 M samples, In this section we verify that, despite AppClassNet no longer has
the 200-th most popular application only comprises 3,080 samples business-relevance (as it is not a real dataset due to the transforma-
(about 325× time less) and the 500-th only 382 (the least numerous tion), it is still meaningful from an academic research viewpoint (as
class in AppClassNet). This skew is rather typical in network traffic a relevant dataset of benchmarking).
but is significantly higher than in image datasets. For instance, the We do so by studying the performance (Sec. 4.2) across different
nearly 1.5M images in ImageNet [53] are divided into 1,000 classes, state of the art ML/DL models (Sec. 4.1). However, the goal of this
each having between 668–3,047 training samples, i.e., a modest 4.5× editorial note is not to perform a fully fledged study (e.g., as in [14]),
difference between the most and least popular classes. but rather to contrast the baseline performance obtained from both
 public and private version of the dataset.
3.4.2 Impact of transformation. The described transformation alters some of the properties of the dataset which we briefly illustrate
here and that we discuss more broadly in Sec. 5. 4.1 Baseline models
 Fig. 1 illustrates the effect of hashing considering the first el- We adopt both traditional ML and DL state of the art methods as
ement of the time series (the effect is qualitatively the same on baselines. First, we decided to evaluate the prediction performance
other time series elements). Domain knowledge states that the first of two traditional tree-based models with different complexities: a

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 23
 Table 3: Performance of several ML/DL baselines on the top-200 slice of the public AppClassNet vs private datasets

 Decision Tree† Random Forest† 1d-CNN‡ ResNet‡
 Dataset Rank Acc Depth Rank Acc. Depth Rank Acc. Params Rank Acc. Params
 Private 2 93.5% 71 1 94.7% 65 4 84.7% 275k 3 90.8% 318k
 Permuted 2 93.5% 71 1 94.7% 65 4 81.9% 275k 3 88.8% 318k
 Public (AppClassNet) 2 86.9% 78 1 88.3% 88 4 72.1% 275k 3 80.3% 318k
 † ML: default scikit-learn configuration, random_state=0
 ‡ DL: epochs=1000, batch_size=1024, learning_rate=0.01

single CART [23] decision tree and an ensemble of trees via a Ran- models. Clearly, one can adjust both architecture parametrizations
dom Forest [22]. Then, we integrate in our benchmark some com- and obtain different results, as we show in [70].
monly adopted state of the art DL methods: a classic 1d-CNN [33]
 Rank consistency. From a higher viewpoint, the rank of the conand ResNet [36].
 sidered models is consistent across the three dataset variations.
 Specifically, we used Scikit-Learn [50] for traditional ML base-
 Albeit the quantitative results provide a conservative estimate of
lines (DecisionTreeClassifier, RandomForestClassifier) with their
 performance in real settings (by about 6-10%), the qualitative comdefault parameters and the random state set to 0. For DL baselines,
 parison retains full informative value — in our option, this strongly
we implemented the 1-d CNN (3 convolutional ReLU layers) and
 indicates that AppClassNet is suitable for research purposes.
ResNet (2 residual blocks) in PyTorch and trained models for 1,000
epochs, with batch size of 1,024 and a 0.01 learning rate. To ease Challenging dataset. Finally, the dataset is interesting as it repthe bootstrapping cost of using AppClassNet, we also provide the resents an instance where classic tree-based ensembles perform
code for both to import the data and to replicate results [12]. better than DL on tabular data [55]. Clearly, the Table 3 has been
 obtained for specific architectures and hyper-parametrizations, and
4.2 Baseline performance results are meant as a qualitative reference baseline in spirit with
We contrast baselines performance of ML and DL models in Table 3. the Ockham razor principle. Thus, we do not rule out DL approaches
For each model we report the raw classification accuracy for top- completely, e.g., as DL gradient backpropagation has a significant
200 and the model accuracy rank (the lower, the better) on the test competitive advantage for zero-day application detection[70]. Moreset. Without loss of generality, we release AppClassNet structured over, Random Forest models contain 30M leaves with a slim imwith separate train/validation/test splits to simplify reproducibility provement (<1%) compared to a simpler decision tree (286k–552k
(although the use of alternative splits for 𝑘-fold cross-validation is leaves). Hence, one cannot conclude that Random Forest models
authorized and rather recommended). The dataset has been normal- obtained with default parameters are a suitable solution to the
ized as a preprocessing step using Scikit-Learn [50] (MinMaxScaler). problem (as it is, quite frankly, an overkill). Rather, the academic
Additionally, the depth (average depth) of the decision tree (ran- community should be aware that the quest for 1% accuracy imdom forest) and the total number of trainable parameters for DL provement comes with a model complexity cost, which should not
approaches are reported as proxy of models complexity. be neglected.
 The effect of permutations. We compare the performance across Summary. The anonymization applied to our private dataset repthree variations: the private dataset, an intermediate step where resents a good compromise as ML/DL models suffer only a modest
only permutation is applied, and the public AppClassNet where accuracy loss with respect to the private dataset and qualitative
both permutation and component hashing are applied. The inter- results show consistent ranking across models – compared to commediate step is added as a litmus test — we expect permutations monly adopted datasets in literature, AppClassNet is a “realistic”
to have little impact on tree-based ML, where the order of the fea- and conservative benchmark aiming to empower researchers to
tures is not important; we conversely expect permutation to have address challenging and larger scale product-level problems [70].
a larger impact on the DL models as they break the correlation in
the sequences, hence making it harder for convolutional filters to 5 DISCUSSION
extract relevant patterns. This is indeed what can be observed in While we hope that AppClassNet becomes one of the standard
Table 3: performance of tree-based approaches remain identical benchmarks for traffic classification problems, we need to clarify
between private and permuted, whereas DL models loose about its allowed and prohibited usages (Sec.5.1), as well as its limitations
2-3% accuracy. as result of the performed anonymization (Sec.5.2).
 The effect of hashing. Intuitively, hash functions spread component far apart (1/2 of bits change in the output for 1-bit change in 5.1 Allowed and prohibited usage
the input) resulting in additional branching in trees that inflates Openly sharing dataset has associated cost (e.g., the anonymization
their depth by 1.09× (average random forest depth by 1.35×) and re- process). Additionally, it exposes the data provider to additional
duces accuracy by 6-7%. DL-models size is instead fixed and results risks (e.g., reverse engineering) and consequent potential harm (e.g.,
into a slightly higher accuracy loss of 9% compared to tree-based leak of business sensitive information) [16]. As such, we clearly state

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 24
the allowed and prohibited usages of AppClassNet. We understand 5.2 Limits and alternatives
that, while doing so, we are not fully sheltered from malicious third As earlier introduced, AppClassNet does not aim to be the one and
parties abuse. At the same time, we appeal researchers seeking to only traffic classification benchmark. As such we list its limits and
use AppClassNet to follow ACM Code of Ethics and Professional alternatives for the interested readers.
Conduct [34], which clearly puts avoid harm among its first and
foremost articles (Art 1.2), and to adhere to the following guidelines. 5.2.1 Limits. The limited amount of information in AppClassNet
 constrains the possible classification operations. For instance, owing
 to the lack of flow-level identifiers, it is not possible to perform ag-
5.1.1 Allowed usage. Explicitly allowed usage of the open-source
 gregated endpoint classification, or correlate multiple classifications
dataset is limited to Academic usage, and in particular limited to
 across multiple flows of the same endpoint [59]. Since the dataset
algorithms for inference and training related to the use case of
 considers only the first 20 packet sizes and directions for a flow,
traffic classification, as described in this paper. While it is out of
 it is unsuitable for multi-modal classification [15] or continuous
the scope of this section to provide a fully exhaustive list of legally
 classification across multiple windows of the same (sub)flow [46].
binding allowed usages, we make concrete examples for the sake
 Moreover, several studies have analyzed the classification perof clarity. Allowed usage for inference-related ML/DL problems
 formance as a function of the sequence length, which is altered
include for instance: application identification (supervised classifiby permutation in AppClassNet, making such analysis worthless.
cation on fine-grained labels[70]), zero-day application detection
 Similarly, while approximate-key caching [31] would work given
(e.g., open set recognition[70]), inference speedup (by hardware
 that the natural skew of the traffic is preserved, approximation
acceleration[32], approximate caching[31], quantization). Allowed
 functions such as prefix(·) that work best on the private dataset
usage for training-related ML/DL algorithms include for instance:
 would not be suitable on the public dataset due to permutation.
distributed training by sharing models instead of data (federated
 The dataset does not contain flow arrival rate so it cannot be
learning[38, 69]), training from few samples (few-shot learning[64]),
 used as a realistic workload for traffic classification engines. Howpre-processing techniques to simplify training (transfer or selfever, it can still be used as a controlled workload [32] for stress
supervised learning[26, 58]), techniques to add/remove classes
 testing the target classification system. As such, AppClassNet is
to/from existing models (incremental/decremental learning[21, 19]),
 more geared for contribution on ML/DL techniques (e.g., comparing
techniques to automatically design new classification engines (neudifferent training algorithms), than for novel system-level aspects
ral architecture search[30]). While it is outside of the scope of this
 (e.g., feature engineering).
paper to also provide a research agenda for open problems related
to traffic classification, we note that combinations of above research 5.2.2 Alternatives. We observe that while collecting large volumes
tasks is also possible and novel. AppClassNet is a good playground of real labeled network data is a daunting effort for a single academic
for the design, e.g., via autoML, of accurate models that are also com- partner, a coordinated pooling effort across multiple research groups
putationally simple from an inference perspective, which has only can be an effective strategy to achieve this goal – the list of datasets
seldomly been taken into account. We finally suggest to researchers reported in Table 1 and the additional datasets reviewed in [59, 13]
working on unrelated traffic classification use cases early listed, or indeed constitutes a good example and starting point.
whenever in doubt about the legitimacy of using AppClassNet in Clearly, due to the anonymization process, the current dataset
their work, to contact us [34]. cannot be directly merged with other datasets (as learning on this
 dataset is non directly informative for other real applications). At
5.1.2 Prohibited usage. We explicitly prohibit usages of the dataset the same time, used alongside alternatives such as those expressed
for commercial use. We additionally prohibit any reverse engineer- above, AppClassNet can hopefully help the scientific community to
ing attempts, in line with deontological considerations concerning focus and reinforce the soundness of scientific results. We believe
network measurements [16]. In reason of the anonymization tech- that, given its characteristics (i.e., scale of samples and classes,
niques employed, the current dataset has direct little commercial conservative performance), AppClassNet provides a challenging
value. As such, we mostly discuss reverse engineering practices. In- and instrumental research playground as it helps ensuring that
deed, while academic work performing reverse engineering would results are not biased by small datasets — this avoids excessively
not constitute a violation of commercial usage per se, it could sig- focusing on “easy problems” where many solutions can achieve the
nificantly lower the barrier for third parties to use the reverse 90% accuracy “holy grail”.
engineered dataset for commercial use. As such, de-anonymization
techniques that would try to expose users, classes, or application 6 CONCLUSION
labels, signatures and any other non directly available information This paper describes AppClassNet, a dataset obtained from a priof the private dataset, from any technique applied on data avail- vate commercial-grade dataset comprising thousands of application
able in the public dataset, are explicitly prohibited. We understand labels. AppClassNet represents a substantial portion of the original
that, once data is available publicly, this risk exists. However, we private dataset, opportunely altered to deprive it of user-private
hope to make it clear that, shall AppClassNet be victim of a re- and business-sensitive information.
verse engineering attempt (fruitful or not), this would significantly We openly release the dataset at [12], along with code for baseline
threaten the ability for industrial players to release datasets such as techniques, and we hope that it can become instrumental for the
AppClassNet in the future. We thus appeal once more to [34] and benchmarking of data-driven algorithms applied to networkingwe suggest to contact us for a usage that is not explicitly authorized. related classification problems.

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 25
REFERENCES [34] DW Gotterbarn, Bo Brinkman, Catherine Flick, Michael S Kirkpatrick, Keith
 [1] https://www.image-net.org/download.php. Miller, Kate Vazansky, and Marty J Wolf. Acm code of ethics and professional
 [2] https://commoncrawl.org/. conduct. 2018.
 [3] https://recon.meddle.mobi/cross-market.html. [35] Francesco Gringoli, Luca Salgarelli, Maurizio Dusi, Niccolo Cascarano, Fulvio
 [4] https://wand.net.nz/projects/details/libprotoident. Risso, and KC Claffy. GT: picking up the truth from the ground for internet traffic.
 [5] https://sourceforge.net/projects/l7-filter/. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 39(5):12–18, 2009.
 [6] https://github.com/ntop/nDPI. [36] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
 [7] https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/ios-nx-os-software/network-based- In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
 application-recognition-nbar/index.html. [37] Yangsibo Huang, Zhao Song, Kai Li, and Sanjeev Arora. InstaHide: Instance-hiding
 [8] https://www.ipoque.com/products/dpi-engine-rs-pace-2-for-application- schemes for private distributed learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International
 awareness. Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119, pages 4507–4518, Jul 2020.
 [9] https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/de/doc/EDOC1000012889?section=j00c. [38] Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik,
[10] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation. Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strate-
[11] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_Information_Protection_Law_of_the_ gies for improving communication efficiency. In NeurIPS Workshop on Private
 People’s_Republic_of_China. Multi-Party Machine Learning, 2016.
[12] https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/AppClassNet_-_A_commercial-grade_ [39] Martina Lindorfer, Matthias Neugschwandtner, Lukas Weichselbaum, Yanick
 dataset_for_application_identification_research/20375580. Fratantonio, Victor Van Der Veen, and Christian Platzer. Andrubis–1,000,000
[13] Giuseppe Aceto, Domenico Ciuonzo, Antonio Montieri, Valerio Persico, and apps later: A view on current android malware behaviors. In IEEE International
 Antonio Pescapé. Mirage: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation. Workshop on Building Analysis Datasets and Gathering Experience Returns for
 In International Conference on Computing, Communications and Security (ICCCS). Security (BADGERS), pages 3–17, 2014.
 IEEE, 2019. [40] Bo Liu, Ming Ding, Hanyu Xue, Tianqing Zhu, Dayong Ye, Li Song, and Wanlei
[14] Giuseppe Aceto, Domenico Ciuonzo, Antonio Montieri, and Antonio Pescapé. Zhou. Dp-image: Differential privacy for image data in feature space, 2021.
 Mobile encrypted traffic classification using deep learning. In Proc. IEEE TMA, [41] Manuel Lopez-Martin, Belen Carro, Antonio Sanchez-Esguevillas, and Jaime
 2018. Lloret. Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural net-
[15] Giuseppe Aceto, Domenico Ciuonzo, Antonio Montieri, and Antonio Pescapè. works for internet of things. IEEE Access, 5:18042–18050, 2017.
 Mimetic: Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning. [42] Mohammad Lotfollahi, Mahdi Jafari Siavoshani, Ramin Shirali Hossein Zade, and
 Computer networks, 165:106944, 2019. Mohammdsadegh Saberian. Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic
[16] Mark Allman and Vern Paxson. Issues and etiquette concerning use of shared classification using deep learning. Soft Computing, 24(3), 2020.
 measurement data. In ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), [43] Meisam Mohammady, Lingyu Wang, Yuan Hong, Habib Louafi, Makan Pourzandi,
 pages 135–140, 2007. and Mourad Debbabi. Preserving both privacy and utility in network trace
[17] Laurent Bernaille, Renata Teixeira, Ismael Akodkenou, Augustin Soule, and Kave anonymization. In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
 Salamatian. Traffic classification on the fly. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communi- (CCS), page 459–474, 2018.
 cation Review, 36(2):23–26, 2006. [44] Andrew W Moore and Konstantina Papagiannaki. Toward the accurate identifi-
[18] Dario Bonfiglio, Marco Mellia, Michela Meo, Dario Rossi, and Paolo Tofanelli. Re- cation of network applications. In Proc. PAM, 2005.
 vealing skype traffic: when randomness plays with you. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM, [45] Andrew W Moore and Denis Zuev. Internet traffic classification using bayesian
 2007. analysis techniques. In Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS, 2005.
[19] Lucas Bourtoule, Varun Chandrasekaran, Christopher A Choquette-Choo, Hen- [46] Thuy TT Nguyen and Grenville Armitage. Training on multiple sub-flows to
 grui Jia, Adelin Travers, Baiwu Zhang, David Lie, and Nicolas Papernot. Machine optimise the use of machine learning classifiers in real-world ip networks. In
 unlearning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03817, 2019. IEEE LCN, pages 369–376, 2006.
[20] Raouf Boutaba, Mohammad A Salahuddin, Noura Limam, Sara Ayoubi, Nashid [47] Thuy TT Nguyen and Grenville J Armitage. A survey of techniques for internet
 Shahriar, Felipe Estrada-Solano, and Oscar M Caicedo. A comprehensive sur- traffic classification using machine learning. IEEE Communications Surveys and
 vey on machine learning for networking: evolution, applications and research Tutorials, 10(1-4):56–76, 2008.
 opportunities. Journal of Internet Services and Applications, 9(1):16, 2018. [48] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar. Towards the
[21] Giampaolo Bovenzi, Lixuan Yang, Alessandro Finamore, Giuseppe Aceto, deployment of machine learning solutions in network traffic classification: A
 Domenico Ciuonzo, Antonio Pescape, and Dario Rossi. A first look at class systematic survey. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, pages 1–1, 2018.
 incremental learning in deep learning mobile traffic. In IFIP Traffic Monitoring [49] Dario Pasquini, Giuseppe Ateniese, and Massimo Bernaschi. Unleashing the
 and Analysis (TMA), 2021. tiger: Inference attacks on split learning. In ACM Computer and Communications
[22] L. Breiman. Random forests. Machine Learning, 45, 2001. Security (CCS), 2021.
[23] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, C.J. Stone, and R.A. Olshen. Classification and Regression [50] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blon-
 Trees. Taylor & Francis, 1984. del, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau,
[24] Tomasz Bujlow, Valentin Carela-Espanol, and Pere Barlet-Ros. Independent com- M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
 parison of popular dpi tools for traffic classification. Computer Networks, 76:75–89, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
 2015. [51] Jingjing Ren, Martina Lindorfer, Daniel J Dubois, Ashwin Rao, David Choffnes,
[25] Nicholas Carlini, Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, Mohammad and Narseo Vallina-Rodriguez. A longitudinal study of PII leaks across android
 Mahmoody, and Florian Tramèr. Neuracrypt is not private. CoRR, abs/2108.07256, app versions. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS),
 2021. volume 10, 2018.
[26] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple [52] Markus Ring, Sarah Wunderlich, Deniz Scheuring, Dieter Landes, and Andreas
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In International Hotho. A survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets. Springer Comconference on machine learning, pages 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020. puters and Security, 86:147–167, 2019.
[27] Zhitang Chen, Ke He, Jian Li, and Yanhui Geng. Seq2img: A sequence-to-image [53] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean
 based approach towards ip traffic classification using convolutional neural net- Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexanworks. In Proc. IEEE BigData, pages 1271–1276, 2017. der C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge.
[28] Manuel Crotti, Maurizio Dusi, Francesco Gringoli, and Luca Salgarelli. Traffic International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015.
 classification through simple statistical fingerprinting. ACM SIGCOMM Computer [54] Tal Shapira and Yuval Shavitt. Flowpic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is
 Communication Review, 37(1):5–16, 2007. as easy as image recognition. In IEEE INFOCOM Workshops, 2019.
[29] P.M. Santiago del Rio, D. Rossi, F. Gringoli, L. Nava, L. Salgarelli, and J. Aracil. [55] Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Amitai Armon. Tabular data: Deep learning is not all you
 Wire-speed statistical classification of network traffic on commodity hardware. need. CoRR, abs/2106.03253, 2021.
 In Proc. ACM IMC, 2012. [56] Nazanin Takbiri, Amir Houmansadr, Dennis L Goeckel, and Hossein Pishro-
[30] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture Nik. Matching anonymized and obfuscated time series to users’ profiles. IEEE
 search: A survey. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017, Transactions on Information Theory, 65(2):724–741, 2018.
 2019. [57] Vincent F Taylor, Riccardo Spolaor, Mauro Conti, and Ivan Martinovic. App-
[31] Alessandro Finamore, James Roberts, Massimo Gallo, and Dario Rossi. Accelerat- scanner: Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
 ing deep learning classification with error-controlled approximate-key caching. traffic. In Proc. IEEE EuroS&P, 2016.
 IEEE INFOCOM, 2022. [58] Md Shamim Towhid and Nashid Shahriar. Encrypted network traffic classification
[32] Massimo Gallo, Alessandro Finamore, Gwendal Simon, and Dario Rossi. Fenxi: using self-supervised learning. In IEEE NetSoft, 2022.
 Deep-learning traffic analytics at the edge. ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Com- [59] Thijs van Ede, Riccardo Bortolameotti, Andrea Continella, Jingjing Ren, Daniel J
 puting (SEC), 2021. Dubois, Martina Lindorfer, David Choffnes, Maarten van Steen, and Andreas Peter.
[33] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. Flowprint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on encrypted network

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 26
 traffic. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), volume 27, [65] Zhanyi Wang. The applications of deep learning on traffic identification. BlackHat
 2020. USA, 2015.
[60] Praneeth Vepakomma, Otkrist Gupta, Tristan Swedish, and Ramesh Raskar. Split [66] Jun Xu, Jinliang Fan, Mostafa H Ammar, and Sue B Moon. Prefix-preserving
 learning for health: Distributed deep learning without sharing raw patient data. IP address anonymization: Measurement-based security evaluation and a new
 CoRR, abs/1812.00564, 2018. cryptography-based scheme. In IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
[61] Ly Vu, Cong Thanh Bui, and Quang Uy Nguyen. A deep learning based method (ICNP), pages 280–289. IEEE, 2002.
 for handling imbalanced problem in network traffic classification. In ACM Inter- [67] Adam Yala, Homa Esfahanizadeh, Rafael G. L. D’ Oliveira, Ken R. Duffy, Manya
 national Symposium on Information and Communication Technology, 2017. Ghobadi, Tommi S. Jaakkola, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Regina Barzilay, and Muriel
[62] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang. End-to-end encrypted traffic Medard. Neuracrypt: Hiding private health data via random neural networks for
 classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks. In Proc. IEEE public training, 2021.
 ISI, 2017. [68] Adam Yala, Victor Quach, Homa Esfahanizadeh, Rafael G. L. D’Oliveira, Ken R.
[63] Wei Wang, Ming Zhu, Xuewen Zeng, Xiaozhou Ye, and Yiqiang Sheng. Mal- Duffy, Muriel Médard, Tommi S. Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Syfer: Neural
 ware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation obfuscation for private data release, 2022.
 learning. In Proc. IEEE ICOIN, 2017. [69] Lixuan Yang, Cedric Beliard, and Dario Rossi. Heterogeneous data-aware feder-
[64] Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M Ni. Generalizing ated learning. In IJCAI Workshop on Federated Learning, 2020.
 from a few examples: A survey on few-shot learning. ACM Computing Surveys, [70] Lixuan Yang, Alessandro Finamore, Jun Feng, and Dario Rossi. Deep learning and
 53(3):1–34, 2020. zero-day traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset.
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 18, 2021.

ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review Volume 52 Issue 2, July 2022

 27