Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

DarknetSec: A novel self-attentive deep learning method for darknet
traﬃc classiﬁcation and application identiﬁcation
Jinghong Lan a,b,∗, Xudong Liu a,b, Bo Li a,b, Yanan Li c, Tongtong Geng d
a
 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
b
 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
c
 School of Computer and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China
d
 School of Economics and Management, Xidian University, Xi’an, China

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: Darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation is crucial for identifying anonymous network applications and defensing cy-
Received 20 October 2021 ber crimes. Although notable research efforts have been dedicated to classifying darknet traﬃc by com-
Revised 10 January 2022
 bining machine learning algorithms and elaborately designed features, current methods either heavily
Accepted 15 February 2022
 depend on hand-crafted features or overlook the global intrinsic relationships among the local features
Available online 17 February 2022
 automatically extracted from different data positions, leading to limited classiﬁcation performance. To
Keywords: tackle this issue, we propose DarknetSec, a novel self-attentive deep learning method for darknet traf-
Darknet traﬃc ﬁc classiﬁcation and application identiﬁcation. Concretely, DarknetSec utilizes a cascaded model with a
Convolutional neural network 1-dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (1D CNN) and a bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-
Long short-term memory LSTM) network to capture local spatial-temporal features from the payload content of packets, while the
Self-attention mechanism self-attention mechanism is integrated into the abovementioned feature extraction network to mine the
Spatial-temporal features
 intrinsic relationships and hidden connections among the previously extracted content features. In addi-
Classiﬁcation
 tion, DarknetSec extracts side-channel features from payload statistics to enhance its classiﬁcation performance. We evaluate DarknetSec on the CICDarknet2020 dataset, which is a representative of darknet
 traﬃc covering both Virtual Private Network (VPN) and The Onion Router (Tor) applications. Thorough
 experiments show that DarknetSec is superior to other state-of-the-art methods, achieving a multiclass
 accuracy of 92.22% and a macro-F1-score of 92.10%. Additionally, DarknetSec maintains its high accuracy
 when applied to other encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks.
 © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction darknet has been extended to Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks and private networks such as Tor (Barratt, 2015; Wood, 2009). After the
 Darknet is described as an individual encrypted part of the In- publication of “The Darknet and the Future of Content Distributernet that can only be accessed with speciﬁc anonymity tools tion” in 2002 (Biddle et al., 2002), the concept of darknet has
such as The Onion Router (Tor), Invisible Internet Project (I2P), gained wide acceptance in academic communities. It should be
Virtual Private Network (VPN), and JonDonym (generally known noted that in some previous literature, darknet is also deﬁned as
as Java Anon Proxy, JAP, or WebMix) (Montieri et al., 2018). The the unused address space of the Internet (also known as network
earliest case of using darknet can be traced back to 1971, when telescopes, sinkholes, or blackholes) that has not been assigned
two students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and to any hosts or devices (Fachkha and Debbabi, 2015; Iglesias and
Stanford University used the Advanced Research Project Agency Zseby, 2017; Niranjana et al., 2020). However, such type of dark-
(ARPANET) to trade marijuana in the artiﬁcial intelligence labo- net is beyond the scope of this paper and will be left for future
ratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Buxton and research.
Bingham, 2015). Since the ARPANET was formed, the deﬁnition of Through encryption techniques and P2P connection networks,
 darknet provides anonymous services to individual users and can
 effectively combat routing eavesdropping and other traﬃc analy-
 ∗
 Corresponding author at: School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang sis techniques, thus ensuring the conﬁdentiality and integrity of
University, Beijing, China.
 the communication data. In the ﬁrst quarter of 2020, nearly two
 E-mail addresses: lanjh@act.buaa.edu.cn (J. Lan), liuxd@act.buaa.edu.cn (X. Liu),
libo@act.buaa.edu.cn (B. Li), xxgcliyanan@163.com (Y. Li), gtt.jesse@veda.com (T. million worldwide users directly connected to Tor services, while
Geng). approximately 50,0 0 0 users indirectly connected to Tor services

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102663
0167-4048/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

through bridges (Habibi Lashkari et al., 2020). Due to its anony- To tackle the aforementioned problems, in this paper, we promous nature, darknet is widely used for criminogenic activities, pose DarknetSec, a novel self-attentive deep learning method for
such as drug dealing, arms smuggling, child pornography, terror- darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation and application identiﬁcation. Each
ism and cyberattacks (e.g., botnets) (Adewopo et al., 2019; Al-Nabki part of DarknetSec processes the payload content or payload statiset al., 2019). Therefore, accurately identifying darknet traﬃc and its tics of a network ﬂow. Concretely, a self-attention-embedded 1D
corresponding application types is very meaningful for monitor- CNN and a bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) neting malware propagation early, detecting malicious activities and work are leveraged to extract local spatial-temporal features from
combating cybercrimes. Although private networks and encryption the payload content of packets, and a multi-head self-attention
techniques provide individual users with anonymity, the interac- module is designed to deal with the payload content in parallel.
tive network traﬃc generated when an end user visits a darknet The output of the multi-head self-attention module and the local
application can still reveal the intrinsic characteristics of the hid- spatial-temporal features extracted by the self-attention-embedded
den network service (Dong et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2021; Shapira 1D CNN and Bi-LSTM network are simultaneously fed into another
and Shavitt, 2021). Indeed, as an essential part of traﬃc engineer- attention module to automatically capture the global intrinsic deing, network traﬃc classiﬁcation can be used to identify the spe- pendency relationships and hidden connections among the local
ciﬁc darknet application type that an end user communicates with. spatial-temporal features with different attention weights. Addi-
 Previous works on network traﬃc classiﬁcation can be dis- tionally, to enhance classiﬁcation accuracy, a side-channel feature
tributed into three main categories according to their analysis ap- learning module is leveraged to extract feature representations
proaches: port-based, signature-based and statistical-based tech- from the payload statistics. Finally, the multiple abovementioned
niques (Xie et al., 2021). Port-based methods rely on the speciﬁc deep features are concatenated into a single vector and fed into
transport port numbers registered by the Internet Assigned Num- a classiﬁcation layer to obtain predictions. Thorough experiments
bers Authority (IANA) to represent well-known services; such ap- on the CICDarknet2020 dataset show that the adoption of the selfproaches are prone to failure due to the widespread use of dy- attention mechanism, as well as the comprehensive consideration
namic ports and covert channel techniques. Signature-based meth- of both side-channel features and content features, signiﬁcantly
ods generally use payload analysis techniques such as Deep Packet improves the accuracy of darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation and appli-
Inspection (DPI) to mine unique signatures from packet payloads cation identiﬁcation.
and judge whether the traﬃc to be inspected contains a spe- In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as folciﬁc signature. However, due to the adoption of encrypted com- lows:
munication techniques, conventional signature-based methods fail
to analyze darknet traﬃc. Statistical-based methods extract traf- • The 1D CNN, Bi-LSTM network and self-attention mechanism
ﬁc features at the packet-level or ﬂow-level and leverage ma- are integrated into a classiﬁer to capture eﬃcient local spatialchine learning algorithms to train a classiﬁer to distinguish be- temporal features and mine the global intrinsic dependency retween different traﬃc types. Since machine learning has made lationships and hidden connections among them. To the best of
great progress in many classiﬁcation-related ﬁelds, statistical-based our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that addresses the darknet
methods have become a research hotspot in network traﬃc classi- traﬃc classiﬁcation problem using a multi-head self-attention
ﬁcation, attracting widespread attention from both academia and module.
industry (Pacheco et al., 2018). • We propose DarknetSec, a powerful end-to-end deep learning-
 At present, many researchers mainly adopt the technical route based classiﬁcation architecture using both side-channel feaof executing data-driven methods to make full use of the power- tures and content features. Our experiments show that Darkful learning capabilities of machine learning algorithms to solve netSec can not only accurately classify darknet traﬃc but also
the darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation problem. For instance, several con- maintain a high accuracy when applied to other encrypted trafventional machine learning methods, including the Light Gradi- ﬁc classiﬁcation tasks.
ent Boosting Machine (LightGBM), K-nearest Neighbor (KNN) algo- • Extensive experiments conducted on the CICDarknet2020
rithm, Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF), Naive Bayesian dataset show that DarknetSec signiﬁcantly outperforms other
(NB) model and Decision Tree (DTree) (Kumar et al., 2019; Mon- state-of-the-art methods in terms of the accuracy and F1-
tieri et al., 2018; 2019), have already been applied to this re- score metrics, demonstrating its superiority to effectively classearch ﬁeld. However, in terms of model training, these methods sify darknet traﬃc and identify its underlying application types.
either rely heavily on hand-crafted features or resort to a time-
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews
consuming feature selection process, thus leading to unstable perthe state-of-the-art related work. The system architecture of Darkformance when dealing with different network environments. As
 netSec and its key components are detailed in Section 3. Expera further improvement, deep learning methods (Dong et al., 2020;
 imental evaluations are presented in Section 4, and we conclude
Habibi Lashkari et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2021; Shapira and Shavitt,
 this paper in Section 5.
2021; Singh et al., 2021) such as Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have also been introduced to automatically extract high-level features representa- 2. Related work
tions from network traﬃc, thus signiﬁcantly reducing the reliance
on domain experts and improving the generalizability for differ- In this section, we review the related studies that investigate,
ent network environments. Compared with conventional machine analyze and classify darknet traﬃc, and we also shed light on enlearning approaches, deep learning possesses an advantage in that crypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and spatial-temporal feature learning
features are not extracted manually but rather are automatically for classiﬁcation-related tasks.
learned from the input data through a neural network. However,
current deep learning-based methods mainly concentrate on ex- 2.1. Darknet traﬃc analysis
tracting local spatial or temporal features from network traﬃc,
whereas the global intrinsic dependency relationships and hidden In the last decade, academic communities have published a
connections among the local features extracted from different data large number of representative works on darknet traﬃc analypositions are not fully considered, which ultimately leads to unsat- sis. For instance, Iliadis and Kaifas (2021) conducted a comparisﬁed classiﬁcation performance. ative study of feature selection and classiﬁcation model chosen

 2
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

for the accurate prediction of darknet traﬃc on the CICDark- ing methods have already adopted the attention mechanism to pay
net2020 dataset. Shahbar and Zincir-Heywood (2017) proposed to increased attention to the features that contribute most to trafuse a C4.5 classiﬁer with network ﬂow-level features to proﬁle the ﬁc classiﬁcation. However, instead of fully mining the global inusers and applications on the I2P networks. Rao et al. (2018) pro- ternal dependencies and hidden connections among the extracted
posed an unsupervised method with gravitational clustering to local features during the feature extraction process, these methidentify Tor network ﬂows from non-anonymous network data. ods only apply a single attention layer to the output feature vec-
Montieri et al. (2018) used several conventional machine learn- tor, thus leaving much room for improvement (Dong et al., 2020;
ing methods (NB, C4.5, and RF) to classify anonymous services Liu et al., 2020b; Yao et al., 2019). In addition, to the best of our
(Tor, I2P, and JonDonym) and predict the speciﬁc application types knowledge, the multi-head self-attention mechanism has not been
from both ﬂow-based and packet-based perspectives. More re- used for darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation in previous studies.
cently, deep learning having the ability of dealing with complex structures of high dimensional data has also been introduced to this research ﬁeld. Sarwar et al. (2021) adopted modi- 2.3. Spatial-temporal feature learning
ﬁed Convolution-LSTM (CNN-LSTM) and Convolution-Gradient Recurrent Unit (CNN-GRU) deep learning techniques to conduct the Spatial-temporal feature learning is widely used in
darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation and application identiﬁcation task. classiﬁcation-related tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, fault
Sirinam et al. (2019) proposed to use triplet networks with a KNN diagnosis, traﬃc ﬂow prediction and network intrusion detecclassiﬁer to perform website ﬁngerprinting against Tor anonymity tion. Here, we only discuss those works that are closely related
systems. Pour et al. (2020) designed a binary classiﬁer based on a to this paper. Hassan et al. (2020), Kanna and Santhi (2021),
CNN to identify compromised IoT devices by merely operating on Xie et al. (2020) used a CNN and a LSTM network successively
darknet traﬃc, thus providing essential evidence for inferring on- to extract the spatial-temporal features of network traﬃc for
going orchestrated botnets. Habibi Lashkari et al. (2020) proposed intrusion detection. Speciﬁcally, Hassan et al. (2020) proposed a
DeepImage, which converts the optimized statistical features se- hybrid deep learning model to detect network intrusions based
lected by a forest of tree classiﬁers into gray images and trains a 2- on a CNN and a weight-dropped LSTM (WDLSTM) network. The
dimensional CNN (2D CNN)-based classiﬁer to classify darknet traf- deep CNN was used to extract spatial features from network traﬃc
ﬁc. Singh et al. (2021) proposed a deep transfer learning architec- data, and the WDLSTM was used to extract long-term temporal
ture consisting of a pre-trained model and a baseline classiﬁer to dependencies from the features extracted by the CNN. Kanna and
distinguish darknet traﬃc from benign traﬃc. Lin et al. (2021) pro- Santhi (2021) proposed a uniﬁed model of an optimized CNN
posed combining a 1D CNN and a stacked Bi-LSTM network to au- (OCNN) and a hierarchical multi-scale LSTM (HMLSTM) network
tomatically extract high-level feature representations for the ﬁne- to extract spatial-temporal features from the input network
grained classiﬁcation of Tor traﬃc. ﬂows, while the Lion Swarm Optimization (LSO) algorithm is
 adopted to ﬁne-tune the hyperparameters of the former OCNN.
2.2. Encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation Xie et al. (2020) proposed HSTF-Model, an HTTP-based Trojan
 detection model based on the hierarchical spatial-temporal fea-
 Various works utilize machine learning-based methods to tures of traﬃc at both packet-level and network ﬂow-level. The
deal with encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks, such as web- authors used a standard CNN to extract spatial information and an
page ﬁngerprinting (Shen et al., 2020), IoT device identiﬁca- LSTM network to extract temporal information. In terms of fault
tion (Pinheiro et al., 2019), malicious communication detec- diagnosis, some representative works like (Yang et al., 2020a;
tion (Fang et al., 2021) and encrypted application classiﬁcation 2020b) leveraged a cascaded model of a CNN and a GRU network
(Dong et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020b; Shapira and Shavitt, 2021; to capture the spatial relations and long-term temporal depen-
Shen et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2019). dencies among the time series signals collected from multiple
 Shen et al. (2020) used the packet length information of client- sensors. Similarly, researchers also used the combination of CNN
server interactions to perform webpage ﬁngerprinting. Speciﬁ- and RNN for traﬃc ﬂow prediction in the intelligent transportation
cally, three types of features, i.e., block features, sequence fea- systems (Liu et al., 2020a; Zheng et al., 2020).
tures, and statistical features, were extracted during the uplink- Compared with conventional machine learning methods, deep
dominant stage and fed into a conventional machine learning learning can capture nonlinear features from the input data more
model (e.g., RF, KNN or DTree) to generate a ﬁne-grained clas- effectively. Additionally, in terms of classiﬁcation tasks, the cassiﬁer. Pinheiro et al. (2019) utilized packet length statistics and cade of CNN and RNN has also been proven to be suitable for
packet transmission rates to classify IoT and non-IoT devices. extracting discriminative and expressive feature representations
Fang et al. (2021) presented a communication channel-based from the original input data with spatial-temporal characteristics
method to detect malicious HTTPS traﬃc. Network packets with (e.g., network traﬃc, time series of sensor signals). Furthermore,
the same destination IP address and destination port were ag- Sarwar et al. (2021) compared the performance of conventional
gregated into a communication channel, and three types of fea- machine learning and deep learning methods especially for darknet
tures, i.e., distribution features, consistency features and statisti- traﬃc classiﬁcation, and demonstrated that deep learning is more
cal features, were extracted independently. Subsequently, a genetic accurate than conventional machine learning methods. Therefore,
algorithm-based method was used for feature selection, and a ﬁnal this paper takes a 1D CNN and a Bi-LSTM network as the basic unit
classiﬁer was built based on the RF algorithm. to learn local spatial-temporal feature representations from the in-
 For the encrypted application classiﬁcation, recent studies have put network ﬂows, and the self-attention mechanism is integrated
tended to utilize the powerful non-linear learning abilities of into the deep feature extraction process to fully mine the inherent
deep learning algorithms to obtain effective feature representa- dependencies of the extracted local spatial-temporal features, thus
tions automatically, including 2D CNN (Shapira and Shavitt, 2021), contributing to capturing global and discriminative feature repre-
1D CNN with a bidirectional Gate Recurrent Unit (Bi-GRU) net- sentations for ﬁne-grained darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation. Besides, inwork (Dong et al., 2020), LSTM network with a hierarchical stead of using a CNN with a ﬁxed convolution kernel size, we use
attention mechanism (Yao et al., 2019), graph neural network multiple convolution kernels of different sizes to extract different
(GNN) (Shen et al., 2021), and Bi-GRU network with an attention local spatial features of the input network ﬂows and combine them
mechanism (Liu et al., 2020b). It is worth noting that several exist- to realize the accurate darknet traﬃc identiﬁcation.

 3
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Table 1
 List of notations.

 Notation Description

 Pi The ith packet of a network ﬂow with only payload content
 bij The jth byte of the ith packet
 N Number of packets kept in a network ﬂow for content feature extraction
 M Number of bytes kept in a packet for content feature extraction
 xsta Statistical features
 xseq Sequential features
 xsc f Side-channel features
 xcontent Content features
 L Size of the input packet length sequence
 H Number of heads in the multi-head self-attention module
 K Key matrix of the self-attention mechanism
 Q Query matrix of the self-attention mechanism
 V Value matrix of the self-attention mechanism
 osc f Output of the side-channel feature learning module
 omsa Output of the multi-head self-attention module
 olst f Output of the local spatial-temporal feature learning module
 oac f f Output of the attentive content feature fusion module
 yˆ Predicted probability vector of being a speciﬁc application type
 y True label of ground truth presented in a one-hot encoding vector

3. The proposed DarknetSec 3.2. Preprocessing layer

 In this work, we propose DarknetSec, a self-attentive deep fea- In this subsection, we focus on discussing the selection of suitture learning architecture, to classify darknet traﬃc and identify its able features to handle the darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation problem.
speciﬁc application types. We present the overview and design de- We select two types of features from the input network traﬃc, i.e.,
tails of each layer in DarknetSec. In summary, DarknetSec is a typ- content features and side-channel features. Since raw network trafical end-to-end classiﬁcation solution for darknet traﬃc that out- ﬁc is usually stored in pcapng or pcap ﬁles, whose formats cannot
puts the application type of each network ﬂow. The notations in- be directly used for machine learning, preprocessing is essential to
troduced in this paper are presented in Table 1. split the raw packets into network ﬂows. In this paper, a network
 ﬂow is deﬁned as a set of packets belonging to the same transportlevel communication that have the same ﬁve-tuples (source IP ad-
3.1. DarknetSec overview dress, destination IP address, source port, destination port, and
 transport-layer protocol) in both directions, i.e., the source IP ad-
 As shown in Fig. 1, DarknetSec is composed of three basic lay- dress/port can be exchanged with the destination IP address/port
ers: a preprocessing layer, a feature learning layer and a classiﬁca- correspondingly. This deﬁnition of a network ﬂow is widely used
tion layer. The preprocessing layer takes raw packets as inputs and in network traﬃc classiﬁcation-related literature.
splits them into network ﬂows. Then, two types of features, i.e., Although the protocol ﬁelds of the network layer and transport
content and side-channel features, are simultaneously extracted layer are essential parts of a packet, they are mainly designed for
and converted into standard normalized vectors, which are fed into network transmission rather than application identiﬁcation. Furthe feature learning layer. The feature learning layer consists of a thermore, the protocol ﬁelds below the application layer contain
side-channel feature learning module, a multi-head self-attention little effective information and cannot adequately provide discrimmodule, a local spatial-temporal feature learning module, and an inative features for ﬁne-grained traﬃc classiﬁcation. Consequently,
attentive content feature fusion module. For the side-channel fea- when extracting ﬁve-tuple network ﬂows, we remove the packet
ture learning module, the side-channel features (statistical and se- header and retain only the application layer data for each packet.
quential features) are fed into a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) net- Moreover, packets with no application layer data, malformed packwork to obtain abstract and high-level representations from the in- ets, loop packets, and retransmitted packets are discarded. As an
puts, which will be proven to be helpful for improving the classi- example, the statistical distribution of network ﬂows containing
ﬁcation performance in Section 4.3. The content features are du- application layer data in the CICDarknet2020 dataset is shown in
plicated into two copies, which are fed into the multi-head self- Fig. 2. Despite of the imbalance of traﬃc categories,we still can
attention module and the local spatial-temporal feature learning obtain enough training samples to build an accurate traﬃc clasmodule to generate embedded feature representations. After that, sifer. Note that the same packet preprocessing approach was also
the attentive content feature fusion module is utilized to fuse the used by Dong et al. (2020), in which the VPN part of the CICDarkoutputs of the two content feature learning modules to highlight net2020 dataset was used to perform application classiﬁcation to
the intrinsic relationships among the learned spatial-temporal fea- demonstrate that only using the application layer data of network
tures. In DarknetSec, the abovementioned feature learning modules packets as inputs is eﬃcient for the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation
focus on different modalities of network traﬃc. The side-channel task.
feature learning module summarizes the statistical and sequential Content features. Content features are extracted from the paycharacteristics from a global perspective, whereas the multi-head load content of each selected packet. Since the number of packets
self-attention module and local spatial-temporal feature learning contained in a network ﬂow and the size of each packet are commodule present ﬁne-grained content representations for darknet monly uncertain and are determined by the speciﬁc application
traﬃc classiﬁcation. The classiﬁcation layer concatenates the out- type under study, a typical method is to select the ﬁrst N packets
puts of the side-channel feature learning module and the attentive of a network ﬂow while retaining the ﬁrst M bytes for each packet.
content feature fusion module. It is composed of a dense layer and N and M are the two hyperparameters of DarknetSec. Note that if
a softmax layer. The focal loss between the true labels and predic- a network ﬂow contains more than N packets, truncation is pertion probabilities is utilized for the overall training process.

 4
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 1. The architecture of DarknetSec.

Fig. 2. Distribution of network ﬂows containing application layer data in the CIC-
Darknet2020 dataset.

formed; otherwise, it is padded with zeros. Similarly, if a packet
contains more or fewer than M bytes, preprocessing will be performed in the same way. Fig. 3. The payload vectorization method for a network ﬂow.
 As shown in Fig. 3, in terms of content feature extraction and
vectorization, the encrypted input packet sequence is converted
into the ﬂow packet format to adapt to the local spatial-temporal
 where xcontent represents the content features of a network ﬂow,
feature mining from packet bytes. The payload content of a net-
 P i is the ith packet with only application layer data, and bij ∈
work ﬂow is formalized as
 [0, 0xff], i ∈ [1, N], j ∈ [1, M] denotes the jth byte of the ith packet.
 Then, data normalization is performed to map the numeric
xcontent = [P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P N ], N ∈ Z+ (1)
 packet bytes to [0,1] by dividing all byte values by 0xff.
 Side-channel features. Side-channel features are deﬁned as the
 information that can be extracted from encrypted network traf-
 ﬁc without decryption (Stergiopoulos et al., 2018); they are com-
P i = [bi1 , bi2 , . . . , biM ], i ∈ [1, N] (2) posed of statistical and sequential features. Multiple statistical fea-

 5
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Table 2
 Detailed descriptions of the selected side-channel features.

 Feature Type Feature description Number

 Statistical features Flow duration 35
 Time intervals among packets(max, min, mean, standard deviation, median)
 Packet length statistics(max, min, mean, standard deviation, median)
 Inbound packet length statistics(max, min, mean, standard deviation, median)
 Outbound packet length statistics(max, min, mean, standard deviation, median)
 Number of packets/bytes
 Number of inbound packets/bytes
 Number of outbound packets/bytes
 Number of packets/bytes per second
 Number of inbound packets/bytes per second
 Number of outbound packets/bytes per second
 Ratio of inbound and outbound packets/bytes
 Sequential features Packet length vector for the ﬁrst L packets L

tures are extracted from the payload content of packets based on malized as
the granularity of a network ﬂow, and the packet length vector for 
 i σ (W i xsc f + bi ), i = 1
the ﬁrst L packets of a network ﬂow is selected as the sequential h = (4)
features. Note that L is a hyperparameter and will be discussed in σ (W i hi−1 + bi ), 1 < i ≤ Z
Section 4.2. Detailed descriptions of the selected side-channel feawhere W i , bi , and hi denote the weight matrix, bias vector, and
tures is presented in Table 2. Additionally, to eliminate the negoutput vector of layer i, respectively. σ () is a non-linear activation
ative effects of different side-channel feature value ranges on the
 function. The MLP is introduced to capture an abstract represenclassiﬁer, as deﬁned in Eq. (4), a normalization method called the
 tation from the original numerical side-channel features. This rep-
“min-max” is utilized for the side-channel data preprocessing. Firesentation is combined with the output of the attentive content
nally, the statistical features, sequential features and side-channel
 feature fusion module to determine the ﬁnal classiﬁcation.
features are denoted as xsta , xseq , and xsc f , respectively.

 x − xmin 3.3.2. Multi-head self-attention module
x= (3)
 xmax − xmin For traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks, network traﬃc is often sequential, and internal dependencies commonly exist among the payload
where xmin and xmax denote the minimum and maximum values content of packets. Thus, we need to develop an appropriate apof feature x, respectively. proach that not only pays attention to extracting spatial-temporal
 representations from the payload content, but also considers their
 inherent dependencies. Sequence encoding based on CNNs or RNNs
3.3. Feature learning layer
 is essentially a type of local encoding method that only models
 the local dependencies among the input data. Although RNNs can
 To obtain high-level representations from the original sidetheoretically establish long-distance dependencies, they are limited
channel features and content features, we design a side-channel
 by the information storage capacity and vanishing gradient probfeature learning module, a multi-head self-attention module, a lolems, thus resulting in only short-distance dependencies. In adcal spatial-temporal feature learning module, and an attentive condition, improved RNNs such as LSTM also have some shortcomtent feature fusion module.
 ings. For example, LSTM considers the later features to be more
 First, the statistical features xsta and sequential features xseq are
 important than the previous ones. In this paper, inspired by the
concatenated into a single vector as the side-channel features xsc f ,
 network structure of Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), which is
which are subsequently fed into an MLP network. The content feaa sequence learning model based on attention mechanisms, we
tures xcontent are duplicated into two copies and simultaneously
 leverage a multi-head self-attention network to mine the multihandled by the multi-head self-attention module and local spatialdimensional dependencies inherent within a network ﬂow and dytemporal feature learning module. Then, the outputs of the two
 namically generate attentive weights for different data positions
abovementioned content feature learning modules ﬂow to an atof the input network ﬂows. The multi-head self-attention network
tentive content feature fusion module to capture the correspondcan adaptively pay more attention to speciﬁc parts of the input
ing weighted spatial-temporal representations. Finally, the sidethat are related to the classiﬁcation and give less attention to
channel feature learning module generates an output osc f , while
 the irrelevant parts, thus contributing to better capturing complex
the attentive content feature fusion module generates an output
 spatial-temporal representations from the input network ﬂows.
oac f f . These two output vectors are fed into the classiﬁcation layer
 The self-attention mechanism usually adopts a query-key-value
to generate the ﬁnal prediction.
 (QKV) mode, whose calculation procedure is shown in Fig. 4. We
 ﬁrst map the input xcontent ∈ RN×M linearly into three different
3.3.1. Side-channel feature learning module spaces to obtain a query matrix Q , a key matrix K , and a value
 The MLP is one of the most basic type of neural networks. The matrix V . This linear mapping can be formalized as
neurons in two adjacent layers are fully connected, so the MLP is
 Q = W q xcontent ∈ RDk ×M (5)
also called the fully connected neural network. An MLP classiﬁer
is a typical machine learning model with strong nonlinear representation ability that is widely used in classiﬁcation-related tasks.
 K = W k xcontent ∈ RDk ×M (6)
For the side-channel features xsc f , we leverage an MLP network
to mine high-level representations from the input data. osc f is the
output of this module, as shown in Fig. 1(osc f = hZ ). More specifically, the MLP used for side-channel feature learning can be for- V = W v xcontent ∈ RDv ×M (7)

 6
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 4. The calculation procedure of the self-attention mechanism model.

where W q ∈ RDk ×N , W k ∈ RDk ×N , and W v ∈ RDv ×N denote the three our model, gconv () is leveraged to capture local spatial representaparameter matrices of the linear mapping, which are randomly ini- tions from the input content features. It is worth noting that since
tialized and updated through backpropagation during the training the spatial feature dimension is not large, a pooling layer is not
process. used after the 1-dimensional convolution function.
 The query matrix Q and key matrix K are used to generate a Batch normalization is a technique used to improve the perfordistribution of attention weights, while the value matrix V is used mance and stability of neural networks. It generates an input with
to obtain the selected information. The output matrix is calculated zero mean/unit variance for any layer of a speciﬁc neural network.
as Even if the mean and variance change during the training process,
 batch normalization can standardize the data adaptively, thus facil-
 K TQ
Attention(Q , K , V ) = V · Softmax(  ) (8) itating gradient propagation and speeding up the training process.
 Dk The calculation process of normalization can be formalized as
 gbn (x1 , x2 , . . . , xNbatch ) = (α xˆ1 + β , α xˆ2 + β , . . . , α xˆNbatch + β ) (14)
 exp(X i j )
Softmax(X i j ) =  (9)
 k exp (X k j )
 x i − μb
where Softmax() represents a column-wise-normalized function. xˆi = (15)
 δb + ξ
 In this paper, we employ a multi-head self-attention module to
obtain better nonlinear representations; this module uses multiple
query vectors to select multiple sets of information from the input 1 
 Nbatch

data in parallel, and each attentive head focuses on a different part
 μb = xi (16)
 Nbatch
 i=1
of the input data. This provides an approach to fully mine the information from multiple representation subspaces at different po- 
sitions. Speciﬁcally, the multi-head self-attention module can be 1 
 Nbatch
 δb = ( x i − μb ) 2 (17)
formalized as Nbatch
 i=1
omsa = Multihead(Q , K , V ) = Concat(head1 , head2 , . . . , headH )W msa where xbn = x1 , x2 , . . . , xN denotes the input of the batch norbatch
 (10) malization function, and μb and δb are the mean and standard deviation of xbn , respectively. α ∈ R+ and β ∈ R are trainable neural
headi = Attention(W qi xcontent , W ki xcontent , W vi xcontent ) (11) network parameters. ξ is an arbitrarily small constant.
 As shown in Fig. 1, after the two-layer Conv1D network, a self-
 Dv ×M
where H and omsa ∈ R denote the head number and output attention layer is placed before the Bi-LSTM network to associate
of the multi-head self-attention module, respectively, and W msa ∈ the positions of the local spatial features obtained by the Conv1D
RHM×M , W qi ∈ RDk ×N , W ki ∈ RDk ×N , and W vi ∈ RDv ×N are parameter network, which enriches the input features for the following Bimatrices. LSTM network.
 Bi-LSTM. After the two-layer Conv1D network and self-
3.3.3. Local spatial-temporal feature learning module attention layer, we apply a Bi-LSTM network to perform compre-
 As shown in Fig. 1, the local spatial-temporal feature learning hensive and thorough feature extraction for xcontent in view of the
module consists of a two-layer Conv1D network, a self-attention temporal dependencies within a network ﬂow. Bi-LSTM consists of
mechanism layer, and a Bi-LSTM network. It is a core component of a forward LSTM and a backward LSTM. Speciﬁcally, the calculation
DarknetSec that aims to capture the local spatial-temporal patterns process of an LSTM unit can be formulated as
of an input network ﬂow. The detailed descriptions are presented
as follows. it = σ (W i xt + U i ht−1 + bi ) (18)
 Conv1D. We utilize Conv1D to capture the spatial dependencies
of xcontent . Conv1D is composed of a 1D CNN layer, a batch normalf t = σ (W f xt + U f ht−1 + b f ) (19)
ization layer, and a Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function,
which can be formalized as
oconv1d (x ) = grelu (gbn (gconv (x ))) (12) ot = σ (W oxt + U oht−1 + bo ) (20)

gconv (x ) = W conv  x + bconv (13) ct = f t  ct−1 + it  tanh(W c xt + U c ht−1 + bc ) (21)
where x and oconv1d (x ) denote the input and output of a Conv1D
block, respectively. gconv (), gbn (), and grelu () are the 1-dimensional
 ht = ot  tanh(ct ) (22)
convolution function, batch normalization function, and ReLU activation function, respectively. W conv , bconv , and  denote the param- where W i , U i , W f , U f , W o, U o, bi , b f , bo denote trainable network
eter matrix, bias vector, and convolution operation, respectively. In parameters, xt is the input vector at time step t, σ () is the

 7
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

element-wise sigmoid activation function and tanh() is the hyper- weight, γ is the focusing parameter, and c denotes the label of the
bolic tangent activation function.  denotes element-wise multi- ground truth. Note that yc = 1 and that other yi (i = c ) values are
plication. all equal to 0 in y ∈ RC .
 →
 − ←−
 A forward hidden state h t and backward hidden state h t are By combining the side-channel feature learning and spatialgenerated at time step t. The ﬁnal hidden state at time step t is ob- temporal content feature learning components, DarknetSec protained by concatenating the forward and backward hidden states, vides a ﬁnal prediction for each network ﬂow. Overall, the detailed
 → ←
 − − workﬂow of DarknetSec is presented in Algorithm 1 .
i.e., ht = [ h t ; h t ], The hidden state ht contains high-level spatialtemporal feature representations obtained from raw content features. In our model, we take all the hidden states of the Bi-LSTM Algorithm 1: The workﬂow of DarknetSec.
network as the output of the local spatial-temporal feature learn- Input: 5-tuple network ﬂows extracted from raw network
ing module, which is denoted as olst f . traﬃc
 Output: The predicted type of each network ﬂow
3.3.4. Attentive content feature fusion module 1 Generating xcontent , xsta and xseq ;
 Composed of an approximate self-attention layer and a dense 2 Initializing neural network parameters;
layer, the attentive content feature fusion module is designed to 3 for each training iteration do
fuse the outputs of the multi-head self-attention module and the 4 Selecting a batch of training samples;
local spatial-temporal feature learning module, thereby helping to 5 xsc f = Concat(xsta , xseq );
obtain the inner dependency relationships among the different 6 osc f = MLP(xsc f );
data positions of a network ﬂow from a global perspective and
 7 omsa = Multi_head_self_attention(xcontent );
contributing to the learning of comprehensive content features.
 8 olst f =
More speciﬁcally, the output of the multi-head self-attention mod-
 Bi_LSTM(self_attention(Two_layer_Conv1D(xcontent )));
ule serves as the key matrix K and query matrix Q , while the out-
 9 oac f f = Attentive(omsa , olst f ) =
put of the local spatial-temporal feature learning module serves as
 oT ·o
the value matrix V . The attentive content feature fusion module W ac f f (olst f · Softmax( √
 msa msa
 )) + bac f f ;
 domsa
can be further formalized as 10 oc = Dense(Concat(osc f , oac f f ));
 oac f f = Attentive(omsa , olst f ) 11 Obtaining yˆ using a softmax layer: yˆ = softmax(oc );
 12 Updating the trainable parameters of DarknetSec for the
 oTmsa omsa
 = W ac f f (olst f · Softmax(  )) + bac f f (23) current batch of training samples with the focal loss;
 domsa
 13 for each test iteration do
where domsa is the dimensionality of omsa used to control the scale, 14 Selecting a batch of test data;
and omsa , olst f , and oac f f denote the outputs of the multi-head self- 15 Calculating and saving yˆ = argmax(yˆ ) using the trained
attention module, local spatial-temporal feature learning module parameters;
and attentive content feature fusion module, respectively. W ac f f 16 return yˆ for all test network ﬂows;
and bac f f respectively denote the parameter matrix and bias vector
of the dense layer used to compress oac f f to a speciﬁed dimensionality.
 4. Experimental evaluation
3.4. Classiﬁcation layer
 In this section, we are dedicated to evaluate the perfor-
 Composed of a dense layer and a softmax layer, the classiﬁca- mance of DarknetSec. We conduct most experiments on the CItion layer combines the outputs of the side-channel feature learn- CDarknet2020 dataset, which is composed of VPN and Tor aping module and the attentive content feature fusion module. Con- plications and acts as a real representative of darknet traﬃc
sidering the class imbalance problem in darknet traﬃc classiﬁca- by merging two public datasets, namely, ISCXTor2016 and IStion, we take the focal loss between the one-hot encoding vectors CXVPN2016 (Habibi Lashkari et al., 2020). Network ﬂow samples
of the true labels and the predicted probability distribution vectors are divided into two types: benign and darknet types, and the
as the loss values of the backpropagation during the deep learning- numbers of benign and darknet network ﬂows containing applibased training process. The core idea of the focal loss function is cation layer data are 102,480 and 21,041, respectively. The netthat samples which are diﬃcult to classify are important for the work ﬂows of darknet traﬃc in CICDarknet2020 can be divided
entire classiﬁcation model. into eight categories, i.e., Audio-Stream, Browsing, Chat, Email, P2P,
 File-Transfer, Video-Stream, and VOIP. Detailed descriptions of the
oc = W c · Concat(osc f , oac f f ) + bc (24)
 darknet applications are shown in Table 3.
 In the following subsections, we start by introducing the experimental settings used for evaluation purposes. After that, we
yˆ = softmax(oc ) (25)
 present a comprehensive evaluation of DarknetSec from the folwhere osc f is the output vector of the side-channel feature learning lowing four perspectives. First, we perform experiments to discuss
module, and oac f f is the output vector of the attentive content fea- the inﬂuences of several hyperparameters and their corresponding
ture fusion module. W c and bc are the weight matrix and bias vec- optimal choices. Second, we conduct an ablation study to evalutor of the dense layer, respectively. oc and yˆ denote the outputs of ate the contribution of each component of DarknetSec to the ﬁ-
the dense layer and the predicted probability vector, respectively. nal classiﬁcation performance. Third, we verify the effectiveness
The focal loss function for a C-class classiﬁcation task can be for- of DarknetSec by comparing it with several state-of-the-art methmalized as ods in both binary and multiclass classiﬁcation scenarios. Finally,
 we demonstrate the generalizability and adaptability of Darknet-
FL(yˆ , y, α , γ ) = −α (1 − yˆc )γ log(yˆc ) (26)
 Sec on conventional encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks using two
 C C
where y ∈ R and yˆ ∈ R denote the one-hot vector of the true la- other public datasets. Note that the experiments in Section 4.2,
bel and the predicted probability vector, respectively. α is the class 4.3, and 4.5 involve only multiclass classiﬁcation scenarios, while

 8
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Table 3
 Detailed descriptions of the darknet applications in CICDarknet2020.

 Application type Detailed description

 Audio-Stream Vimeo and Youtube
 Browsing Firefox and Chrome
 Chat ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook and Hangouts
 Email SMTPS, POP3S and IMAPS
 P2P uTorrent and Transmission (BitTorrent)
 File-Transfer Skype, FTP over SSH (SFTP) and FTP over SSL (FTPS) using Filezilla and an external service
 Video-Stream Vimeo and Youtube
 VOIP Facebook, Skype and Hangouts voice calls

both binary and multiclass classiﬁcation scenarios are discussed 4.1.2. Cross-validation
in Section 4.4, which presents detailed performance comparisons We use 10-fold cross-validation for the comparison experiwith other state-of-the-art methods. ments. We randomly divide the dataset into ten disjoint subsets
 of equal size. For each experiment, we perform training and testing ten times, selecting one subset as the test set and the remain-
4.1. Experimental settings ing nine subsets as the training set each time. We use the average value of the ten tests as the ﬁnal result. Note that all exper-
4.1.1. Methods for comparative evaluation iments are conducted on a personal computer with an Intel i7-
 To fully demonstrate the effectiveness of DarknetSec in terms of 8700K 3.7 GHz CPU, an NVIDIA GeForce GTX1650 4 GHz GPU and
darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation, we choose six existing representative 32 GB of memory.
methods for comparison, which are brieﬂy introduced as follows.
Note that the parameters of all these methods are ﬁne tuned to ob- 4.1.3. Implementation details
tain the best classiﬁcation performance on the evaluation datasets. As shown in Section 3.2, the size of xcontent is N ∗ M, which de-
 FlowPic, which transforms the basic byte data of each net- notes the ﬁrst N packets of each network ﬂow and the ﬁrst M bytes
work ﬂow into a grayscale image and uses a typical 2D CNN to of each packet. Each Conv1D block represents a 1D CNN model.
classify the encrypted network traﬃc and identify the application Speciﬁcally, for the Conv1D block directly connected to xcontent , we
in use. FlowPic provides a generic representation learning model set the number of convolution kernels to 128, the kernel size to
for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and application identiﬁcation, 3, the step size to 1, and the padding ﬁeld to ‘SAME’. Each of the
where a LeNet-5-style architecture is leveraged to build the clas- following four parallel Conv1D blocks has 32 convolution kernels,
siﬁer (Shapira and Shavitt, 2021). each with the same step size of 1 and the same padding ﬁeld
 CETAnalytics, which extracts high-level feature representations of ‘SAME’. However, the kernel sizes of the four parallel Conv1D
for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation from both payload content and blocks are set to 1, 3, 5 and 7, respectively. DarknetSec uses sevpayload statistics. A Bi-GRU network and a cascaded model com- eral convolution kernels of different sizes to extract multiple local
posed of a 1D CNN and a Bi-GRU network are used to realize the spatial features for each network ﬂow and combines the outputs of
payload statistics and payload content analytics, respectively. Ad- the four Conv1D blocks to obtain ﬁne-grained spatial feature repditionally, to improve accuracy and reduce dimensionality, a sim- resentations.
ple attention layer is introduced to the output of the feature ex- The input and output size of the self-attention layer after the
traction module to create the ﬁnal feature vector for classiﬁca- Conv1D block are both 128∗ N. We set the number of hidden units
tion (Dong et al., 2020). to 256 for the Bi-LSTM network and set the number of heads to
 BGRUA, which uses a Bi-GRU network and an attention mecha- 8 for the multi-head self-attention module. The output sizes of
nism to classify web services running on HTTPS connections. Note the Bi-LSTM network and the multi-head self-attention module are
that the author only uses three consecutive packets of a network both 128∗ 256. The attentive content feature fusion module consists
ﬂow and 900 bytes for each packet to build the classiﬁer (Liu et al., of a self-attention layer and a dense layer, and the output sizes of
2020b). these two layers are 16∗ 256 and 256, respectively.
 VGG19+RF, which transforms the time-based features of dark- The statistical feature learning module consists of an MLP with
net traﬃc into three-dimensional images and uses a pre-trained a 64-unit hidden layer and a 32-unit output layer. The MLP in the
neural network model to perform feature extraction. After that, a classiﬁcation layer has a hidden layer, and the number of hidden
traditional machine learning method is introduced for classiﬁca- units is set to 64.
tion. The combination of VGG19 and RF is chosen as the best com- We employ the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001
bination (Singh et al., 2021). for DarknetSec. Adam is an eﬃcient stochastic optimization algo-
 RF, which addresses traﬃc classiﬁcation for anonymous services rithm that performs step-by-step optimization on a stochastic ob-
(Tor, I2P, JonDonym) in both ﬂow-based and packet-based classiﬁ- jective function with adaptive low-order moment estimation. Adcation scenarios. For the ﬂow-based scenario, 74 ﬂow-based statis- ditionally, DarknetSec is executed with 30 training epochs and a
tics are extracted, and several supervised classiﬁcation algorithms batch size of 32.
are employed for classiﬁcation. Here, we consider only the ﬂowbased classiﬁcation scenario and chose the RF algorithm for com- 4.1.4. Evaluation metrics
parison since it achieves the highest accuracy with respect to the To comprehensively evaluate the classiﬁcation performance of
classiﬁcation of anonymous services (Montieri et al., 2018). the proposed architecture, ﬁve well-known metrics are adopted for
 DIDarknet, which uses CICFlowMeter to extract 80 statistical our experiments, i.e., the Accuracy (Acc), False Positive Rate (F P R),
features from each network ﬂow of darknet traﬃc, after which an Precision (P re), Recall (Rec), and F1-score (F 1), which are widely
RF-based feature selection method is employed to select the most used in classiﬁcation-related tasks. The abovementioned metrics
important features, which are then converted into grayscale im- are based on four basic indicators, namely True Positive (T P ), True
ages and fed into a 2D CNN for classiﬁcation (Habibi Lashkari et al., Negative (T N), False Positive (F P ) and False Negative (F N). Addi-
2020). tionally, Macro − P re, Macro − Rec and Macro − F 1 are the average

 9
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

values of precision, recall, and F1-score values for all of each class Meanwhile, we set N, M, and β as 30, 256 and 2, respectively. As
in the multiclass classiﬁcation scenario, respectively. shown in Fig. 6, the accuracy gradually improves with increasing
 TP + TN L. When L reaches 100, the best accuracy rate emerges and begins
Acc = (27) to remain stable. Thus, L = 100 is selected as the optimal value for
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 the subsequent experiments.

 FP
F PR = (28) 4.2.3. The hyperparameters of the focal loss function
 FP + TN The focal loss function has two adjustable parameters, namely,
 α and γ . α represents the weight of each class in the training set.
 TP It is obvious that compared with the majority classes, the minor-
P re = (29)
 TP + FP ity classes with fewer training samples are more diﬃcult to classify accurately. Therefore, the minority classes need to be assigned
 TP larger weights. In this paper, α is commonly deﬁned as the recip-
Rec = (30)
 TP + FN rocal of the category ratio for each class.
 In the following discussion, we focus on the inﬂuence of γ ,
 2 ∗ P re ∗ Rec which represents how much the classiﬁcation model pays atten-
F1 = (31) tion to the minority classes that are diﬃcult to classify. Generally,
 P re + Rec
 γ should be set as a natural number. When α = 1 and γ = 0, the
4.2. Parameter optimization of DarknetSec focal loss function degenerates into the standard cross-entropy loss
 function.
 The selection of hyperparameters has a signiﬁcant impact on We conduct experiments to select the suitable value of γ for
the performance of DarknetSec. In this subsection, we discuss the imbalanced dataset of DarknetSec. γ is successively set as 1,
the selection of several important hyperparameters, including the 2, 3, 4, and 5, and the other hyperparameters are set as N = 30,
number of packets N for each network ﬂow and the number of M = 256, and L = 100. Additionally, since the focal loss function
bytes M for each selected packet used to generate the content fea- mainly focuses on alleviating the problem of class imbalance, in
tures, the size of packet length sequence L for the sequential fea- addition to the accuracy metric, we also calculate the Macro −
tures, and the focusing parameter β of the focal loss. P re, Macro − Rec and Macro − F 1 of each class. Fig. 7 presents the
 abovementioned four metrics by calculating the average of the 10-
4.2.1. The numbers of packets (N) and bytes (M) fold cross-validation results obtained with different values of γ .
 The number of packets N and the number of bytes M used We can see that γ = 2 achieves the best performance and slightly
to generate content features can directly inﬂuence the execu- outperforms the other results when γ is set to larger than 2. We
tion eﬃciency and accuracy of the neural network. Therefore, can also conclude a value of γ that is too large may result in
we conduct experiments to obtain the optimal values of N and overﬁtting. These experiments demonstrate that the most suitable
M. To reduce the complexity of the training process, we choose value of γ is 2.
smaller values of N and M. We construct various training and
test sets with N = 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100 and 4.3. Ablation study
M = 64, 128, 256, 512, 1500 (consistent with the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)). Furthermore, the other hyperparameters are DarknetSec contains several components for content and sideset as L = 100, and β = 2. channel feature extraction that use hybrid deep learning algo-
 We choose the average accuracy of 10-fold cross-validation as rithms. We want to evaluate the contribution of each component
the evaluation metric. An exhaustive grid search with a total of 60 to the ﬁnal classiﬁcation performance.
experiments is conducted for all values of N and M. The exper- As shown in Table 4, we can obtain an Acc of 76.56% and a
imental results obtained with different N and M values are pre- Macro − F 1 of 77.94% by leveraging only the sequential features,
sented in Fig. 5. When M reaches 256, the increase in the number while the performance of the statistical features is slightly betof bytes for each selected packet has a very weak effect on the re- ter than that of the sequential features. By considering both feasulting accuracy. Thus, we set M as 256 to ensure high accuracy ture sets, namely, by using side-channel features, the Acc and
with a moderate training overhead. As shown in Fig. 5, the accu- Macro − F 1 can be increased to 84.26% and 84.75%, respectively.
racies yielded with a varying number of packets selected for each However, since the payload content of packets is nonexistent in
network ﬂow are presented with a red curve when M is set to 256. the side-channel features, this approach may not be able to provide
When only the ﬁrst 15 packets of each network ﬂow are utilized enough suﬃcient information for accurately predicting application
(N = 15), DarknetSec achieves a multiclass accuracy of 86.15%. With types.
the increase in the number of selected packets, the accuracy rate A more interesting ﬁnding is that we can obtain an Acc of
signiﬁcantly improves when provided with more packets to gen- 85.42% and a Macro − F 1 of 85.41% by using the content feaerate content features. When N exceeds 30, the accuracy is main- tures only; these values are even higher than those yielded by the
tained at approximately 92.22% and tends to be stable with no sig- combination of statistical features and sequential features, which
niﬁcant change. Therefore, we choose N = 30, and M = 256 for the demonstrates that the payload content of packets plays a greater
following experiments. role than payload statistics when applied to encrypted traﬃc analysis. Furthermore, if we combine the content features and the
4.2.2. The size of packet length sequence L side-channel features, the Acc and Macro − F 1 can be improved
 For the extraction of sequential features, the size of packet to 87.68% and 87.84%, respectively. This also veriﬁes that the ﬁnelength sequence L needs to be speciﬁed. To make full use of grained analysis of encrypted traﬃc by comprehensively considerthe sequence characteristics of the packets in a network ﬂow, ing both context features and side-channel features can effectively
we consider a larger range of L from 15 to 300 and use the facilitate the accurate classiﬁcation of darknet traﬃc.
average accuracy of 10-fold cross-validation as the evalua- We next discuss the impact of the self-attention mechanism,
tion metric. Various values of L are selected from the set of including the multi-head self-attention module and the self-
{15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 120, 150, 180, 200, 250, 300}. attention layer embedded in the local spatial-temporal feature

 10
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 5. The average Acc of 10-fold cross-validation with different values of N and M.

 Fig. 6. The average Acc of 10-fold cross-validation with different values of L.

 Table 4
 Descriptions of the evaluation results regarding the different feature learning components of DarknetSec.

 Feature learning components Acc Macro − Pre Macro − Rec Macro − F 1

 Statistical features 78.13 ± 2.34 80.54 ± 3.15 77.82 ± 2.56 79.16 ± 2.79
 Sequential features 76.56 ± 3.72 78.63 ± 2.80 77.27 ± 1.92 77.94 ± 2.22
 Side-channel features (statistical + sequential features) 84.26 ± 2.18 84.64 ± 2.42 84.86 ± 1.94 84.75 ± 2.06
 Content features 85.42 ± 2.11 85.46 ± 1.62 85.38 ± 2.04 85.41 ± 1.87
 Content + side-channel features 87.68 ± 1.31 87.56 ± 0.82 88.12 ± 1.04 87.84 ± 0.98
 Content + side-channel features + multi-head self-attention module 91.28 ± 0.64 91.96 ± 0.70 90.67 ± 1.18 91.31 ± 1.04
 All 92.22 ± 0.51 93.36 ± 0.62 90.88 ± 1.24 92.10 ± 0.92

 11
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 7. The average Acc, Macro − Pre, Macro − Rec and Macro − F 1 of 10-fold cross-validation with different values of γ .

learning module, on darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation. On the basis of clude that DarknetSec is superior to its counterparts in terms of
using a combination of content features and side-channel features the binary classiﬁcation scenario.
(with an Acc of 87.68% and a Macro − F 1 of 87.84%), the application In addition, to further verify the stability of DarknetSec, we ranof multi-head self-attention module signiﬁcantly increases the Acc domly select 80 0 0 network ﬂows proportionally from the 8 types
and Macro − F 1 by 3.60% and 3.47%, respectively. The experimen- of darknet applications (stratiﬁed sampling). The ratio of benign
tal results demonstrate that the multi-head self-attention module and darknet network ﬂows is gradually increased from 1:1 to 9:1.
can effectively mine the inherent dependencies and hidden con- Fig. 9 presents the recall and FPR values of all comparison methnections among the local spatial-temporal features extracted from ods with a varying ratio of benign and darknet network ﬂows.
the input encrypted traﬃc, thus contributing to providing more In general, the recall and FPR values of all methods decrease as
discriminative feature representations for ﬁne-grained darknet traf- the proportion of benign network ﬂows increases, and DarknetSec
ﬁc classiﬁcation. Finally, by embedding a self-attention layer into achieves the best classiﬁcation results when compared with the
the local spatial-temporal feature learning module to help the neu- rest of the methods. Furthermore, with the increase in the proporral network pay more attention to the most important spatial- tion of benign network ﬂows, the recall and FPR values of Darktemporal feature variables, the Acc and Macro − F 1 are increased netSec decrease the least. When the ratio of benign and darknet
from 91.28% and 91.31% to 92.22% and 92.10%, respectively. network ﬂows reaches 5:1, the recall and FPR of DarknetSec tend
 to be stable at approximately 96.20% and 1.44%, respectively. However, the recall values of the remaining methods continue to de-
4.4. Performance comparison with existing methods
 crease when the ratio of benign and darknet network ﬂows reaches
 9:1, as more darknet network ﬂows are undetected.
 In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of DarknetSec
 The reason for this phenomenon is that DarknetSec extracts
relative to several representative methods in binary and multiclass
 more stable and comprehensive feature representations from netclassiﬁcation scenarios. We apply 10-fold cross-validation and take
 work ﬂows, which contribute to the accurate identiﬁcation of darkthe average values as the ﬁnal results.
 net ﬂows from a large number of benign ﬂows; in contrast, the
 other approaches are not suﬃciently discriminative to differenti-
4.4.1. Binary classiﬁcation ate between benign and darknet network ﬂows. The comparison
 In terms of the binary classiﬁcation scenario, all application results show that DarknetSec is superior to the other methods, estypes of darknet traﬃc are treated as a single class. This scenario pecially in scenarios with a large amount of background traﬃc.
aims to distinguish between benign and darknet network ﬂows. It
is worth noting that if a network ﬂow is labeled with the dark- 4.4.2. Multiclass classiﬁcation
net type, we can further employ the multiclass classiﬁcation model In the multiclass classiﬁcation scenario, there are a total of nine
(see Section 4.2.2) to identify the speciﬁc application type to which classes of network ﬂows, namely, Benign, VoIP, Video-Stream, P2P,
it belongs. Email, File-Transfer, Chat, Browsing and Audio-Stream. We use the
 We use the Acc, P re, Rec and F 1 metrics to evaluate the classi- Acc, Macro − P re, Macro − Rec and Macro − F 1 metrics to evaluate
ﬁcation results of all these methods. The average metrics obtained the classiﬁcation results of all the tested methods. As shown in
via 10-fold cross-validation are presented in Fig. 8. DarknetSec sig- Fig. 10, similar to those for the binary classiﬁcation results, the
niﬁcantly outperforms the other methods in all evaluation met- above four evaluation metrics of DarknetSec are better than those
rics. By jointly considering the accuracy and F1-score values ob- of the other methods. In addition, we provide the accuracy valtained on the representative dataset of Darknet2020, we can con- ues of each type for all methods, as shown in Table 5. Darknet-

 12
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 8. Binary classiﬁcation: the average Acc, Pre, Rec and F 1 of different methods.

 Fig. 9. Binary classiﬁcation: impact of the ratio of benign and darknet network ﬂows on the Rec and F PR.

 Table 5
 Multiclass classiﬁcation: the Acc of different methods for each type of network ﬂow in DarknetSec.

 Traﬃc Methods
 Type
 FlowPic CETAnalytics BGRUA VGG19+RF RF DIDarknet DarknetSec

 Benign 98.29 ± 0.73 99.64 ±0.28 98.22 ± 0.43 99.10 ± 0.36 97.68 ± 1.23 98.66 ± 0.82 99.54 ± 0.54
 VoIP 89.58 ± 0.83 90.17 ± 0.49 89.14 ± 0.54 89.92 ± 0.68 89.51 ± 0.39 89.04 ± 0.71 91.35 ± 0.84
 Video-Stream 89.22 ± 0.27 89.87 ± 0.91 88.76 ± 0.23 89.58 ± 1.11 86.29 ± 0.66 88.33 ± 0.76 92.56 ± 0.72
 P2P 90.64 ± 0.72 92.26 ± 0.54 90.12 ± 0.83 90.34 ± 0.83 88.79 ± 0.63 89.86 ± 0.78 94.69 ± 0.57
 Email 79.25 ± 0.93 80.34 ± 0.75 78.33 ± 0.77 79.60 ± 0.71 75.65 ± 1.21 78.13 ± 0.60 81.68 ± 1.05
 File-Transfer 90.64 ± 0.72 91.86 ± 0.54 90.12 ± 0.83 91.14 ± 0.83 88.79 ± 0.63 89.86 ± 0.78 94.69 ± 0.57
 Chat 94.26 ± 0.35 94.63 ± 0.75 94.86 ± 0.81 93.57 ± 0.64 92.58 ± 0.95 94.23 ± 1.08 95.58 ± 0.63
 Browsing 78.05 ± 0.94 78.92 ± 0.85 78.28 ± 0.65 78.34 ± 0.72 77.54 ± 1.21 78.11 ± 1.12 82.74 ± 0.38
 Audio-Stream 98.21 ± 0.43 98.32 ± 0.78 97.62 ± 0.35 98.53 ± 0.65 96.24 ± 0.83 97.36 ± 0.16 98.45 ± 0.56

Sec achieves the best classiﬁcation accuracy values on traﬃc types (1) DarknetSec outperforms all other approaches, with the
except Benign and Audio-Stream. Furthermore, for the Benign and highest Acc (92.22%) and Macro − F 1 (92.10%) values. Compared
Audio-Stream traﬃc types, the accuracy values of DarknetSec are with those of the second-place method, i.e., CETAnalytics, the aconly 0.10% and 0.08% lower than the second-place metrics, respec- curacy and Macro-F1-score values are 2.96% and 3.06% higher, retively; this is obviously trivial, and no obvious differences are ex- spectively, which shows that our classiﬁcation architecture has bethibited. From the ﬁne-grained experimental multiclass classiﬁca- ter accuracy and adaptability than other state-of-the-art methods.
tion results, we can obtain several major conclusions as follows.

 13
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Fig. 10. Multiclass classiﬁcation: the average Acc, Macro − Pre, Macro − Rec and Macro − F 1 of different methods.

 Fig. 11. Multiclass classiﬁcation results obtained with different methods on USTC-TFC2016 and The Open HTTPS Dataset.

 (2) The multiple deep features, i.e., content features, statis- 4.5. Evaluation on other encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks
tical features, and sequence features, make different contributions to the classiﬁcation of darknet traﬃc. It can be seen that Although DarknetSec is proposed to classify the encrypted darkthe comprehensive utilization of these three types of features helps net traﬃc of VPN and Tor applications, it is still suitable for other
DarknetSec achieve the best classiﬁcation performance. encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks. To demonstrate the generaliz-
 (3) The multi-head self-attention module in parallel with the ability of DarknetSec, we conduct comparison experiments on two
local spatial-temporal feature extraction module helps to cap- other public datasets, namely, USTC-TFC2016 (Wang et al., 2017)
ture the global intrinsic relationships among the local spatial- and The Open HTTPS Dataset (Wazen Shbair, 2016). Speciﬁcally, as
temporal features extracted from different data positions. Al- shown in Table 6, we choose the benign part of the USTC-TFC2016
though two other methods, i.e., CETAnalytics and BGRUA, also use dataset that has ten traﬃc types in fourteen pcap ﬁles (with a tothe attention mechanism, unlike DarknetSec, they use only a sim- tal size of 3.71 GB) and randomly selected ten HTTPS services with
ple attention layer in a cascaded manner after performing feature more than 10 0 0 network ﬂows from The Open HTTPS Dataset for
extraction, which is equivalent to adding a module for the selec- evaluation. As this is a multiclass classiﬁcation task, we use the
tion of feature importance rather than mining the global inherent Acc and Macro − F 1 metrics to analyze the performance of each
dependencies and hidden connections among the extracted local method.
spatial-temporal features. Fig. 11 (a) and (b) show the Acc and Macro − F 1 values
 In summary, the comparison results demonstrate the superior- of different methods, respectively. FlowPic, CETAnalytics, BGRUA,
ity of DarknetSec in terms of darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation and ap- VGG19+RF and DarknetSec obtain superior performance, revealing
plication identiﬁcation due to the use of the self-attention mecha- that the feature representations learned by these methods are disnism and multiple deep feature learning. tinguishable enough to identify the network applications in these

 14
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

 Table 6 Barratt, M., 2015. A discussion about dark net terminology. Drugs Internet Soc. 15.
 Description of USTC-TFC2016 and The Open HTTPS Dataset used to eval- Biddle, P., England, P., Peinado, M., Willman, B., et al., 2002. The darknet and the fuuate the generalizability of DarknetSec. ture of content distribution. In: ACM Workshop on Digital Rights Management,
 vol. 6, p. 54.
 Dataset Traﬃc types Buxton, J., Bingham, T., 2015. The rise and challenge of dark net drug markets. Policy
 USTC-TFC2016 BitTorrent, Facetime, FTP, Gmail, Brief 7, 1–24.
 Dong, C., Zhang, C., Lu, Z., Liu, B., Jiang, B., 2020. CETAnalytics: comprehensive ef-
 (benign part) MySQL, Outlook, Skype, SMB, Weibo,
 fective traﬃc information analytics for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. Comput.
 WorldOfWarcraft
 Netw. 176, 107258.
 The Open HTTPS www.google.com, r.nexac.com, Fachkha, C., Debbabi, M., 2015. Darknet as a source of cyber intelligence: survey,
 Dataset (10 spanalytics.yahoo.com, ib.adnxs.com, taxonomy, and characterization. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 18 (2), 1197–1227.
 randomly selected bat.bing.com, www.facebook.com, Fang, Y., Li, K., Zheng, R., Liao, S., Wang, Y., 2021. A communication-channel-based
 HTTPS services) bat.bing.com, selfrepair.mozilla.org, method for detecting deeply camouﬂaged malicious traﬃc. Comput. Netw. 197,
 pixel.quantserve.com, tags.tiqcdn.com 108297.
 Habibi Lashkari, A., Kaur, G., Rahali, A., 2020. DIDarknet: a contemporary approach
 to detect and characterize the darknet traﬃc using deep image learning. In:
 2020 the 10th International Conference on Communication and Network Secudatasets. Among them, DarknetSec slightly outperforms the other rity, pp. 1–13.
methods, demonstrating that DarknetSec is also suitable for the Hassan, M.M., Gumaei, A., Alsanad, A., Alrubaian, M., Fortino, G., 2020. A hybrid
conventional network traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks. deep learning model for eﬃcient intrusion detection in big data environment.
 Inf. Sci. 513, 386–396.
 Iglesias, F., Zseby, T., 2017. Pattern discovery in internet background radiation. IEEE
5. Conclusion Trans. Big Data 5 (4), 467–480.
 Iliadis, L.A., Kaifas, T., 2021. Darknet traﬃc classiﬁcation using machine learning
 techniques. In: 2021 10th International Conference on Modern Circuits and Sys-
 In this paper, we propose DarknetSec, which can accurately tems Technologies (MOCAST). IEEE, pp. 1–4.
classify the encrypted network ﬂows of darknet traﬃc using a self- Kanna, P.R., Santhi, P., 2021. Uniﬁed deep learning approach for eﬃcient intrusion
attentive deep learning method. We extract content features from detection system using integrated spatial–temporal features. Knowl. Based Syst.
 226, 107132.
the payload content of packets and side-channel features from pay- Kumar, S., Vranken, H., van Dijk, J., Hamalainen, T., 2019. Deep in the dark: a novel
load statistics. Through multiple deep feature learning, we turn the threat detection system using darknet traﬃc. In: 2019 IEEE International Condarknet application identiﬁcation problem into a typical classiﬁca- ference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, pp. 4273–4279.
 Lin, K., Xu, X., Gao, H., 2021. TSCRNN: a novel classiﬁcation scheme of encrypted
tion task and use hybrid deep learning algorithms to design a powtraﬃc based on ﬂow spatiotemporal features for eﬃcient management of IIoT.
erful classiﬁer. The experiments conducted on the CICDarknet2020 Comput. Netw. 190, 107974.
dataset indicate that DarknetSec performs better than other state- Liu, L., Zhen, J., Li, G., Zhan, G., He, Z., Du, B., Lin, L., 2020. Dynamic spatial-tempoof-the-art methods and can distinguish darknet applications from ral representation learning for traﬃc ﬂow prediction. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
 Syst..
benign applications more accurately. Additionally, we evaluate the Liu, X., You, J., Wu, Y., Li, T., Li, L., Zhang, Z., Ge, J., 2020. Attention-based bidieffectiveness of DarknetSec on other encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation rectional GRU networks for eﬃcient HTTPS traﬃc classiﬁcation. Inf. Sci. 541,
tasks. In the future work, we plan to use more datasets to verify 297–315.
 Montieri, A., Ciuonzo, D., Aceto, G., Pescapé, A., 2018. Anonymity services Tor, I2P,
the effectiveness of DarknetSec and study the impact of network JonDonym: classifying in the dark (web). IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comtraﬃc concept drift on the classiﬁcation performance of Darknet- put. 17 (3), 662–675.
Sec. Montieri, A., Ciuonzo, D., Bovenzi, G., Persico, V., Pescapé, A., 2019. A dive into the
 dark web: hierarchical traﬃc classiﬁcation of anonymity tools. IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Sci. Eng. 7 (3), 1043–1054.
Declaration of Competing Interest Niranjana, R., Kumar, V.A., Sheen, S., 2020. Darknet traﬃc analysis and classiﬁcation
 using numerical AGM and mean shift clustering algorithm. SN Comput. Sci. 1
 (1), 1–10.
 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan- Pacheco, F., Exposito, E., Gineste, M., Baudoin, C., Aguilar, J., 2018. Towards the decial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to ployment of machine learning solutions in network traﬃc classiﬁcation: a sysinﬂuence the work reported in this paper. tematic survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 21 (2), 1988–2014.
 Pinheiro, A.J., Bezerra, J.d.M., Burgardt, C.A., Campelo, D.R., 2019. Identifying IoT devices and events based on packet length from encrypted traﬃc. Comput. Com-
CRediT authorship contribution statement mun. 144, 8–17.
 Pour, M.S., Mangino, A., Friday, K., Rathbun, M., Bou-Harb, E., Iqbal, F., Samtani, S.,
 Jinghong Lan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Crichigno, J., Ghani, N., 2020. On data-driven curation, learning, and analysis for
 inferring evolving internet-of-things (IoT) botnets in the wild. Comput. Secur.
Software, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, 91, 101707.
Writing – review & editing. Xudong Liu: Supervision, Resources, Rao, Z., Niu, W., Zhang, X., Li, H., 2018. Tor anonymous traﬃc identiﬁcation based
Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Bo Li: Funding acqui- on gravitational clustering. Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl. 11 (3), 592–601.
 Sarwar, M.B., Hanif, M.K., Talib, R., Younas, M., Sarwar, M.U., 2021. DarkDetect: darksition, Supervision, Project administration. Yanan Li: Visualization, net traﬃc detection and categorization using modiﬁed convolution-long short-
Software, Validation. Tongtong Geng: Validation, Writing – review -term memory. IEEE Access 9, 113705–113713.
& editing. Shahbar, K., Zincir-Heywood, A.N., 2017. Effects of shared bandwidth on anonymity
 of the I2P network users. In: 2017 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW).
 IEEE, pp. 235–240.
Acknowledgments Shapira, T., Shavitt, Y., 2021. FlowPic: a generic representation for encrypted traﬃc
 classiﬁcation and applications identiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manage. 18
 (2), 1218–1232.
 This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program Shen, M., Liu, Y., Zhu, L., Du, X., Hu, J., 2020. Fine-grained webpage ﬁngerprinting
China (2018YFB0803 503), the 2018 joint Research Foundation using only packet length information of encrypted traﬃc. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forenof Ministry of Education, China Mobile (MCM20180507) and the sics Secur. 16, 2046–2059.
 Shen, M., Zhang, J., Zhu, L., Xu, K., Du, X., 2021. Accurate decentralized application
Opening Project of Shanghai Trusted Industrial Control Platform
 identiﬁcation via encrypted traﬃc analysis using graph neural networks. IEEE
(TICPSH202003020-ZC). Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16, 2367–2380.
 Singh, D., Shukla, A., Sajwan, M., 2021. Deep transfer learning framework for the
References identiﬁcation of malicious activities to combat cyberattack. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 125, 687–697.
Adewopo, V., Gonen, B., Varlioglu, S., Ozer, M., 2019. Plunge into the underworld: a Sirinam, P., Mathews, N., Rahman, M.S., Wright, M., 2019. Triplet ﬁngerprinting:
 survey on emergence of darknet. In: 2019 International Conference on Compu- more practical and portable website ﬁngerprinting with n-shot learning. In:
 tational Science and Computational Intelligence (CSCI). IEEE, pp. 155–159. Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu-
Al-Nabki, M.W., Fidalgo, E., Alegre, E., Fernández-Robles, L., 2019. ToRank: identi- nications Security, pp. 1131–1148.
 fying the most inﬂuential suspicious domains in the Tor network. Expert Syst.
 Appl. 123, 212–226.

 15
J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li et al. Computers & Security 116 (2022) 102663

Stergiopoulos, G., Talavari, A., Bitsikas, E., Gritzalis, D., 2018. Automatic detection of Jinghong Lan is a PhD candidate in the School of Computer Science and Engivarious malicious traﬃc using side channel features on TCP packets. In: Euro- neering, Beihang University, China. He received the MS degree in the School of
 pean Symposium on Research in Computer Security. Springer, pp. 346–362. Cyberspace Security from PLA Information Engineering University in Zhengzhou,
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., China. His current research interests include intrusion detection, machine learning,
 Polosukhin, I., 2017. Attention is all you need. In: Advances in Neural Informa- and deception defense.
 tion Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008.
Wang, W., Zhu, M., Zeng, X., Ye, X., Sheng, Y., 2017. Malware traﬃc classiﬁcation Xudong Liu is a professor in the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beiusing convolutional neural network for representation learning. In: 2017 Inter- hang University, China. His current research interests include machine learning, big
 national Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN). IEEE, pp. 712–717. data and industrial information security.
Wazen Shbair Thibault Cholez, J. F. I. C., 2016. Https websites dataset. http://
 betternet.lhs.loria.fr/datasets/https/.
Wood, J.A., 2009. The darknet: a digital copyright revolution. Rich. JL Tech. 16, 1. Bo Li is an Assistant Professor in the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Xie, G., Li, Q., Jiang, Y., 2021. Self-attentive deep learning method for online traﬃc Beihang University, China. He received the PhD degree in the School of Computer
 classiﬁcation and its interpretability. Comput. Netw. 196, 108267. Science and Engineering from Beihang University. His current research interests in-
Xie, J., Li, S., Yun, X., Zhang, Y., Chang, P., 2020. HSTF-model: an HTTP-based trojan clude industrial information security, mobile and IoT security, and cyber threat indetection model via the hierarchical spatio-temporal features of traﬃcs. Com- telligence.
 put. Secur. 96, 101923.
Yang, J., Zhang, L., Chen, C., Li, Y., Li, R., Wang, G., Jiang, S., Zeng, Z., 2020. A hierar- Yanan Li is a MSc candidate in the School of Computer and Information Secuchical deep convolutional neural network and gated recurrent unit framework rity, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, China. He received the BS degree
 for structural damage detection. Inf. Sci. 540, 117–130. in the School of Cyberspace Security from PLA Information Engineering University
Yang, Z.-b., Zhang, J.-p., Zhao, Z.-b., Zhai, Z., Chen, X.-f., 2020. Interpreting network in Zhengzhou, China. His current research interests include intrusion detection, maknowledge with attention mechanism for bearing fault diagnosis. Appl. Soft chine learning, and knowledge graph technology.
 Comput. 97, 106829.
Yao, H., Liu, C., Zhang, P., Wu, S., Jiang, C., Yu, S., 2019. Identiﬁcation of encrypted Tongtong Geng is a PhD candidate in the School of Economics and Management,
 traﬃc through attention mechanism based long short term memory. IEEE Trans. Xidian University, China. Her received the MS degree in the School of Economics
 Big Data. and Management, Xidian University, China. Her current research interests include
Zheng, H., Lin, F., Feng, X., Chen, Y., 2020. A hybrid deep learning model with at- sharing economy business model, machine learning, and big data research.
 tention-based Conv-LSTM networks for short-term traﬃc ﬂow prediction. IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst..

 16