Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic Classification
 and Unknown Data Detection
 Madushi H. Pathmaperuma, Yogachandran Rahulamathavan, Senior Member, IEEE, Safak Dogan, Senior
 Member, IEEE, Ahmet M. Kondoz, Senior Member, IEEE, and Rongxing Lu, Fellow, IEEE,

 Abstract— Despite the widespread use of encryption techniques to information revealed by network traffic patterns such as frame
provide confidentiality over Internet communications, mobile device length, inter arrival time and direction (incoming/ outgoing).
users are still susceptible to privacy and security risks. In this paper, a These are known as side channel data and can be used to reveal
new Deep Neural Network (DNN) based user activity detection private information related to user’s online behaviour.
framework is proposed to identify fine grained user activities Users perform various activities using apps installed on their
performed on mobile applications (known as in-app activities) from a mobile devices. Different in-app activities have different
sniffed encrypted Internet traffic stream. One of the challenges is that network behaviours [3], generating different traffic flow
there are countless applications, and it is practically impossible to statistics such as maximum frame length, mean interarrival time
collect and train a DNN model using all possible data from them. etc. These statistical features can be used to fingerprint the in-
Therefore, in this work we exploit the probability distribution of DNN
 app activities and later identify them in generic network traces.
output layer to filter the data from applications that are not considered
 Network traffic classification methods have evolved
during the model training (i.e., unknown data). The proposed
 significantly over time from port based, Deep Packet Inspection
framework uses a time window based approach to divide the traffic flow
 (DPI) to Machine Learning (ML) methods. Increasing use of
of an activity into segments, so that in-app activities can be identified
just by observing only a fraction of the activity related traffic. Our tests
 encryption protocols such as Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and its
have shown that the DNN based framework has demonstrated an
 successor Transport Layer Security (TLS) as well as dynamic
accuracy of 90% or above in identifying previously trained in-app ports create new challenges for accurate traffic classification,
activities and an average accuracy of 79% in identifying previously defeating DPI and port-based methods [4]. Classifiers based on
untrained in-app activity traffic as unknown data when this framework classical ML algorithms such as Random Forest, J48 and Bayes
is employed. Net are considered appropriate to classify encrypted network
 Index Terms—Encrypted Traffic Classification, Mobile Data, traffic [4]. However, the traditional ML algorithms require
Network Analysis, Deep Neural Network. complex feature engineering techniques to reach better accuracy
 [4]. On the other hand, Deep Learning (DL) can optimize the
 I. INTRODUCTION feature engineering by itself. Moreover, as shown in Section III-
 D the probability distribution of output layer of Deep Neural
SMARTPHONES have increasingly become the primary user Networks (DNN) can be exploited to filter noise and/or
devices for accessing the Internet in recent years. Both mobile unknown data samples.
websites and applications (aka apps) can be accessed via a With this motivation, we propose a novel framework for
mobile device. Usually, users prefer using apps installed on their identifying in-app activities with DNN in encrypted traffic
devices instead of accessing the corresponding websites from conditions in this paper. Identification of the activities performed
web browsers due to better personalization, speed and easy by users on mobile apps can be used to profile a mobile user’s
access offered by mobile apps. Thus, web browsers have largely
 habits. This is useful for user reconnaissance within networks
been replaced by mobile apps for interacting with most online
 and in aggregated form, for marketing or intelligence purposes.
services such as social networking, finances, and media
streaming. According to [1], it is shown that mobile users spend The proposed method is based on DL, which is a representation
nearly 90% of their time on mobile apps compared to websites. learning method [5]. The main contributions of our paper are
 Mobile devices are often connected to IEEE 802.11 Wire-less summarized below.
Local Area Networks (WLAN). Wireless networks employ
security protocols such as Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), Wi- • There is a wide variety of app categories, from social
Fi Protected Access (WPA), WPA2 and WPA3 to secure the networking to lifestyle, games, entertainment, health,
wireless connection and most networks are protected by strong education, finance etc. It is impractical to train ML
passwords [2]. Even though these security protocols are used to algorithms for such a wide range and for each in-app
encrypt data, it is still possible to passively sniff wireless network activity in those applications. When deploying an in-app
traffic and infer sensitive information of users such as the activity classification framework in a real world setting, the
activities performed within apps, location of the user, websites framework needs to identify a set of applications and
visited by the user etc [3]. This is because even though activities within those applications while earmarking
encryption protects the packet’s payload, it does not hide previously untrained activities as unknown data traffic. In
 majority of the existing work in literature, ML algorithms
 ---------------------------------------------------------------- were trained and tested on the same set of applications,
 which renders them unfit for filtering previously unknown
• The dataset obtained for this work is available at traffic. The proposed framework in our work is capable
 https://www.dropbox.com/s/9tihcj9wx2sia1t/Dataset.7z?dl= of handling network traffic analysis accurately in the
 0 presence of noise generated by the unknown traffic.
 Further, this framework can provide the percentage of
• Madhushi, Safak, Yogachandran, and Ahmet are with
 unknown traffic in a given dataset and how the unknown
 Institute for Digital Technologies, Loughborough traffic gets misclassified as previously trained in-app
 University, UK. Emails: -{ o.m.h.pathmaperuma, activities.
 s.dogan, y.rahulmathavan, and a.kondoz}@lboro.ac.uk. • In attempt to detect in-app activities, there may be instances
• Rongxing is with Faculty of Computer Science, University where an eavesdropper captures the network traffic
 of New Brunswick, Canada. Email :- RLU1@unb.ca partially rather than the entire transaction, as user activity
 may well be already underway [6]. In those cases, most
 existing work in literature fails to detect an activity if its This combination of RNN and CNN model attained an accuracy
 signature does not fall into the captured window. The of 96%.
 proposed framework can identify fine grained in-app In [5], an end-to-end encrypted traffic classification model
 activities even by observing a subset of an activity’s with 1D CNN was proposed. Feature extraction, feature selection
 traffic. and classifier were integrated into a single framework in the
Existing work focuses on either coarse grained activities such as model, which automatically learnt non-linear relationship
browsing, downloading, uploading etc. [7] or generic activities between the raw input and expected output. This model was
such as posting on Instagram, messaging on WhatsApp etc. [8], validated with the ISCX public dataset and showed a significant
[9], [10]. Our research advances the state-of-the-art by improvement over the C4.5 ML method.
identifying fine grained user in-app activities in encrypted In [15], DataNet was introduced as an application aware
network traffic. As such, e.g., when a generic WhatsApp activity framework for smart home networks. It was developed and
‘sending a message’ is considered, it can determine whether this evaluated using three deep learning based approaches, namely
message is a long text, short text, image, video, or voice multilayer perceptron, stacked autoencoder, and CNN.
recording. This level of classification is challenging when Experiments were conducted using the ISCX public dataset with
performed using metadata in an encrypted domain as it requires encrypted data samples from 15 applications. The experimental
deep traffic pattern inspection. However, it provides valuable results showed that recall, precision, and f1 score were all greater
information for an analyst to identify the users, where than 92%.
confidential information is retained. The proposed framework A Server Name Identification (SNI) classification technique
can identify 92 in-app activities from eight distinct was proposed in [16], using HTTPS features (packet sizes,
applications. payload sizes, inter-arrival times, direction). The model
 • A comprehensive dataset was created by performing a consisted of a combination of RNN and CNN and obtained an
 series of actions on apps such as Facebook, Instagram, accuracy of 82.3%.
 WhatsApp, Viber, Messenger, Gmail, Skype and Aceto et al. proposed two frameworks named MIMETIC [17]
 YouTube. To foster new studies and allow reproducing and DISTILLER [18]. MIMETIC takes two inputs namely data
 of the results presented, the dataset is shared openly payload and protocol/time series features. The DL model
 with the research community. captures patterns in both input viewpoints to perform traffic
 (https://www.dropbox.com/s/9tihcj9wx2sia1t/Dataset.7z? classification. Multitask and multimodal DL is adapted to devise
 dl=0) the DISTILLER to perform mobile app classification. In [19],
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II, FS-Net an end-to-end model was proposed that learns features
the related work is reviewed to position the above listed from the raw flow sequences and makes classification to identify
contributions within literature. Section III describes the flows. FS-Net achieves a True Positive Rate of 99.14% in
methodology of the proposed classification system using DL. identifying 18 applications.
Sections IV present experimental results and discussions. In [20], a traffic classification method based on CNN was
Finally, Section V concludes the paper. proposed. This method used the NetFlow and packet based
 features to identify Quick UDP Internet Connection (QUIC)
 II. RELATED WORKS protocol based services such as Google Hangout chat, Google
 Conti et al. [8] developed a framework to infer user actions Hangout voice call, YouTube, File transfer and Google Play
executed on mobile apps based on packet sizes and their order music. The experiments demonstrated that this method could
information. Park and Kim [9] target KakaoTalk, a mobile detect five kinds of QUIC based services with an accuracy
instant messaging service and proposed a framework to infer approximately 99%. This work uses NetFlow based features that
user activities by passive analysis of network traffic. leads to an increase in the runtime of processing and
Saltaformaggio et al. [10] proposed NetScope, a tool to identify
 classification. Using all packets in the traffic flows is another
user activities generated by mobile apps, based on the statistics
originated from the Internet Protocol (IP) headers. The disadvantage in this work, as this causes obstacles when the
AppScanner [11] framework was implemented for real time number of packets in flows is large.
identification of Android apps from encrypted network traffic. In [21], a framework called ‘ActiveTracker’ was proposed to
All these methods employ classical ML algorithms such as k- recognize app trajectory over the encrypted Internet traffic
nearest neighbour and random forest. However, their streams. Experiments were conducted based on real world
performance heavily depends on human generated features encrypted mobile traffic as well as synthetic traffic. The
which is significantly time consuming and limited in proposed DNN based classification model which consisted of an
generalizability. app filter and an activity classifier achieved up to 79.65% in
 DL obviates the need to perform feature selection by a domain recognizing app trajectory from a long traffic stream.
expert and it has a higher capacity to learn highly complicated Table I presents a summary of the existing body of research in
patterns compared to traditional ML methods. Recent work has this domain as discussed above. The variety of work in literature
demonstrated the efficacy of DL methods to perform traffic
 primarily focused on classifying previously trained traffic while
classification. In [12], a framework named ‘Deep Packet’ was
 none has targeted providing network traffic analysis accurately
presented that achieved both traffic characterization, where the
network traffic was categorized into major classes (e.g., FTP and in the presence of noise generated by unknown traffic, albeit this
P2P), and application identification (e.g., BitTorrent and Skype). would be a typical situation encountered in a real world scenario.
Deep Packet framework embedded Stacked Autoencoder (SAE) Thus, our work is aimed at advancing the state-of-the-art by
and One Dimensional Convolutional Neural Networks (1D identifying previously trained fine grained in-app activities
CNN) to classify network traffic. Experiments were conducted accurately as well as detecting and classifying previously
using the ISCX public dataset [13] and the model achieved a unknown in-app activities as unknown data. As such, the
recall rate of 0.98 in application identification task and 0.94 in proposed model performs classification based on a few frames
traffic categorization task. of the encrypted traffic flow rather than considering the entire
 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) and CNN were applied to flow of a transaction. The experimental results of this work are
perform application level identification in [14]. Their DL model compared with those of the state-of-the-art methods [12], [16] to
used packet level features such as ports, payload bytes, TCP
 validate the performance of our proposed model.
window size, inter arrival times of packets and packet direction.
 TABLE I
 POSITIONING OF THE PROPOSED WORK WITH RESPECT TO THE EXISTING BODY OF RESEARCH IN LITERATURE

 Research Encrypted Unknown Classification type Classification Results Dataset type Accuracy
 article traffic data based on subset compared
 detection of traffic with the stateof-the-art
 methods
 [12] Traffic But not DL ISCX Traffic
 characterization and methods characterization
 application 94%, app
 identification 98%
 [14] Service (HTTP, First 20 RedIRIS 96%
 DNS, Telnet, etc.) packets
 [5] Traffic First 784 But not DL ISCX 86%
 characterization bytes of a flow methods
 session
 [15] Application ISCX 93% - 98%
 precision. accuracy
 not given
 [16] SNI Sequence Private 82.3%
 length 25
 [17] Application 3 Private 79.98%, 89.49%,
 datasets 89.14%
 [18] Traffic type and ISCX 93.75%
 application
 [19] Application MaMPF 99.14% True
 positive rate
 [20] QUIC based services Private 99%
 [21] App trajectory But not DL Private 79.65%
 methods
 This Application and Openly 90% to 95%
 paper Activity shared

 III. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY Data collection for each activity was repeated four times to
 In this work, a framework is proposed that comprises deep generate sufficient amount of traffic flows for inference. The
learning methods, namely DNN for in-app activity identification. number of samples obtained for Facebook, Skype and YouTube
This framework consists of four phases, namely the data is greater. This is because Facebook has lots of activities
collection, pre-process, training, and test phases. The pre-process compared to other apps; YouTube mainly has video related
phase transforms the raw traffic data to the required input format
 activities such as video watching, uploading, and downloading;
for training. At the training phase, a neural network is trained
 Skype has activities such as taking audio and video calls, sending
using a labelled training dataset and at the test phase, the pretrained model’s performance is evaluated based on its video clips. These activities generate lots of traffic. The captured
classification of previously trained and untrained apps’ traffic network traffic was saved as .pcap files. To obtain the ground
flows. truth, network traffic generated after executing each activity was
 collected separately and the network trace was labelled with the
A. Data Collection name of the activity performed. To minimize traffic noise, only
 A comprehensive dataset was collected through recording a the traffic generated by a target app was captured while no other
series of user actions performed via eight mobile apps, whose apps were allowed to run in the background.
features are presented in Table II. The number of samples for In this research, the network was monitored passively, and the
each app is obtained when the traffic flows are segmented into network traffic was captured without connecting to the WLAN
0.5sec window size. to which the target user’s smartphone was connected. To this
 TABLE II end, Airmon-ng and Airodump-ng sniffing tools from the
APP FEATURES RECORDED DURING DATA COLLECTIONS Aircrack-ng [22] suite was used to sniff the network traffic
 transmitting within a wireless network. Network adapters were
 App Category Number of Number of set only to capture packets that were sent to them. Therefore, the
 activities samples network adapter was set to the monitoring mode to capture all
 Facebook Social networking 22 19,944 traffic. Encrypted traffic was sniffed on the same WLAN channel
 Instagram Photo and video 20 6,818 as the access point. Fig. 1 shows the experimental testbed used
 YouTube Photo and video 9 14,501 to sniff traffic. The smartphone was provided access to the
 WhatsApp Social networking 9 436 Internet over a wireless connection via a router. To avoid other
 Viber Social networking 9 690 sources of interference, the smartphone was connected to the
 Gmail Productivity 5 1,036 WLAN exclusively.
 Skype Social networking 8 15,703
 Messenger Social networking 10 6,061
 Total: 8 apps 92 65,189
 time window sizes were set, and the classification accuracies
 were checked against those. The obtained results are presented
 in Section IV-A. This provides the opportunity for an
 eavesdropper to detect in-app activities even by observing only
 a part of an activity’s traffic.

 C. Neural Network Architecture
 In this work, a DNN has been used for performing necessary
 classifications. As shown in Fig. 2, the first layer of the DNN is
 an input layer which contains the set of features. The two
 characteristics of traffic considered in this research were the
 frame length and frame inter arrival time measured in bytes and
 seconds, respectively. For each of these 12 different statistics
 (minimum, maximum, standard deviation, first quartile, second
 quartile, third quartile, mean, median absolute deviation,
 variance, skew, kurtosis, sum) were calculated separately in the
Fig. 1. Test setup for traffic data collection uplink and downlink channels. Hence, in total 48 features (12
 statistics x 2 directions x 2 characteristics) were considered as
B. Data Pre-processing
 input to the DNN (see the input layer Fig. 2). Python Pandas
 Before training the model, it is required to prepare the
 library [26] was used to compute these features. The final output
network traffic data so that it can be fed suitably to the neural
 layer is a layer of nodes that produces the output variables in a
network. For this, a pre-processing phase was performed on the
 DNN setup. In this work, the output layer consisted of 92 nodes
dataset prepared, with the following steps.
 which is equal to the number of in-app activities considered in
 this work (see the output layer Fig. 2).
a) Data frame filtering
 There are three IEEE 802.11 frame types, namely data,
control, and management. Among all, only the data frames are
used to carry data during communication, while presence of the
other two may hinder the analysis process. Therefore, at this
stage management and control frames are eliminated from
analysis and remaining data frames are processed further.

b) Obtaining error free frames
 Wireless traffic typically suffers from high rates of
retransmissions due to packet losses [23]. Packet retransmission
may change the traffic pattern of an application. Studies that use
statistical features of an entire flow are resistant to a few of the
unrelated packets, while methods that use only a few packets to
perform classification may be affected more [24]. Since our work
is based on using only a part of the activity related traffic for
classification, the retransmission frames were filtered out and
only error free frames were processed further. Fig. 2. Neural network architecture.
c) Data normalization Construction of a neural network involves several critical
 Data normalization is a step that is crucial to DL performance.
 decisions such as the number of hidden layers, number of nodes
Feature scaling aka standardization is performed to normalize the
 in each hidden layer, choice of activation function etc. The
data. The dataset contains feature values that are different in
scale. The variables with larger ranges will dominate over those performance of a model can vary considerably according to the
with small ranges, leading to biased results. Therefore, to selected set of hyper parameters. There is no rule for deciding
equalize the importance of all features, standardization is applied the hyperparameters of a DNN model. Therefore, a series of tests
on the feature values to bring them into the same scale. This also were performed with different hyperparameter values. It was
allows DL methods to converge faster. Standard scaler [25] was observed that when the complexity of the model is increased with
used to standardize a feature by subtracting the mean and then increasing number of hidden layers and node values, the time it
scaling to unit variance. Below formula is used to perform the takes to train the model also increases. However, when the
standardization: structure is simple it suffers from reduced training and validation
 X’ = (X - μ) / σ (1) accuracies. After conducting several experiments and analyses,
where, X’ is the normalized value of the feature, X is the original we present the results obtained from the following DNN
value, μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the feature architecture in Table III. This architecture can be optimized to
values, respectively.
 increase the accuracy.
d) Traffic Segmentation TABLE III
 During in-app activity detection, it is not possible to ensure THE RESULTING MODEL
that the entire transaction of a user activity may be observed.
This is because there can be instances where the eavesdropper Parameter Values
may start capturing the traffic while the target user is in the Number of hidden layers 4
middle of performing an activity. In these situations, the Number of nodes in each [1024, 512, 256, 128]
eavesdropper will observe only a part of the transaction instead layer
of its entirety. Therefore, instead of considering the traffic Activation functions Hidden layers – Tanh
generated by the entire user transaction, a short window was used Output layer - Softmax
to divide the traffic into shorter segments. In this work, different Loss function Categorical cross entropy
 Optimizer Adam
 Batch size 2048 satisfies a pre-set threshold value. Based on this, the known and
 Number of epochs 100 unknown instances get classified. However, setting this
 threshold is challenging, as setting it too high increases false
 The proposed DNN model architecture consists of four negatives whereas setting it too low increases the false positives.
hidden layers made up of 1024, 512, 256 and 128 neurons. All Refer to Section IV-C for further details.
layers employ Tanh as the activation function, except for the Parallel to this work, we also tested the performance of this
final softmax classifier layer. To prevent overfitting, the dropout approach using CNN architecture in our previous work [29].
technique was employed with a 0.3 dropout rate. During the
training phase, the dropout technique randomly sets a series of IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
the neurons to zero. Therefore, at each iteration there is a random
set of active neurons [12]. In this section, performance evaluation of the proposed
 framework is presented. The performance evaluation is twofold:
D. Classification Technique to Identify Untrained In-app
Activities • When previously trained in-app activities are input to the
 Identifying untrained in-app activities as unknown traffic is model, it should be able to detect them accurately.
 • When previously untrained in-app activities are input to the
one of the key contributions of this work. For this purpose, the
 model, it should be able to identify them as unknown data.
trained model given in Table III is used and the probability
distribution of the output layer has been exploited. The technique To develop the proposed DNN, the Keras library [27] was
used to detect noise generated by previously untrained in-app used with TensorFlow [28] as its backend. The training dataset
activities is shown in Fig. 3. consisted of network traffic from in-app activities of the
 Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, Viber, WhatsApp, Gmail,
 Skype and Messenger apps. The training dataset was split into
 two subsets: the first one which included 80% of the total training
 samples was used for training while the second contained the
 remaining 20% of the samples was used for validation. The
 validation performed during the training phase aimed to
 determine how well the model could identify previously trained
 in-app activities. In the testing phase, the model’s capability to
 identify previously untrained in-app activities as unknown data
 was checked.

 To evaluate the performance of the trained model, the
 accuracy metric was computed by:
 True Positives + True Negatives
 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 =
 Total no.of known instances
 (2)
Fig. 3. Noise detection framework.

 When input traffic is presented, the model’s output layer can 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑛 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎
 True Negatives
predict the probability of the data instance belonging to each =
class. The number of nodes in the output layer is equal to the Total no. of unknown instances
 (3)
number of classes in the pre-trained model. Let us denote this as
N_out. Hence, for each input data, the DNN architecture outputs
N_out number of values. The values are between 0 and 1, and A. In-app Activity Detection
since these are probabilities, they add up to 1. Getting a value 1 The DNN model architecture proposed in Table III was used
and 0 represents the likelihood of the observation belonging to a to perform in-app activity identification. Instead of considering
class is 100% and 0%, respectively. Typically, for any given the entire traffic flow generated by a user transaction, traffic was
input, one node is expected to have a value higher than the rest divided into shorter segments. In this work, four different time
of the other output nodes. In Fig. 3 the node with the highest window sizes were considered to divide the flows. They are
probability is denoted as P max. The decision for converting a 0.5sec, 0.2sec, 0.05sec and 0.02sec. Classification accuracies
predicted probability into a class label is governed by a obtained for the 92 in-app activities were checked against these
parameter referred to as the threshold. If the P max is less than window sizes and are reported in Table IV.
the threshold value, then the input traffic flow is considered as
an unknown instance. The reason for this is that the model is not TABLE IV
highly confident. By setting a threshold on the positive class, it IN-APP ACTIVITY CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE
determines whether the input data belongs to one of those trained
output nodes, which translates into one of the pre-trained in-app Window Total Training Validation
activities or not. size samples accuracy accuracy
 To test the impact of threshold value on model’s performance, 0.5 sec 65,189 97% 93%
a range of threshold values were selected, and tests were 0.2 sec 231,824 97% 95%
performed. The threshold value that contributes to achieving the 0.05 sec 1,876,624 94% 91%
highest classification accuracy was selected as reported in 0.02 sec 7,067,363 93% 90%
Section IV-C.
 Use of threshold at the output layer to exploit the phenomenon From the experimental results, it was observed that the
is novel. Because typically in classification tasks, the node with validation accuracy is the highest when the window size is
the highest probability will be chosen and the corresponding 0.2sec. This is because when the flows are split into 0.2sec sizes,
class label gets assigned. In this research, we use a two stage we were able to obtain plenty of samples compared to the 0.5sec
approach to check if the node with the highest probability split. Training the model with a greater number of samples led to
an increase in accuracy. However, when the traffic flows were shaded in dark blue and those that have the low percentages are
further split into 0.05sec and 0.02sec windows, even though the in light blue.
number of samples increased, we can see the accuracies have
decreased. This is because when the splitting window size gets
smaller, the number of frames in those window segments also TABLE VI
reduces. When frames are considered individually [7] or when CONFUSION MATRIX REPRESENTING
the number of frames is small, they contain very little MISCLASSIFICATIONS (% VALUES)
information leading to a direct negative effect on the accuracies.
Furthermore, when the split size gets smaller, time it takes to
train and test the models increases. This is because when the
window size is smaller, the traffic flows are divided into larger
number of segments, which take more time to process and train
the produced traffic flows. However, for all the above mentioned
window sizes, the model was able to obtain an accuracy of 90%
or above. This shows the possibility of the proposed model’s
ability to identify in-app activities even by observing only a
small subset of an activity’s traffic.

B. Unknown In-app Activities Detection Looking at Table VI, the majority of the misclassified data
 In this work, a total of eight apps are considered. From the was assigned to Facebook. More than 33% of the misclassified
collected dataset, two separate sub datasets: training dataset and traffic from YouTube, Skype, Messenger, and Instagram test
test dataset were created. At each instance, one of the apps was apps belongs to Facebook. The reason for this is shown in Fig. 4
selected and separated to be used in the test dataset and the (a), where the corelation graphs of Facebook vs those four apps
remaining seven apps were used in the training dataset. Training are presented. In Fig. 4(a) the points are closely packed. This
dataset was used to train the model. To test how well the model means the strength of the correlation is high among these apps
was capable of detecting “unknown” traffic, the test dataset with with Facebook, which has caused them to get misclassified as
the previously untrained in-app activities was input to the model. Facebook traffic. Facebook Inc.’s apps (i.e., Facebook,
Values obtained at each test instance are seen in Table V. Instagram, and Messenger) use FB-Zero protocol. Most of
 misclassifications occur within the same protocol group, that is
 TABLE V wrongly assigning to a flow a label of an app using the same
 NOISE DETECTION RATES OF UNKNOWN IN-APP protocol.
 ACTIVITIES

 Test The apps used to train The app not used Noise
 no. the DNN model. in model training. detecti
 on
 T1 I, Y, G, M, S, W, V F 88%
 T2 F, I, G, M, S, W, V Y 62%
 T3 F, Y, G, M, S, W, V I 75%
 T4 F, I, Y, M, S, W, V G 91%
 T5 F, I, Y, G, S, W, V M 75%
 T6 F, I, Y, G, M, W, V S 63%
 T7 F, I, Y, G, M, S, W V 91%
 T8 F, I, Y, G, M, S, V W 85%

 In Table V, Facebook, YouTube, Viber, Gmail, Skype,
Messenger, Instagram, and WhatsApp apps are denoted by F, Y,
V, G, S, M, I and W letters, respectively. Considering all the tests
reported in the table, the model achieved an average of 79% in
detecting noise. When Gmail and Viber were input to the model
as test traffic, most of its traffic got correctly classified as
unknown resulting a high noise detection rate. However, most of
the YouTube and Skype test traffic got misclassified as one of
the already trained classes resulting in a low noise detection rate.
In test T2, 62% of the YouTube traffic has been detected
correctly as unknown traffic/noise. The remaining 38% of the
traffic was incorrectly classified as activities that contain in the
training dataset.
 To have a better insight into the nature of the misclassified
traffic, the apps to which test (unknown) traffic got classified
were further analysed. The results are presented in Table VI in
percentages. For example, 12% of the data from F is classified
as known data (see T1 in Table V). The distribution of this 12%
of the misclassified data from F is shown in the first row in Table
VI. Majority (34% and 33%) of this data are assigned to S
(Skype) and Y (YouTube) respectively. The apps that contribute
to the misclassification with the highest percentage value are
Fig. 4. Correlation graphs of applications (a) correlation of Facebook distribution of instances. For any given input instance, one node
with YouTube, Skype, Messenger and Instagram. (b) correlation of in the model would result in having a probability value higher
Gmail with Viber and WhatsApp. (c) correlation of Skype vs than the rest of the output nodes. This is refereed as the
YouTube. confidence value. The number of known and unknown instances
 that falls under each confidence value is obtained to plot the
Apps that are highly correlated with each other have similar in- histogram depicted in Fig. 5. This demonstrates that the majority
app activities with similar behaviour. For example, when of the input data associated with the known data (orange
Instagram was input to the model as the test data, majority of coloured bars) is skewed towards the higher probability, the
(34%) of the misclassified traffic was labelled as Facebook. This majority of unknown data is distributed uniformly in the lower
is because, both these social networking apps provide similar probabilities. This demonstrates that setting a threshold at
functionalities such as posting on wall, liking posts, commenting probability closer to 1 will be able to remove majority of
on posts, adding stories etc. Therefore, it is likely that having unknown data. Following tests with several threshold values, it
similar in-app activities to cause the Instagram samples to be was observed that when the threshold value was set to 0.97, the
misclassified as part of the Facebook traffic. model reached the most optimum operating point characterized
 To get a better insight into the misclassification, the in-app by the set of highest training accuracy, validation accuracy and
activities that cause such misclassification among these apps are unknown data detection rate. This is detectable in the area
considered. When YouTube is the test app, the highest number indicated by the red bounding box in the Fig. 5, where the
of misclassified instances comes from Facebook live in-app
activity (21%), as YouTube has a similar activity, which is
uploading a video. 86% of the YouTube traffic is from this
activity. For Skype, Messenger, and Instagram, the highest
number of misclassified instances 25%, 21%, 21% respectively
come from YouTube video uploading in-app activity. Video
support is available in all the three test apps, and thus having such
similar in-app activity has caused the misclassification.
 When Gmail is considered as the test app, only 9% of the
unknown traffic was misclassified as previously trained class
labels. 1% of the misclassified traffic was labelled as traffic
belonging to WhatsApp, and another 1% was labelled as traffic
belonging to Viber. This means that the lowest misclassified
Gmail unknown traffic came from WhatsApp and Viber. On the
other hand, when WhatsApp and Viber are considered as test
 selected threshold value resulted in the highest number of known
apps, 2% of the misclassified traffic was labelled as Gmail. This
 and unknown data samples. This means most of the positive
is because of the inherently distinctive dissimilarities in the
 instances showed a high confidence level during the
activities between Gmail-Viber and Gmail-WhatsApp. This
 classification phase. Higher the confidence level of the instances,
means that the correlation of Viber and WhatsApp with Gmail is
 greater the accuracy of the results obtained from the model.
low. This has been demonstrated by the correlation graphs of Fig.
4 (b). It can be observed that the points are distributed loosely Fig. 5. Confidence distribution of training and testing data.
which means the considered apps are only slightly correlated to
each other. D. Performance Comparison with the State-of-the-art
 When Skype is provided as the unknown test dataset to the For the performance comparison of our framework with the
model, 37% of Skype traffic was misclassified as trained class state-of-the-art, two best matching models have been considered,
labels. 29% of the misclassified traffic was labelled as YouTube. namely Bayat et al. model and Deep Packet model. For a fair
After Facebook, this is the second highest misclassified class comparison, the same dataset generated in our research was also
label of Skype. On the other hand, when YouTube is considered, used for traffic classification employed in these selected DL
38% of the unknown YouTube test traffic was misclassified as models.
trained class labels. 31% of the misclassified traffic was labelled The model proposed by Bayat et al. [16] consists of a
as Skype. This is the second highest misclassified class label of combination of RNN and CNN. The first two layers are 1D
YouTube. To understand the cause of the misclassification convolutional layers with 200 and 400 filters respectively, which
between Skype and YouTube, we obtained the corelation graphs employ the ReLU activation function. Each 1D CNN layer is
of the two apps. As shown in Fig. 4 (c), a high correlation followed by a batch normalization to speed up the learning phase.
between Skype and YouTube can be noted, which has caused Next, Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with 200 hidden units is
this misclassification. included to process sequences of variable length. GRU layer is
 From the experiments reported above to detect unknown followed by two fully connected layers with 200 and 63
traffic, it is evident that the proposed model can effectively (matching the number of classes in our work) hidden units,
identify previously untrained in-app activity traffic as unknown respectively. Sigmoid and Softmax activation functions are used
data with an average accuracy of 79%. Misclassification is for the two fully connected layers, respectively. Dropout
caused by apps that have high correlation among each other due between the fully connected layers is used to reduce over fitting.
to their similar network behaviours and having similar in-app The model was trained for 100 epochs and used a batch size of
activities. Apps from the same provider and sharing the same 64, Adam optimizer and categorical cross entropy loss. This
underlying protocols also cause traffic misclassification. model is used in this research to perform in-app activity
 classification. When this model was tested with the dataset
C. Threshold Selection generated in this study, an accuracy of 81% was obtained.
 To obtain a calibrated and robust indication of the model’s The Deep Packet model presented by Lotfollahi et al. [12]
performance, the confidence distribution of all the known and comprises two deep learning methods, namely CNN and SAE.
unknown data instances were examined. The probability output The SAE architecture consists of five dense layers with 400, 300,
by the model’s output layer is used to obtain the confidence 200, 100 and 50 neurons respectively. All five dense layers
employ the ReLU activation function. After each dense layer, the 79%. The proposed windowing approach enables the model to
dropout technique is employed with 0.05 dropout rate to avoid perform classification based on a few frames of the traffic flow
over fitting. In the final layer, a Softmax classifier with 63 instead of the entire flow of a transaction. This is significantly a
neurons (matching the number of classes in our work) is applied harder task, since there is more information in the entire traffic
for the classification task. The 1D CNN model of [12] consists flow compared to a part of the flow. This feature allows our
of two convolutional layers with 200 filters, followed by a model to be more applicable in real world situations. Because
pooling layer. Then, the Two Dimensional (2D) tensor is when detecting in-app activities, there may be instances where
squashed into a 1D vector and fed into a network of three dense an eavesdropper starts capturing the traffic while the target user’s
layers which also employ the dropout technique. All these layers activity is already underway, which leads to observing only a part
employ the ReLU activation function. Finally, a Softmax of the activity related traffic. Further, classifications were
classifier is applied to perform the classification. For this CNN performed only considering side channel data statistics, without
model, the number of neurons of the three dense layers are not decryption or using any header information. The novel approach
provided. Therefore, the number of neurons of the first three of using threshold on the confidence values exploits the output
dense layers (1024, 512, 256) of our proposed model have also layer of the trained DNN model to identify in-app activities while
been utilized for the performance comparison tests. removing unknown in-app activity traffic.
 In both models considered in [12], batch normalization was As future work, we plan to convert the encrypted traffic flow
used to speed up the learning phase. Categorical cross entropy sequences into multi channel images, and then to apply DL
and Adam were used as the loss function and optimizer, models on the generated images to perform traffic classification.
respectively. SAE model was trained for 200 epochs and CNN
was trained for 300 epochs. The batch size was not available in REFERENCES
this work, thus the batch size obtained for the model of our
 [1] Flurry Analytics, comScore, Pandora, Facebook, NetMarketShare,
framework was also used here, which was 2048. These models https://www.marketingcharts.com/industries/media-and-entertainare used in this research to perform in-app activity classification. ment58693/attachment/ flurry-share-time-spent-mobile-devices-sept 2015,
When the SAE and CNN models were tested with the dataset 2021.
generated in this study, accuracies of 34% and 32% were [2] Al-Mejibli, I.S. and N.R. Alharbe, “Analyzing and evaluating the security
 standards in wireless network: a review study”. Iraqi Journal for Com-puters
obtained, respectively. and Informatics, 46(1), pp.32-39, 2020.
 [3] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust
 TABLE VII smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH THE STATE-OF-THE- Transac-tions on Information Forensics and Security, 13(1), pp.63-78, 2017.
 ART [4] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri and A. Pescapé, “Mobile Encrypted
 Traffic Classification Using Deep Learning,” Network Traffic Measure-ment
 Paper Architecture Accuracy Accuracy with and Analysis Conference (TMA), Vienna, pp. 1-8, doi:
 10.23919/TMA.2018.8506558, 2018.
 with original our dataset [5] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted
 dataset traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural net-works,”
 [16] 1D CNN and 82.3 % 81% IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security In-formatics
 RNN (ISI), Beijing, pp. 43-48, doi: 10.1109/ISI.2017.8004872, 2017
 [12] 1D CNN 98% 32% [6] M.H. Pathmaperuma, Y. Rahulamathavan, S. Dogan, and A.M. Kondoz,
 “In-App Activity Recognition from Wi-Fi Encrypted Traffic,” in: Arai K.,
 SAE 95% 34% Kapoor S., Bhatia R. (eds) Intelligent Computing. SAI 2020. Advances in
 This DNN 93% 93% Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol 1228. Springer, Cham.
 paper https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-52249-0_46, 2020.
 [7] Zhang, F., He, W., Liu, X., And Bridges, P. G. “Inferring users’ online
 ac-tivities through traffic analysis”. In Proc. ACM Conference on Wireless
 Table VII shows the accuracy values obtained from the Network Security, 2011.
models introduced in [16] and [12] when they are tested using [8] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing
their original datasets reported vs when tested using the dataset Android encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE on
generated in our study. The datasets used in the referenced works Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.114–125, January
were not publicly available for our use to test our model. The 2016.
results presented show that there is a significant decrease in [9] K. Park and H. Kim, “Encryption is not enough: Inferring user activities
 on KakaoTalk with traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 16th Interna-tional
accuracies when the two selected state-of-the-art models are used Workshop on Information Security Applications, ser. WISA ’15, H.-W. Kim
to perform in-app activity identification using the dataset and D. Choi, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 254–265, 2015.
generated in this research. As these models consider the same [10] Saltaformaggio, B., Choi, H., Johnson, K., Kwon, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhang,
data to perform training and testing, they suffer when unknown X., Xu, D., Qian, J.: “Eavesdropping on fine-grained user activities within
data is presented. smartphone apps over encrypted network traffic”. In: WOOT'16 Proceedings of the 10th USENIX Conference on Offensive Technologies, pp 69-
 In this work the dataset is collected, and the model is tested 78. USENIX Association Berkeley, CA, USA, 2016.
in an ideal setting. However, when this model is deployed in a [11] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
real world traffic scenario, such as in a coffee shop or airport, we Auto-matic Fingerprinting of Smartphone Apps from Encrypted Network
except that there will be differences in model accuracies, but Traffic,” in IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (Euro S&P),
without any major variations in detecting and eliminating pp. 439–454, March 2016.
 [12] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian, “Deep
unknown traffic effectively. packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
 learning”. Soft Computing, 24(3), pp.1999-2012, 2020.
 V. CONCLUSIONS [13] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani,
 ‘‘Char-acterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 This work contributes to the literature in encrypted traffic features’’, in Proc. ICISSP, pp. 407–414, 2016.
classification by applying a DNN architecture for fine grained [14] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for
in-app activity detection. Experiments were executed to find out
 internet of things”, IEEE Access, 5:18042–18050, 2017.
the hyperparameters that maximize the performance of the DL [15] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “DataNet: Deep learning based
model. Results showed that the proposed model effectively en-crypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway”, IEEE Acidentified previously trained in-app activities with an accuracy cess, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
of 90% or above while filtering out previously untrained in-app [16] N. Bayat, W. Jackson, and D. Liu, “Deep Learning for Network Traffic
activity traffic as unknown data with an average accuracy of Classification”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12693, 2021.
[17] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “MIMETIC:
Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning”.
Computer Networks, 165, p.106944, 2019.
[18] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, ‘‘DISTILLER:
Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,’’,
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 183, p.102985, 2021.
[19] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, “FS-Net: A Flow Sequence
Network for Encrypted Traffic Classification”, IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM), 1171–1179, 2019.
[20] V. Tong, H.-A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel QUIC traffic
classifier based on convolutional neural networks”, In 2018 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM) (pp. 1-6), 2018.
[21] Li, D., Li, W., Wang, X., Nguyen, C.T. and Lu, S., “App trajectory
recogni-tion over encrypted internet traffic based on deep neural network,”
Computer Networks, 179, p.107372, 2020.
[22] Aircrack-ng, https://www.aircrack-ng.org/, 2021.
[23] M. Rodrig, C. Reis, R. Mahajan, D. Wetherall, and J. Zahorjan,
“Measure-ment-based characterization of 802.11 in a hotspot setting”, in:
Proceed-ings of the ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Experimental
Approaches to Wireless Network Design and Analysis, pp. 5 -10, 2005.
[24] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, "Deep Learning for Encrypted Traffic
Classification: An Overview," in IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 57,
no. 5, pp. 76-81, doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2019.1800819, May 2019.
[25] Sklearn.preprocessing. StandardScaler, http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated sklearn.preprocessing. StandardScaler.html., 2021
[26] W. McKinney, “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python”,
Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pp. 51-56, 2010.
[27] F. Chollet, et al., Keras, https://github.com/fchollet/keras, 2020.
[28] M. Abadi, et al., “TensorFlow: Large- scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems”. URL http://tensorflow.org/, software available from
tensorow.org, 2015.
[29] MH Pathmaperuma, Y Rahulamathavan, S Dogan, A Kondoz. CNN for
User Activity Detection Using Encrypted In-App Mobile Data. Future
Internet. 2022; 14(2):67. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi14020067