E-GraphSAGE: A Graph Neural Network based
 Intrusion Detection System for IoT
NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium | 978-1-6654-0601-7/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NOMS54207.2022.9789878

 Wai Weng Lo∗ , Siamak Layeghy† , Mohanad Sarhan‡ , Marcus Gallagher§ , and
 Marius Portmann¶
 School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering
 The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
 Email: ∗ w.w.lo@uq.net.au, † siamak.layeghy@uq.net.au, ‡ m.sarhan@uq.net.au, § marcusg@itee.uq.edu.au, ¶ marius@itee.uq.edu.au

 Abstract—This paper presents a new Network Intrusion Detec- years, there has been great progress in the application of new
 tion System (NIDS) based on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). Machine Learning (ML) models and techniques, in particular
 GNNs are a relatively new sub-field of deep neural networks, deep learning-based approaches, for the development of new
 which can leverage the inherent structure of graph-based data.
 Training and evaluation data for NIDSs are typically repre- NIDS solutions.
 sented as flow records, which can naturally be represented in In this paper, we are exploring the use of GNNs, a relaa graph format. In this paper, we propose E-GraphSAGE, a tively new sub-field of deep neural networks for IoT network
 GNN approach that allows capturing both the edge features intrusion detection. GNNs are tailored to applications with
 of a graph as well as the topological information for network graph-structured data, such as social sciences, chemistry, and
 intrusion detection in IoT networks. To the best of our knowledge,
 our proposal is the first successful, practical, and extensively telecommunications, and are able to leverage the inherent
 evaluated approach of applying GNNs on the problem of network structure of the graph data by building relational inductive
 intrusion detection for IoT using flow-based data. Our extensive biases into the deep learning architecture. This provides the
 experimental evaluation on four recent NIDS benchmark datasets ability to learn, reason, and generalise from the graph data,
 shows that our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art in inspired by the concept of message propagation [2].
 terms of key classification metrics, which demonstrates the
 potential of GNNs in network intrusion detection, and provides Network intrusion detection is typically performed on flowmotivation for further research. based network data such as NetFlow [3], where flows are
 Index Terms—Graph Neural Networks, Network Intrusion identified by the communication endpoints (IP address, L4
 Detection System, Internet of Things port number, L4 protocol), and annotated via a set of flow
 fields which provide details on the flows, such as the number
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 of packets, number of bytes, flow duration, etc. This flow data
 IoT network attacks have significantly increased over the can naturally be represented in a graph format, where the flow
 last few years, both in terms of frequency and level of endpoints are mapped to graph nodes, and network traffic
 sophistication. IoT networks consist of many interconnected flows are mapped to the graph edges. Both the topological
 devices, including cameras, temperature sensors, smart TV, information as well as the information contained in edge
 wireless printer, and other edge devices that require network features are crucial for the classification of network traffic and
 connectivity [1]. Cybercriminals can compromise and exploit the detection of attack flows.
 IoT networks to perform malicious activities such as IoT Key recent works on ML-based NIDS, such as
 ransomware, Botnet DDoS attacks. NIDSs, which are placed [4][5][6][7][8], consider flow data records independently,
 at strategic points within the IoT network to monitor traffic, without considering the interrelation between them, and hence
 are an important tool for the detection and mitigation of the traffic pattern more globally. Consequently, these methods
 network-based cyber attacks. There are two main types of are limited in their ability to detect sophisticated IoT network
 NIDS, signature-based and intrusion detection-based systems. attacks, such as botnet attacks [9], distributed port scans [10],
 A signature-based NIDS relies on a pre-installed set of attack or DNS Amplification attacks [11], where a more global view
 signatures, which are compared and pattern-matched with the of the network and traffic flow is required.
 monitored network traffic in order to detect attacks. As a result, We believe that traffic patterns at a more global level,
 this type of NIDS can effectively detect known attacks with and hence flow interrelationships should be considered for
 a relatively low false alarm rate, but they are significantly the detection of distributed attacks in IoT, providing the
 less effective in detecting new attacks or variants of existing motivation for the work presented in this paper. We propose
 attacks. In contrast, intrusion detection-based systems have E-GraphSAGE, a GNN model that aims to overcome the
 the potential to detect intrusions by detecting deviations from current limitations of NIDSs for IoT. E-GraphSAGE enables
 the regular traffic patterns in the network. Over the last few the collection of information on flow-based features and
 978-1-6654-0601-7/22/$31.00 © 2022 IEEE topological patterns to account for the interconnected patterns

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 In [5], an attack mitigation framework for IoT networks
 is proposed using a hybrid of signature- and intrusion-based
 detection systems. The signature-based system uses a database
 of black-listed sources. The intrusion-based module adopts
 an extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) algorithm. The XG-
 Boost classifier achieved a binary classification accuracy of
 99.99% and a false alarm rate of 0.05% on the BoT-IoT
 dataset, and 99.96% multiclass classification F1-Score of 97%.
 Sarhan et al. [6] converted the UNSW-NB15, BoT-IoT, and
 ToN-IoT datasets from their proprietary formats and feature
 set into a common Netflow-based format, with eight Netflow
 features as a common feature set. The corresponding new
 Netflow-based variants of the datasets, i.e. NF-UNSW-NB15,
 NF-BoT-IoT, and NF-ToN-IoT, have been made publicly avail-
 Fig. 1: Overall deployment architecture able. The authors evaluated an Extra Tree ensemble classifier
 across these three datasets and have reported an F1-Score of
 0.85, 0.97, and 1.00, respectively for binary classification. For
of network flows.Consequently, E-GraphSAGE supports the the multi-class case, the corresponding F1-Scores are 0.98,
process of edge classification, and hence the detection of 0.77 and 0.60.
malicious network flows, as illustrated in Figure 1. In [7], the authors focused on securing Internet of medical
 We demonstrate how the E-GraphSAGE algorithm can be things’ networks (IoMT) using a two-level intrusion detection
utilized to build a reliable NIDS, and provide an extensive model. The first level used a decision tree (DT), naive Bayes
experimental evaluation of the proposed system on four re- (NB), and random forest (RF) as first-level individual learners.
cent NIDS benchmark datasets. Our results show that the In the next level, an XGBoost classifier was used to identify
E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS outperformed the state-of-the-art normal and attack instances. The ensemble model achieved a
in regards to key classification metrics in all four consid- binary classification accuracy of 96.35% and an F1-Score of
ered benchmark datasets. To the best of our knowledge, our 0.95 on the ToN-IoT dataset.
approach is the first successful, practical, and extensively Churcher et al. [8] applied several machine learning alevaluated approach of applying GNNs on the problem of gorithms such as k-nearest neighbour (KNN), decision tree
network intrusion detection for IoT using flow-based data. (DT), support vector machine (SVM), naive Bayes (NB),
 In summary, the key contributions of this paper are twofold: random forest (RF), artificial neural network (ANN), and
 • We have proposed and implemented E-GraphSAGE, a logistic regression (LR) for network intrusion detection. The
 GNN-based NIDS, which allows the incorporation of authors evaluated different classifier performances on BoTedge features and topological patterns for IoT network IoT datasets and reported that the KNN classifier achieved the
 intrusion detection. highest multiclass classification performance with an F1-Score
 • We applied E-GraphSAGE on four benchmark IoT NIDS of 0.99 and classification accuracy of 99.00%.
 datasets for network intrusion detection, where the results Xiao et al. [12] proposed a graph embedding approach to
 demonstrated its potential via extensive experimental perform intrusion detection on network flows. The authors first
 evaluation. converted the network flows into a first-order and second-
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II order graph. The first-order graph learns the latent features
discusses key related works, and Section III provides the from the perspective of a single host by using its IP address
relevant background on GNNs and GraphSAGE. Our proposed and port number. The second-order graph aims to learn the
E-GraphSAGE algorithm and the corresponding NIDS are latent features from a global perspective by using source IP
introduced in Section IV. Experimental evaluation results are addresses, source ports, destination IP addresses, as well as
presented in Section VI, and Section VII concludes the paper. destination ports. The extracted graph embeddings and the raw
 features are then used to train a Random Forest classifier to
 II. R ELATED W ORK detect network attacks.
 Haitao et al.[4] designed a multimodal sequential NIDS with However, a significant limitation of this approach is its use
a hierarchical progressive network to capture different levels of of a traditional transductive graph embedding method [13],
network data features. The approach is based on a combination which limits its ability to classify samples with graph nodes,
of a deep autoencoder and LSTM architecture, in order to e.g. IP addresses and port numbers, which were not seen
integrate the structural information within the temporal in- during the training phase. This makes the approach unsuitable
formation shared between similar network connections. The for most practical NIDS application scenarios. In contrast,
system is evaluated on 3 datasets including the UNSW-NB15 the E-GraphSAGE approach presented in this paper uses an
dataset, where it achieved an accuracy of 96.8% and 86.2% in inductive learning approach, which does not suffer from this
binary and multiclass classification experiments respectively. limitation.

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Zhou et al.[14] proposed using a graph convolutional neu- attempt to work with graph data, this is typically quite cumral network (GCN) to perform P2P botnet node detection. bersome and relies on hand-engineered features.
The authors first generated botnet traffic by creating botnet A common task performed by GNNs is to generating
connections mixed with different real large-scale network node embeddings [17], which aims to encode nodes as lowtraffic flows. Then, they applied the GCN for botnet node dimensional vectors, while maintaining their key relationships
classification.The generated graph does not include any flow and graph position in the original format. Node embedding is
or node features and the approach only considers the topo- typically a key precursor to apply for downstream tasks such
logical information of the network connectivity graph for P2P as node classification and node clustering [17]. GNNs have
botnet node classification, rather than flow classification. This recently received a lot of attention due to their convincing
approach limits the detection of botnet attacks, and does not performance and high interpretability of the results through
focus on other network attacks, such as XSS and ransomware. the visualisation of the node embeddings [18].
In addition, it does not leverage all the information provided
in network flow data, i.e., the network flow features. B. GraphSAGE
 While some existing graph representation learning methods The Graph SAmple and aggreGatE (GraphSAGE) algorithm
have already considered edge features, none of them can be is one of the most well-known GNNs and was developed by
directly applied to network intrusion detection. Methods such Hamilton et al. [13] . In GraphSAGE, a fixed size sub-set is
as [15] [16] consider edge features, but only for the purpose (uniformly randomly) sampled. This allows limiting the space
of improving node representation for better performance, and and time complexity of the algorithm, irrespective of the graph
not edge classification, which is the aim in NIDSs. structure (e.g. node degree distribution) and batch size.
 In contrast to related studies, our approach leverages edge The GraphSAGE algorithm operates on a graph G(V, E),
features that can be extracted from network flow data, and where V is the set of nodes and E is the set of edges. The
is critical for the detection of individual attack flows via node features of a node v are represented as the vector xv ,
its edge embedding approach. NIDSs based on traditional and the complete set of node feature vectors as {xv , ∀v ∈ V}.
(non-graph-based) machine learning algorithms currently have A key hyperparameter of the GraphSAGE algorithm is the
not fully leveraged the structural and topological information number of graph convolutional layers K, which specifies the
inherent in network flow data for complex network attack number of hops via which node information is aggregated at
detection, such as a botnet attack, which is one of the key each iteration. Another important aspect of GraphSAGE is the
strengths of GNNs. A key feature and novel contribution choice of a differentiable aggregator function AGGk , ∀k ∈
of E-GraphSAGE proposed in this paper, is its ability to {1, ..., K}, to aggregate information from neighbor nodes.
leverage both, topological information and edge features in The algorithm is performed in both a forward and backward
network flow data. Furthermore, related studies that apply a propagation stage, which we now discuss in more detail.
ML approach for NIDS typically use either, one, two, or a 1) Node Embedding: Similar to the convolution operation
maximum of three NIDS benchmark datasets to evaluate the in convolutional neural networks (CNNs), information relating
proposed systems. For the evaluation of the proposed GNN- to the local neighborhood of a node is collected and is used
based approach, we used four different benchmark datasets, to compute the node embedding. The GraphSAGE algorithm
which provide a higher degree of confidence in the robustness starts by assuming the model has already been trained and the
of the method and the ability to generalize to different types weight matrices and aggregator function parameters are fixed.
of network scenarios. For each node, the algorithm iteratively aggregates information
 III. BACKGROUND from the node’s neighbours, the node’s neighbours-neighbours,
 and so on.
A. Graph Neural Networks (GNN) At each iteration, initially the neighborhood of the node
 GNN is one of the most recent and fastest growing subareas is sampled, and the information from the sampled nodes
in machine learning. Its power and potential lies in its ability is aggregated into a single vector. At the k-th layer, the
to leverage the inherent graph structure of a lot of data aggregated information hkN (v) at a node v, based of the
encountered in real world application domains, such as social sampled neighborhood N (v), can be expressed as Equation
media networks, biology, telecommunications, etc. The graph 1 [13]:
format captures the structural information by modelling a set
of objects and their relationships. The objects are represented hkN (v) = AGG k
  k−1 
 hu , ∀u ∈ N (v) (1)
by graph nodes and their relationships by graph edges. In the
case of computer networks, individual hosts (IP addresses) are Here, hk−1
 u represents the embedding of node u in the
modelled as graph nodes, and the communication between the previous layer. These embeddings of all nodes u in the
hosts, i.e., the network flows, are modelled as graph edges. neighbourhood of v are aggregated into the embedding of node
 The key motivation of using a GNN for NIDSs is the ability v at layer k.
to easily and directly exploit the rich structural information in This aggregation process is illustrated in Figure 2 (right),
the network flow data, which can be directly encoded in a the topological and node features in the graph, as collected and
graph format. While some traditional ML-based approaches aggregated from the k-hop neighborhood of each graph node.

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 A
 D Algorithm 1: E-GraphSAGE edge embedding
 B AGG
 A input : Graph G(V, E);
 B C
 A AGG input edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ E};
 C AGG A input node features xv = {1, . . . , 1};
 depth K;
 A
 E
 D AGG weight matrices Wk , ∀k ∈ {1, . . . , K};
 D
 E non-linearity σ;
 differentiable aggregator functions AGGk ;
 B
 output: Edge embeddings zuv , ∀uv ∈ E
Fig. 2: A given graph (left), and the corresponding Graph- 1 h0v ← xv , ∀v ∈ V
SAGE architecture with depth-2 convolutions (right) and full 2 for k ← 1 to K do
 3 for v ∈ V do
neighborhood sampling. n
 k−1
 o
 4 hkN (v) ← AGGk euv , ∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E
   
 5 hkv ← σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1 v , hkN (v)
In the GraphSAGE model, we can use different aggregation
 6 zv = hKv
methods, including mean, pooling, or different types of neural 7 for uv ∈ E do
networks, e.g., Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [13]. 8 zK K K
 uv ←CON CAT (zu ,zv )

 The aggregated embeddings of the sampled neighborhood
hkN (v) are then concatenated with the node’s embedding from
the previous layer hk−1
 v . After applying the model’s trainable Our proposed approach (E-GraphSAGE) aims to overcome
parameters (Wk , the trainable weight matrix) and passing the this limitation and facilitate the capture of edge features and
result through a non-linear activation function σ (e.g. ReLU), topological information for intrusion detection. This section
the layer k node v embedding is calculated, as shown in introduces E-GraphSAGE in two parts. The first part discusses
Equation 2 [13]. the E-GraphSAGE model and the extensions to the original
    GraphSAGE algorithm that were made to facilitate edge
 hkv = σ Wk · CONCAT hk−1
 v , hkN (v) (2) embedding and edge classification. In the second part, we
 discuss the application of E-GraphSAGE as an NIDS.
 The final representation (embedding) of node v is expressed
as zv , which is essentially the embedding of the node at the A. E-GraphSAGE Model
final layer K, as shown in Equation 3. For the purpose of node
 1) Edge Embedding: The message passing function in the
classification, zv can be passed through a sigmoidal neuron or
 original GraphSAGE algorithm only considers node features,
softmax layer.
 and edge features are not taken into consideration [13]. To
 include the edge features, it is required to sample and aggrezv = hK
 v , ∀v ∈ V (3) gate the edge information of the graph. In addition, the final
 output of the algorithm needs to provide an edge embedding
 IV. E-G RAPH SAGE
 rather than the node embedding provided by the original
 Traditional GNNs, e.g. GraphSAGE, have been successfully algorithm. Our proposed E-GraphSAGE algorithm with these
applied in a wide range of applications. However, these modifications is shown in Algorithm 1.
approaches mainly focus on node features for node classifi- Key differences to the original GraphSAGE algorithm [13]
cation, and are currently unable to consider edge features for are in regards to the algorithm input, the message passedge classification. In contrast, our proposed E-GraphSAGE ing/aggregator function, and the output.
algorithm allows us to consider the edge (flow) information The input includes edge features {euv , ∀uv ∈ E}, which
in the embedding process. This provides the basis for com- are, as mentioned before, missing from the list of inputs in
puting the corresponding edge embeddings and enabling edge GraphSAGE. Since the flow-based NIDS datasets only consist
classification; that is, the classification of network flows into of flow (edge) features rather than node features. Therefore,
benign and attack flows. we are using only provided edge features. We use the vector
 The goal of an NIDS is to detect and identify malicious xv = {1, . . . , 1} to initialise the node features (and initial node
traffic and flows. This corresponds to the problem of edge embeddings) and the dimension of all one constant vector is
classification in our graph representation of flow datasets, the same as the number of edge features, as shown in Line 1
where the key information is provided as edge features. Con- of the algorithm.
sequently, the current NIDS benchmark network datasets [6] In Line 4, instead of using the standard GraphSAGE node
[19] [20] provide network flow information as edge features, aggregator function (Equation 1), our newly proposed neighrather than node features, which only allows edge (flow) borhood aggregator function creates the aggregated embedclassification. In contrast, most related GNN research to date dings of the sampled neighborhood edges at the k-th layer, as
has focused on the problem of node classification, and the shown in Equation 4 below.
proposed solutions cannot be applied to the edge classification n o
problem in the context of NIDS. hkN (v) = AGG k k−1
 euv , ∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E (4)

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Here, ek−1
 uv are the features of edge uv from N (v), the
sampled neighborhood of node v, at layer k-1. The set
{∀u ∈ N (v), uv ∈ E} represents the sampled edges in the
neighborhood N (v)). In Line 5, the node embedding for node
v at layer k is calculated as in GraphSAGE (Equation 2), but
with the critical difference that in the new algorithm hkN (v) is
calculated via Equation 4 to include the edge features. Thus,
the topological and edge information in the network flow graph
 Fig. 3: Proposed E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS architecture.
is collected and aggregated from the k-hop neighborhood of
each network graph node.
 The final node embeddings at depth K, zv = hK v , are There are various possibilities for defining the end points
assigned in Line 8. Finally, the edge embeddings zK uv for of a flow and hence the graph nodes. The method used in this
each edge uv are calculated as the concatenation of the node study uses the following 4 flow fields to identify a graph edge:
embeddings of nodes u and v, as shown in Equation 5 below. Source IP Address, Source (L4) Port, Destination IP Address,
   and Destination (L4) Port. The first two fields form a 2-tuple
 zK K K
 uv = CON CAT zu , zv , uv ∈ E (5) that identifies the source node and the two last fields identify
 the destination node of the flow. The additional flow fields
This represents the final output of the forward propagation
 provide features that are associated with the corresponding
stage in E-GraphSAGE.
 graph edge. e.g. , the source node (172.26.185.48 : 52962)
 2) Time and Space Complexity: The loops over the k-hop
 exchanges data with destination node (192.168.1.152 : 80)
neighbour edges are the most time-consuming of the model
 and the corresponding flow can be represented as a network
as shown in Algorithm 1, Line 4. The upper bound time
 edge.
complexity estimation of E-GraphSAGE can be represented
  To construct the network graph from the flow data, we
as O eKnd2 , where n is the total number of nodes in the
 mapped the original source IP addresses to randomly assigned
network, e is the number of neighbour edges being sampled
 IP addresses in the range from 172.16.0.1 to 172.31.0.1. The
for each node, K is the number of layers, d is the dimension
 reason for this is the fact that in a lot of the NIDS datasets
of the node hidden features. The  space complexity of E- used in this paper, only a small number of IP addresses were
GraphSAGE is O beKd + Kd2 , where b is the batch size.
 used as the source of the attacks. The random mapping avoids
Since E-GraphSAGE can support a min-batch setting, i.e.,
 the potential problem of the source IP addresses providing an
a fixed size of neighbour edges are being sampled to imunintentional label for attack traffic.
prove the training efficiency and reduce memory consumption.
 Since in our graph construction all remaining flow record
Instead of using full neighbourhood sets in Algorithm 1,
 fields were assigned to the edge, the graph nodes are featurethe per-batch space and time complexity for E-GraphSAGE,
 less. In this algorithm, we assign a one vector, a vector with all
which uniformly randomlysamples a fixed-size set of edge
 QK values of one to all nodes. As shown in Algorithm 1, we are
neighbors, is O i=1 Ei , where the sampled edges are using this method in our algorithm, with the dimensionality
Ei , i ∈ {1, . . . , K}. of the all one constant vector in each node depending on the
 number of edge features.
B. E-GraphSAGE NIDS
 2) E-GraphSAGE Training: The neural network model we
 Figure 3 shows a high level overview of our proposed NIDS use in our implementation consists of two E-GraphSAGE
based on E-GraphSAGE. First, the network graph is generated layers (K = 2), which means that neighbour information is
from the network flow data, and is then fed into the supervised aggregated from a two-hop neighbourhood. For the aggregatraining process of the E-GraphSAGE model in the next step. tion function AGG, as shown in Equation 4, we use the mean
In the last step, the edge embeddings are created, which forms function which simply finds the element-wise mean of the
the basis for the classification of edges (network flows) into edge features in the sampled neighborhood. The definition of
benign and attack classes. These three steps are explained in the mean aggregator function in E-GraphSAGE is provided in
the following subsections. Equation 6 below.
 1) Network Graph Construction: Network flows (e.g., Net- X ek−1
 uv
Flow) are a common format for recording network communi- hkN (v) = (6)
 |N (v)|e
cation in production networks, and it is also the most common u∈N (v),
 uv∈E
format in the context of NIDS. The flow records usually
consist of fields for identifying the source and destination of Here, |N (v)|e represents the number of edges in the samthe communication, and the rest of a record field provides pled neighborhood, and ek−1
 uv represent their edge features at
further information on the flow, such as the number of packets layer k − 1. For our implementation, we chose full neighborand bytes, flow duration, etc. A graph therefore provides a very hood sampling, which means information from the full set of
natural way to model such data. edges in a node’s neighbourhood is aggregated.

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 In both E-GraphSAGE layers, for the hidden feature sizes well as IoT network traffic collected from a mediumof each layer represented in Equation 2, we use a size of scale network at the Cyber Range and IoT Labs at
128 hidden units, which is also the dimension of the node the UNSW Canberra (Australia). In this paper, only the
embeddings. For the nonlinear transformation (σ in Equation network traffic component of the dataset is used. The Bro-
2), we use the ReLU activation function, and for the purpose of IDS network monitoring tool was used to generate the
regularisation, we use a dropout mechanism with a rate of 0.2 dataset’s 44 network flow features. The dataset consists of
between the two E-GraphSAGE layers. We chose the cross- 796,380 (3.56%) benign flows and 21,542,641 (96.44%)
entropy loss function, and gradient descent in the backward attack flows, with a total of 22,339,021 flows.
propagation phase is performed using the Adam optimizer with • NF-ToT-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT: A lack of a standard forlearning rate of 0.001. mat and feature set among the various NIDS datasets has
 When node embeddings are generated in the last made it very difficult to compare the performance of ML-
E-GraphSAGE layer, they are converted to the corresponding based network traffic classifiers across different datasets,
edge embeddings (Line 10 of Algorithm 1). Since the edge and to evaluate their ability to generalise to different
embeddings are created via concatenation of two node em- network scenarios. Sarhan et al. [6] have addressed this
beddings, the size of the edge embeddings is 256 dimensions. problem by providing the NetFlow version of the above
 The output edge embeddings pass through a softmax layer, mentioned three NIDS datasets. The authors of [6] used
which makes it possible to compare the output of the algorithm the raw packet capture (pcap) files of the original NIDS
to the labels provided by the NIDS datasets and to tune the datasets and converted them to the NetFlow format via
trainable model parameters in the backward propagation phase. the nprobe [22] tool and selected 12 fields to be extracted,
 3) Edge Classification: After the model parameters have resulting in the new variants of the original datasets, i.e.
been tuned in the training process, the model is ready for NF-ToT-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT. In NF-ToT-IoT, the total
evaluation via the classification of unseen test samples. The number of network flows is 1,379,274, out of which
test flow records are also converted to graphs, passed through 1,108,995 (80.4 %) are attack flows and 270,279 (19.6
the trained E-GraphSAGE layers, from which the edge embed- %) are benign flows. The NF-BoT-IoT dataset has a total
dings are calculated. They are then converted to class prob- number of 600,100 flows, out of which 586,241 (97.69
abilities in the final softmax layer and are finally compared %) are attack flows and 13,859 (2.31 %) are benign flows.
with the true class labels in order to compute the classification
evaluation performance metrics. VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
 V. DATASETS To evaluate the performance of the proposed neural network
 model, the standard metrics listed in Table I are used, where
 For the evaluation of the GNN-based NIDS proposed in this
 T P , T N , F P and F N represent the number of True Positives,
paper, we use four publicly available NIDS datasets, which
 True Negatives, False Positives and False Negatives respecconsist of different types of labelled attack flows as well as
 tively. First, the results of the binary classification problem,
benign network flows. The first two datasets, consisting of
 where the aim is to distinguish between attack and benign
ToN-IoT [20] and BoT-IoT [19], have proprietary formats and
 traffic, are presented. Subsequently, we present the results of
feature sets, and have been widely used to evaluate Machine
 the multiclass classification experiments, where the aim was
Learning based network intrusion detection systems in IoT.
 to identify the specific attack type of each flow.
In addition, we also consider two recently created variants
of these datasets, where the respective format is translated to
NetFlow with a common feature set, i.e. NF-TON-IoT [6] and A. Binary Classification Results
NF-BoT-IoT [6]. A brief overview of these datasets is provided
in the following. The datasets used in this paper all include two sets of labels.
 • BoT-IoT: This is another recent dataset with a specific
 The first label determines if a flow record belongs to a benign
 on IoT networks, created by Koroniotis et al. [19] in or attack class, and the second label identifies the attack type.
 2019. The authors simulated IoT services such as water We use the first label set for binary classification, and the
 stations, by using the Node-red tool [21] and gener- second set for multiclass classification.
 ated the corresponding IoT traffic. The Argus tool was
 consequently used for feature extraction. This dataset is TABLE I: Evaluation metrics utilised in this study
 comprised of 6 types of attacks and a total of 47 features
 Metric Definition
 with corresponding class labels. The dataset contains only
 TP
 477 (0.01%) benign flows and 3,668,045 (99.99%) attack Detection Rate (Recall) T P +F N
 TP
 flows, with a total of 3,668,522 flows. Precision T P +F P
 • ToN-IoT: This is a relatively new and extensive dataset F1-Score Recall×P recision
 2 × Recall+P recision
 that was generated in 2019 by Abdullah et al.[20], which Accuracy T P +T N
 T P +F P +T N +F N
 includes different types of IoT data, such as operation FP
 False Alarm Rate (FAR)
 system logs, telemetry data of IoT/IIoT services, as F P +T N

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE II: E-GraphSAGE binary classification results TABLE IV: Results of multiclass classification by E-
 Dataset Accuracy Precision F1-Score Recall (DR) FAR
 GraphSAGE on BoT-IoT dataset families
 BoT-IoT 99.99% 1.00 1.00 99.99% 0.00 %
 NF-BoT-IoT 93.57% 1.00 0.97 93.43% 0.38 %
 BoT-IoT NF-BoT-IoT
 ToN-IoT 97.87% 1.00 0.99 97.86% 1.92% Class Name DR F1-Score DR F1-Score
 NF-ToN-IoT 99.69% 1.00 1.00 99.85% 0.15% Benign 100.00% 0.99 99.45% 0.42
 DDoS 99.99% 1.00 40.82% 0.39
 DoS 99.99% 1.00 57.13% 0.47
 We use the full dataset, except for the ToN-IoT dataset, Reconnaissance 99.98% 1.00 84.50% 0.92
 Theft 93.75% 0.97 99.83% 0.39
where we considered a randomly sampled subset with 10% Weighted Average 99.99% 1.00 78.16% 0.81
of the original size, due to the very large size of the original
dataset. In regards to training and evaluation data split, 70%
of the flow records of each datasets were selected for training GraphSAGE approach across four significantly different NIDS
and 30% were reserved for testing and evaluation. benchmark datasets. The consistently solid results demonstrate
 As mentioned above, the experimental evaluation was based the robustness of our GNN-based approach and its ability to
on three original datasets with proprietary flow formats and generalise across different types of network traffic patterns,
feature sets, as well as their corresponding NetFlow versions. feature sets, and attack types. We believe this is due to the
As shown in [6], even though the original dataset and its ability of the GNN architecture to capture the information in
NetFlow counterpart represent essentially the same network the inherent graph structure of the flow-based NIDS datasets.
events, the performance of a classifier for the two datasets
versions can vary significantly, due to the different feature B. Multiclass Classification Results
sets. Table II presents the detailed results of our E-GraphSAGE
 We are now considering the multiclass classification probclassifier for the binary classification case, showing Accuracy,
 lem, where the classifier aims to distinguish between different
Precision , F1-Score, Recall and FAR, for the considered
 types of attacks as well as benign traffic. This is a much
four benchmark datasets. As can be seen in the table, the Eharder problem than in the binary case. For the evaluation
GraphSAGE classifier performs very well across all different
 of the E-GraphSAGE classifier in the multiclass scenario, we
performance metrics. Since the considered datasets are genconsidered the same four NIDS datasets as for the binary case.
erally highly imbalanced, the F1-Score is a more relevant
 Depending on the NIDS dataset, the number of attack classes
performance metric. We use the F1-Score to compare our
 range between 4 and 9.
classifier with the state-of-the-art, i.e., the best classification
 Tables IV and V show the corresponding results for the
results reported in the literature for each of the four NIDS
 BoT-IoT and ToN-IoT datasets and their respective Netflow
datasets.
 counterparts. For the BoT-IoT dataset with its original format
 Table III shows the corresponding results of our
 and feature set, a very high weighted Detection Rate and F1-
E-GraphSAGE classifier compared to the best performing
 Score is achieved for all the 5 traffic classes (4 attack classes
related works for each datasets in terms of F1-Score. As
 plus benign class), with a weighted average of 99.99% and
can be observed from the table, in regards to F1-Score,
 1.00 respectively. The corresponding numbers for the NF-BoT-
E-GraphSAGE outperforms the best reported classifiers in
 IoT dataset are significantly lower, with a weighted average
ToN-IoT and BoT-IoT. The NF-ToN-IoT and NF-BoT-IoT
 DR value of 78.16% and weighted F1-Score of 0.81.
experiments achieved an F1-score of 1.0 and 0.97, respectively,
 The results for the ToN-IoT datasets show a high weighted
which are the same as the state-of-art algorithms.
 average Detection Rate (86.78%) and F1-Score (0.87), but
 These results demonstrate the power of our GNN-based
 the values vary significantly for the individual traffic classes.
approach for traffic classification and network intrusion detection. In contrast to most related works, where a new ML-based
NIDS classifier is evaluated on one, two or a maximum three TABLE V: Results of multiclass classification by Edatasets, we have demonstrated the performance of our E- GraphSAGE on ToN-IoT datasets families
 ToN-IoT NF-ToN-IoT
TABLE III: Performance of binary classification by E- Class Name DR F1-Score DR F1-Score
 Benign 88.12% 0.91 98.86% 0.92
GraphSAGE compared with the state-of-art algorithms Backdoor 5.06% 0.08 98.38% 0.99
 Method Dataset F1 DDoS 96.94% 0.98 52.35% 0.68
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE BoT-IoT 1.00 DoS 96.08% 0.73 0.00% 0.00
 XGBoost [5] BoT-IoT 0.99 Injection 88.94% 0.83 93.15% 0.71
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE NF-BoT-IoT 0.97 MIMT 87.43% 0.18 22.88% 0.28
 Extra Tree Classifier [6] NF-BoT-IoT 0.97 Ransomware 98.55% 0.94 96.49% 0.23
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE ToN-IoT 0.99 Password 89.15% 0.91 19.92% 0.25
 Ensemble [7] ToN-IoT 0.95 Scanning 75.84% 0.85 15.32% 0.13
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE NF-ToN-IoT 1.00 XSS 92.08% 0.95 0.00% 0.00
 Extra Tree Classifier [6] NF-ToN-IoT 1.00 Weighted Average 86.78% 0.87 67.16% 0.63

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 weighted F1-Scores of E-GraphSAGE compared with the top
 one or two best reported results in the literature, depending
 on availability. We observe that E-GraphSAGE outperforms
 all the state-of-the-art classifiers, with the only exception of
 the ToN-IoT dataset, where E-GraphSAGE matches the F1-
 Score as the best reported results.
 Overall, we see that E-GraphSAGE at least matches, and in
 most cases significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art MLbased NIDS approaches, for both binary and multi-class classification. This is particularly significant, given our stringent
 comparison methodology, where we picked the best perform-
 (a) raw data (b) edge embedded data
 ing classifiers for each of the four individual NIDS datasets,
Fig. 4: Visualisation of dimensionality reduction a) Sample of and performed a pairwise comparison with E-GraphSAGE.
BoT-IoT raw validation data, b)Sample of edge embeddings This is in contrast to a more typical approach in which a
generated by E-GraphSAGE (Multiclass). classifier is compared with related approaches on one, two, or
 three common datasets.

As for the BoT-IoT dataset, we observe a significantly lower VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
classification performance for the NetFlow variant of the BoT- This paper presents a novel approach to network intru-
IoT dataset. This can be explained by the very different sion detection based on GNNs. For this, we propose Enature of the feature set. While the original feature sets GraphSAGE which the capturing of edge features as well as
include specifically engineered features to detect the attack the topological pattern of a network flow graph, and is hence
classes included in the dataset, the NetFlow variants consist able to implement attack flow detection. In this paper, we
of relatively simple and generic features. focus on the application of E-GraphSAGE for IoT network
 To get an intuitive understanding of the promising and intrusion detection, and more specifically, for the detection of
robust performance of the E-GraphSAGE classifier, we in- malicious network flows. To the best of our knowledge, this
vestigated and visualised the edge embeddings generated by represents the first implementation and extensive evaluation
the algorithm, based on the BoT-IoT dataset. For this, we of an GNN-based NIDS for IoT using network flow data. Our
generate two visualisations. First, we take the sample ‘raw’ experimental evaluation based on four IoT NIDS benchmark
BoT-IoT dataset and the edge embedding then applied the datasets shows that our E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS performs
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) exceptionally well and overall outperforms the state-of-the-
[23] dimensionality reduction algorithm to map the high- art ML-based classifiers. The evaluation results of our initial
dimensional data down to two dimensions, for the purpose system demonstrate the potential of a GNN-based approach
of visualisation. The result is shown in Figure 4. We now see for network intrusion detection. In the future, we plan to
a clear separation of attack flows and normal/benign flows. apply neighbourhood sampling techniques to improve the
This illustrates the ability of the edge embedding mechanism run-time of the proposed E-GraphSAGE model, particularly
of the E-GraphSAGE algorithm to leverage the inherent graph exploring non-uniform sampling techniques. Also, it is worth
structure of the flow-based NIDS data, and to be able to sepa- investigating explainable graph neural network algorithms,
rate attack traffic from normal traffic in the embedding space, such as GNNExplainer [24], to get more insights about GNN
which in turn results in a high classification performance. model outputs.
 As in the binary classification case, we have provided a R EFERENCES
comparison of our E-GraphSAGE-based NIDS with the state- [1] A. Ghasempour, “Internet of things in smart grid: Architecture, appliof-the-art classifiers. Table VI shows the average multiclass cations, services, key technologies, and challenges,” Inventions, vol. 4,
 no. 1, p. 22, 2019.
 [2] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
TABLE VI: Performance of multiclass classification by E- comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
 on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24,
GraphSAGE compared with the state-of-art algorithms 2021. DOI: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386.
 [3] B. Claise, “Cisco systems netflow services export version 9,” RFC,
 Method Dataset W-F1 vol. 3954, pp. 1–33, 2004.
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE BoT-IoT 1.00 [4] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel
 KNN [8] BoT-IoT 0.99 multimodal-sequential approach based on multi-view features for net-
 XGBoost [5] BoT-IoT 0.97 work intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183 207–183 221,
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE NF-BoT-IoT 0.81 2019. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2959131.
 Extra Tree Classifier [6] NF-BoT-IoT 0.77 [5] M. A. Lawal, R. A. Shaikh, and S. R. Hassan, “An anomaly mitigation
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE ToN-IoT 0.87 framework for iot using fog computing,” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 10,
 2020, ISSN: 2079-9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics9101565.
 Extra Tree Classifier [6] ToN-IoT 0.87
 [6] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, Netflow
 Proposed E-GraphSAGE NF-ToN-IoT 0.63 datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection sys-
 Extra Tree Classifier [6] NF-ToN-IoT 0.60 tems, Nov. 2020. arXiv: 2011.09144.

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 [7] P. Kumar, G. P. Gupta, and R. Tripathi, “An ensemble learning and fogcloud architecture-driven cyber-attack detection framework for iomt
 networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 166, pp. 110–124, 2021,
 ISSN : 0140-3664. DOI : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2020.12.003.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 S0140366420320090.
 [8] A. Churcher, R. Ullah, J. Ahmad, S. ur Rehman, F. Masood, M.
 Gogate, F. Alqahtani, B. Nour, and W. J. Buchanan, “An experimental analysis of attack classification using machine learning in iot
 networks,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 2, 2021, ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.
 3390/s21020446. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-
 8220/21/2/446.
 [9] G. Vormayr, T. Zseby, and J. Fabini, “Botnet communication patterns,”
 IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2768–
 2796, 2017. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2017.2749442.
[10] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Surveying
 port scans and their detection methodologies,” The Computer Journal,
 vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1565–1581, 2011.
[11] G. Kambourakis, T. Moschos, D. Geneiatakis, and S. Gritzalis, “Detecting dns amplification attacks,” in International workshop on critical
 information infrastructures security, Springer, 2007, pp. 185–196.
[12] Q. Xiao, J. Liu, Q. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, and Y. Yao, “Towards
 Network Anomaly Detection Using Graph Embedding,” in Computational Science – ICCS 2020, V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, G. Závodszky,
 M. H. Lees, J. J. Dongarra, P. M. A. Sloot, S. Brissos, and J. Teixeira,
 Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 156–169,
 ISBN : 978-3-030-50423-6.
[13] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 learning on large graphs,” in Proceedings of the 31st International
 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, ser. NIPS’17,
 Long Beach, California, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp. 1025–
 1035, ISBN: 9781510860964.
[14] J. Zhou, Z. Xu, A. Rush, and M. Yu, “Automating Botnet Detection
 with Graph Neural Networks,” in 4th Workshop on Machine Learning
 and Systems (MLSys), 2020.
[15] L. Gong and Q. Cheng, “Exploiting edge features for graph neural
 networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2019.
[16] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl,
 “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proceedings of
 the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, D. Precup
 and Y. W. Teh, Eds., ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 vol. 70, PMLR, Jun. 2017, pp. 1263–1272. [Online]. Available: https:
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/gilmer17a.html.
[17] H. Cai, V. W. Zheng, and K. C. Chang, “A Comprehensive Survey
 of Graph Embedding: Problems, Techniques, and Applications,” IEEE
 Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 30, no. 9,
 pp. 1616–1637, 2018, ISSN: 1558-2191. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2018.
 2807452.
[18] J. Zhou, G. Cui, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Graph
 neural networks: A review of methods and applications,” ArXiv,
 vol. abs/1812.08434, 2018.
[19] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
 the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things
 for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Generation
 Computer Systems, 2019, ISSN: 0167739X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j . future .
 2019.05.041. arXiv: 1811.00701.
[20] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, A. M. Z. Tari, and A. Anwar, “TON IoT
 telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot for datadriven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165 130–
 165 150, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3022862.
[21] Low-code programming for event-driven applications, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://nodered.org/.
[22] An extensible netflow v5/v9/ipfix probe for ipv4/v6, Feb. 2021. [Online].
 Available: https://www.ntop.org/products/netflow/nprobe/.
[23] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “Umap: Uniform manifold
 approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.
[24] R. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, “Gnnexplainer: Generating explanations for graph neural networks,” Advances
 in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, p. 9240, 2019.

 NOMS 2022 - 2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.