Flow Sequence-Based Anonymity Network Traffic
 Identification with Residual Graph Convolutional Networks
 Ruijie Zhao† , Xianwen Deng† , Yanhao Wang‡ , Libo Chen† , Ming Liu† , Zhi Xue† , and Yijun Wang†∗
2022 IEEE/ACM 30th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS) | 978-1-6654-6824-4/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IWQoS54832.2022.9812882

 † School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
 ‡ NIO Security Research, Shanghai, China
 ∗ Corresponding Author

 Abstract—Identifying anonymity services from network traf- made to develop various traffic analysis methods based on
 fic is a crucial task for network management and security. machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) algorithms.
 Currently, some works based on deep learning have achieved The AI-based traffic analysis methods monitor traffic data’s
 excellent performance for traffic analysis, especially those based
 on flow sequence (FS), which utilizes information and features basic and statistical characteristics to better deal with complex
 of the traffic flow. However, these models still face a serious and changeable network traffic. There is no doubt that AI
 challenge because of lacking a mechanism to take into account technology has greatly improved the performance of traffic
 relationships between flows, resulting in mistakenly recognizing analysis methods. In addition, we note that many studies have
 irrelevant flows in FS as clues for identifying traffic. In this shown that the traffic data has obvious spatio-temporal correpaper, we propose a novel FS-based anonymity network traffic
 identification framework to tackle this problem, which leverages lations [13]–[15]. For example, when a user uses an anonymity
 Residual Graph Convolutional Network (ResGCN) to exploit network to browse the web, many related application requests
 relationships between flows for FS feature extraction. Moreover, will appear in a short period. These application requests will
 we design a practical scheme to preprocess the raw data of real- generate corresponding multiple flows in the traffic. Based
 world traffic, which further improves identification performance on the spatio-temporal correlation, some researchers proposed
 and efficiency. Experimental results on two real-world traffic
 datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the- methods [16]–[18] to establish flow sequences to achieve betart methods by a large margin. ter traffic analysis performance. However, they all ignore some
 Index Terms—Anonymity network, traffic classification, flow critical relationships between flows, resulting in mistakenly
 sequence, deep learning, graph convolutional networks. taking irrelevant flows in the flow sequence as clues for traffic
 identification. Therefore, to make the identification more accu-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 rate, we should leverage these relationships to extract features
 Due to the increasing demand for the protection of personal from flow sequences. The definitions of these relationships are
 network meta-data, anonymity networks have grown in pop- listed below.
 ularity. They provide a way for users to achieve anonymity
 online. In detail, anonymity networks use encryption and • Attribute Relationship. The same application request
 obfuscation methods in communication to conceal the trans- generated forward direction flow (F-flow) and corremission content and the true identity of users. However, while sponding reverse direction flow (R-flow) have the atmaking communication harder to trace and identify, anonymity tribute relationship.
 • Time Relationship. The time relationship represents the
 networks also provide hiding space for illegal and criminal
 activities [1]–[3]. Thus, it is essential to design an effective time interval between the flows. The longer the interval,
 traffic analysis system to supervise anonymity networks. the lower the correlation between them.
 In the early stage, the traditional network traffic analysis Due to the structural constraints of current methods implesystem, mainly based on rules to realize scene identification, mented based on DL algorithms (e.g., CNN and LSTM), they
 plays a vital role in network monitoring. These methods cannot consider the two relationships during the feature extracidentify a limited number of services by analyzing the inherent tion process. So how can we leverage these relationships? The
 components (i.e., port numbers and characteristic values) in the graph convolutional network (GCN), which connects neighbor
 traffic packet. Unfortunately, the identification method based nodes through edges with different weights and updates the
 on port numbers has become invalid due to the mechanism of feature representation by calculating the feature summation
 anonymity networks and many other networks using random of neighbor nodes, provides a way to solve this problem by
 ports [4]. At the same time, the growth of network scale and connecting flows according to their relationships.
 the application of encryption technology have also adversely In this paper, we propose a novel flow sequence-based traffic
 affected the performance of traffic analysis methods based on identification framework with residual graph convolutional
 characteristic values. network (ResGCN). We take continuous multiple flows (i.e.,
 Recently, benefiting from the development of artificial in- the flow sequence) as the input feature. Each flow is a node,
 telligence (AI) technology, many efforts [5]–[12] have been and the weight of the edge is set according to the relationships
 978-1-6654-6824-4/22/$31.00 © 2022 IEEE between flows. To better preserve the spatial structure of the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 gradient, we adopt the residual structure to extract features. for classification. Obviously, a large amount of traffic packets
 Besides, as an end-to-end framework for identifying real- are needed to form structures with different characteristics.
 world traffic, it extracts rich features (e.g., statistical features, Sun et al. [12] designed a traffic classifier based on GNN
 basic features, etc.) from the raw traffic according to the flow and k-nearest neighbors. Their edge weights of the graph are
 segmentation scheme, and uses the Light Gradient Boosting the similarity of 5 nearest neighbors selected by k-nearest
 Machine (LightGBM) algorithm to select the optimal com- neighbor (KNN). However, the graph of this method relies
 bination of features, improving the model performance and heavily on the KNN, which means that the quality of the graph
 efficiency. is not stable.
 In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: To conquer the limitations in current studies, we propose
 • We propose exploiting the attribute and time relationships a R ES GCN classifier for anonymity network traffic identifibetween the flows and realizing a more reasonable and cation, which explores the use of attribute relationships and
 effective feature extraction of the flow sequence for traffic time relationships between flows to build graph structures for
 identification. We posit that graph convolutional network feature extraction. Our method uses statistical features of flows
 (GCN) is suitable for our purpose, and propose a novel to counter obfuscation and encryption techniques (as described
 R ES GCN model to identify different network services. in Section III-A), and builds graphs in only eight continuous
 To our best knowledge, this is the first investigation in flows for real-time analysis.
 this direction.
 III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND A PPROACH OVERVIEW
 • We design a practical scheme to process real-world raw
 traffic data. It considers flow segmentation, which is In this section, we first provide the background of flows in
 used to generate and enrich the flow features of the raw the traffic. Then, we introduce the preliminaries of ML-based
 traffic, and LightGBM-based feature combination, which feature selection algorithm and DL-based feature extraction
 avoids the insignificant features from reducing model algorithm. Finally, we present an overview of our approach
 performance and efficiency. to identifying the various anonymity services in the network
 • We evaluate the framework on two real-world traffic
 traffic.
 datasets. Experimental results show that our method has A. Flow Generation
 a more excellent classification performance than other
 In packet switching networks, traffic flow is a sequence
 methods, and it is suitable for identifying different netof packets carrying information between two hosts. The raw
 work services.
 traffic data is captured and stored in pcap (abbreviation of
 II. R ELATED W ORK packet capture) format. As a kind of encrypted traffic, it
 The identification of anonymity network traffic is a typ- is more difficult to identify different services by directly
 ical traffic classification task. Network traffic classification analyzing the pcap file of anonymity network traffic. Thus,
 methods are mainly implemented using three methods (i.e., it is necessary to calculate and extract the statistical features
 rules, ML, and DL). The rule-based analysis method can to enrich the feature information of each flow.
 only analyze the uncomplicated network traffic, and the port The statistical features of encrypted traffic are calculated
 number identification has been proved to be invalid [19] in the through the Layer 2 to Layer 4 header features, which are
 complex network environment. not affected by any encryption on Layer 7 1 . These statistical
 To solve the issues with rule-based analysis methods, re- features reflect the characteristics of the traffic from many
 searchers applied ML and DL algorithms to analyze the traffic aspects. For instance, the inter-arrival time (IAT) represents the
 of anonymity networks or other networks. For instance, Cai et packet interval; the maximum, minimum, and average package
 al. [2] adopted feature selection algorithm to filter out some size of the Layer 3 reflects the package size characteristics
 irrelevant and redundant features, and then used XGBoost- of the traffic; packet length (PL) represents the length of
 based algorithm to identify Tor, I2P, and JonDonym networks the packet produced by each flow from the beginning. Note
 for four scenarios; Wang et al. [9] proposed an encrypted that as above-mentioned are only a tiny part of the statistical
 traffic classification method based on 2D-CNN, which con- features. Since the statistical features are computed using the
 verted traffic data into image representations; Lin et al. [10] lightweight traffic feature extraction tool Tranalyzer2 , which is
 proposed an intrusion detection system with stacked sparse au- not the contribution of our method, we only briefly introduce
 toencoder (SSAE) and recurrent neural network (RNN), which them.
 extracts traffic features with the greedy layer-wise strategy To preserve the spatio-temporal correlations of the raw trafto obtain good detection performance. Due to the structural fic, we need to store the generated flow sequentially according
 constraints of aforementioned algorithms, they cannot consider to the timestamp during extraction. As shown in Fig. 1, we
 the relationships between flows during the feature extraction take continuous I flows as a flow sequence, where each flow
 process. Recently, we have also noticed some works exploring contains a total of J features. The raw traffic is composed of K
 graph neural networks (GNN) for traffic classification tasks. 1 In the OSI reference model, the communications between a computing
 Shen et al. [11] proposed to use different applications’ graph system are split into seven different abstraction layers, labelled 1 to 7.
 structures (e.g., spindle-shaped, fish-shaped) as input features 2 https://tranalyzer.com

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Sequences performance. However, these methods are time-consuming
 Features i-th flow since they have to scan all sample points for each feature
 I

 Flows j-th feature to select the best segmentation point. LightGBM greatly
 J reduces the time complexity of processing samples through the
 I
 gradient-based one-side sampling (GOSS) algorithm [23]. The
 I J main idea of the GOSS algorithm is that samples with large
 K gradients play a major role in the calculation of information
 k-th sequence K
 J gain, which means that these samples with large gradients will
 J
 contribute more information gain. Therefore, to maintain the
 Fig. 1. The traffic flow model. accuracy of information gain evaluation, samples with large
 gradients can be retained when samples are down-sampled,
 flow sequences, and each sequence is continuous in time with and samples with small gradients are randomly sampled in
 the previous sequence. As the same type of network behavior proportion. Due to the reduction of a large number of data
 often lasts for a certain period, building a flow sequence samples with small gradients, the amount of calculation is
 for analysis has become an effective method to improve greatly reduced.
 classification performance. Obviously, there are some rela- C. GCN for Feature Extraction
 tionships (i.e., attribute and time relationships) between flows
 Graph convolution network (GCN) is derived from graph
 in each sequence. If these relationships can be considered in
 spectral theory [24], which extends the convolution operathe feature extraction process, the classifier network’s design
 tion from grid-based data to graph structure data. GCN also
 will be more reasonable and effective. Unfortunately, there is
 solved natural language processing (NLP) tasks with similar
 currently no related work that combines these relationships for
 issues (i.e., the relationship between words in a sentence) and
 feature extraction.
 achieved great success [25]. In this research, we regard the
 In addition, many variables will affect the results generflow sequence as a graph, and each flow is a node in the
 ated during the flow generation process. First, flows can be
 graph. A connection relationship is formed according to the
 segmented according to different durations or packet sizes,
 relationship between different flows.
 directly affecting the calculation results of related statistics.
 Based on the decomposition of graph Laplacian matrix, the
 Second, the generated flows contain different statistical feasignal x on the graph G is filtered by a kernel gθ:
 tures, but some may be meaningless for traffic identification.
 To achieve optimal flow generation results, we should consider gθ ∗G x = gθ (L)x = gθ (U ΛU T )x = U gθ (Λ)U T x, (1)
 the following two aspects:
 where ∗G denotes a graph convolution operation. L is the
 • Effectiveness: Effectiveness means that the classifier can graph Laplacian matrix. The eigenvalue decomposition of the
 achieve excellent classification performance by using the Laplacian matrix is L = U ΛU T , where Λ is a diagonal
 generated flows. matrix, and U is Fourier basis.
 • Timeliness: Timeliness means that anonymous services However, the decomposition becomes very difficult when
 can be identified as quickly as possible. the scale of the graph is large. For this purpose, Chebyshev
 Therefore, based on effectiveness and timeliness, the perfor- polynomials are adopted to solve this computational problem:
 mance of different segmentation methods and selected features M −1
 X
 will be comprehensively evaluated in Section V-C. gθ ∗G x = gθ (L)x = θm Cm (L̃)x, (2)
 m=0
 B. LightGBM for Feature Selection 2
 where θm is the learnable parameters. L̃ = λmax L − IN ,
 Feature selection is to remove insignificant features in the in which λmax is the maximum eigenvalue of the Laplacian
 generated flows, which can make the generated results more matrix and IN is a unit matrix. The recursive definition of the
 in line with effectiveness and timeliness [20]–[22]. In terms Chebyshev polynomial is Cm (L̃) = 2L̃Cm−1 (L̃) − Cm−2 (L̃)
 of effectiveness, insignificant features can be characterized as and C1 (L̃) = L̃, C0 (L̃) = IN .
 noise under certain conditions, which can adversely affect the
 identification result. In terms of timeliness, removing these D. Our Approach
 features can reduce the calculation of statistics in the flow In this paper, our research focuses on how to identify
 generation process and speed up flow generation. In addition, different anonymity services in real-world anonymity networks
 low-dimensional features will also reduce the complexity and more effectively and quickly. Thus, our approach includes a
 classification time of the feature extraction network. novel traffic classifier and the scheme of traffic acquisition,
 LightGBM is an ML algorithm based on a gradient boosting flow generation, and feature selection.
 decision tree (GBDT). As the GBDT algorithm sorts the Our approach includes three steps. As the first step, we
 importance of features during the training process, it is very configure the switch mirror port, and use the traffic capture
 suitable for feature selection tasks. Traditional GBDT-based tool tcpdump to obtain the real-time traffic and save it as a
 algorithms (e.g., PGBRT and XGBoost) have achieved good series of pcap files. The frequency of traffic acquisition can

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Generate Flows Compose Flow Sequences Build Graph Structures Select Feature Combination ResGCN Classifier
 IMPOTRANCE High
 dir pktps tcnt … bytps st
 1 flow st
 1 flow st
 1 flow uppQuartileIat

 ResGCN Blocks
 dir pktps tcnt … bytps 2nd flow 2nd flow 2nd flow pktps
 ipMinTTL

 Output
 Flows
 3rd flow 3rd flow …

 Input
 3rd flow

 MLP
 dir pktps tcnt … bytps ipMaxTTL
 … dsIqdIat
 4th flow 4th flow 4th flow MaxIAT

 …

 …

 …
 …
 dsRobStdIat
 Generator Ith flow Ith flow Ith flow dsMeanIat
 dir pktps tcnt … bytps 1st FS graph Kth FS graph LightGBM
 Raw Traffic Data 1st FS 2nd FS Kth FS

 …
 Features Low

 Fig. 2. Overview of the flow sequence-based anonymity network traffic identification framework.

 be set differently according to the actual situation. Second, we A. Raw Traffic Data Processing Scheme
 use a flow generator to realize the fast and real-time analysis As mentioned in Section III-A, the raw traffic data is
 of pcap files. According to the preset rules, we extract the flow obtained as the pcap file, which needs to be processed to
 in the pcap file. The flow sequence is composed of multiple be more effectively applied to the R ES GCN model. Data
 continuous flows, and the relationship graph between different processing includes the following four steps.
 flows will also be generated in this step. Then, the LightGBM- 1) Generate Flows: In real-world traffic, e.g., the service
 based feature selection method is used to select the optimal provided by BitTorrent will cause a very long flow duration.
 feature combination. Finally, the proposed R ES GCN classifier If we do not segment the long-duration flow, it will adversely
 leverages generated relationship graphs to realize effective affect the classification efficiency. Flow segmentation schemes
 anonymity network traffic identification. can be divided into two categories: time-based and size-based.
 The time-based segmentation scheme sets the upper limit of
 the duration of the flow, and the size-based segmentation
 IV. F RAMEWORK OF A NONYMITY N ETWORK T RAFFIC
 scheme sets the upper limit of the maximum packet size. Thus,
 I DENTIFICATION
 we first use the generator to generate rich features from the raw
 traffic through a time-based or size-based flow segmentation
 In this section, we introduce our anonymity network traffic
 scheme. Then, the following standard normalization method
 identification method. After processing the raw traffic data,
 is adopted to improve the reliability of the data:
 R ES GCN is adopted to realize the anonymity services identification. The overview of the proposed method is shown in x−µ
 z= , (3)
 Fig. 2, and the process of our approach is summarized in σ
 Algorithm 1. The details of each processing stage in the where µ represents the mean of the original data, and σ the
 proposed framework are presented as follows. standard deviation of the original data.
 2) Compose Flow Sequences: Some previous studies on
 Algorithm 1 Pseudocode of the Proposed Framework traffic classification have shown that the use of flow sequences
 Input: raw traffic data Dr , total epoch times n will significantly improve the classification performance [16]–
 Output: ResGCN model for anonymity network traffic iden- [18]. However, a flow sequence containing too few flows
 tification has insufficient information and cannot achieve the ideal
 1: procedure Data Preprocessing (Dr )
 classification performance; too many flows will bring more
 2: Generate flows and compute the standardization result computational burden and reduce efficiency. Thus, we set each
 3: Take continuous multiple flows as flow sequences of the flow sequence to contain eight continuous flows.
 3) Build Graph Structures: Graph generation is the key to
 4: Build relationship graph between flows
 the successful application of GCN. We want to achieve a more
 5: Use LightGBM-based method to select feature combieffective and reasonable analysis of the flow sequences through
 nation
 the graph structure. Obviously, there are many relationships
 6: Dp ←− New training dataset after preprocessing
 between the different flows in each sequence. We build the
 7: Gp ←− Graph structure of the training data
 graph structure from the following two aspects.
 8: return Dp , Gp
 Attribute Relationship Graph (ARG): As mentioned in
 9: procedure ResGCN Model (Dp , Gp )
 Section I, the relationship between the F-flow and the R-
 10: while i ≤ n do
 flow generated by an application request is defined as the
 11: Load the proposed network
 attribute relationship. Obviously, these two flows have a strong
 12: Input Dp , Gp into the network for training
 correlation. We determine the attribute relationship between
 13: Update the model according to cross entropy loss
 the two flows through the 3-tuple (i.e., flow index, transmitted
 14: Save ResGCNi model
 bytes, and received bytes). During the flow generation process,
 15: end while
 a flow index is generated according to the source/destination
 16: Save ResGCNn as the final model
 IP, source/destination port, and protocol. However, the segmentation scheme splits the flow, resulting in a situation where

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 F(x) F(x) + x
 x

 2nd F-flow

 3rd R-flow

 6th R-flow

 8th R-flow
 1st R-flow
 Flow Sequence

 4th F-flow

 7th F-flow
 5th F-flow
 Input GFI RFI GFI RFI MLP Output
 GCN Unit GCN Unit
 Relu Relu

 FS & FS Graph ResGCN Block  4 3 Layers Traffic Label

 Fig. 4. The structure of ResGCN.

 I[xi ∈ O], njl|O (d) =
 P P
 Attribute Relationship Time Relationship where nO = I[xi ∈ O : xi ≤ d]
 and njr|O (d) =
 P
 I[xi ∈ O : xi >d]. Traverse the split point
 Fig. 3. The time relationship and attribute relationship of different flows
 in the flow sequence. of each feature, find the split point d∗j = argmaxd Vj (d)
 and calculate the maximum information gain Vj (d∗j ), and then
 divide the data into the left and right child nodes according
 there are multiple continuous flows with the same index. if the to the split point d∗j of feature j ∗ . After sorting and random
 two flows have the same flow index and swap the number of sampling operations, the information gain is estimated by the
 transmitted bytes and received bytes, they have an attribute following formulas:
 relationship. Based on the 3-tuple, we connect the F-flow and X 1−a X
 the R-flow and set their attribute relationship weight to 1. vl = gi + gi , (8)
 b
 xi ∈Al xi ∈Bl
 Ga (V, E) = 3T upleM atching. (4) X 1−a X
 vr = gi + gi , (9)
 Time Relationship Graph (TRG): The continuous multiple b
 xi ∈Ar xi ∈Br
 flows are arranged in order according to the generation time of
 the flow. We build TRG for different flows based on generation 1 vl2 v2
 Ṽj (d) = ( j + j r ). (10)
 time. If the generation time of the traffic is closer, the higher n nl (d) nr (d)
 the weight will be set. Specifically, in each flow sequence, the
 In subsequent experiments, different comparison algorithms
 A-th flow is f lowa , and the B-th flow is f lowb . The distance
 will be used to implement feature selection, and the perforbetween the two flows is |B − A|, and the initial weight is
 1 mance of these algorithms will be compared.
 |B−A| . Only flows in the same direction (i.e., forward direction
 or reverse direction) will be connected. B. Flow Sequence-based R ES GCN Classifier
 Gt (V, E) = distance−1 . (5) Some previous studies have considered the use of flow
 sequences to achieve better traffic classification perfor-
 To set the time relationship weights of each flow more mance [16]–[18], but they cannot carry out directed informareasonably, we input the time relationship weights of each tion exchange between flows. Aiming to address the limitaflow into the Softmax function, so that the sum of the new tions of these methods, we leverage a GCN over the fused
 weights is 1. Suppose we have n time relationship weights in graph of the flows, which allows related flows in the flow
 a flow, we can denote the process as: sequence to exchange information.
 The input of R ES GCN is a flow sequence consisting of
 w1′ , w2′ , ..., wn′ = Sof tmax(w1 , w2 , ..., wn ). (6) eight continuous flows after feature selection, which can be
 As shown in Fig. 3, different flows in the flow sequence constructed as a graph mentioned above. Every flow is seen
 are connected through the attribute relationship and time as a node in a graph. The entire model is composed of four
 relationship. After establishing the ARG and TRG, we perform ResGCN blocks and a 3-layer MLP.
 normalized on the adjacency matrix of these two graphs to The structure of the ResGCN block is shown in Fig. 4.
 obtain the fusion graph. It consists of two GCN units, and the activation function
 4) Select Feature Combination: The LightGBM-based ReLU is used in between. The residual structure is applied in
 feature selection method is designed to select the optimal fea- the ResGCN block, which can solve the degradation problem
 ture combination, which can effectively avoid the insignificant that occurs as the depth of the network increases. The GCN
 features from reducing the performance and efficiency of the unit includes two key components, i.e., the generated features
 classifier. interaction module (GFI) and related flows interaction module
 To evaluate the importance of the j-th feature shown in (RFI). The GFI is a fully connected layer without bias. It
 Fig. 1, we adopt LightGBM to calculate the gradient of each performs a linear transformation on the features (e.g., packet
 sample. For the gradient calculation of each sample, O is the interval, package size, etc.) of each flow, allowing different
 flows on a fixed node in the decision tree. The variance gain features to interact. The RFI enables related flows to exchange
 of node split feature j at point d is expressed as: information based on the relationship graph. According to
 2
 the fusion graph mentioned above, these two modules can
 ( xi ∈O:xi >d gi )2
 P P
 1 ( xi ∈O:xi ≤d gi ) perform effective information interaction on different features
 Vj|O (d) = ( + ) (7)
 nO njl|O (d) njr|O (d) and related flows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE I generated by ten anonymity services3 . There are 29,214 flows
 S UMMARY OF T HE DATASETS U SED FOR E VALUATION . and 6,979 flows in the training and test datasets, respectively.
 To evaluate the generality of the classifier, we introduce
 Dataset Category Training dataset Test dataset
 another real-world traffic dataset ISCXVPN2016 (D2 ) [29].
 Eepsites 1,825 1,197
 IRC 3,009 484
 This dataset provides the traffic of different application ser-
 Snark 7,284 1,784 vices over virtual private network (VPN). VPN also provide
 Video 12,577 581 anonymity by creating a private network from a public internet
 JonDonym 1,254 967
 SJTU-AN21
 Bittorrent 198 76
 connection. Unlike Tor, I2P, and JonDonym, which are slow
 (D1 ) and privacy-oriented, VPN is faster and more suitable for
 Chat 624 150
 FTP 364 184 daily tasks like casual browsing and streaming. A total of 7
 Streaming 949 598
 Browsing 1,130 958
 application services (Browsing, FTP, VoIP, etc.) are included
 in the selected dataset, and 28,395 flows are parsed for
 Total 29,214 6,979
 classification. The ISCXVPN2016 dataset is divided into an
 Browsing 3,646 912 independent training dataset and test dataset according to the
 FTP 4,446 1,112
 P2P 736 184 proportion of 80% and 20%. Details of these two datasets are
 ISCXVPN2016 VoIP 8,464 2,117 summarized in TABLE I.
 (D2 ) Email 689 173
 Streaming 1,523 381 B. Experiment Setup
 Chat 3,209 803
 Total 22,713 5,682
 We design several experiments to evaluate the efficacy of
 our method for classifying anonymity network traffic. To
 answer RQ1, we evaluate the performance of the proposed raw
 traffic data processing method on different flow segmentation
 After information interaction through 4 ResGCN blocks, a schemes and feature selection methods, and determine the
 dropout layer is used to improve model generalization ability optimal combination for subsequent experiments. To answer
 and reduce overfitting. Finally, the output of the dropout layer RQ2, we analyze the training process of R ES GCN, and
 is flattened, and a 3-layer MLP with two hidden layers and one discuss the confusion matrix of the classification results on
 output layer is used to perform traffic classification. The first the test dataset. To answer RQ3, we compare the classification
 hidden layer consists of a linear layer with output size 220, performance of R ES GCN and the state of the art of traffic
 followed by rectified linear units (ReLU) [26]. The second classification methods on the test dataset. It should be noted
 hidden layer has a similar structure but with an output size of that both AnonymityNet and ISCXVPN2016 datasets are used
 110. The hidden layer can learn nonlinear functions for feature to conduct the above evaluation experiments. To make the
 extraction. experimental evaluation clearer, we introduce the experimental
 environment and evaluation metrics as follows.
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATIONS 1) Experimental Environment: All the evaluations are conducted in Python 3.7 with the PyTorch framework of ver-
 In this section, we present and discuss our experimental sion 1.9.0 and running on the PC with Intel® Core™ i9-
 results. Especially, we answer the following three research 11900K@3.50 GHz, 64 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce
 questions: RTX3090 GPU.
 • RQ1: How effective is the traffic data processing scheme in 2) Evaluation Metrics: To measure the classification perprocessing real-world raw traffic? (Section V-C) formance of our method, we calculate the number of True
 • RQ2: How well does R ES GCN work on real-world network Positive (Tp ), True Negative (Tn ), False Positive (Fp ), and
 traffic, identifying different network services? (Section V-D) False Negative (Fn ). Based on the above definition, Recall,
 • RQ3: If R ES GCN achieves better performance than the Precision and F1 can be obtained:
 state-of-the-art methods? (Section V-E) Tp
 Recall = , (11)
 Tp + Fn
 A. Datasets for Evaluation
 Currently, there are two mainstream datasets (i.e., ISCX- Tp
 P recision = , (12)
 Tor2016 [27] and Anon17 [28]) for anonymity network traffic Tp + Fp
 analysis, released in 2016 and 2017, respectively. Due to
 many changes in protocols and communication mechanisms P recision · Recall
 F1 = 2 · . (13)
 of anonymity networks over the years, these two datasets are P recision + Recall
 no longer suitable for the current anonymity network traffic Beside, Floating-Point-Operations (FLOPs) is used to evaluate
 analysis. Thus, we use the latest SJTU-AN21 dataset (D1 ), the model complexity.
 which includes the traffic data in the latest version of the three
 most popular anonymity networks (i.e., Tor, I2P, JonDonym) 3 SJTU-AN21 dataset: https://github.com/iZRJ/The-SJTU-AN21-Dataset

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Accuracy on D1 [%]

 Number of Features (Selected by PCA) Number of Features (Selected by XGBoost) Number of Features (Selected by LightGBM)
 Accuracy on D2 [%]

 Number of Features (Selected by PCA) Number of Features (Selected by XGBoost) Number of Features (Selected by LightGBM)

 Fig. 5. Classification accuracy with different flow segmentation schemes and feature selection methods.

 3) Hyper-parameter Configurations: For all the experi- TABLE II
 ments in this section, we optimize the cross-entropy loss using P ERFORMANCE OF T HREE F EATURE S ELECTION M ETHODS .
 stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer over 100 epochs.
 Performance PCA XGBoost LightGBM
 The initial learning rate is set to 0.01 with the batch size 80
 MaxAcc1 [FN] 85.60% [84] 86.56% [65] 87.31% [50]
 and a momentum of 0.9. MaxAcc2 [FN] 94.03% [70] 94.36% [60] 95.37% [50]
 Time (s) 4.17 62.9 11.11
 C. Efficacy of Raw Traffic Data Processing Scheme (to RQ1)
 1 MaxAcc and MaxAcc represent the maximum accuracy on Anonymi-
 1 2
 Our aim is to classify real-world anonymity network traffic tyNe dataset and ISCXVPN2016 dataset, respectively.
 effectively, so it is not enough to design the classifier. After 2 FN represents the number of features with the maximum accuracy.

 capturing the raw traffic, different traffic data processing
 schemes can significantly affect the classification performance.
 In this stage, we conduct research on the following three main the PCA-based method is better when the number of features
 influencing factors: flow segmentation, feature combination, is small, which is because the PCA method maps the origand flow sequence length. inal high-dimensional features to low-dimensional, so very
 We evaluate the performance of 6 segmentation schemes low-dimensionality can retain more information. TABLE II
 (i.e., time-based 5s, 10s, 15s, and size-based 5MB, 10MB, comprehensively shows the performance of the three feature
 and 15MB) and 3 feature selection methods (i.e., PCA-based, selection methods. LightGBM-based feature selection method
 XGBoost-based, and LightGBM-based). XGBoost and Light- achieves the highest MaxAcc on two datasets, and the num-
 GBM are both GBDT-based ML algorithms, which calculate ber of features is 50. PCA method has achieved apparent
 the gain of the j-th feature in the tree to reflect the feature advantages in speed, but it is not satisfactory in terms of
 importance. The PCA algorithm reduces the data dimension by accuracy. It can be concluded that the LightGBM-based feature
 maximizing the variance of the target dimension. We use the selection method has the best overall performance because of
 training dataset for feature selection and evaluate the accuracy its high accuracy and computational efficiency. Thus, we use
 of our method on the test dataset. the LightGBM-based method to set the feature number to 50
 It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the 10s feature segmentation with the LightGBM for subsequent experiments.
 scheme achieves the best classification performance on both
 datasets, and the 15MB segmentation scheme has the worst D. Performance of R ES GCN Classifier (to RQ2)
 performance. Furthermore, through data analysis of the 15MB The train accuracy and loss using the R ES GCN model for
 flow segmentation scheme, it is found that the duration of the two datasets are shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen that
 many flows using this segmentation scheme is very long, and the R ES GCN model learns the feature information of the
 it is evident that the spatio-temporal correlation between flows training dataset very well during the training process, which
 is weakened. Besides, in the comparison of feature selection has satisfactory performance in terms of accuracy and loss.
 algorithms, the LightGBM-based method and the XGBoost- To comprehensively evaluate the classification performance
 based method achieve higher maximum accuracy (MaxAcc) of R ES GCN, we analyze the confusion matrices of the clasthan the PCA-based method. However, the performance of sification results on the test datasets. As shown in Fig. 7,

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 Confusion Matrix on D1
 1.0

 Bro. Str. FTP Chat Bit. Jon. Vid. Sna. IRC Eep.
 Accuracy on D1 [%]
 0.8

 Loss [10-2]
 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0.0
 Number of Features Eep. IRC Sna. Vid. Jon. Bit. Chat FTP Str. Bro.

 (a) Training process on D1 (a) Confusion matrix of D1

 Confusion Matrix on D2
 1.0

 Bro.
 Accuracy on D2 [%]

 FTP
 Loss [10-2] 0.8

 Str. Email VOIP P2P
 0.6

 0.4

 0.2
 Chat

 0.0
 Number of Features Bro. FTP P2P VOIP Email Str. Chat
 (b) Training process on D2 (b) Confusion matrix of D2

 Fig. 6. Train accuracy and loss of R ES GCN model on two datasets. Fig. 7. Performance confusion matrices of classifier on two datasets.

 our classifier can effectively classify the traffic generated by RFI leverages the relationship graph of the flow sequence for
 different services. On the AnonymityNet dataset, the traffic more reasonable and effective feature extraction. Moreover,
 of the three types of anonymity networks (i.e., I2P, Tor, the performance of R ES GCN w/o RES (i.e., preserving GCN
 JonDoNym) is correctly distinguished. In terms of identifying units, but without residual structure) shows that the residual
 anonymity network services, services on I2P networks are structure can effectively avoid network degradation through dithe most difficult to identify, and there have been some rect signal transmission. The experimental results of R ES GCN
 misclassifications. On the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, we can see w/o GCN and the R ES CNN both prove that the GCN unit
 that the classifier has some classification errors between the plays a vital role in feature extraction of the flow sequence.
 FTP and Chat service traffic. By referring to the official
 E. Comparison with Other Methods (to RQ3)
 description of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, we found that both
 services contain the traffic generated by the Skype application, To comprehensively evaluate our model, we compare R ES -
 which is the main cause of misclassification. GCN with a range of baselines and state-of-the-art models, as
 To further examine the level of benefit that each component listed below:
 of R ES GCN brings to the performance, an ablation study is • NB, SVM, and C4.5 are implemented based on the
 performed on R ES GCN. The evaluation results are reported in popular data mining tool Weka [30].
 TABLE III. We also present the results of R ES CNN as a base- • CNN and LSTM models use the structure similar to R ES -
 line, which uses residual CNN blocks with similar structures GCN (i.e., the same number of layers and input/output
 to residual GCN blocks. First, the removal of GFI leads to size), and use flow sequences as input for classification.
 significant performance drops, which illustrates the necessity • 2D-CNN proposed by Wang et al. [9] directly reads
 of GFI for information interaction between generated features. traffic pcap files and converts them into grey images (size
 Compared with R ES GCN, R ES GCN w/o RFI is much less of each image is 28×28) for classification.
 powerful on two datasets. Thus it could be concluded that • 3D-CNN is an improved model of the 2D-CNN proposed
 RFI contributes to R ES GCN to a considerable extent since by Zhang et al. [8], which uses multiple channels to

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDY.

 AnonymityNet ISCXVPN2016
 Model
 Acc. F1 Acc. F1
 R ES GCN 87.3% 87.4% 95.4% 95.4%
 R ES CNN 82.1% 81.6% 91.0% 91.0%
 R ES GCN w/o GFI 79.4% 78.7% 91.8% 91.9%
 R ES GCN w/o RFI 81.9% 81.6% 88.9% 89.1%
 R ES GCN w/o GCN 78.1% 77.6% 87.1% 87.3%
 R ES GCN w/o RES 81.0% 80.6% 92.4% 92.5%

 TABLE IV
 T HE P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON WITH OTHER M ETHODS .

 AnonymityNet ISCXVPN2016 FLOPs Params Size Speed
 Model
 Acc. F1 Acc. F1 (106 ) (104 ) (KB) (flows/ms)
 NB 34.0% 27.0% 54.7% 57.2% N/A N/A N/A 18.3
 SVM 46.8% 42.8% 71.8% 72.0% N/A N/A N/A 56.8
 C4.5 48.4% 48.7% 78.5% 76.2% N/A N/A N/A 113.6
 CNN 78.3% 77.0% 90.2% 90.4% 46.5 16.2 642 84.1
 LSTM 79.1% 77.9% 90.2% 90.3% 114.6 26.5 1,043 23.5
 2D-CNN 65.0% 66.9% 86.2% 86.1% 1110.7 327.5 12,796 4.9
 3D-CNN 71.9% 73.2% 87.6% 87.9% 113.4 44.7 1,749 8.8
 LAttn 81.5% 81.1% 92.3% 92.3% 28.3 12.2 484 17.7
 FS-Net 83.7% 86.3% 92.4% 92.6% 497.6 64.6 2,532 2.1
 Ours 87.3% 87.4% 95.4% 95.4% 20.9 12.1 482 100.7

 1 We highlight the best in • and the worst in •.
 2 Speed is evaluated on CPU mode.
 3 Since the three ML-based models are directly implemented and tested on the data mining tool Weka, the results of FLOPs, Params, and model size
 cannot be obtained (marked N/A).

 enrich feature information during image conversion. The and its performance is further improved. FS-Net achieves a
 model input is the 3D tensor with the size of 22×22×3, better feature representation of encrypted traffic by introducwhich can be visualized as 24-bit RGB images. ing reconstruction loss, effectively improving classification
 • LSTM+Attn proposed by Yao et al. [17] uses LSTM performance. However, this model structure also brings a
 combined with a self-attention mechanism to pay atten- larger amount of parameters. Our R ES GCN designs the model
 tion to important flows in the flow sequence. structure from a brand-new perspective. It leverages generated
 • FS-Net is a LSTM-based network proposed by Liu et relationship graphs for feature extraction of flow sequence,
 al. [13] for encrypted traffic classification. This method which significantly improves the classification performance on
 leveraged reconstruction loss to ensure that the extracted anonymity network traffic.
 features by LSTM contain more information of the raw
 flow sequences. Further, we analyze the model complexity, model parameter size, model size, and speed. These evaluations are very
 TABLE IV shows the results of traffic classification per- important for some deployments, where a much smaller model
 formance. It can be seen that R ES GCN achieves the best (or faster model that can analyze traffic in real-time) is more
 performance in both two datasets in terms of almost all evalu- important than the performance classification of a model
 ation metrics. We can observe that the classification results of that, in the end, cannot be run on some devices. Since the
 traditional ML-based methods are usually not ideal, demon- Memory and CPU usage are easily interfered with by other
 strating those methods’ limited abilities to classify complex programs, we use FLOPs to reflect the model complexity for
 network traffic. The classification performance of the 2D-CNN evaluating the hardware consumption of the running model.
 and 3D-CNN models (i.e., directly reading pcap files without The model parameter size also affects memory usage during
 calculating the statistical features; see Section III-A) is very model inference. Besides, the model size indicates the disk
 limited. CNN, LSTM and LDAE all use statistical features space occupied by this model, and the speed indicates the
 and the flow sequence to achieve significant performance number of flows that the model can process per millisecond.
 improvements. However, due to the lack of mining the inherent We observe that, due to the use of 2D convolution for feature
 relationship of the flow sequence, they still cannot achieve extraction, both the 2D-CNN and 3D-CNN models are highly
 high accuracy. The LAttn model learns the inherent relation- complex. The complicated gate structure of the LSTM-based
 ship of the flow sequence through the attention mechanism, model leads to very low computational efficiency. Thus, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 speed of the three LSTM-based models (i.e., LSTM, LAttn, [9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 and FS-Net) is very slow. Benefiting from the effective fea- classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 learning,” in 2017 International Conference on Information Networking
 ture extraction of flow sequences by GCN, R ES GCN can (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam, Jan. 11–13, 2017, pp. 712–717.
 achieve accurate classification without large parameters. We [10] Y. Lin et al., “Time-related network intrusion detection model: a deep
 also noticed that the C4.5 has a fast speed, but the subpar learning method,” in 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference,
 Waikoloa, USA, Dec. 9–13, 2019, pp. 1–6.
 classification performance limits its deployment. It can be [11] M. Shen et al., “Accurate decentralized application identification via enconcluded that the R ES GCN classifier achieves the highest crypted traffic analysis using graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions
 classification accuracy as well as has low complexity and high on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 [12] B. Sun et al., “An encrypted traffic classification method combinspeed due to excellent structural design. ing graph convolutional network and autoencoder,” in IEEE International Performance Computing and Communications Conference,
 VI. C ONCLUSION Austin, USA, Nov. 6–8, 2020, pp. 1–8.
 In this paper, we propose a novel flow sequence-based net- [13] C. Liu et al., “FS-Net: A flow sequence network for encrypted traffic
 classification,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Communications,
 work traffic identification framework, which leverages R ES - Paris, France, Apr. 29 – May 2, 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 GCN to exploit attribute relationships and time relationships [14] T. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on
 between flows and successfully identifies different anonymity encrypted network traffic,” in NDSS, San Diego, USA, Feb. 23–26, 2020,
 pp. 1–18.
 network services. Moreover, as an end-to-end and real-time [15] J. Wang, J. Tang, Z. Xu, Y. Wang, G. Xue, X. Zhang, and D. Yang,
 traffic identification method, our framework can effectively “Spatiotemporal modeling and prediction in cellular networks: A big
 process real-world traffic. It takes into account flow seg- data enabled deep learning approach,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
 Communications, Atlanta, USA, May 1–4, 2017, pp. 1-9.
 mentation, which is used to generate and enrich the flow [16] Y. Yan, L. Qi, J. Wang, Y. Lin, and L. Chen, “A network intrusion
 features from the raw traffic, and LightGBM-based feature detection method based on stacked autoencoder and LSTM,” in 2020
 combination, which avoids the insignificant features from IEEE International Conference on Communications, Dublin, Ireland,
 Jun. 7–11, 2020, pp. 1–6.
 reducing model performance and efficiency. The results of our [17] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 experiments show that the R ES GCN classifier achieves the of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short
 highest classification accuracy as well as has low complexity term memory,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, doi: 10.1109/TB-
 DATA.2019.2940675.
 and high speed due to excellent structural design. [18] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel multimodalsequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, 2019.
 [19] A. Madhukar and C. Williamson, “A longitudinal study of P2P traffic
 This work was supported by the Foundation Item: Cy- classification,” in IEEE International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis,
 ber Security from the National Key Research and Develop- and Simulation, Monterey, USA, Sept. 11–14, 2006, pp. 179–188.
 ment Program of Shanghai Jiao Tong University under Grant [20] A. Montieri et al., “A dive into the dark web: hierarchical traffic classification of anonymity tools,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science
 2019QY0703. Yijun Wang is the corresponding author. and Engineering, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1043–1054, 2020.
 [21] X. Li, W. Chen, Q. Zhang, and L. Wu, “Building auto-encoder intrusion
 R EFERENCES detection system based on random forest feature selection,” Computers
 [1] A. Montieri et al., “Anonymity services Tor, I2P, JonDonym: classifying & Security, vol. 95, artcile number: 101851, 2020.
 in the dark (web),” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure [22] Y. Dong, J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and classification
 Computing, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 662–675, 2020. of Internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,” Computer
 [2] Z. Cai, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, J. Liu, and P. Ma, “isAnon: Flow-based Networks, vol. 119, no. 4, pp. 102–111, 2017.
 anonymity network traffic identification using extreme gradient boost- [23] G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, and T.
 ing,” in 2019 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks Liu, “LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree,”
 (IJCNN), Budapest, Hungary, Jul. 14–19, 2019, pp. 1-8. NIPS 2017, Long Beach, USA, Dec. 3–9, 2017, pp. 3149–3157.
 [3] L. Wang et al., “Multilevel identification and classification analysis of [24] J. Bruna et al., “Spectral networks and locally connected networks on
 Tor on mobile and PC platforms,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial graphs,” in 2014 International Conference on Learning Representations
 Informatics, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1079–1088, 2021. (ICLR), Banff, Canada, Apr. 14–16, 2014, pp. 1-14.
 [4] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, ”A survey on encrypted network [25] Z. Yu et al, “CodeCMR: cross-modal retrieval for function-level binary
 traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM source code matching,” NIPS 2020, pp. 3872-3883, 2020.
 Computing Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021. [26] V. Nair and G. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted boltz-
 [5] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, ”Realtime robust malicious traffic mann machines,” in 27th International Conference on Machine Learning
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in ACM SIGSAC Conference (ICML), Haifa, Israel, Jun. 21-24, 2010, pp. 807–814.
 on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), Virtual, Korea, Nov. [27] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 15 – 19, 2021, pp. 3431–3446. “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in 3rd
 [6] A. Khan, N. Hassan, C. Yuen, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, Y. Zhang, and H. International Conference on Information System Security and Privacy,
 Vincent Poor, ”Blockchain and 6G: the future of secure and ubiquitous Porto, Portugal, Feb. 19–21, 2017, pp. 253–262.
 communication,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. [28] K. Shahbar and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Packet momentum for identifi-
 194–201, 2022. cation of anonymity networks,” Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility,
 [7] M. Shen, Z. Gao, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Efficient fine-grained web- vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27–56, 2017.
 site fingerprinting via encrypted traffic analysis with deep learning,” [29] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 in IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of Service “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,” in 2nd
 (IWQoS), Tokyo, Japan, Jun. 25–28, 2021, pp. 1-10. International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy,
 [8] J. Zhang et al., “Autonomous unknown-application filtering and labeling Rome, Italy, Feb. 19–21, 2016, pp. 407—414.
 for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in IEEE Conference on Computer [30] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I. H.
 Communications, Toronto, Canada, Jul. 6–9, 2020, pp. 397–405. Witten, “The weka data mining software: an update,” ACM SIGKDD
 explorations newsletter, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 10–18, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 06:16:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.