Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

KRYSTAL: Knowledge graph-based framework for tactical attack
discovery in audit data
Kabul Kurniawan a,c,∗, Andreas Ekelhart b,d, Elmar Kiesling a, Gerald Quirchmayr c,
A Min Tjoa e
a
 Vienna University of Economics and Business, Welthandelsplatz 1, Vienna, Austria
b
 SBA Research, Floragasse 7, Vienna, Austria
c
 University of Vienna, Währinger Straße 29, Vienna, Austria
d
 University of Vienna, Kolingasse 14-16, Vienna, Austria
e
 Vienna University of Technology, Favoritenstraße 9-11, Vienna, Austria

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: Attack graph-based methods are a promising approach towards discovering attacks and various tech-
Received 10 August 2021 niques have been proposed recently. A key limitation, however, is that approaches developed so far are
Revised 10 June 2022
 monolithic in their architecture and heterogeneous in their internal models. The inﬂexible custom data
Accepted 3 July 2022
 models of existing prototypes and the implementation of rules in code rather than declarative languages
Available online 8 July 2022
 on the one hand make it diﬃcult to combine, extend, and reuse techniques, and on the other hand hin-
Keywords: der reuse of security knowledge – including detection rules and threat intelligence. KRYSTAL tackles these
Attack graph construction challenges by providing a knowledge graph-based, modular framework for threat detection, attack graph
Log analysis and scenario reconstruction, and analysis based on RDF as a standard model for knowledge represen-
Knowledge graph tation. This approach provides query options that facilitate contextualization over internal and external
Attack discovery background knowledge, as well as the integration of multiple detection techniques, including tag prop-
Cybersecurity
 agation, attack signatures, and graph queries. We implemented our framework in an openly available
Information security
 prototype and demonstrate its applicability on multiple scenarios of the DARPA Transparent Computing
 dataset. Our evaluation shows that the combination of different threat detection techniques within our
 framework improved detection capabilities. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that RDF provenance graphs are scalable and can eﬃciently support a variety of threat detection techniques.
 © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.
 This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

1. Introduction volume of low-level log data grows, manual analyses become increasingly infeasible.
 In the face of complex cyber attacks, it is crucial to not only de- In this context, system-level provenance graphs, which rely on
tect attacks as early as possible, but also to understand their con- audit data represented in graph structures, have recently attracted
text and implications in order to choose an appropriate response considerable attention in the security research community as a
strategy. To protect themselves, organizations typically rely on de- promising tool with strong abstract expression ability and relafenses such as Intrusion Detection System. These systems are use- tively high eﬃciency (Li et al., 2021). Such provenance graphs repful in that they can point to indicators of compromise and issues, resent relationships between the control ﬂow and data ﬂow bebut they also typically generate a large number of false positive tween subjects (e.g., processes, threads) and objects (e.g., ﬁles,
alerts. To identify relevant alerts, it is necessary to investigate their network sockets) in the system through a timestamped directed
context, which typically requires substantial manual effort and ex- graph. Based on that, a large variety of techniques have been depertise (Hossain et al., 2017; Milajerdi et al., 2019b). As the sheer veloped to automatically detect and connect attack steps in such
 graphs.1
 Motivating Example Figure 1 depicts the provenance graph of
 an exﬁltration attack carried out in the context of the DARPA
 ∗
 Corresponding author at: Vienna University of Economics and Business,
Welthandelsplatz 1, Vienna, Austria.
 1
 E-mail address: kabul.kurniawan@wu.ac.at (K. Kurniawan). cf. Li et al. (2021) for a recent survey.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.102828
0167-4048/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

Fig. 1. Motivating Example - the enlarged section of the graph (the sub-graph inside the red line) depicts an attack graph. Speciﬁcally, the graph inside the blue dottedline shows low-level event interaction as part of the attack pattern. While existing approaches can construct such an attack graph, it remains challenging for an analyst to
recognize and understand the real attack steps without linking to high-level context (i.e., adversary tactics and techniques). (For interpretation of the references to colour in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Transparent Computing program (DAR, 2021). The depicted graph, plementing a particular combination of techniques. Various protowhich was generated by our prototype, captures running processes, types have individually been shown to be effective in identifying
ﬁle reads and writes, and sent packets on a host over a given pe- and analyzing attacks, but robust detection still remains a key chalriod of time2 The enlarged section of the graph highlights an attack lenge (Li et al., 2021).
fragment in which an attacker exploits a vulnerable nginx web Interoperability. Existing approaches have so far been developed
server through a malformed HTTP request. The attacker opens a in the context of tightly coupled research prototypes with proprishell connection to the victim’s host via the vulnerable web server etary internal data structures that are not interoperable. The re-
(1 2 ); manages to write an executable ﬁle /tmp/XIM ( 345 ); spective implementations are typically not openly available, which
starts a process that reads sensitive information from /etc/passwd on the one hand impedes the reproducibility of the ﬁndings, and
(6 ), and ﬁnally exﬁltrates data via HTTP to an external network on the other hand hinders integration and reuse.
(7 ). The automatically constructed provenance graph summarizes Solution approach To tackle these challenges, we propose a
the attack scenario as a sequence of connected low level events, knowledge graph-driven framework (KRYSTAL) that leverages Sewhich provides a good starting point for security analyses. mantic Web technologies for audit log analysis and tactical attack
 Challenges Despite its potential, provenance graph-based analy- discovery.
sis faces a number of challenges that currently make it diﬃcult to We hypothesize that more robust detection can be achieved in
apply them in practical settings. an integrated platform that makes it possible to combine hetero-
 Context and interpretability. The closed nature of existing at- geneous approaches and techniques – which is currently diﬃcult
tack graph-based approaches makes it diﬃcult to relate prove- due to the lack of a uniform data model and a common techninance data to internal and external knowledge. This is crucial be- cal foundation. Furthermore, we propose to disentangle data colcause context information is important when interpreting security lection, data management, and threat detection – which are curalerts in order to identify rare occurrences of malicious patterns rently to a varying degree part of and speciﬁc to each approach –
within an overwhelmingly large amount of activities that are be- by means of a uniform, ontology-based target representation for
nign. provenance graphs. This abstracts from storage layer implemen-
 The graphs typically generated by state of the art techniques tation details, facilitates separation of concerns, and provides inconnect low-level events that are not easily interpretable without teroperability between components on these layers. It also makes
additional context. In our motivating example, for instance, the it possible to reuse and recombine collection, management, and
sub-graph inside the blue dotted line shows the low-level events threat detection modules.
that constitute the sequence of attack (steps  1 to  7 ). Without To this end, our contributions in this paper are as follows:
relating such granular low-level events to a high-level context, it (i) We develop a standardized3 , shared and reusable concepturemains diﬃcult to identify the underlying attack tactics and tech- alization of log events, detection rules, and threat intelligence.
niques, interpret the events in a broader context, and understand Thereby, we unify and integrate log events from heterogeneous
the attack. This lack of abstraction from low-level event graphs to sources and enrich it with background knowledge; (ii) We inhigher level techniques and tactics results in tedious attack inves- troduce a modular threat detection and attack graph reconstructigations necessary to link low-level evidence to phases of complex tion framework that leverages this model and integrates multimulti-stage attacks. ple state of the art techniques such as tag propagation, attenua-
 Robust detection. Provenance graph-based attack discovery ap- tion & decay, signature-based, and graph querying; (iii) We generproaches have so far been developed as monolithic prototypes im- ate attack graphs that can be enriched and contextualized through

 2 3
 In this case 140 h. https://www.w3.org/standards/

 2
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Table 1
 Comparison of attack discovery approaches. (DS) refers to domain-speciﬁc, (N/A) refers to not available, () refers to provided, (✗) refers to not provided.

 High-Level Background
 Detection Data Reduction Attack Attack Knowledge Published
 Approaches Data Models Techniques Techniques Reconstruction Summarization Linking Prototype

 Backtracking (King and Custom Graph Naive ✗  ✗ ✗ N/A
 Chen, 2003a) Backtracking
 AIQL (Gao et al., 2018b) Relational DB DS Query ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ N/A
 Language
 SAQL (Gao et al., 2018a) Relational DB DS Stream ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ N/A
 Query
 POIROT (Milajerdi et al., Custom Graph Graph ✗  ✗ ✗ N/A
 2019a) Alignment
 HOLMES (Milajerdi et al., Custom Graph HSG/Severity ✗   ✗ N/A
 2019b) Score
 RapSheet (Hassan et al., Custom Graph EDR/Threat CPR (Xu et al., 2016)   ✗ N/A
 2020) Score
 Zou et al. (2020) Custom Graph Pre/Post ✗ ✗  ✗ N/A
 Condition
 SLEUTH (Hossain et al., Custom Graph Tag ✗  ✗ ✗ N/A
 2017) Propagation
 MORSE (Hossain et al., Custom Graph Tag CSR (Hossain et al.,  ✗ ✗ N/A
 2020) Propagation 2018)
 CyGraph (Noel et al., 2016) NoSQL Graph DS Query ✗  ✗  
 UCO (Syed et al., 2016) RDF Graph SPARQL Query ✗ ✗ ✗  
 Ekelhart et al. (2018) RDF Graph SPARQL Query ✗ ✗ ✗  
 Kurniawan et al. (2020) RDF Graph SPARQL Query ✗  ✗  
 SLOGERT (Ekelhart et al., RDF Graph SPARQL Query HDT (Fernández et al., ✗ ✗  
 2021) 2013)
 KRYSTAL RDF Graph Hybrid HDT (Fernández et al.,    
 2013)

linking to background knowledge (e.g., assets, vulnerabilities, cy- searchers introduced approaches to mitigate this problem through
berthreat intelligence, etc.); such contextualization can help ana- ﬁned-grained taint-tracking or information ﬂow tracking (Ji et al.,
lysts to identify and assess high-level attack scenarios in order to 2017; 2018; Kemerlis et al., 2012). Although these approaches
understand their signiﬁcance, cause, and impact. (iv) We provide can accurately distinguish suspicious and benign nodes, scaling
an open source prototype of the system4 and evaluate it on a well- them remains a challenge (Hossain et al., 2018). Another apestablished large-scale dataset (DAR, 2021). proach tried to solve this problem by introducing tag-propagation.
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: SLEUTH (Hossain et al., 2017), for instance, introduced trustwor-
Section 2 discusses related work in threat detection and attack thiness tags (t-tags) and conﬁdentiality tags (c-tags) that are used
graph construction, Section 3 provides the necessary background to assign suspicion levels to nodes and propagate them through
on knowledge graph concepts that are central to the developed ap- the provenance graph. In combination with a policy framework,
proach; Section 4 puts forth a set of requirements as a basis of our these tags can trigger alarms and successfully identify unseen atproposed solution; Section 5 discusses the conceptualization of our tacks in real-time and with low overhead. However, SLEUTH suffers
approach; Section 6 introduces our knowledge graph-based attack from numerous false-positives for attacks with long-running prodetection framework, and Section 7 discusses the implementation cesses (Hossain et al., 2020). MORSE (Hossain et al., 2020) extends
and introduces application scenarios; we evaluate our approach in this approach by introducing tag-attenuation and tag-decay to cut
Section 8, discuss the results in Section 9 and conclude with an down false alarms by more than an order of magnitude. To reduce
outlook on future research in Section 10. the provenance graph, it indexes all subjects and objects using a
 numeric index. However, none of these approaches leverage stan-
2. Related work dard representations, but rely on custom graph models and hardcoded rules and policies. Consequently, they are diﬃcult to expand
 In this article we focus on misuse-based intrusion detec- and it is diﬃcult to investigate the resulting attack graphs further,
tion techniques, which search for well-deﬁned patterns of at- e.g., by linking them to background knowledge. Furthermore, both
tack (Kumar, 1996). Consequently, we organize related work on SLEUTH and MORSE do not explicitly represent the high-level conthreat detection and attack graph construction into the following text of attacks. As a result, it becomes exceedingly diﬃcult to idencategories: (i) provenance-based tracking, (ii) tactical attack con- tify attacks as attack graphs become more complex.
struction, (iii) graph queries, and (iv) ontology-based threat detec- Our approach introduces a standard and ﬂexible graph model
tion. Table 1 summarizes and compares existing attack discovery based on an ontology. Hence, with a standard graph model and
approaches, which will be discussed in the following sections. declarative rules and policies, our approach can produce compact
 Provenance-based Tracking Seminal work on provenance-based attack graphs and also ﬂexibly integrate and link them to backattack detection (King and Chen, 2003a) introduced the idea to ground knowledge. For graph reduction, we use (Header, Dictioinvestigate attacks through backward tracking. A major limita- nary, Triples) HDT (Fernández et al., 2013), a compact RDF-based
tion of initial “naive” backtracking approaches is that they are structure that keeps large provenance graph compressed. We disbased on coarse-grained provenance data. This typically introduces cuss it in more detail in Section 6.1.
a large number of false dependencies in the graph, a problem Tactical Attack Construction Provenance-based tracking typiknown as “dependence explosion” (Hossain et al., 2018). Several re- cally relies on a bottom-up approach, i.e., identifying attacks based
 on the causality relationship of system objects, such as processes,
 ﬁles, and sockets. By contrast, several approaches follow a top-
 4
 https://github.com/sepses/Krystal

 3
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

down strategy, i.e., they aim to identify attacks based on high- Kenaza and Aiash (2016) proposed an ontology that supports IDS
level models of APT campaigns (e.g. techniques, tactics) and/or kill- alert correlation. Through the use of reasoning rules, it can infer
chain phases. HOLMES (Milajerdi et al., 2019b) introduced threat and classify IDS alerts (i.e., false alert, unclassiﬁed, plausible atscores and 16 techniques, tactics, procedures (TTP) proposed by tack) based on existing vulnerability information. As the focus is
the authors to construct a high-level scenario graph (HSG) from solely on attack detection, however, this proposed approach does
a provenance graph. This approach can mitigate dependence ex- not result in attack graphs.
plosion and offers a map to TTP. However, its ability to identify In prior work, we proposed a modular ontology (Ekelhart et al.,
attacks with only a single APT stage is limited (Hossain et al., 2018) that can harmonize and integrate heterogeneous log
2020). RapSheet (Hassan et al., 2020) is an attack graph con- sources (e.g., Syslog, Auth log, Apache log). Subsequent work
struction approach based on alert correlation from a commer- (Kiesling et al., 2019) facilitates forensic analyses of arbitrary
cial Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) tool. By incorporating logs and contextualizes them with external background knowl-
67 EDR rules, it can relate alerts into a tactical provenance graph edge (e.g. CPE, CVE, CVSS, CWE, and CAPEC) in a federated settings
based on MITRE’s ATT&CK TTPs. For graph reduction, it implements (SPARQL, 2021). SLOGERT (Ekelhart et al., 2021) extends this precausality-preserved reduction (CPR) (Xu et al., 2016) that merges vious work with the ability to construct knowledge graphs autoedges with identical operations and keeps only the edge with the matically from arbitrary raw log messages. It identiﬁes, links, and
latest timestamp. Our approach also facilitates TTP mappings, but enriches entities in log sources with background knowledge. In this
we rather incorporate rules from open, standard and community- work, we extend and enhance our previous work on security ondriven detection rules (i.e., SIGMA Roth and Patzke, 2021), thus tologies to integrate events from heterogeneous log sources, repreavoiding a dependence on a commercial platform. sent them in attack scenario graphs, and link them to background
 Another recently proposed approach (Zou et al., 2020) uses knowledge.
tactic-centric Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) recognition to detect APT tactics based on APT techniques’ prerequisites (i.e., requirements for techniques to be matched to a tactic) and post- 3. Background
conditions (i.e., the result of a technique, e.g., malicious process
being created). The identiﬁed attack techniques are mapped to In this section, we introduce knowledge graphs as a conceptual
speciﬁc tactics and ranked based on their tactic matching. This foundation of our approach.
approach shows the detected tactics and techniques, but it does Knowledge Graph A knowledge graph is a directed, labeled
not represent the complete attack scenario, i.e., attack sequences, graph G = (V, E ) where V is a set of vertices (nodes) and E is a
causality and connections. set of edges (properties). A single graph is usually represented as
 In our work, we propose a hybrid approach that facilitates both a collection of triples T = < s p o > where s is a subject, p is a
bottom-up and top-down techniques for threat detection and at- predicate, and o is an object.
tack construction in a single, modular framework. Our approach RDF, RDF-S, OWL Resource Description Framework (RDF) is a
generates detailed attack graphs from low-level events but also fa- W3C5 standard data model to represent knowledge graphs. In RDF,
cilitates linking and contextualization to existing high-level, tacti- a subject is a resource identiﬁed by a unique identiﬁer (URI) or a
cal attack patterns such as MITRE ATT&CK TTPs. blank-node, an object can be both resource, blank-node or literal
 Graph Queries A number of research efforts resulted in query- (e.g. String, number), and predicate is a property deﬁned in an onbased and graph-matching approaches to detect and construct tology and must be a URI. RDF-S (Resource Description Framework
attack scenario graphs from historical audit log data stored in Schema)6 is a W3C standard data model for knowledge representadatabases. AIQL (Gao et al., 2018b) introduced a domain-speciﬁc tion. It extends the basic RDF vocabulary with a set of classes and
model and query language to analyze and investigate attacks. SAQL RDFS entailment (inference patterns).7 OWL (Ontology Web Lan-
(Gao et al., 2018a) extends AIQL for stream-based querying over guage)8 is also a W3C standard for authoring ontologies. We use
system monitoring data. POIROT (Milajerdi et al., 2019a) proposed RDF-S and OWL to represent our system-call provenance ontology.
an attack graph detection approach based on manually extracted We discuss this in more detail in Section 5.2.
graph patterns from previously seen attacks, e.g., in threat intel- Semantic Reasoning One of the central ideas of both OWL and
ligence reports. In our approach, we rely on a semantic model, RDF-S is that they enable reasoning over a knowledge graph. This
which facilitates graph matching through semantic graph queries is an important aspect and enables us to automatically infer new
(formulated in SPARQL). Furthermore, our RDF-based provenance knowledge based on existing facts (entities and their relationships).
graph can be easily queried and linked to internal and external We leverage several built-in RDF-S and OWL reasoning rules in
background knowledge through SPARQL query federation. our approach as discussed in Section 5.3, which are based on the
 Ontology-based Threat Detection A number of research ef- foundation of description logics (Horrocks, 2005). Furthermore, in
forts investigated ontologies to support cybersecurity and threat our approach, semantic reasoning is used to simplify RDF mapdetection. Early work (Pinkston et al., 2003) developed an on- pings during the provenance graph building process (discussed in
tology for the intrusion detection domain based on DAML+OIL more detail in Section 6.1) and to reduce the query complexity, e.g.,
(Mcguinness et al., 2002) to extend simple IDS taxonomies with for attack reconstruction i.e. backward-forward chaining mechanism
machine-interpretable deﬁnitions. Ref. More et al. (2012) extended (discussed in Section 6.3).
this IDS Ontology to incorporate cybersecurity-related information SPARQL SPARQL9 is a W3C query language to retrieve and mafrom heterogeneous resource (e.g., web texts, reports). nipulate data stored in RDF. It offers rich expressivity for com-
 Uniﬁe Cybersecurity Ontology (UCO) (Syed et al., 2016) in- plex queries such as aggregation, subqueries, and negation. Furtroduced a more instance-data driven approach to construct a thermore, SPARQL provides capabilities to express queries across
rich cybersecurity ontology by integrating cybersecurity standards multiple distributed data sources through SPARQL query federasuch as STIX (2021), CyBox (2021), CVE (2021), CAPEC (2021),
CVSS (2021a), and CVSS (2021b). UCO provides integration from 5
 https://www.w3.org/standards
heterogeneous sources and supports reasoning (e.g. using prede- 6
 https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/
ﬁned rules to infer attacks). However, UCO and other previously 7
 https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-mt/
proposed ontologies were designed to support intrusion detection 8
 https://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/
rather than attack graph construction. More recent works such as 9
 https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-overview/

 4
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

tion.10 In the security context, this is a major beneﬁt, as security- tion for prioritization, impact assessment and mitigation, and make
relevant information is typically dispersed across different sys- tedious attack investigations more eﬃcient and effective.
tems and networks and requires the consideration of e.g., different R4. Cross-platform Interoperability Integrating provenance
log sources, IT repositories, and cyberthreat intelligence sources data from heterogeneous sources and constructing integrated at-
(Kurniawan et al., 2020). tack graphs spanning multiple systems would be highly beneﬁcial
 in the face of complex multi-host/multi-platform attacks (Li et al.,
 2021). This necessitates a uniﬁed provenance representation that
4. Requirements can abstract from speciﬁcs of individual platforms.

 Based on our analysis of the limitations of the state of the art 5. Conceptualization
(cf. Section 2), we identify the following set of requirements for the
construction of a modular framework for knowledge graph-driven In this section, we describe the conceptualization of our aptactical attack discovery. proach and the use of inference for provenance graph construction.
 R1. Contextualization
 Investigating and prioritizing security alerts, which typically 5.1. System-Call provenance representation
include a large number of false positives, requires extensive
security domain knowledge to understand the context of an Provenance graphs are a highly effective representation to keep
alert (Sarker et al., 2020). This makes it necessary to contextualize track of information ﬂows (Li et al., 2021). They represent interinformation in the provenance graph with appropriate background actions between objects as events. Each event involves a subject,
knowledge, which necessitates a ﬂexible data model. As an exam- i.e., a system object (e.g., a process, thread) that performs a parple, important contextual information on the system under eval- ticular operation (e.g., write, read, send) on an object (e.g., ﬁle,
uation includes installed software and patch versions of the host socket, registry). As objects typically appear in multiple events,
where an alert has been raised. Existing approaches (e.g., Hossain a graph emerges. Although system-call provenance is represented
et al., 2020; Milajerdi et al., 2019a) typically hard-code some con- similarly across different existing approaches (Hassan et al., 2020;
text information (e.g., external networks and software), whereas Hossain et al., 2017; 2020; Milajerdi et al., 2019b), no formal and
the majority currently ignores them altogether. To overcome these standardized representation (ontology) exists. Instead, existing aplimitations, the ability to contextualize provenance graphs with proaches typically use ad-hoc and hard-coded data models which
background knowledge on the system under investigation is a key limits their interoperability, reusability and extensibility.
requirement for our framework.
 R2. Reusability and Extensibility Reusability – e.g., of attack 5.2. KRYSTAL Provenance ontology
patterns and resulting graphs – and extensibility – e.g., of detection, reconstruction, and summarization techniques – have not We propose the KRYSTAL ontology11 as a standard representabeen design priorities in existing monolithic solutions for prove- tion for system-call provenance graphs. Key beneﬁts of using onnance based log analysis. Consequently, approaches each rely on tologies is the ability to share a common understanding – includtheir own data structures developed speciﬁcally for each approach, ing concepts and structure, making assumptions explicit, facilitat-
While this allows for some optimization, it makes it diﬃcult to ing semantic reasoning, and promoting concept reuse (Noy and
reuse and extend methods, techniques, information, and results. McGuinness, 2001). Furthermore, the use of an ontology for prove-
The lack of uniﬁed data formats as a (more speciﬁc) aspect of this nance graph representation makes it easy to integrate background
requirement has also been highlighted as a major limitation of the knowledge and unify the conceptual model across different threat
state of the art in a recent survey (Li et al., 2021). To tackle this detection approaches.
limitation, the developed framework should – while offering ad- In developing the KRYSTAL ontology, we followed a hybrid apequate performance – make it possible to: (i) formulate and ex- proach, i.e., using bottom-up and top-down approaches concurrently
change rules for detection, alerting, and attack graph reconstruc- (Noy and McGuinness, 2001). Bottom-up, we started by analysing
tion in a declarative language, (ii) exchange instances of prove- low-level data structures from applications (e.g., auditlog) and
nance graphs in a standard representation, (iii) query the prove- identifying their entities and relations. Top-down, we considered
nance graphs in a standard language, (iv) incorporate and exchange attack patterns from existing cyberthreat intelligence sources (e.g.,
threat information, and (v) reuse and combine analytic techniques. MITRE ATT&CK Mitre, 2021) and compared our ontology to existing
 R3. Threat intelligence linking Connecting isolated events to re- non-ontological provenance models/schemas. Our developed ontolconstruct a complete attack scenario is an important step to under- ogy is able to represent low-level system-call provenance data and
stand the relevance and impact of alerts. In this context, an ability link it to high-level attack patterns (cf. Section 6.4).
to link low-level threat evidence to phases of complex multi-stage Figure 2 depicts an excerpt of the KRYSTAL Ontology centered
attacks would be highly beneﬁcial. While some existing approaches around core concepts such as User, Host, System Object.
(Hassan et al., 2020; Milajerdi et al., 2019b; Zou et al., 2020) aim to The latter represent system entities such as Processes, Files,
identify steps and associate them with high-level APT phases, they and Sockets. We assign each system object so to a class
do not take advantage of the abundance of available Cyber Threat (identiﬁed by rdfs:Class) and potential sub-classes (identi-
Intelligence (CTI) information available in external sources such as ﬁed by rdfs:subClassOf). Each system object so is a ver-
MITRE ATT&CK (Mitre, 2021), which offers links to Common Vul- tex v and the relations between system objects (e.g., writes,
nerabilities and Exposures (CVE) (CVE, 2021), Common Weakness isReadBy, sends, etc.) are represented via edges e (identiﬁed by
Enumeration (CWE) (CWE, 2021), and others. We therefore deﬁne owl:ObjectProperty).
the ability to leverage such connections and provide integrated The SystemObject class represent system entities in general. It
querying capabilities as a key requirement for the developed ap- has three sub-classes such as Process, File and Socket. The Proproach. This will facilitates abstraction from low-level event graphs cess class represents a running process in a system (e.g. ﬁrefox,
to higher level techniques and tactics, provide additional informa- ssh, etc.) while the File class represents a ﬁle (e.g., system ﬁle, application ﬁle, etc.). We introduce kry:writes, kry:isReadBy

 10 11
 https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-federated-query/ https://w3id.org/sepses/vocab/event/log/

 5
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Fig. 3. RDFS & OWL reasoning for vertice/edge inference.12

Fig. 2. Krystal Ontology - nodes represent concepts (classes) and edges represent
the class relationship (properties).

 Table 2
 RDFS & OWL Reasoning Rules.

 Rule Premise Conclusion

 rdfs2 e1 (v1 , v2 ), rdfs:domain (e1 , X ) v1 ∈ X
 rdfs3 e1 (v1 , v2 ), rdfs:range (e1 , Y ) v2 ∈ Y
 rdfs7 e1 (v1 , v2 ), rdfs:subPropertyOf (e1 , e2 ) e2 ( v1 , v2 ) Fig. 4. rdfs7 (rdfs:subPropertyOf) inference example.
 owl: InverseOf e1 (v1 , v2 ), owl:inverseOf (e1 , e2 ) e2 ( v2 , v1 )

 :/home/admin/clean, since in the ontology we deﬁne kry:writes
and kry:isExecutedBy, kry:deletes, kry:mmap proper- as owl:ObjectProperty with an rdfs:domain of kry:Process.
ties to represent links between Process class and File class. Consequently, based on rdfs2 rule deﬁnition, it will be automat-
The Socket class represents a network connection (combination ically inferred that :Firefox ∈ kry:Process. The system object
of an IPAddress and Port). We deﬁned kry:sends and :/home/admin/clean is another example. Since kry:writes has
kry:isReceivedBy properties that link the Process class to the rdfs:range of kry:File, based on the rdfs3 rule deﬁnition, it will
Socket class. be deduced that :/home/admin/clean ∈ kry:File. This class type
 We also deﬁned User, a class that describes user of a system. inference is useful for, e.g., formulating semantic graph queries
It has three sub-classes, i.e., (i) RootUser, that represents the root- to detect attack patterns based on the system object type and
level user, (ii) SystemUser, represents the system-level user, (iii) their relations. We discuss the query processes in more detail in
LocalUser, represents the local-level user. Section 6.
 We also deﬁned Host class that represent a host machine. The rdfs7 This rule is used to generalize relations based on propkry:hasUser property connects Process class to the User class, erty hierarchies identiﬁed by rdfs:subPropertyOf. In the examwhile the kry:originatesFrom property links it to Host class. ple in Fig. 4, for instance, :Firefox has the relation kry:writes
Finally, we also deﬁned several other classes such as Executable to :/home/admin/clean, and in the ontology, kry:writes is a subclass that identiﬁes an executable ﬁle and IPAddress that repre- property of the more generic property kry:provRel, which represents an IP Address. The kry:hasExe property connects Process sents provenance relationships.
to Executable and kry:hasHostIP that links Process to IPAd- Based on the rdfs7 rule, kry:provRel will be automatically indress. ferred between objects that have a more speciﬁc relation; this
 Furthermore, we introduce a provenance relation (identiﬁed by creates provenance links for all system object relationships (e.g.,
kry:provRel) that self-links to SystemObject. It is a generic, from the :Firefox process to the :/home/admin/clean ﬁle to the
upper-level relation property that is used to represent provenance :Clean process etc.). This is helpful to identify information ﬂows,
relationships between system objects (e.g., socket to process, pro- track causality of events, and reconstruct attack graph. We discuss
cess to ﬁle, ﬁle to process). This provenance relation is automati- the advantage of having explicit provenance relations (e.g., during
cally inferred from more speciﬁc relation properties, as explained backward-forward analysis for attack graph reconstruction) further
in the following. in Section 6.3.
 owl:InverseOf Finally, a reasoning technique that we use in our
5.3. Inference features in KRYSTAL ontology ontology is property inversion, identiﬁed by owl:InverseOf, which
 creates relations between system objects in both directions. For in-
 The KRYSTAL ontology uses the RDF-S entailment and OWL rea- stance, as depicted in Fig. 3, :Firefox has a relation kry:writes
soning rules summarized in Table 2 for provenance graph con- to :/home/admin/clean and in the ontology, kry:writes is deﬁned
struction. as owl:inverseOf to kry:isWrittenBy. Based on the owl:inverseOf
 rdfs2 & rdfs3 These rules are used to automatically infer the rule, it will be automatically inferred that :/home/admin/clean also
speciﬁc type of a given system object based on its relations.12 has a relation kry:isWrittenBy to :Firefox. The same holds for
 For example, as depicted in Fig. 3, system object :Firefox13 property kry:executes, since it has the relation owl:inverseOf to
has the relation kry:writes to another system object kry:isExecutedBy in the ontology.

 12
 6. Solution architecture
 We represent objects with different colors: orange for processes, purple for ﬁles,
blue for sockets, and transparent-dotted circles for inferred system object types.
 13
 Note that we deﬁne preﬁx “:” for an instance and “kry:” for Krystal ontology. We In this section we present KRYSTAL, a modular framework for
omit it in ﬁgures for simplicity. tactical attack discovery in audit data. The proposed framework in-

 6
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Fig. 5. Krystal Framework Architecture.

Listing 1. Excerpt of an RDF-based provenance graph generated from a log event.
 Listing 2. Excerpt of inferred RDF triples.

tegrates a variety of attack discovery mechanisms and takes advantage of its semantic model to include internal and external knowl- graph representation. Speciﬁcally, we used the KRYSTAL ontology
edge in the analysis. Fig. 5 gives an overview of the KRYSTAL attack described in Section 5.2 and RML14 , a declarative RDF-mapping
discovery framework which consists of three main parts, i.e., (i) language, to map the parsed audit data and transform them into
provenance graph building, (ii) threat detection and alerting, and well-deﬁned, RDF-based provenance graphs.
(iii) attack graph and scenario reconstruction. Listing 1 shows an excerpt of a log event in RDF representation.
 Security analysis is typically conducted either online or oﬄine. It captures the fact that a system object (Firefox process) created a
Online refers to an analysis performed in a running system in ﬁle (“/home/admin/clean”). In RDF, the Firefox process is modeled
(near) real-time, whereas oﬄine refers to analysis over collected as subject :Firefox, the “write” operation is represented as propdata. These two modes have a different purpose (monitoring vs erty kry:writes and the ﬁle “/home/admin/clean” is connected
forensics), but they can complement each other in hybrid settings as object :/home/admin/clean.
(Marz and Warren, 2015). Taking advantage of reasoning rules (cf. Section 5.3), Listing 2
 KRYSTAL works in an online mode in that it imports each shows the inferred RDF triples from the provenance graph.
log event in sequence from potentially heterogeneous hosts (e.g., :Firefox has been identiﬁed as a kry:Process and
Linux, Windows, FreeBSD). The Provenance Graph Building mod- kry:SystemObject. In addition, the provenance relation propule then generates an RDF-based provenance graph, taking advan- erty :provRel with the object :/home/admin/clean has been
tage of the well-deﬁned ontology and enabling enrichment with added automatically, and the type of :/home/admin/clean has
background knowledge. Subsequently, the Threat Detection & Alert- been inferred as kry:File.
ing module allows for the combination of various approaches on Graph Reduction & Compression We apply two strategies to rethe uniform Knowledge Graph (KG). We illustrate the generality duce the graph size. First, we automatically merge the duplicated
of the approach by implementing a set of common mechanisms RDF output identiﬁed by the same URI (2021), thus eliminating reas SPARQL queries, combining (i) tag propagation, (ii) attenuation dundant events (events with the same subject, property and object).
& decay, and (iii) signature-based detection based on Indicator of Furthermore, we skipped irrelevant events – i.e., events that are
Compromise. The Attack Graph Reconstruction module then facili- not considered in our ontology – from being processed. Second,
tates (oﬄine) attack graph generation via Backward-forward chain- we use Header Dictionary Triples (HDT) (Fernández et al., 2013) as
ing and attack pattern matching via Graph Querying over the prove- a graph compression technique that provides a compact data strucnance graph. We explain each component in more detail in the fol- ture and binary serialization format for RDF. HDT keeps large graph
lowing subsections. data compressed and manageable while enabling query operations
 without prior decompression. We discuss our graph reduction and
6.1. Provenance graph building compression results in Section 8.

 This component consists of two sub-components, Log Parsing
 6.2. Threat detection & alerting
and RDF Mapping. Log Parsing transforms raw log events from heterogeneous hosts and operating systems (e.g., auditd from Linux,
 Due to the uniform KG representation, the KRYSTAL framework
ETW from Windows, and dtrace from FreeBSD) into a structured allows to combine and integrate a variety of techniques for threat
format (i.e., JSON). This component selects and parses important
 detection and alerting. We illustrate this by (i) transforming and
information from the log event such as system entities (e.g., processes, ﬁles, sockets, etc.) and their relations (e.g., read, write, execute, etc). RDF-Mapping maps the structured log data into an RDF 14
 https://rml.io/

 7
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Fig. 6. Tag Propagation Example.

 Listing 3. Propagation rule for incoming socket connections.
 Listing 4. Attenuation rule for a benign write propagation.

integrating established threat detection and alerting techniques (ii)
incorporating a signature-based threat detection approach through viate this issue by considering objects imperfect intermediaries for
the transformation of curated public rules (e.g. Sigma Rule), and propagating malicious behavior through a benign process. In the
(iii) link the identiﬁed attack pattern into high-level attack tech- previous example (cf. Fig. 6), for instance, the low integrity process
nique and tactic (TTPs Mapping). Rather than hard-coding these p1 writes a ﬁle f1 , lowering its integrity. To avoid excessive propamechanisms and developing them for a custom data structure, we gation to other objects from there, the integrity and conﬁdentiality
show in the following how they can be implemented as stan- tags of a benign subject get attenuated before they propagate to
dard declarative SPARQL queries. Tag Propagation is a prominent another benign object. This can be achieved by applying an addimethod to establish event causality in the context of provenance tive factor af to the original tag value.
graphs. It is based on a set of rules to assign tag values onto sys- Tag decay is based on the assumption that in case a benign
tem object nodes (i.e., process, ﬁle, socket, etc.) upon interaction subject gets compromised and becomes suspicious, it will do so
between them (Hossain et al., 2017). In order to trace the impact of soon after consuming a suspicious input (e.g., read low integrity
malicious events, tags and values will be propagated sequentially ﬁle) (Hossain et al., 2020). Consequently, this technique gradually
through a provenance graph to other system objects if a given tag lifts the score of the low integrity subject and limits benign obpropagation rule is satisﬁed. jects from being propagated and ﬂagged as suspicious, particularly
 Figure 6 illustrates tag propagation with an example. It for long-running processes.
introduces integrity and conﬁdentiality tags to identify the Listing 4 illustrates how the KRYSTAL framework enables declarsuspicion level of a node. We express propagation rules ative deﬁnitions of such rules using SPARQL queries. It shows an
Hossain et al. (2020) as SPARQL queries processed by our tag prop- example of an attenuation rule for a benign write propagation that
agation component. Listing 3 shows the query matching the illus- checks for a <process> that :writes a conﬁdential <file>.
tration in Fig. 6. It checks if a socket connection (<socket>) The rule gradually increments the conﬁdentiality tag (:confTag)
is received by (:isReceivedBy) a process (<process>) and value (?sct) of processes.
then compares the minimum (afn:min) integrity tag value Provenance-Based Alerting Provenance-based alerting policies
(:intTag) of the <socket> (identiﬁed by ?oit variable) and detect attacks based on the simultaneous fulﬁllment of sev-
<process> (identiﬁed by ?sit variable).15 If ?oit is not the eral conditions in the provenance graph. These conditions (cf.
same as ?sit, it updates16 ?sit with the new value (identiﬁed Hossain et al., 2020) take data integrity tags as well as informaby the ?nit variable). tion associated with nodes (e.g., permissions, users) into account.
 Attenuation & Decay are techniques to tackle the “dependence For example, a suspicious ﬁle execution can be detected under the
explosion” problem (Hossain et al., 2017), which occurs when a following alert policy:
node in the provenance graph interacts with a large number of sys-
 • a ﬁle f is executed by a process p,
tem objects, causing a large number of benign events to be ﬂagged
 • f has a low integrity tag value (<0.5) and p is benign (integrity
as being part of an attack (Hossain et al., 2020). This leads to a
 >=0.5).
large number of false-positive alerts, making it diﬃcult to identify
relevant alerts. Tag attenuation (Hossain et al., 2020) aims to alle- The KRYSTAL framework facilitates provenance-based alerting by
 expressing alert policies as SPARQL queries and matching them
 against the provenance log graph. Listing 5 provides an exam-
 15
 System objects with integrity scores in the interval [0.0 − 0.5| are considered
suspicious and scores in the interval [0.5 − 1.0] are considered benign. ple of an alerting policy for suspicious ﬁle execution. The query
 16
 SPARQL uses DELETE and INSERT to perform update operations on triple(s); matches a ﬁle (?file) with a low integrity value that has been
cf. https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-update/ executed by a benign process. Speciﬁcally, ﬁles with a tag value

 8
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Fig. 7. Signature/rule-based threat detection example using the translated Sigma-rule query.

 Our framework translates these Sigma rule speciﬁcations23 automatically and transforms them into SPARQL query expressions.
 Speciﬁcally, we identiﬁed two search-identiﬁers under the detection attribute: (i) lists that contain strings applied to the full log
 message and joined with a logical ’OR’, and (ii) maps that consist
 of key/value pairs, where key is a ﬁeld in the log data and value
 is a string or integer. Lists of maps are joined with a logical “OR”
 while all elements of a map are joined with a logical “AND”.
 We express lists as SPARQL ﬁlters with regex matching, while
 maps are represented as triple patterns, i.e. Subject (S), Predicate
 Listing 5. Alerting policy represented as SPARQL query.
 (P), and Object (O). S is a log object, P is a log property i.e., key/ﬁeld
 in the log data and O is the value. Similar to lists, we express
 the key/value pair matching using regex ﬁlters in SPARQL. Furthermore, we also map and transform the rule metadata into RDF.
below 0.5 are considered low integrity and the respective triple
 Figure 7 part (2) shows an example translation of a Sigma rule into
?file :isExecutedBy ?process) will be marked with the
 SPARQL and RDF.
detected rule.17
 The translated Sigma rules are executed against the provenance
 Signature/Rule-based Threat Detection We complement the
 graph to detect potential attacks/threats in the Threat Detection and
provenance-based mechanisms with a signature/rule-based detec-
 Alerting module of our framework. As we can see in Fig. 7 part (3),
tion approach that utilizes IoC deﬁnitions to identify known atwe detect an alert called “Program Executions in Suspicious Folder”
tacks in log events. This illustrates that the uniform KG representain the provenance graph since the execution of the /tmp/vUgefal
tion facilitates the combination of a variety of approaches by using
 process is located in the /tmp/ folder as deﬁned in the Sigma rule.
a common declarative query language.
 Subsequently, the generated alert will be linked automatically to
 Signatures are an established and effective approach in dethe T1204.002 (User Execution: Malicious File) technique from the
tecting known attack patterns, but maintaining the set of rules
 ATT&CK knowledge graph (Kurniawan et al., 2021) in the backand signatures can be labour-intensive (Li et al., 2021). To tackle
 ground knowledge (cf. Fig. 7 part (4)). We explain this linking
this problem, KRYSTAL leverages Sigma18 – an open, shareable,
 mechanism further in Section 6.3.
community-driven and generic rule format for threat detection in
logs.
 Figure 7 part (1) shows an example of signature/rule-based
threat detection deﬁned in Sigma.19 Each Sigma-rule is written 6.3. Attack graph reconstruction
in YAML20 and deﬁnes the detection rule and its metadata (title, id, date, author, log-source etc.). A key beneﬁt of these rules The next important step once the provenance graph has been
is that the tags metadata links rules to speciﬁc TTPs from MITRE constructed and alerts have been raised is to understand how the
ATT&CK. For example, attack.t1204.002 corresponds to the tech- alerts are connected and to reconstruct potential attack steps. To
nique T1204.00221 (User Execution: Malicious File). As per November this end, we construct an attack graph and the attack scenario
202122 , Sigma contains more than 1497 rules/signatures for differ- out of the provenance graph through (i) Backward-Forward Chainent log sources (e.g., application, network, web logs) and platforms ing and (ii) Graph Querying.
(e.g., Linux & Windows). Backward-Forward Chaining Backward-Forward Chaining is
 used to ﬁrst identify the potential root cause of an attack and then
 reconstruct the overall attack steps. As provenance-based alerting
 may produce a lot of alerts, we need to prioritize them and iden-
 17
 We used the SPARQL CONSTRUCT syntax to generate new triples and link the tify potential root cause alerts of an attack. This can be done by
detected alert to the respective rule. assigning an alert score during backward searching, i.e., increment-
 18
 https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
 19
 ing alert scores of each predecessor alert on a path.
 https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
 20
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML
 21
 https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1204/003/
 22 23
 Last access: 11/26/2021 https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma/wiki/Speciﬁcation

 9
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Listing 6. Backward searching expressed as SPARQL query.

 Listing 7. Forward chaining mechanism expressed as SPARQL query.

 For this search, we leverage Property Paths24 , a SPARQL feature
that allows us to ﬁnd routes between nodes in the RDF provenance
graph. Recall that we used rdfs7 inference to automatically generate an upper-level relation :provRel between system objects.
 As shown in Listing 6, the backward search query consists of
a triple pattern [ ?currentAlert ∧:provRel∗ ?s ], in which
∧.∗ represents the property path that ﬁnds all possible backward connections from a node ?currentAlert to a node ?s
via the relation property :provRel, where ?s is classiﬁed as
part of another alert. We represent this condition as an RDF-star25
statement, i.e., [ <<?s ?p ?o>> rule:hasDetectedRule
 Fig. 8. Graph query alignment example: Graph query (red box) is aligned over the
?rule ].
 provenance graph to detect potential attack patterns. The constructed attack graph
 Next, we iteratively update the alert scores for each prede- below represents a detected pattern. (For interpretation of the references to colour
cessor alert (+1). After scoring all alerts, we can construct attack in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
sequences, starting with the alerts with the highest values and
performing forward chaining to construct attack scenario graphs.
We use the same technique as we did for backward chaining,
i.e., property paths to ﬁnd forward routes connected to the de-
ﬁned starting nodes. Listing 7 shows the generic SPARQL query
to construct an attack scenario from the provenance graph. From
the ?startingNode, it ﬁnds possible routes and visits connected
nodes via the :provRel relation. A threshold deﬁnes which nodes
will be connected, e.g., only low integrity nodes with an integrity
tag lower than 0.5.
 Graph Querying Graph querying can detect attack behavior in a
provenance graph based on attack patterns. The graph query patterns can be constructed from observed behavior or existing information in published CTI, incident reports, public malware documentation, etc. Based on that, the patterns can be constructed
manually or – potentially – also through automated extraction
methods such as AttacKG (King and Chen, 2003b).
 Listing 8. SPARQL graph query26 for Fig. 8.
 Figure 8 visualizes a graph query example. A subset of the
graph (red box) represents an observed attack pattern inside the
provenance graph. Unlike previous work (Gao et al., 2018a; 2018b;
Milajerdi et al., 2019a) that use custom domain-speciﬁc languages to match potential attack patterns. Listing 827 depicts an examto perform graph querying, KRYSTAL provides a uniform graph ple graph query visualized in Fig. 8. It detects a potential attack
querying mechanism with a high expressivity through SPARQL. Fur- where a browser receives a connection from a socket (?socket
thermore, it also supports linking to other datasets. :isReceivedBy ?browser). The fact that ?browser is of
 To formulate graph patterns in SPARQL26 , we can deﬁne sys- type :Browser is established in the background knowledge (i.e.
tem object types as nodes (i.e., via Classes) and their interac- <http://w3id.org/sepses/..knowledge>). The SPARQL
tions as relation properties (i.e., via Object Properties). The formu- query federation mechanism is used to include the background
lated graph queries can be executed against the provenance graphs knowledge in the query (SERVICE syntax).
 Subsequently, the browser creates a ﬁle in the local system
 (deﬁned by ?browser :writes ?file1). This ﬁle is then exe-
 24
 https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/#propertypaths
 25
 https://w3c.github.io/rdf- star/cg- spec/editors_draft.html
 26 27
 Graph pattern that identiﬁes a speciﬁc known attack pattern; deﬁned based on Note that the automatic construction of graph patterns from existing resources
the DARPA Transparent Computing TA5.1 Ground Truth Report (DAR, 2021). is out of scope for this paper.

 10
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Listing 9. Contextualization and linking through semantic query federation
Fig. 9. Background linking example, to automatically link alerts detected by the (SPARQL Service).
threat detection module to external background knowledge (e.g. ATT&CK-KG).

cuted as a new process (:file1 :isExecutedBy :process2)
and reads another conﬁdential ﬁle (?file1 :reads ?file2).
Next, the process sends the conﬁdential ﬁle to another socket
(process :sends ?socket2). We can use the FILTER syntax
(i.e. FILTER (?fit < 0.5)) to focus on conﬁdential ﬁles (i.e.,
with a tag value (?file2 rule:confTag ?fit) lower than
0.5).28
 To reconstruct the resulting attack graph, we used SPARQL
CONSTRUCT queries to generate new triples in RDF. The generated
attack graph can be shared and reused – e.g., for further threat
hunting activities and analysis.
 Fig. 10. Implementation Setup.
6.4. Contextualization & linking

 Security-related events are typically highly context-speciﬁc and query patterns such as SERVICE followed by an endpoint e.g.
hence, their interpretation requires extensive background knowl- http://w3id.org/sepses/repositories/knowledge which references exteredge (Ekelhart et al., 2018). Such knowledge plays an important nal background knowledge. This links a detected rule with a corrole in our approach and can enrich and provide additional infor- responding attack technique in the background knowledge (idenmation – e.g., to identify high-level attack steps in the generated tiﬁed by the triple pattern ?r rule:hasAttackTechnique
attack graph. ?tech). Finally, we also link the identiﬁed technique to a tactic
 In particular, we link results to our previously developed SEPSES (identiﬁed by ?tech at:accomplishesTactic ?tt). This il-
CSKG (Kiesling et al., 2019), a continuously updated cybersecu- lustrates how the SPARQL federation mechanism makes it possible
rity knowledge graph that integrates data from various publicly to query and link an entity to additional resources, such as mitigaavailable sources, including CAPEC, CPE, CVE, CVSS, and CWE. Fur- tion techniques, impacts, etc.
thermore, we extend the SEPSES CSKG with attack patterns from
MITRE ATT&CK that consist of 665 attack techniques and 14 attack 7. Implementation & application scenarios
tactics (ATT&CK-KG Kurniawan et al., 2021).
 Figure 9 illustrates this background knowledge link- In this section, we describe the implementation of our frameing. The example relation :isExecutedBy between a ﬁle work and demonstrate its feasibility in several scenarios.
:/home/admin/clean and a process :Clean can be linked to
attack techniques and tactics in the background knowledge: in this
case, the technique “exploitation for client execution”, identiﬁed by 7.1. Implementation
node :T1203) from the MITRE ATT&CK matrix29 (Kurniawan et al.,
2021). Since node :T1203 also provides links to additional infor- Figure 10 visualizes the implementation architecture of our apmation (tactics, mitigations, etc.), we can use this node to abstract proach. We developed a Java-based log processing tool called the
from concrete indicators to a higher-level conceptualization of KRYSTAL engine30 that consumes log data from three different log
attacks and their techniques, tactics, procedures. sources, i.e., Linux auditd, FreeBSD DTrace31 , and Windows ETW.
 Listing 9 shows an excerpt of background linking dur- We used the KRYSTAL Ontology to parse and map log data into
ing forward chaining via SPARQL query federation. We mod- an RDF-based provenance graph. By means of the Jena32 reasoniﬁed the query from Listing 7 and introduced additional ing engine, we can infer new knowledge during provenance graph
 building.

 28
 Recall that semantic reasoning infers the type (i.e. Class) of system objects auto-
 30
matically based on their relations (i.e., rdfs2 & rdfs3), hence, we can deﬁne attack https://github.com/sepses/SimpleLogProvenance
 31
patterns based on their relations only. https://wiki.freebsd.org/DTrace/
 29 32
 https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1203/ https://jena.apache.org/documentation/inference/

 11
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Table 3
 Attack Scenarios.

 Scenario
 ID Dataset ID OS Platform Scenario Name Scenario description

 1 Cadets I FreeBSD Nginx Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory. An attacker sent a malformed HTTP request to a
 backdoor vulnerable Nginx web server that leads to several malicious ﬁle creations and process
 executions in the local system (Figure 11).
 2 Cadets I FreeBSD Nginx Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory. A vulnerable Nginx webserver downloads several
 backdoor malicious ﬁles after being exploited by a malformed HTTP request (Figure 12).
 3 Cadets II FreeBSD Nginx Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory. Similar to Scenario 3, the vulnerable Nginx webserver
 backdoor was successfully exploited by an attacker. It downloads a payload ﬁle which leads to
 sensitive information leaking (Figure 13).
 4 Theia Ubuntu Firefox Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory. Firefox process gets exploited by a malicious website
 12.04 backdoor to download and execute ﬁles to steal sensitive information from users (Figure 11).
 5 Five Windows Firefox Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory. Firefox process gets exploited via a drakor memory
 Direction 10 backdoor payload after browsing a malicious website (Figure 15).

 Furthermore, we extended the existing SEPSES Cybersecurity RAM) machine was used for scenario reconstruction, graph query-
Knowledge Graph (Kiesling et al., 2019) by including attack tech- ing and attack graph visualization using Stardog Studio.35
niques and tactics from MITRE ATT&CK and incorporate it as exter- Dataset Overview For the evaluation, we used well-established
nal background knowledge. Furthermore, we translate existing IoC datasets from red vs. blue team adversarial engagements produced
Sigma (Roth and Patzke, 2021) rules into SPARQL queries. as part of the third Transparent Computing (TC) program organized
 To construct attack graphs (through backward-forward chaining by DARPA (DAR, 2021). The datasets are organized into ﬁve catand graph querying), link internal and external background knowl- egories, namely Cadets, Trace, Theia, FiveDirections and ClearScope.
edge (via SPARQL query federation), as well as to visualize the re- Each dataset includes log events generated during the engagesulting attack graphs, we use the in-memory Jena TDB33 and the ments on a speciﬁc targeted host and platform. For example, Cadets
Stardog Enterprise Knowledge Graph platform.34 represents dtrace36 log data from FreeBSD OS, Trace and Theia have
 been generated from auditd37 Ubuntu log data, and FiveDirection
7.2. Application scenarios contains ETW38 log data from Microsoft Windows and ClearScope
 collected from Android logs. In addition, a description of attack
 In the following application scenarios, we demonstrate how steps is available as ground truth. Table 4 summarizes the ﬁve atthe KRYSTAL framework automatically constructs compact attack tack scenarios from the Theia (TH), Cadets (CD), and FiveDirection
graphs, links and contextualizes them with background knowledge, (FD) datasets that we evaluated. In total, the scenarios covers more
and ﬁnally maps them to high-level attack steps via TTPs deﬁned than 7 days of log data from three datasets, with more than 53 GB
in MITRE ATT&CK. of logs in JSON format.39
 We use a DARPA dataset (DAR, 2021) that contains attack sce-
 8.2. Experiment results
narios carried out by a red team as part of the DARPA Transparent Computing (TC) program. An overview of the attack scenarios
 We collect the following evaluations metrics in our experican be found in Table 3. Due to space limitation, we only explain
 ments: (i) provenance graph size reduction and compression perone scenario in this section (Scenario 1), and include the remaining
 formance, (ii) run-time performance, (iii) provenance-based alert
scenarios in the appendix. Scenario 1 - Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon
 detection, (iv) rule-based alert detection.
in-memory This attack scenario has been used as motivation exam-
 Graph Size Reduction & Compression Performance Table 4 shows
ple in Section 1. As shown in Fig. 11, our system detected a numthe evaluation results for provenance graph generation and comber of alerts including ﬁle creation, change permission, ﬁle execupression in the ﬁve scenarios.
tion, and data-leak. After performing backward and forward chain-
 Our system generates RDF-based provenance graphs in RDF
ing, we successfully constructed the attack graph of this scenario.
 TURTLE format.40 Out of the 18.7 GB Theia log dataset, for instance,
Furthermore, we performed query federation during forward chainwe generated a 280 MB provenance graph (i.e., 66x smaller), the
ing to include external background knowledge. Our query yields
 set of Cadets datasets (19 GB) resulted in a 400 MB provenance
an attack graph that automatically links the detected alerts to the
 graph (i.e., 48x smaller), and out of the Five direction dataset
MITRE ATT&CK techniques and tactics. Finally, we can see the re-
 (16 GB), we generated a 25 MB provenance graph (i.e., 640x
constructed attack graph together with its kill-chain phases such
 smaller).
as Reconnaissance, Defense Evasion, Execution and Exﬁltration.
 The last column of Table 4 shows the compression results of the generated provenance graphs for each dataset in
8. Evaluation HDT (Fernández et al., 2013) format. On average, the resulting compressed provenance graphs are approximately smaller by a factor
 In this section, we evaluate the KRYSTAL framework through a of 22 than the generated provenance graphs in TURTLE format.
set of experiments and discuss the results. Run-time Performance We evaluate three aspects to measure
 the run-time performance of our approach: (i) Time for generating
8.1. Experimental setup the provenance graphs from the log data, including time for tagpropagation, attenuation & decay and provenance-based alerting; (ii)
 We performed the experiments on two machines: (i) an Ubuntu
18.04 Server (Intel 2.59 GHz vCPU, 32 GB RAM) was used for 35
 https://www.stardog.com/studio/
provenance graph building and evaluation of threat detection and 36
 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DTrace
alerting techniques. (ii) a Windows 10 (Intel 2.90 GHz vCPU, 16 GB 37
 https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd
 38
 https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/etw/event-tracing-portal
 39
 Note that DARPA published the datasets in both binary and JSON formats, we
 33
 https://jena.apache.org/documentation/tdb/ used the JSON data as input in our evaluation.
 34
 https://www.stardog.com/platform/ 40
 https://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/

 12
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

Fig. 11. Scenario 1 (Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory). This attack begins with a vulnerable Nginx web server hosted on a FreeBSD server that gets exploited by a
malformed HTTP request. The exploit leads to multiple ﬁle creations on the local system. The attacker successfully creates an executable ﬁle (“/tmp/XIM”), changes the
permissions and runs it as an elevated process. This process reads a sensitive ﬁle (“/etc/passwd”) and forwards data to an external network (53.158.101.118:80).

 Table 4
 Graph size reduction & compression.

 Scenario ID Dataset ID Duration (hh:mm) Log data in JSON (GB) Prov. in RDF (MB) Prov. in HDT (MB)

 1,2 CD I 48:59 7 150 7
 3 CD II 90:01 12 250 10
 4 TH 25:33 18.7 280 16
 5 FD 19:27 16 25 0.9

 Table 5
 Scenario graph construction run-time.

 Scenario ID Total Events (M) Prov. Graph Building & Alerting (events/sec) Forward Chaining (sec) Graph Querying (sec)

 1,2 7.8 16.8 K 0.79 0.31
 3 12.9 17.5 K 0.99 0.26
 4 23.4 15.6 K 1.6 0.41
 5 19.3 37.8 K 1.99 0.42

Time for constructing the scenario graphs via list:forward-chaining; background knowledge the tradeoff seems favorable. Overall, our
and (iii) Time for generating scenario graphs through graph query- framework achieved a performance of 1.2 s per attack on average
ing. in the scenario graph construction via list:forward-chaining. The
 We repeated each experiment ﬁve times and present average highest performance has been achieved in scenario 2 and 3 (Cadets
results. dataset with FreeBSD) with 0.79 s. Note that we excluded time for
 As shown in Table 5, our approach can generate RDF-based backward-chaining for root cause identiﬁcation as it is basically a
provenance graphs from log data with up to 20k events/sec on select query over the provenance graph (without constructing a
average. The highest performance for provenance generation is new graph) and therefore the run times are relatively fast. The run
achieved in Scenario 5 (FiveDirection dataset on Windows), with time for scenario graph generation through graph querying is even
37.8k events/sec. Compared to the other scenarios, FiveDirection has faster, i.e., less than 0.5 s for all scenarios. This indicates that our
a larger number of events that are not considered in our model, RDF-based provenance graph data model scales well with respect
resulting in a large number of events that can be excluded in the to graph size and query complexity when it comes to graph-query
provenance graph generation process. based attack construction.
 Compared to MORSE, which achieved 100K events/sec Propagation-Based Alert Detection Performance In the follow-
(Hossain et al., 2020), provenance construction is somewhat ing, we measure the effectiveness of our approach in detecting
slower.41 This performance penalty with respect to approaches alerts based on alerting policies over the tagged provenance graph.
based on optimized custom data structures is expected and We leverage alert policies such as Change Permission, File Execution,
mainly attributable to the parsing, RDF lifting and the in-memory File Corruption, or Data Leak from (Hossain et al., 2020). In addi-
SPARQL query execution times necessary for tag propagation. The tion, we created a custom alert Reconn that detects connections
manageable reduction in run time performance in our evaluation from external IPs to processes that access sensitive ﬁles. Table 6
demonstrates that the approach is viable. Given the beneﬁts, in- summarizes the detected alerts for all scenarios. Overall, our apcluding improved reusability, interoperability, and enrichment with proach detected all high-level attack activities in the ground truth
 and achieved similar detection performance as the evaluation in
 41
 Hossain et al. (2020) (cf. Table 3).
 Speciﬁcally, by a factor of 5 for Linux/FreeBSD and 3 for Windows, respectively.

 13
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Table 6
 Provenance-based alert detection.

 Scenario ID Total Events (M) Reconn Change Perm File Exec File Corrupt Data Leak

 1,2 7.8 65 1152 15 115 3
 3 12.9 4 1274 1 1040 3
 4 23.4 3 9 2 618 3
 5 19.3 22 448 0 288 10

 Table 7
 Detected alerts by Sigma rules.

 Scenario ID Dataset ID Total Events (M) Correctly Identiﬁed Alert Incorrectly Identiﬁed Alert

 1,2 CD I 7.8 34 0
 3 CD II 12.9 41 0
 4 TH 23.4 19 0
 5 FD 19.3 1162 261

 Signature-Based Alert Detection Performance In this evalu- The scenario attack graph in Fig. 11, for instance, shows an enation, we used the Sigma rules incorporated into our KRYSTAL riched attack graph constructed through a combination of techframework to detect attacks based on IoCs from logs. As discussed niques summarized in Table 8, which compares KRYSTAL to other
in Section 6.2, we automatically translated Sigma rules into ex- state of the art approaches and highlights the integrative aspect
ecutable SPARQL queries and run them against the provenance of the framework. The identiﬁed attack steps are linked to rich
graph. To this end, we translated most of the existing Sigma rules background knowledge on techniques, tactics, procedures (SEPSES
for Linux logs (33 rules) and Windows logs (160 rules). At the time ATT&CK-KGKurniawan et al. (2021)) in (cf. Fig. 9, detailed informaof writing42 , there are no speciﬁc Sigma rules for dtrace FreeBSD, tion on tactics and techniques not shown due to space constraints).
however, dtrace FreeBSD logs have a similar structure to auditd
Linux logs in the evaluated DARPA dataset, hence, we could also
use them to detect attacks in FreeBSD logs.
 9. Discussion
 Table 7 shows the number of triggered alerts based on Sigma
rules from all ﬁve scenarios within our KRYSTAL framework. For
 In this section, we discuss how KRYSTAL can support threat descenarios with Linux and FreeBSD as log sources, the translated
 tection and attack reconstruction processes and cover its limita-
Sigma rules detected similar alerts as propagation-based alert detions.
tection without any incorrectly identiﬁed alerts. It includes alerts
 Uniform Data Model and Representation A uniform represenfor system owner or user discovery43 , ﬁle or folder permissions
 tation is a key foundation to be able to fulﬁll the requirements put
change44 , privilege escalation preparation45 , program executions in
 forth in Section 4. Existing provenance-graph based detection and
suspicious folders46 , etc. Furthermore, Sigma rules detected more
 investigation approaches lack a uniﬁed data format, which hinders
speciﬁc alerts which have been missed by propagation-based aptheir reuse and integration. KRYSTAL ﬁlls this gap (also cf. Li et al.,
proaches, such as bash_proﬁle modiﬁcation47 (as part of the persis-
 2021) with a knowledge graph framework based on the W3C stantence phase), and data compressed48 (as part of the data-exﬁltration
 dards RDF and OWL.55 The uniﬁed model allowed us to combine
phase).
 various state of the art threat detection techniques and apply them
 For Windows, we identiﬁed more alerts on Scenario 5 (Five Dion a common provenance graph – fulﬁlling R2. Furthermore, it also
rection) with a total of 1162 alerts (with 261 incorrect alerts that
 also makes it easier to construct datasets and share provenance
could not be linked to actual attack activities in the scenario).
 graph data.
Relevant alerts include, e.g., Suspicious Service Path Modiﬁcation49 ,
 Our evaluation showed that the KRYSTAL ontology can be used
Suspicious XOR Encoded PowerShell Command Line50 , Rar with Passto model audit data across platforms – i.e., Linux (auditd), FreeBSD
word or Compression Level51 , Change Default File Association52 , LSASS
 (dtrace), and Windows (ETW) – thereby fulﬁlling R4. Overall, this
Memory Dumping53 , and Capture a Network Trace with netsh.exe.54
 should contribute towards lowering the barrier for further re-
 Integrated and Enriched Cross-Technique Graphs
 search, reproduction, and quantitative comparison.
 Our experiments showed that the knowledge graph founda-
 Finally, we also ﬁnd that the uniform representation makes it
tion enables the integration of results from various detection techpossible to contextualize provenance graphs with knowledge from
niques and their linking to additional knowledge and gives the
 internal and external sources (R1). This is particularly useful for
analyst a rich view for comprehensive, multi-paradigmatic threat
 KRYSTAL’s ability to not only reconstruct low-level attack graphs,
analysis.
 but also link them to high-level attack tactics and techniques from
 MITRE ATT&CK (R3).
 42
 last access 04/05/2021 Future approaches building on our model can take advantage
 43
 http://bit.ly/sigmaDiscovery of the semantic ﬂexibility and richness offered by the existing RDF
 44
 http://bit.ly/sigmaFolderPermission
 45
 ecosystem. RDF can, for instance, support multiple paradigms for
 http://bit.ly/sigmaPrivilegeEscalation
 46
 http://bit.ly/sigmaProgramExecution
 the implementation of data management architectures in prove-
 47
 http://bit.ly/sigmaBashProﬁleModiﬁcation nance graph-based detection systems, including (i) materialized
 48
 http://bit.ly/sigmaDataCompressed graphs in triple stores, (ii) cached graphs implemented as in-
 49
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinSuspService memory triple stores (Hu et al., 2016), (iii) distributed graphs
 50
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinPowerShellXOR (Abdelaziz et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2014; Lehmann et al., 2017), (iv)
 51
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinRarFlags
 52
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinChangeFileAssoc
 53
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinLSASSDump
 54 55
 http://bit.ly/SigmaWinNetSHPacket cf. https://www.w3.org/standards/

 14
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Table 8
 Detection techniques supported by state of the art approaches.

 Detection Holmes Morse (Hossain et al., Poirot (Milajerdi et al., Rapsheet (Hassan et al.,
 Technique (Milajerdi et al., 2019b) 2020) 2019a) 2020) Krystal

 Tag-Propagation -  - - 
 Rule/Policy-Based   - - 
 Signature-Based - - -  
 Graph Query - -  - 
 Tactical Analysis  - -  
 (TTP Mapping)

virtualized graphs (Kurniawan et al., 2022; Xiao et al., 2019), and ently supports distributed analysis (i.e., querying data across differ-
(v) stream reasoning techniques Dell’Aglio et al. (2017).56 ent machines). In Sections 6 and 7, we demonstrated how KRYSTAL
 Standard Query Language KRYSTAL leverages SPARQL can integrate external information sources and facilitate distributed
Consortium et al. (2013), a graph-based query language for analysis through SPARQL query federation, a technique that enables
RDF that offers high expressivity and supports complex querying multiple data sources to be queried in an integrated manner.
(e.g., aggregation, subqueries, negation) in a declarative man- To support large-scale provenance graph based attack discovery
ner Kaminski et al. (2016). We ﬁnd that this standardized query in production environments, it is necessary to distribute and parallanguage provides powerful means to deﬁne reusable rules, lelize computational loads to multiple (local) log processing nodes.
policies and graph patterns (cf. R2). This will be part of our future research, where we plan to allow for
 In particular, we observe that SPARQL property path queries independent local analysis modules for threat detection and alertcan perform analyses that are critical to provenance-based anal- ing and to integrate the local results into a (global) module, e.g.,
yses – such as backward-forward chaining for attack graph re- via SPARQL query federation in order to construct complete attack
construction – eﬃciently. This is despite the fact that theoretical graphs to address cross-machine attack scenarios. If necessary, sevstudies Arenas et al. (2012) on the computational complexity of eral layers of hierarchies can be introduced to better scale the coproperty paths found that the implementation of a naïve (unﬁl- ordination effort.
tered) query can result in double exponential runtime complex- Online Attack Graph Reconstruction KRYSTAL has been evaluity, which becomes critical, e.g., for nodes with more than 15k se- ated in an oﬄine setting, which can facilitate, e.g., forensic analquence paths. The typical property path lengths in our scenario at- yses. A (near real-time) online deployment mode would require
tack graphs, however, tend to be rather short, with a maximum consideration of issues for attack reconstruction over streaming
path length of 37. This is attributable to the absence of long chains data. In particular, it would require (i) strategies to dynamically
in the provenance data to begin with on the one hand, but also construct attack graphs, (ii) mechanisms to manage continuous updue to tagging and ﬁltering mechanisms such as attenuation and dates on a multitude of parallel attack graph reconstruction prodecay, which effectively limit path lengths by focusing only on rel- cesses, (iii) policies for prioritizing and discarding attack graph
evant suspicious events and nodes with low integrity. As a conse- reconstruction processes. Furthermore, the complexity of the apquence, we observe that the attack graph reconstruction through proach grows if analyses should be performed in large distributed
property paths performs eﬃciently. scenarios and over multiple data streams, which raises issues
 Although SPARQL is part of computer science curricula and around time synchronization, latency, throughput, etc. We plan to
is increasingly being adopted in many industries57 , it is typ- investigate online scenarios with (semantic) streaming technoloically new to security analysts and thus requires some train- gies and extend the framework accordingly in future work.
ing. This could partly be addressed with general-purpose visual Unknown Attack Behavior To increase robustness against new
query building and exploration tools such as Haag et al. (2014), ways to evade detection, KRYSTAL provides a more general frame-
Vargas et al. (2019), but we also see a potential for future work in work that makes it possible to combine a variety of attack reconthe development of intuitive specialized interfaces for threat de- struction techniques on top of a common knowledge graph foundatection and attack reconstruction. tion. For instance, we demonstrated how KRYSTAL can incorporate
 Integrated & Modular Framework Current research has re- existing community-based threat detection rules such as Sigma
sulted in numerous prototypes that each provide solutions for spe- and integrate them with state of the art detection techniques that
ciﬁc detection techniques. KRYSTAL, by contrast, enables the com- have been demonstrated to be effective in the context of Advanced
bination of multiple different threat detection techniques and at- Persistent Threat.
tack reconstruction approaches in a single integrated framework We argue that although evasion techniques to circumvent de-
(cf. R2). Instead of applying different techniques – each with their tection will always be a concern, the possibility to apply multiown preprocessing pipelines – in isolation, the framework allows ple techniques (combining, e.g., rule-based, graph queries, and tag
us to compare and combine different techniques in a single model. propagation) in the KRYSTAL framework can provide more robust
In Sections 6 and 7, we speciﬁcally showed how a variety of de- detection of unknown attack behavior compared to the isolated aptection and attack reconstruction techniques can be formulated in plication of individual approaches. Furthermore the ﬂexible frame-
SPARQL and executed within the KRYSTAL framework. The modular- work allows for faster adaptation, experimentation, and parameter
ity of the framework also makes it extensible for future techniques. tuning. For instance, the rules and policies in the Listings in this
 Distributed Log Analysis In production settings, security anal- paper can be adapted quickly to address new evasion techniques.
ysis will often require and involve data from disparate sources.
KRYSTAL is built upon Semantic Web technologies which are ex- 10. Conclusions
plicitly designed for decentralization. Consequently, KRYSTAL inher-
 In this paper, we proposed KRYSTAL, a modular knowledge
 56
 graph-based framework for threat detection, scenario reconstruc-
 For a survey of RDF data storage and query processing schemes, cf.
Wylot et al. (2018). For a survey of approaches to scale to massive data, cf. tion, and tactical attack analysis. We provide an open, standards-
Ma et al. (2016). based provenance graph representation based on Semantic Web
 57
 cf. http://sparql.club technologies that can ﬂexibly combine multiple threat detection

 15
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

techniques and contextualize provenance data over both internal approach in different implementation settings such as in decentralsystem knowledge and external cyber-security knowledge. Based ized and distributed scenarios.
on the KRYSTAL ontology, we provide a foundation for provenance
and attack graph modeling in a uniﬁed framework. The ontology Declaration of Competing Interest
provides semantic interoperability and allows users to leverage
community knowledge for tactical attack analysis. Furthermore, The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnanour framework introduces a declarative and modular architecture cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
to overcome the inﬂexibility of monolithic prototypes; hence, it inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
supports rapid development and integration of new approaches,
lowering the barriers for rule development, reproducibility, and CRediT authorship contribution statement
further research.
 To evaluate the ability of SPARQL to effectively express threat Kabul Kurniawan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
detection rules, we implemented several state of the art techniques Investigation, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft.
including tag propagation, list:attenuation and decay, signature/rule- Andreas Ekelhart: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.
based detection and graph queries. We evaluated the feasibil- Elmar Kiesling: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.
ity of our approach for threat detection and attack construc- Gerald Quirchmayr: Supervision. A Min Tjoa: Supervision.
tion through multiple attack scenarios from the well-established
DARPA-TC dataset. The evaluation shows that our ontology-based Acknowledgments
RDF provenance graphs are scalable with respect to graph size and
query complexity without sacriﬁcing graph reduction, compres- This work has been supported by netidee SCIENCE and the Aussion, and attack reconstruction performance. This makes it possi- trian Science Fund (FWF) under grant P30437-N31. The compeble to combine a variety of threat detection techniques, which im- tence center SBA Research (SBA-K1) is funded within the frameproved the detection capabilities in our evaluation. For instance, work of COMET — Competence Centers for Excellent Technologies
we found that complementary rule-based threat detection identi- by BMVIT, BMDW, and the federal state of Vienna, managed by
ﬁed threats which were missed by tag-propagation techniques. the FFG. Moreover, the ﬁnancial support by the Christian Doppler
 Finally, our framework facilitates linking to high-level attack Research Association, the Austrian Federal Ministry for Digital and
patterns to establish a “kill-chain” of high-level attacker tactics, Economic Affairs and the National Foundation for Research, Techwhich results in a navigable and queryable provenance graph en- nology and Development is gratefully acknowledged (Christianriched with security knowledge. This can help improve attack un- Doppler-Laboratory for Security and Quality Improvement in the
derstanding and situational awareness. Production System Lifecycle).
 As next steps in our research, we plan to integrate with multiple large-scale heterogeneous log sources beyond audit log data Appendix
and aim for performance optimization (e.g., for better exploration
and visualization). Based on the possibility to combine detection Scenario 2 - Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory In this scetechniques, we want to explore how alerts raised by one technique nario our system detects several alarms on the provenance graph
could automatically trigger analysis by other techniques for conﬁr- as shown on Fig. 12. We performed backward-forward chaining
mation and additional information. Further research will also focus with query federation to construct the attack graph together with
on exploring other threat detection approaches, including anomaly its kill-chain phases. We successfully linked the generated attack
detection techniques, and integrating them into our framework. Fi- graph to MITRE ATT&CK techniques such as Gather Victim Idennally, we plan to adapt and evaluate the attack graph construction tity Information (T1589), File and Directory Permissions Modiﬁcation

Fig. 12. Scenario 2 (Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory). The attack begins with a vulnerable Nginx installed on a FreeBSD host that gets exploited by an attacker. The
attacker sends a malformed HTTP request that results in downloading several malicious ﬁles on the local system. One of the ﬁles i.e. /tmp/pEja72mA then gets executed,
which spawns a process pEja72mA. This process reads sensitive information/etc/passwd) and connects remotely via C&C to the attacker console.

 16
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

Fig. 13. Scenario 3 (Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory). The same case as before, this time the attacker successfully exploits a vulnerable Nginx by downloading another
payload ﬁle (“/tmp/vUgefal”). The attacker spawns an elevated process. This process later reads sensitive information (“/etc/passwd”) from the local system and sends data
the the external network.

Fig. 14. Scenario 4 (Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory) The attack starts with the exploitation of Firefox 54.01 on Ubuntu 12.04 by a malicious ad server. The Firefox
process gets compromised after visiting a malicious website, and subsequently downloads a malicious ﬁle to the user directory “/home/admin/clean”. This ﬁle is then executed
spawning a new process Clean. Another ﬁle Proﬁle is also created and spawned. Both processes access a sensitive ﬁle “/etc/passwd” and send the data to an external network
(161.116.88.72:80).

(T1222), Exploitationfor Client Execution (T1203) and Automated Ex- cation (T1222), Exploitation for Client Execution (T1203) and Auto-
ﬁltration (T1020). Finally, following the connection from techniques mated Exﬁltration (T1020). Finally, these detected techniques lead
to tactics, we can see kill-chain phases including Reconnaissance, to the attack phases including Reconnaissance, Defense-evasion, Ex-
Defense-evasion, Execution and Exﬁltration. ecution and Exﬁltration.
 Scenario 3 - Nginx backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory Scenario 4 - Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory As shown
 As shown in Fig. 13, from the detected alerts, we performed in Fig. 14, our system detects several alarms in this scenario,
backward-forward chaining over the provenance graphs together including ﬁle execution (“Clean” and “Proﬁle” process) and data
with query federation to external background knowledge. The sys- leaks (both “Clean” and “Proﬁle” processes read a sensitive ﬁle
tem successfully constructed this scenario attack graph together “/etc/passwd” and send data to “161.116.88.72:80”). Furthermore,
with connections to MITRE ATT&CK techniques and tactics. In that due to the query federation those detected alarms are automati-
ﬁgure, we see identiﬁed attack techniques such as Gather Victim cally linked and mapped to our CTI background knowledge, yield-
Identity Information (T1589), File and Directory Permissions Modiﬁ- ing two MITRE ATT&CK techniques namely Exploitation for Client

 17
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Fernández, J.D., Martínez-Prieto, M.A., Gutiérrez, C., Polleres, A., Arias, M., 2013. Binary RDF representation for publication and exchange (HDT). J. Web Semant. 19,
 22–41. http://www.websemanticsjournal.org/index.php/ps/article/view/328.
 Gao, P., Xiao, X., Li, D., Li, Z., Jee, K., Wu, Z., Kim, C.H., Kulkarni, S.R., Mittal, P., 2018a.
 SAQL: a stream-based query system for real-time abnormal system behavior
 detection. In: 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 18). USENIX
 Association, Baltimore, MD, pp. 639–656. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
 usenixsecurity18/presentation/gao-peng
 Gao, P., Xiao, X., Li, Z., Jee, K., Xu, F., Kulkarni, S.R., Mittal, P., 2018b. AIQL: enabling
 eﬃcient attack investigation from system monitoring data. In: USENIX ATC ’18:
 Proceedings of the 2018 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual Technical Conference. USENIX Association, USA, pp. 113–125. doi:10.5555/3277355.3277367.
 Gu, R., Hu, W., Huang, Y., 2014. Rainbow: a distributed and hierarchical RDF
 triple store with dynamic scalability. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference
 on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, pp. 561–566. https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData.2014.
 7004274.
 Haag, F., Lohmann, S., Bold, S., Ertl, T., 2014. Visual SPARQL querying based on
 extended ﬁlter/ﬂow graphs. In: AVI ’14: Proceedings of the 2014 International
 Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces. Association for Computing
 Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 305–312. doi:10.1145/2598153.2598185.
 Hassan, W.U., Bates, A., Marino, D., 2020. Tactical provenance analysis for endpoint
 detection and response systems. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 1172–1189. doi:10.1109/SP40 0 0 0.2020.0 0 096.
 Horrocks, I., 2005. OWL: a description logic based ontology language. In: van
 Beek, P. (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - CP 2005.
 Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 5–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/
 11564751_2
Fig. 15. Scenario 5 (Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory). This attack begins with Hossain, M.N., Milajerdi, S.M., Wang, J., Eshete, B., Gjomemo, R., Sekar, R.,
 Stoller, S.D., Venkatakrishnan, V.N., 2017. SLEUTH: real-time attack scenario rethe exploitation of Firefox 54.01, installed on a Windows 10 host. The exploit loads
 construction from COTS audit data. In: SEC’17: Proceedings of the 26th USENIX
drakon into Firefox memory, which opens a C&C connection to the attack network.
 Conference on Security Symposium. USENIX Association, USA, pp. 487–504.
Via the Firefox process, multiple user documents are successfully exﬁltrated to the
 doi:10.5555/3241189.3241228.
attacker’s network. Hossain, M.N., Sheikhi, S., Sekar, R., et al., 2020. Combating dependence explosion
 in forensic analysis using alternative tag propagation semantics. In: 2020 IEEE
 Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 1139–
Execution (T1203) and Automated Exﬁltration (T1020). Those tech- 1155. doi:10.1109/SP40 0 0 0.2020.0 0 064.
 Hossain, M.N., Wang, J., Sekar, R., Stoller, S.D., 2018. Dependence-preserving data
niques are further linked to high-level MITRE ATT&CK tactics, i.e.
 compaction for scalable forensic analysis. In: SEC’18: Proceedings of the 27th
Execution and Exﬁltration. USENIX Conference on Security Symposium. USENIX Association, USA, pp. 1723–
 Scenario 5 - Firefox backdoor w/ Drakon in-memory As shown in 1740. doi:10.5555/3277203.3277331.
Fig. 15, our system detects several alerts within this scenario. After Hu, C., Wang, X., Yang, R., Wo, T., 2016. ScalaRDF: a distributed, elastic and scalable
 in-memory RDF triple store. In: 2016 IEEE 22nd International Conference on
performing backward-forward chaining and queries with federation Parallel and Distributed Systems (ICPADS). IEEE, pp. 593–601. https://doi.org/10.
to background knowledge, our system successfully identiﬁed two 1109/ICPADS.2016.0084.
MITRE ATT&CK attack techniques within the attack graph, namely Ji, Y., Lee, S., Downing, E., Wang, W., Fazzini, M., Kim, T., Orso, A., Lee, W., et al., 2017.
 RAIN: reﬁnable attack investigation with on-demand inter-process information
Gather Victim Identity Information (T1589) and Automated Exﬁltra- ﬂow tracking. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
tion (T1020). Finally, we identify kill-chain phases such us Recon- and Communications Security. ACM, Dallas Texas USA, pp. 377–390. doi:10.1145/
naissance and Exﬁltration. 3133956.3134045.
 Ji, Y., Lee, S., Fazzini, M., Allen, J., Downing, E., Kim, T., Orso, A., Lee, W., 2018. Enabling reﬁnable cross-host attack investigation with eﬃcient data ﬂow tagging
References and tracking. In: SEC’18: Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Conference on Security Symposium. USENIX Association, USA, pp. 1705–1722. doi:10.5555/3277203.
Abdelaziz, I., Harbi, R., Khayyat, Z., Kalnis, P., 2017. A survey and experimental com- 3277330.
 parison of distributed SPARQL engines for very large RDF data. Proc. VLDB En- Kaminski, M., Kostylev, E.V., Cuenca Grau, B., 2016. Semantics and expressive power
 dowment 10 (13), 2049–2060. https://doi.org/10.14778/3151106.3151109 of subqueries and aggregates in SPARQL 1.1. In: Proceedings of the 25th Inter-
Arenas, M., Conca, S., Pérez, J., 2012. Counting beyond a Yottabyte, or how SPARQL national Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 227–238. https://doi.org/10.1145/
 1.1 property paths will prevent adoption of the standard. In: WWW ’12: Pro- 2872427.2883022
 ceedings of the 21st International Conference on World Wide Web. Associa- Kemerlis, V.P., Portokalidis, G., Jee, K., Keromytis, A.D., 2012. libdft: Practical dynamic
 tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 629–638. doi:10.1145/ data ﬂow tracking for commodity systems. SIGPLAN Not 47 (7), 121–132. doi:10.
 2187836.2187922. 1145/2365864.2151042.
Capec, 2021Common attack pattern enumeration and classiﬁcation. Accessed: Kenaza, T., Aiash, M., 2016. Toward an eﬃcient ontology-based event correlation in
 30.03.2021, https://capec.mitre.org/. SIEM. Procedia Comput. Sci. 83, 139–146. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.04.109.
Consortium W.W.W., et al. SPARQL 1.1 overview. 2013. https://www.w3.org/TR/ Kiesling, E., Ekelhart, A., Kurniawan, K., Ekaputra, F., 2019. The SEPSES knowlsparql11-overview/. edge graph: an integrated resource for cybersecurity. In: Ghidini, C., Hartig, O.,
CVE, 2021Common vulnerabilities and exposures. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://cve. Maleshkova, M., Svátek, V., Cruz, I., Hogan, A., Song, J., Lefrançois, M., Gandon, F.
 mitre.org/about/index.html. (Eds.), The Semantic Web – ISWC 2019. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
CVSS, 2021Common event expression. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://cee.mitre.org/. pp. 198–214. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 30796- 7_13
CVSS, 2021Common vulnerability scoring system. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https:// King, S.T., Chen, P.M., 2003a. Backtracking intrusions. SIGOPS Oper. Syst. Rev. 37 (5),
 www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/. 223–236. doi:10.1145/1165389.945467.
CWE, 2021Common weakness enumeration. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://cwe. King, S.T., Chen, P.M., 2003b. Backtracking intrusions. In: SOSP ’03: Proceedings
 mitre.org/about/index.html. of the Nineteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. Associa-
Cybox, 2021Cyber observable expression. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://cyboxproject. tion for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 223–236. doi:10.1145/
 github.io/. 945445.945467.
DARPA, 2021Transparent computing engagement 3 data release. Kumar S.. Classiﬁcation and detection of computer intrusions. 1996. Ph.D. thesis.
 Accessed: 02.02.2021, https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/ USA. UMI Order No. GAX96-01522.
 1QlbUFWAGq3Hpl8wVdzOdIoZLFxkII4EK. Kurniawan, K., Ekelhart, A., Kiesling, E., et al., 2021. An ATT&CK-KG for linking cy-
Dell’Aglio, D., Della Valle, E., van Harmelen, F., Bernstein, A., 2017. Stream reason- bersecurity attacks to adversary tactics and techniques. In: The Semantic Web
 ing: a survey and outlook. Data Sci. 1 (1–2), 59–83. https://doi.org/10.3233/ – ISWC 2021, p. 5. http://ceur- ws.org/Vol- 2980/paper363.pdf
 DS-170 0 06. Kurniawan, K., Ekelhart, A., Kiesling, E., Winkler, D., Quirchmayr, G., Tjoa, A.M., 2022.
Ekelhart, A., Ekaputra, F.J., Kiesling, E., et al., 2021. The SLOGERT framework VloGraph: a virtual knowledge graph framework for distributed security log
 for automated log knowledge graph construction. In: The Semantic Web: analysis. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Extr. 4 (2), 371–396. doi:10.3390/make4020016.
 ESWC 2021. Springer International Publishing, p. 16. https://doi.org/10.1007/ Kurniawan, K., Kiesling, E., Ekelhart, A., Ekaputra, F., 2020. Cross-platform ﬁle sys-
 978- 3- 030- 77385- 4_38 tem activity monitoring and forensics a semantic approach. In: Hölbl, M., Ran-
Ekelhart, A., Kiesling, E., Kurniawan, K., et al., 2018. Taming the logs - Vocabularies nenberg, K., Welzer, T. (Eds.), ICT Systems Security and Privacy Protection. SEC
 for semantic security analysis, 137, pp. 109–119. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2018.09.011. 2020. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology. Springer,
 Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 58201- 2_26

 18
K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling et al. Computers & Security 121 (2022) 102828

 Kabul Kurniawan received a BSc and MSc degree in Com-
Lehmann, J., Sejdiu, G., Bühmann, L., Westphal, P., Stadler, C., Ermilov, I., Bin, S.,
 puter Science at Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM) Indone-
 Chakraborty, N., Saleem, M., Ngomo, A.C.N., et al., 2017. Distributed semantic
 sia in 2013 and 2015 respectively. He was a research asanalytics using the SANSA stack. In: International Semantic Web Conference.
 sistant at the Institute of Software and Information Sys-
 Springer, pp. 147–155. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 319- 68204- 4_15
 tem, Vienna University of Technology in 2018 before join-
Li, Z., Chen, Q.A., Yang, R., Chen, Y., Ruan, W., 2021. Threat detection and invesing the Institute of Data, Process, and Knowledge Mantigation with system-level provenance graphs: a survey. Comput. Secur. 106,
 agement as a project assistant at Vienna University of
 102282. doi:10.1016/j.cose.2021.102282.
 Business and Economics, in 2020. He is currently a Doc-
Ma, Z., Capretz, M.A.M., Yan, L., 2016. Storing massive resource description frametoral Candidate at the Computer Science, University of Viwork (RDF) data: a survey. Knowl. Eng. Rev. 31 (4), 391–413. https://doi.org/10.
 enna, Austria. His research including Data Interoperability,
 1017/S02698889160 0 0217.
 Knowledge Management, and Semantic Application in the
Marz, N., Warren, J., 2015. Big Data: Principles and Best Practices of Scalable Real–
 domain of Cybersecurity in particularly log-stream moni-
 Time Data Systems. Manning, Shelter Island, NY. OCLC: ocn909039685
 toring and analysis.
Mcguinness, D.L., Fikes, R., Hendler, J., Stein, L.A., 2002. DAML+OIL: an ontology language for the semantic web. IEEE Intell. Syst. 17 (5), 72–80. doi:10.1109/MIS.
 Andreas Ekelhart is a senior researcher at the Depart-
 2002.1039835.
 ment of Information Systems and Operations at WU and
Milajerdi, S.M., Eshete, B., Gjomemo, R., Venkatakrishnan, V.N., 2019a. POIROT:
 works in the ﬁeld of IT security with focus on leveragaligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber threat hunting. In:
 ing semantic technologies. He furthermore holds a senior
 CCS ’19: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 researcher position at the Security and Privacy group at
 Communications Security. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
 the University of Vienna, and SBA Research, a competence
 USA, pp. 1795–1812. doi:10.1145/3319535.3363217.
 centre for IT Security. He received a master’s degree in
Milajerdi, S.M., Gjomemo, R., Eshete, B., Sekar, R., Venkatakrishnan, V.N., et al.,
 Business Informatics and a master’s degree in Software
 2019b. HOLMES: real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious in-
 Engineering & Internet Computing, and holds a Ph.D. in
 formation ﬂows. In: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE,
 Computer Science from the Institute of Software Technol-
 San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 1137–1152. doi:10.1109/SP.2019.0 0 026.
 ogy and Interactive Systems at TU Wien. He is a member
Mitre ATT&CK Matrix, 2021Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://attack.mitre.org/matrices/
 of ISC2 and holds various industrial certiﬁcations includenterprise/.
 ing CISSP, CSSLP, CEH, MCPD, MCSD, and ISTQB CTFL.
More, S., Matthews, M., Joshi, A., Finin, T., et al., 2012. A knowledge-based approach
 to intrusion detection modeling. In: 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-
 Elmar Kiesling is a post-doctoral researcher at the Invacy Workshops. IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 75–81. doi:10.1109/SPW.2012.
 stitute for Data, Process and Knowledge Management at
 26.
 WU Wien (Vienna University of Economics and Business),
Noel, S., Harley, E., Tam, K.H., Limiero, M., Share, M., 2016. Chapter 4 - CyGraph:
 Austria. Furthermore, he coordinates the research area
 graph-based analytics and visualization for cybersecurity. In: Gudivada, V.N.,
 “Data Integration and Analytics for Digital Production” at
 Raghavan, V.V., Govindaraju, V., Rao, C.R. (Eds.), Cognitive Computing: Thethe Austrian Center for Digital Production (ACDP). Before
 ory and Applications. In: Handbook of Statistics, vol. 35. Elsevier, pp. 117–167.
 taking up these positions, he headed the Linked Data Lab
 doi:10.1016/bs.host.2016.07.001.
 at TU Wien (Vienna University of Technology) and was a
Noy N.F., McGuinness D.L.. Ontology development 101: a guide to creating your ﬁrst
 senior researcher at SBA Research, an industrial research
 ontology. 2001. http://www.ksl.stanford.edu/KSL_Abstracts/KSL- 01- 05.html.
 center for IT security, as well as a researcher at the Uni-
Pinkston, J., Undercoffer, J., Joshi, A., Finin, T., 2003. A target-centric ontology for
 versity of Vienna, where he obtained his PhD. His current
 intrusion detection. In: Workshop on Ontologies in Distributed Systems, held
 research focuses on Knowledge Graphs and their indusat The 18th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, p. 9. https:
 trial applications, most notably in the I4.0 and cybersecu-
 //www.csee.umbc.edu/∼ﬁnin/papers/ijcai03OntologiesIDS.pdf
 rity contexts. Elmar has published numerous publications in these areas and other
Roth F., Patzke T.. Sigma: generic signature format for SIEM systems, 2021. Accessed:
 ﬁelds including decision analysis, security management, innovation management,
 30.03.2021, https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma.
 and blended learning.
Sarker, I.H., Kayes, A.S.M., Badsha, S., Alqahtani, H., Watters, P., Ng, A., et al., 2020.
 Cybersecurity data science: an overview from machine learning perspective. J.
 Gerald Quirchmayr holds Doctor’s degrees in computer
 Big Data 7 (1), 41. doi:10.1186/s40537- 020- 00318- 5.
 science and law from Johannes Kepler University in Linz
SPARQL, 20211.1 federated query. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://www.w3.org/TR/
 (Austria) and currently is Professor in the Multimedia Insparql11-federated-query/.
 formation Systems Research Group of the Faculty of Com-
STIX, 2021Structured threat information expression. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://
 puter Science at the University of Vienna. In 20 01/20 02
 stixproject.github.io/.
 he held a Chair in Computer and Information Systems
Syed, Z., Padia, A., Finin, T., Mathews, L., Joshi, A., et al., 2016. UCO: a uniﬁed cyberat the University of South Australia. He ﬁrst joined the
 security ontology. In: AAAI Workshop: Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Cyber Security,
 University of Vienna in 1993 from the Institute of Comp. 8. https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/WS/AAAIW16/paper/view/12574/12365
 puter Science at Johannes Kepler University in Linz (Aus-
URI Uniform resource identiﬁer, 2021. Accessed: 30.03.2021, https://en.wikipedia.
 tria) where he had previously been teaching. His major
 org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identiﬁer.
 research focus is on information systems in business and
Vargas, H., Buil-Aranda, C., Hogan, A., López, C., 2019. RDF explorer: a visual SPARQL
 government with a special interest in security, applicaquery builder. In: International Semantic Web Conference. Springer, pp. 647–
 tions, formal representations of decision making and legal
 663. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 030- 30793- 6_37
 issues. His publication record comprises over 200 peer reviewed papers plus several
Wylot, M., Hauswirth, M., Cudré-Mauroux, P., Sakr, S., 2018. RDF data storage and
 edited books and conference proceedings as well as nationally and internationally
 query processing schemes: a survey. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 51 (4), 1–36.
 published project reports.
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3177850.
Xiao, G., Ding, L., Cogrel, B., Calvanese, D., 2019. Virtual knowledge graphs: an
 overview of systems and use cases. Data Intell. 1 (3), 201–223. https://doi.org/ A Min Tjoa is full professor for Software Technology at
 10.1162/dint_a_0 0 011. the Vienna University of Technology for Software Technol-
Xu, Z., Wu, Z., Li, Z., Jee, K., Rhee, J., Xiao, X., Xu, F., Wang, H., Jiang, G., et al., 2016. ogy since 1994 and currently also adjunct professor at ITB
 High ﬁdelity data reduction for big data security dependency analyses. In: Pro- (Bandung Institute of Technology). He is Vice-President
 ceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communica- of Infoterm (International Information Center for Termitions Security. ACM, Vienna Austria, pp. 504–516. doi:10.1145/2976749.2978378. nology) since 2010. Currently, he holds the executive-
Zou, Q., Singhal, A., Sun, X., Liu, P., 2020. Automatic recognition of advanced per- chairperson position at the Austrian National Compesistent threat tactics for enterprise security. In: IWSPA ’20: Proceedings of the tence Center for Excellent Technologies in the ﬁeld of IT-
 Sixth International Workshop on Security and Privacy Analytics. Association Security (SBA).He was the Vice-president of the United
 for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 43–52. doi:10.1145/3375708. Nations Commission on Science and Technology for De-
 3380314. velopment. He has been awarded the Honorary Doctorate
 from the Czech University of Technology in Prague for his
 research in Data Science.

 19