ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 ISA Transactions
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/isatrans

Research article

A graph empowered insider threat detection framework based on daily
activities
 ∗
Wei Hong a , Jiao Yin b , , Mingshan You b , Hua Wang b , Jinli Cao c , Jianxin Li d , Ming Liu d ,
Chengyuan Man e
a
 School of Artificial Intelligence, Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, Chongqing, 402160, China
b
 Institute for Sustainable Industries and Liveable Cities, Victoria University, Melbourne, VIC, 3011, Australia
c
 Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, 3086, Australia
d
 School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Melbourne, VIC, 3125, Australia
e
 Async Working Pty Ltd, Melbourne, VIC, 3149, Australia

article info a b s t r a c t

Article history: While threats from outsiders are easier to alleviate, effective ways seldom exist to handle threats
Received 30 November 2022 from insiders. The key to managing insider threats lies in engineering behavioral features efficiently
Received in revised form 27 June 2023 and classifying them correctly. To handle challenges in feature engineering, we propose an integrated
Accepted 28 June 2023
 feature engineering solution based on daily activities, combining manually-selected features and
Available online 4 July 2023
 automatically-extracted features together. Particularly, an LSTM auto-encoder is introduced for auto-
Keywords: matic feature engineering from sequential activities. To improve detection, a residual hybrid network
Sequential activity (ResHybnet) containing GNN and CNN components is also proposed along with an organizational
Graph neural networks graph, taking a user-day combination as a node. Experimental results show that the proposed LSTM
Insider threat auto-encoder could extract hidden patterns from sequential activities efficiently, improving F1 score
LSTM auto-encoder by 0.56%. Additionally, with the designed residual link, our ResHybnet model works well to boost
 performance and has outperformed the best of other models by 1.97% on the same features. We
 published our code on GitHub: https://github.com/Wayne-on-the-road/ResHybnet.
 © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of ISA. This is an open access article under the CC
 BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction assets. On the other hand, due to legitimate authorization, insider
 threats are often hard to contain, even with comprehensive access
 Since the information boom from the early 90 s of last century, control solutions [6–8].
cybersecurity has been a rising concern all the way to nowa- To mitigate the threats posed by insiders, the key is to find
days [1–3]. According to one of the latest cyber-security reports hidden patterns in an insider’s malicious behavior and distinguish
from Accenture in 2021,1 the cyber attacks experienced by each them from benign ones. Typically, domain experts would first
respondent increased 31% compared with previous year, reaching preset specific rules for feature extraction, and then craft suitable
an eye-catching high number of 270 times. Out of all those cyber classification models to discover malicious activities [9]. Since
attacks, although threats from insiders account for only a small different domain experts see individual behavior from different
portion of the total, organizations generally consider them to pose perspectives, the feature engineering approach often varies depending on how the problem is defined. At the same time, applied
far more risks to their information security [4].
 detection methods have also evolved from simple statistical ap-
 According to the seventh edition of the CERT Common Sense
 proaches to machine learning ones such as linear regression (LR),
Guide to Mitigating Insider Threats published by Carnegie Mellon
 Gaussian naive Bayes (GNB), support vector machine (SVM), and
University [5], insider refers to an individual who has or had auall the way to deep learning approaches such as convolutional
thorized access to an organization’s critical assets. Therefore, on
 neural networks (CNNs) [10–12].
the one hand, once insiders initiate attacks, they could bring sig- Regarding activity feature engineering, although domain
nificant losses for the organization due to their access to essential knowledge could help to select key features efficiently, they
 are more related to the standalone properties of certain activi-
 ∗ Corresponding author. ties [13]. Some latent features in the sequential order of activities
 E-mail address: jiao.yin@vu.edu.au (J. Yin). could still exist during a specific time interval, and it has the
 1 https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/security/invest-cyber-resilience potential to improve detection performance [14].

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2023.06.030
0019-0578/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of ISA. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 In terms of classification models, on the one hand, traditional presents experiment results on detection performance and ablamodels such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) and convolu- tion study findings related to sequential activity feature engineertional neural networks (CNNs) only see user behavior in an iso- ing. Section 6 concludes the paper with limitation discussion and
lated way, trying to discover the patterns behind a large amount future works.
of individual data separately [15–17]. On the other hand, when
taking the approach of graph intelligence such as graph neural 2. Related works
networks (GNNs), individual characteristics would suffer downgrade to a certain degree due to the over-emphasized connections 2.1. Insider threat detection
between individuals [18–20].
 In order to offer more solutions in insider threat detection re- For long, the terms insider and insider threat have never been
garding feature engineering, and considering that an employee’s easy to define. Nowadays, the most widely recognized definiworkload would most likely show pattern according to calendar
 tions in this field are dynamically updated by the CERT research
day, we first propose a daily activity based feature engineering
 team of the Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon
approach. Furthermore, to better discover the behavior similarity
 University [5].
between employees from organizational connection, we propose
 Previous research works on insider threat detection could be
a residual hybrid network (ResHybnet) model that can combine
 categorized mainly into two streams: conceptual works, which
GNN model and CNN model together.
 focus on the methodology and theories about insider threat de-
 Specifically, for daily activity feature engineering, we first
 tection, and operational works, which emphasize practical soluemploy domain knowledge to manually select features from stantions related to certain datasets. [21].
dalone activities, and then use a long short-term memory (LSTM)
 In the operational research fields that relate most to our work,
model based auto-encoder to extract features from sequential
 Schonlau, M. et al. [22] adopted a statistical approach to detect
activities automatically. After combining extracted features, we
 insider threats and introduced a command history-based dataset
feed them into the proposed ResHybnet, and along with the
information from constructed organizational graph, the insiders SEA as early as in 2001. Garg, A. et al. [23] then introduced a
conducted malicious behaviors during specific day could be found new dataset based on mouse operation history, putting insider
out. detection problem in a graphical user interface (GUI) context. This
 To summarize, this paper makes contributions from three work also employed SVM method, which achieves an accuracy
aspects listed below: rate up to 96% high with few false positives.
 As time went by, more comprehensive approaches were intro-
 • We proposed an integrated feature engineering method duced to insider threat research thanks to the increasing availbased on user’s daily behaviors. Firstly, we manually extract ability of richer data, such as synthetic dataset CERT [24]. In
 domain knowledge-based features from standalone activi- 2015, Gavai, G. et al. [25] also presented a real-world dataset
 ties. Secondly, we define sequential activities on a daily basis containing enterprise social and online activity with intentionally
 and use an LSTM auto-encoder model to extract latent fea- injected insider threat events. They modified the isolation forest
 tures from sequential activities automatically. Experimental algorithm and tested it on the dataset based on supervised and
 results show that the features extracted from sequential unsupervised settings.
 activity indeed can improve the detection performance in Some researchers also experimented graph-based methods in
 the final stage. insider threat detection research. For example, a novel organiza-
 • We designed a residual hybrid network (ResHybnet) model tional graph was created in the paper [26], and then node degree
 consisting of GNN and CNN layers, and a residual link from and betweenness centrality are introduced to practice clustering
 node attributes to the CNN component to enhance the per- techniques. Outliers in the clustering process are considered maformance of insider threat detection. ResHybnet achieves licious insiders. Jiang, J. et al. in paper [27] introduced a GCN
 the best results for the following three reasons. Firstly, the model to detect malicious insides. With the calculated similar-
 GNN component can discover the topological connections of ity of different users inside an organization, they constructed a
 daily behavior (represented by node attributes) from con- weighted graph to facilitate better performance. The mentioned
 structed organizational graph. Secondly, the residual link two works demonstrate graph neural networks is promising in
 can compensate node attributes that have been weakened the research field of insider threat. However, while GNN-based
 by the GNN component during propagation. Lastly, the CNN classification models are good at discovering the connections in
 component is a sound model for pattern discovering in graph structures, they also may cause the downgrading of node
 non-topological context. When integrated together with de- attributes, as found by previous researchers in [19].
 signed residual link, the best part of two classical models To the best of our knowledge, previous work has yet to try to
 could be made use of. address the node attributes downgrading problem and integrate
 • We conducted a comparative study to see the impact of GNN and CNN layers into one model in insider threat detection
 length choice on the final detection performance to bet- research.
 ter understand how the input sequence length of LSTM
 auto-encoder will affect feature engineering of sequential
 2.2. Insider threat feature engineering
 activities. Experimental results show longer sequence setting for LSTM auto-encoder facilitate better performance,
 and the statistics of sequence length could contribute to To discover malicious insiders, feature engineering often plays
 proper length selection. an important role due to the fact that human behavior is complex [28,29]. As early as 2005, Liu et al. [30] investigated three
 In the rest of this paper, we will first review the related works feature representation ways on system calls and found that
on insider threat detection and the corresponding feature engi- parameter-based features for certain system calls indeed were
neering approaches in Section 2, followed by Section 3 consisting sensitive to some extent for detecting the insider threat. In the
of framework overview and LSTM auto-encoder architecture in- paper [31], the authors used a deep belief network(DBN) to
troduction. Section 4 implement the proposed methodology on extract hidden features from users’ behavior logs and showed its
an open-source insider threat dataset as a use case. Section 5 effectiveness in insider threat feature engineering.
 85
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Fig. 1. Daily activity based insider threat detection framework.

 Chattopadhyay et al. [32] saw the potential of feature engi- are first pre-processed to generate daily activities, which can
neering from a time series perspective. From user activity logs, be categorized into standalone activities and sequential activithey constructed a time series feature vector based on statistics ties. Then, we apply an integrated feature engineering approach
of single-day features over a period of time. Singh et al. [33] ap- to extract features from them separately. At the same time, a
plied isometric feature mapping (ISOMAP) for feature extraction graph is constructed to represent the organizational connection
and Emperor Penguin Algorithm for optimal feature selection. between different user-days. After combining the two feature
Although temporal nature was considered in feature extraction, groups together, we use a special-designed residual hybrid netthose two works still focused on the statistical side of feature work model to perform insider threat detection with the help of
engineering. graph information. The detailed processes are described in the
 To discover the behavioral pattern of a user in a certain day, following sections.
Yuan, F. et al. [34] designed a framework to extract fixed-size
features from activity sequence of one whole day using the LSTM 3.2. Integrated feature engineering
model and applied a CNN classifier to distinguish insiders. Another later work [35] applied LSTM auto-encoder as a classi- For malicious insiders, we believe the subtle difference in their
fier based on the reconstructed loss to do detection rather than behavior could be revealed from two aspects. First, the stanfeature extraction. dalone activities in a daily schedule, such as the first logon time,
 Based on our extensive review, no previous work has ex- could be an indicator of a threat if it significantly deviates from
tracted latent features from sequential activities using an LSTM normal ones. Second, within a single working day, the activities
auto-encoder model under user-day problem setting. conducted by an employee would happen in time series, which
 naturally forms a sequence of activities. If an activity sequence
3. Methodology
 shows a different pattern from others, it could also serve as
 a good indicator for insider threat detection. Therefore, in the
 In previous works, researchers defined insider detection probframework shown in Fig. 1, we start with feature engineering
lems in different ways. For example, paper [26,34] aim to find
 regarding those two kinds of activities.
out insiders by examining users’ activities across a time window
more than one year long, and considering all the activities as a
 3.2.1. Manual engineering
whole, while Liu et al. [36] define insider detection problem as to
 For each user-day, features of standalone activities are selected
find out malicious activities. Those two approaches represent the
 based on domain knowledge. As a result of this manual selection,
majority problem settings for insider threat detection.
 Considering that an employee in an organization usually has the output feature matrix for all user-days from this stream is
a working load pattern following the calendar day, we define denoted as Xm (Xm ∈ Rn×dm ), among which n represents the
our insider threat detection task as finding out malicious user- total of user-day combinations, and dm stands for the number of
days. This is also because an insider could behave maliciously on manually selected features for each user-day. Regarding a certain
certain days and otherwise on the rest days, and for cybersecurity user-day, the vector for manual features could be denoted as
 (i)
analysts, monitoring risk level on a daily basis often echoes with xm ∈ Rdm (i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}).
the typical operation pattern of an organization.
 Based on this problem formation, we lay out the whole so- 3.2.2. Automatic engineering
lution for insider threat detection in this section, starting with As for sequential activities, we designed an auto-encoder
a framework overview, followed by a detailed description of the based on a widely used LSTM model to extract useful features
proposed integrated feature engineering method and the residual automatically.
hybrid network model. In regard to the implementation of this On the one hand, to use the LSTM auto-encoder, a fixed input
solution, we present the whole process in Section 4, and apply it sequence length L needs to be set and then the actual sequence
on the CERT 4.2 dataset will be trimmed or filled to the length L. After numbering and
 one-hot encoding, each daily activity sequence is encoded as S (i)
3.1. Framework overview = { s1 , s2 , · · · , sL }, where S (i) ∈ RL×ds (i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}), and ds
 stands for the dimension of an encoded activity (depending on
 The proposed daily activity-based insider threat detection how many unique types of activity are defined). This S (i) sequence
framework is shown in Fig. 1. Overall, the behavioral log files serves as the input for our auto-encoder.
 86
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Fig. 2. LSTM auto-encoder for sequential activity feature extraction.

 On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 2, the LSTM auto-encoder As shown in Fig. 1, the proposed ResHybnet will take behavis a symmetrical network consisting of two LSTM layers with L ioral feature matrix Xb and user-day organizational graph G(V , A)
cells for each and three fully connected (FC) layers. The first half as inputs, and performs the final insider threat detection task.
of the LSTM auto-encoder is the encoder part, and the rest is the The process of this detection can be described in Eq. (2), (3),
decoder part. (4).
 In the training process, each sequence S (i) = { s1 , s2 , · · · , sL } will
be fed into the LSTM auto-encoder, and the output Ŝi = { ŝ1 , ŝ2 , Hc = fgnns (Xb , V , A, Θgnns ), (2)
· · · , ŝL } from the decoder side will be compared with the original
input sequence. By minimizing the differences between Si and Ŝ (i) , X = Hc + Xb , (3)
we could find the best parameters of the LSTM auto-encoder for
feature extraction. Ŷ = ffc (fcnns (X , Θcnns ), Θfc ), (4)
 After training, for each sequence S (i) , the extracted feature
from the output of the encoder part will be denoted as xa ∈
 (i) where fgnns , fcnns and ffc are the mapping functions of the GNN,
 da
R (i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}), since those features are automatically CNN and FC layers shown in Fig. 1; Θgnns , Θcnns and Θfc are the
generated from the trained encoder, where the da stands for the corresponding model parameters, which can be learned in an
dimension of automatic features. end-to-end manner.
 By putting automatic features from all user-days together, we As shown in Eq. (2), in the first step of ResHybnet, the GNN
will have the automatic feature matrix of sequential activities, component will take the behavioral feature matrix Xb and graph
which can be denoted as Xa , where Xa ∈ Rn×da , n is the total G(V , A) as inputs to embed the topological connections of usernumber of user-days. days. At the same time, a residual link from Xb will send the
 original node attributes to the output side of the GNN component
3.2.3. Feature integration for compensation purposes, as shown in Eq. (3). After adding Xb
 In the final stage of feature engineering, features extracted back to GNN output Hc to generate X , the compensated node
from the manual and automatic ways are concatenated as the feature, X , will be further processed by the CNN component,
final behavioral feature matrix, as shown in Eq. (1). followed by a fully connected layer to yield the final insider
 threat detection result from the ResHybnet model, denoted as
Xb = concatenate(Xm , Xa ), (1) Ŷ , as shown in Eq. (4). At the last stage, the effectiveness of
where Xb ∈ R n×(dm +da )
 stands for the final behavioral feature the proposed framework is evaluated through the comparison
matrix of all user-days, and each feature vector has a dimension between the predicted results Ŷ and the true labels Y .
of dm + da . For the ith user-day, the behavioral features could be
 (i) 4. A use case
represented as xb ∈ R{dm +da } , where i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , n}.

3.3. Residual hybrid network For a better illustration of the implementation process, we
 applied it to the CERT4.2 dataset for insider threat research [24],
 Behavioral features Xb are successfully extracted from users’ which helps to avoid privacy concerns due to its synthetic nabehavioral log files at the final stage of the integrated feature ture [37,38]. We constructed a balanced sample dataset using the
engineering. For insider threat detection, it will be sent into a down-sampling technique. This section presents details on how
special-designed Residual hybrid network model consisting of to construct the sample graph, conduct feature engineering and
GNN, CNN, and FC layers, and a residual link, as shown in Fig. 1. perform the insider threat detection task.
 To apply the residual hybrid network model, a graph is first
constructed following paper [19], and denoted as G = {V , A}, 4.1. Sample organizational graph
where V stands for all the vertex of the graph, A stands for
the adjacency matrix of the graph, which is derived from the For CERT 4.2, there are 70 malicious insiders out of 1000 emorganizational relationship between users. For any user-day, it ployees, and the raw dataset is organized by activity categories,
could be represented as a node in the graph (v ∈ V ). which contain logs of activities such as logging on/off a personal
 87
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

Table 1 auto-encoder for training, we further did one-hot encoding for
File content description for CERT4.2 dataset. the 24 types of activities plus the ‘none’ type. Therefore, for the
 File Content LSTM auto-encoder, the input sequence length is 74, and the
 LDAP files Describe organizational information of the enterprise, input dimension is 25.
 such as supervisor name, department name .etc In the training part, we take all the sample datasets as input
 Device Describe the activities related to USB device, such as and try to minimize the training loss with an early stopping stratconnect or disconnect a removable device
 egy. After multiple training rounds, we use the encoder output
 Email Describe all email activities including content in the from the middle full connection layer as our automatic features
 form of key words.
 for sequential activities and concatenate it with manual features
 File Describe the activities related to file usages on a PC, extracted in Section 4.2.1. For this implementation, we set the
 including file type and content summary.
 encoder output dimension to be 5, so for the final feature matrix,
 Http Describe the web usage information from a PC, the dimension would be 1908X10, and for each sample node, the
 including url and key words of content
 feature vector dimension is 10.
 Logon Describe the logon/logoff activities on a PC
 Psychometric Describe the personality evaluation result for all 4.3. Integrated insider detection with ResHybnet
 employees using big five OCEAN model

 As illustrated in Section 3.1, the concatenated feature matrix
 will serve as the node attribute matrix for nodes in the sample
computer (PC), opening a file, using a USB drive, etc. Addition- graph. With the help of the data loader tool in PyTorch, node
ally, the organizational relations are also given by LDAP file to attributes data and graph connection data (edge information) will
elaborate employee’s supervisor and department. In Table 1, key be fed into our ResHybnet model for a supervised insider threat
information of CERT 4.2 dataset files is briefly described. detection task.
 We first randomly down-sampled a balanced data set contain- During this process, the daily activity pattern would be mined
ing 1908 user-day samples, mapping them into 1908 nodes in an by the GNN and CNN component in our model, where GNN
organizational graph by several rules: focuses more on finding the behavior similarity between different user-day nodes that have organizational connections, and
 • First: If user B supervises user A, then every user-day from CNN focuses more on discovering the behavior pattern for each
 A will be connected with every user-day from B. individual node.
 • Second: If user A shares the same supervisor with user B,
 then every user-day from A will be connected with every 5. Experiments
 user-day from B.
 • Third: All the user-days that belong to the same user will be In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed solution,
 connected with each other. we conducted our experiment mainly from two aspects. In the
 first part, we hold the feature engineering part unchanged and
 After constructing this organizational graph, 70% of the whole investigate the detection performance of our ResHybnet model.
sample dataset are selected out for training while the rest 30% In the second part, we apply the best setting of our model and
for testing. Facilitated by this graph, behavior similarity could investigate how the different feature groups have contributed.
potentially be discovered by deep learning models. We performed all experiments with Python language. Specifically, PyTorch package2 is used for CNN model constructing,
4.2. Daily activity feature engineering scikit-learn3 package is adopted for binary classifier implementation, and PyTorch Geometric4 is used for implementing GNN
4.2.1. Manual feature engineering based on domain knowledge models. Default settings are used for all ready-to-go models and
 For manual feature engineering, it is largely relied on do- classifiers unless otherwise specified.
main knowledge to select the potential indicators. In this pa- For the training process, we employed an early stop strategy,
per, we studied two types of activity file for this feature group, setting the waiting epoch number to be 30, and monitored the
namely, device.csv file and logon.csv file, and manually selected test loss value with 0.0001 as delta threshold, and each experifive features that have the potential to be good indicators. ment will be carried out for 10 rounds to report the average. This
 To be specific, the five manual features for standalone activi- setting is universally applied to all training processes.
ties are shown in Table 2.
 5.1. Performance study of the proposed model
4.2.2. Automatic feature engineering based on LSTM auto-encoder
 For automatic feature engineering, we need to encode the 5.1.1. Performance comparison with other classifiers
daily activities first and join them into a sequence based on the Since ResHybnet is a model-independent structure that can
time each activity was performed. We referenced the practice make the best out of GNN and CNN components, in experimental
adopted by paper [34] and analyzed all the activities logged in part, we first chose the most simple and popular GNN and CNN
file.csv, logon.csv, device.csv, and email.csv. The rules for encod- structures to verify the effectiveness of our model, and compared
ing those activities are shown in Table 3. it with commonly used binary classifier such as SVM, LR, RF, GNB.
 In total, we defined 12 different types of activities and encoded We also compared it with a CNN and GNN classifier using the
them further into 24 types of activities based on whether it is same setting as the components use in our model. Actually, for
conducted during work time or off-work time, numbering them our ResHybnet model, when setting it to gnn mode, it would
from 1 to 24. Our sample dataset’s longest daily activity sequence perform exactly like a GNN classifier, while setting it to cnn mode
is 74, which serves as our sequence length setting when training will make it act like a CNN classifier. Specifically, for the CNN
the LSTM auto-encoder for feature engineering. For those userdays that have shorter sequences, we add 0 to represent ‘none’ 2 https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/index.html
activity at the end of sequence until it reaches the sequence 3 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
length setting 74. Before feeding the sequence into the LSTM 4 https://pytorch-geometric.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

 88
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Table 2
 Manual feature engineering method.
 Feature name Process method Value type
 First logon time
 Map the time of the activity to the
 Last logoff time
 range of [0, 1], where 0 stands for Float
 First device activity time
 00:00, 1 stands for 24:00
 Last device activity time
 Number of off-work Count the number of the activities Integer
 device activities related to device in off-work time

 Table 3
 Daily activity encoding rules.
 Activity type Code for work time Code for off-work time
 Logon a PC 1 13
 Logoff a PC 2 14
 Connect a USB drive 3 15
 Disconnect a USB drive 4 16
 Open a .doc file 5 17
 Open a .exe file 6 18
 Open a .jpg file 7 19
 Open a .pdf file 8 20
 Open a .text file 9 21
 Open a .zip file 10 22
 Send an email to internal address 11 23
 Send an email to external address 12 24

Table 4 out the residual link in our model to show the power of it. We
Performance comparison for different detection models. set the ResHybnet model to work in hybrid mode, and tried GCNs
 Model name Acc (%) Pre (%) Rec (%) F1 (%) and GATs as GNN component separately. Each time, we switch
 ResHybnet(GCN+CNN) 92.62 91.52 92.87 92.19 the residual link on/off to see the effect. The result is shown in
 SVM 90.56 87.68 92.91 90.22
 Table 5, and Fig. 3.
 CNN 90.44 87.13 93.40 90.15
 GNB 89.69 86.67 92.16 89.33 From Table 5, we could see no matter which GNN component
 RF 89.69 87.46 91.04 89.21 we choose, just stacking it with CNN component will not improve
 LR 89.34 87.36 90.30 88.81 the performance. Without the residual link, the hybrid model’s
 GCN 70.77 62.14 96.34 75.53
 performance would even downgrade to the worst situation. This
 phenomenon is also well visualized by the huge gap of performance under the setting of with or without residual link in
component, we used a simple two-layer convolutional networks, Fig. 3.
and for the GNN component we choose one of the most popular, As mentioned in the contribution part, we think the power
namely GCNs, and apply a simple two-layer GCN model for our of this residual link mainly comes from the fact it keeps the full
hybrid model. The comparison results on the constructed sample information of the node attribute, and adds it back to the output
dataset are presented in Table 4. of GNN component. In this way, our model could make use of the
 From Table 4, we could clearly see that the proposed detection information from graph and individual node attribute to achieve
model achieved the best result overall, leading performance in better performance.
accuracy and precision, with the number of 92.62%, 91.52%. Although Recall score does not top the list, the more balanced f1 5.2. Ablation study of feature engineering
score is notably higher than all the other classification models.
What worth noticing is, when the components adopted in our In our solution, the other contribution is the integrated feamodel working separately as a classification model, none of them ture engineering combining manual features from standalone
could achieve a desirable result. In particular, the GCN model
 activities and automatic features from sequential activities. In
comes in the last place in all the metrics except for Recall rate.
 this section, we will show how these two groups of features
One explanation is that in the GNN model, each node will collect
 contribute to the final detection task, holding the best hybrid
node attribute information from its neighbors for updating in
 model setting unchanged. Which is to say, we choose GCN for
each training round, which inevitable causes the attribute of
 GNN component and working in hybrid mode. Firstly, we will
its own to be downgraded. For this dataset, although there is
 show the comparison result for different feature combinations,
some information hidden in organizational graph, individual node
 and secondly, we will investigate how the length of sequence
attribute still plays a more important role in classification.
 affects the final result.
 Therefore, from Table 4, we could fairly say, for this insider
threat sample dataset, the proposed ResHybnet model could
make the best use of the discovering power from both compo- 5.2.1. Representative power of different feature groups
nents, and has a satisfying performance. To better capture the nature of employee’s behavioral pattern
 in all kinds of activities, we designed two groups of features for
5.1.2. Discussion on the power of residual link engineering as shown in Section 4.2. For standalone activities, it is
 As shown in the previous part, our model outperforms not relatively easy to select out some feature based on domain knowlonly traditional classifiers but also the deep learning models edge and experience. However, we believe there also exist some
that have been adopted as a component of the model. However, patterns behind how those activities are performed, which could
this improved performance does not come by simply stacking only be discovered by algorithm. With the proposed LSTM autocomponents together. We did an ablation experiment by taking encoder, we extracted out feature automatically from activity
 89
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Table 5
 Performance comparison for with/without the residual link.
 Model setting Residual link status Acc (%) Pre (%) Rec (%) F1 (%)
 ResHybnet With residual link 92.62 91.52 92.87 92.19
 (GCN+CNN) Without residual link 70.38 63.12 89.51 73.73
 ResHybnet With residual link 91.01 89.79 91.19 90.47
 (GAT+CNN) Without residual link 68.69 62.66 88.02 72.16

 Fig. 3. F1 score comparison for with/without the residual link.

Table 6
Performance comparison for different feature groups.
 Feature combination Acc (%) Pre (%) Rec (%) F1 (%)
 Manual + Automatic Feature 92.62 91.52 92.87 92.19
 Manual Feature 92.01 89.97 93.36 91.63
 Automatic Feature 86.03 83.06 88.25 85.56

sequence. Table 6 shows how different feature groups contribute
in our solution.
 From Table 6, it shows that in some situations, manual feature selection based on domain knowledge could already help to
obtain satisfying result, while the hidden pattern in sequential
behavior may not be so significant. However, adding those automatic features to feature pool indeed improves final classification
performance for this case. Specifically, regardless of recall rate
drop, adding automatic feature to manual feature group will Fig. 4. Statistics and histogram for activity sequence lengths.
improve f1 score from 91.63% to 92.19%, and the rest metrics also
enjoyed improvement.
 length for auto-encoder to train and extract feature, and for all
5.2.2. Discussion on sequence length in automatic feature engineersequence lengths, feature output dimension is set to the same
ing
 number of 5.
 In the previous section, we showed that for this sample
 In the comparison process, we investigated different sequence
dataset, adding sequential activity features to the feature replength based on how it deviates from the mean. Specifically, startresentation indeed improves the performance of insider threat ing from the average length, we set the sequence length roughly
discovering. At the beginning, we intuitively set the maximal every additional standard deviation both above and below aversequence length as the input sequence length for the LSTM auto- age, until out of boundary. That is to say, for a specified user-day
encoder, and fill the empty positions at the end with ‘none’ sample, if the actual sequence length exceeds our setting, the rest
activities. However, it is possible there is a balance that needs to would be cut off, and if the actual sequence length is smaller than
be reached between detection performance and input sequence the setting, empty positions at the end will be filled with ‘none’
length due to computation concerns. Moreover, it is possible activity type. We present the comparison result in Table 7.
that employee’s activities have a circling pattern, and taking the From Table 7 and Fig. 5, we could observe there exists a genmaximal sequence length as the input for LSTM auto-encoder is eral trend of increased overall performance along with increased
not a must choice. sequence length. However, there are two things worth noticing.
 Therefore, in this experimental part, we tried to find some in- First, starting from 1 standard deviation above mean all the way
sights by looking into how the sequence length choice in feature to maximal sequence length, F1 score actually fluctuates around a
engineering part will affect the final detection performance. Here, point, which means for this dataset and LSTM auto-encoder, after
we hold model setting and manual features unchanged, compare a certain point of sequence length, features extracted are becomthe performance of classification for different sequence length ing limited. Second, for sequence length equals to and smaller
choices during the feature engineering process. than the mean, the final performance actually suffered draw-
 Fig. 4 shows the statistical characteristics for daily activity ing back compared with the performance using only manually
sequence. Based on this information, we set the different input selected features.
 90
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 Fig. 5. F1 score trend for different activity sequence lengths.

Table 7 extent, in practice, insider threat detection is an extremely im-
Performance comparison for different activity sequence length settings. balanced classification problem, and we need to face this obstacle
 Input sequence length Acc (%) Pre (%) Rec (%) F1 (%) in real-world application. Thirdly, in real world application, an
 Length = 5 (−1 Std) 90.91 89.08 91.87 90.44 online learning strategy would be more suitable for insider threat
 Length = 16 (Mean) 90.28 88.37 91.27 89.79
 scenario, and this could be our prior working direction in the
 Length = 27 (+1 Std) 92.59 91.38 92.95 92.16
 Length = 38 (+2 Std) 91.92 90.33 92.69 91.49 future. As for insider threat detection itself, we think there still
 Length = 49 (+3 Std) 92.50 90.97 93.28 92.10 exist two major challenges, one of which is that currently not so
 Length = 60 (+4 Std) 92.40 91.12 92.84 91.96 many rich datasets are available due to privacy issues, and the
 Length = 74 (Max) 92.62 91.52 92.87 92.19 other is how to better protect privacy for an average employee
 when monitoring insiders within an organization. We expect
 follow-up researchers to propose some solutions regarding those
 Thus, we think how to choose the proper length is largely two aspects.
determined by how long the maximal length is. If the activity
length is relatively small like the situation in our sample dataset, Declaration of competing interest
then using the maximal sequence length would certainly give a
better result. However, if the maximal sequence is too long for The authors declare that they have no known competing finanprocessing, and the distribution of length is extremely imbal- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
anced, then analyzing statistic of sequence length could be a good to influence the work reported in this paper.
starting point for reaching a balanced choice. For example, in this
specific situation, setting the length to be 1 standard deviation Acknowledgments
above mean could have already given a satisfying result.
 This work was partially supported by the Research Program
 of Chongqing University of Arts and Sciences, China (Grant No.
6. Conclusion
 P2020RG08).
 In this paper, we proposed a residual hybrid network (ResHyb-
 References
net) and an integrated featuring engineering solution to handle
the challenges in insider threat detection research. Experimental [1] Rasool RU, Ahmed K, Anwar Z, Wang H, Ashraf U, Rafique W. CyberPulse++:
results on the CERT 4.2 dataset show the proposed ResHybnet A machine learning-based security framework for detecting link flooding
model could outperform other state-of-art classifiers in insider attacks in software defined networks. Int J Intell Syst 2021;36(8):3852–79.
 [2] Agrawal N, Kumar R. Security perspective analysis of industrial cyber
threat detection task, and the residual link design in our detection
 physical systems (I-CPS): A decade-wide survey. ISA Trans 2022.
model has proved to be effective. At the same time, the proposed [3] Wang Y, Shen Y, Wang H, Cao J, Jiang X. Mtmr: Ensuring mapreduce
LSTM auto-encoder approach for automatic feature engineering computation integrity with merkle tree-based verifications. IEEE Trans. Big
indeed indicates there is some hidden information in daily ac- Data 2016;4(3):418–31.
tivity sequence, and LSTM auto-encoder is an effective feature [4] Sun N, Zhang J, Rimba P, Gao S, Zhang LY, Xiang Y. Data-driven
 cybersecurity incident prediction: A survey. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor
extractor. 2018;21(2):1744–72.
 However, there are still some limitations in our work that [5] Center CNIT. Common sense guide to mitigating insider threats. Seventh.
could be improved in the future. Firstly, we only utilized part Carnegie Mellon University; 2022.
of the activities provided by CERT 4.2 dataset in our use case [6] Wang H, Sun L. Trust-involved access control in collaborative open social
 networks. In: 2010 Fourth International conference on network and system
study, and it could be more promising as well as challenging if security. IEEE; 2010, p. 239–46.
more activity data are introduced in the feature engineering part. [7] Wang H, Cao J, Zhang Y. A flexible payment scheme and its role-based
Secondly, although our approach shows potential to a certain access control. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 2005;17(3):425–36.

 91
W. Hong, J. Yin, M. You et al. ISA Transactions 141 (2023) 84–92

 [8] You M, Yin J, Wang H, Cao J, Wang K, Miao Y, Bertino E. A knowledge graph [24] Glasser J, Lindauer B. Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach to generating
 empowered online learning framework for access control decision-making. insider threat data. In: 2013 IEEE Security and privacy workshops. IEEE;
 World Wide Web 2022;1–22. 2013, p. 98–104.
 [9] Sun X, Li M, Wang H, Plank A. An efficient hash-based algorithm for min- [25] Gavai G, Sricharan K, Gunning D, Rolleston R, Hanley J, Singhal M.
 imal k-anonymity. In: Conferences in research and practice in information Detecting insider threat from enterprise social and online activity data.
 technology, vol. 74. CRPIT, 2008, p. 101–7. In: Proceedings of the 7th ACM CCS International workshop on managing
[10] Yin Y, Yu W, Bu X, Yu Q. Security data-driven iterative learning control for insider security threats. 2015, p. 13–20.
 unknown nonlinear systems with hybrid attacks and fading measurements. [26] Gamachchi A, Boztas S. Insider threat detection through attributed graph
 ISA Trans 2022. clustering. In: 2017 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS. IEEE; 2017, p. 112–9.
[11] Wang H, Cao J, Zhang Y, Wang H, Cao J, Zhang Y. Building access control [27] Jiang J, Chen J, Gu T, Choo K-KR, Liu C, Yu M, Huang W, Mohapatra P.
 policy model for privacy preserving and testing policy conflicting problems. Anomaly detection with graph convolutional networks for insider threat
 Access Control Manag Cloud Environ 2020;225–47. and fraud detection. In: MILCOM 2019-2019 IEEE Military communications
[12] Lin G, Wen S, Han Q-L, Zhang J, Xiang Y. Software vulnerability detection conference. MILCOM, IEEE; 2019, p. 109–14.
 using deep neural networks: a survey. Proc IEEE 2020;108(10):1825–48. [28] Zhang S, Liu Z, Chen Y, Jin Y, Bai G. Selective kernel convolution deep resid-
[13] Sun X, Wang H, Li J, Pei J. Publishing anonymous survey rating data. Data ual network based on channel-spatial attention mechanism and feature
 Min Knowl Discov 2011;23(3):379–406. fusion for mechanical fault diagnosis. ISA Trans 2022.
[14] Chen X, Li C, Wang D, Wen S, Zhang J, Nepal S, Xiang Y, Ren K. An- [29] Wang H, Wang Y, Taleb T, Jiang X. Special issue on security and privacy
 droid HIV: A study of repackaging malware for evading machine-learning in network computing. World Wide Web 2020;23:951–7.
 detection. IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 2019;15:987–1001. [30] Liu A, Martin C, Hetherington T, Matzner S. A comparison of system call
[15] Yin J, You M, Cao J, Wang H, Tang M, Ge Y-F. Data-driven hierarchical feature representations for insider threat detection. In: Proceedings from
 neural network modeling for high-pressure feedwater heater group. In: the Sixth Annual IEEE SMC Information assurance workshop. IEEE; 2005,
 Australasian database conference. Springer; 2020, p. 225–33. p. 340–7.
[16] Tang C, Yin J. A localization algorithm of weighted maximum like- [31] Lin L, Zhong S, Jia C, Chen K. Insider threat detection based on deep belief
 lihood estimation for wireless sensor network. J Inform Comput Sci network feature representation. In: 2017 International conference on green
 2011;8(16):4293–300. informatics. ICGI, IEEE; 2017, p. 54–9.
[17] Hu X, Ma W, Chen C, Wen S, Zhang J, Xiang Y, Fei G. Event detection [32] Chattopadhyay P, Wang L, Tan Y-P. Scenario-based insider threat detection
 in online social network: Methodologies, state-of-art, and evolution. Comp from cyber activities. IEEE Trans Comput Soc Syst 2018;5(3):660–75.
 Sci Rev 2022;46:100500. [33] Singh M, Mehtre B, Sangeetha S. Insider threat detection based on user
[18] Yin J, Tang M, Cao J, You M, Wang H, Alazab M. Knowledge-driven behaviour analysis. In: International conference on machine learning,
 cybersecurity intelligence: software vulnerability co-exploitation behaviour image processing, network security and data sciences. Springer; 2020, p.
 discovery. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2022. 559–74.
[19] Hong W, Yin J, You M, Wang H, Cao J, Li J, Liu M. Graph intelligence [34] Yuan F, Cao Y, Shang Y, Liu Y, Tan J, Fang B. Insider threat detection
 enhanced bi-channel insider threat detection. In: Network and system with deep neural network. In: International conference on computational
 security: 16th international conference, NSS 2022, Denarau Island, Fiji, science. Springer; 2018, p. 43–54.
 December 9–12, 2022, Proceedings. Springer; 2022, p. 86–102. [35] Paul S, Mishra S. LAC: LSTM autoencoder with community for insider threat
[20] Wang Y, Sun Y, Liu Z, Sarma SE, Bronstein MM, Solomon JM. Dynamic detection. In: 2020 the 4th International conference on big data research
 graph cnn for learning on point clouds. Acm Trans Graphics (Tog) (ICBDR’20). 2020, p. 71–7.
 2019;38(5):1–12. [36] Liu F, Wen Y, Zhang D, Jiang X, Xing X, Meng D. Log2vec: A heterogeneous
[21] Homoliak I, Toffalini F, Guarnizo J, Elovici Y, Ochoa M. Insight into insiders graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber threats within enand it: A survey of insider threat taxonomies, analysis, modeling, and terprise. In: Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on computer
 countermeasures. ACM Comput Surv 2019;52(2):1–40. and communications security. 2019, p. 1777–94.
[22] Schonlau M, DuMouchel W, Ju W-H, Karr AF, Theus M, Vardi Y. Computer [37] Sun X, Wang H, Li J. Satisfying privacy requirements: One step before
 intrusion: Detecting masquerades. Statist Sci 2001;58–74. anonymization. In: Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and
[23] Garg A, Rahalkar R, Upadhyaya S, Kwiat K. Profiling users in GUI based data mining. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2010, p. 181–8.
 systems for masquerade detection. In: Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE [38] Sun X, Wang H, Li J, Zhang Y. Satisfying privacy requirements before data
 Workshop on information assurance, vol. 2006. 2006, p. 48–54. anonymization. Comput J 2012;55(4):422–37.

 92