Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

AAE-DSVDD: A one-class classification model for VPN traffic identification
Sicai Lv a , Chao Wang a , Zibo Wang a , Shuo Wang c , Bailing Wang a ,∗, Yongzheng Zhang b
a
 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology at Weihai, Weihai, China
b
 Chinese Asset Cybersecurity Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
c
 School of life and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Virtual Private Network(VPN) can provide a concealed transmission channel for communication and protect the
VPN traffic identification privacy of users. However, it also brings hidden dangers to cybersecurity with its wide application. Malicious
Deep one-class classification behavior or harmful information can be transmitted secretly through VPN tunnels to avoid firewall censorship.
Network flow feature extraction
 Therefore, VPN traffic identification is an important part of ensure cybersecurity. Although many efforts have
 been made for VPN traffic identification, existing methods mainly focus on supervised learning models. In this
 paper, we propose an one-class classification model called AAE-DSVDD for VPN traffic identification. First,
 we introduce Adversarial AutoEncoder(AAE) for preliminary modeling of VPN traffic. AAE can match the
 aggregated posterior distribution of the hidden layer to an arbitrary prior distribution. It associates the samples
 with a normal distribution in the hidden space. Secondly, We implement representation learning for VPN traffic
 via Deep Support Vector Data Description(DSVDD). A standardized method is designed to match the output
 distribution of DSVDD with the aggregated posterior distribution of AAE. It alleviates the hypersphere collapse
 problem of DSVDD and improves identification performance. Finally, we verify the abilities of the AAE-DSVDD
 model on the public dataset ISCXVPN. Compared with other one-class models, AAE-DSVDD achieved the best
 identification ability for VPN traffic identification. It also improves the recognition ability when identifying
 strange classes that are not included in the training data.

1. Introduction problem is traffic encryption. In order to ensure the security of communication, VPNs use IPsec [4], PPTP [5] or many other protocols to build
 A VPN [1], a private network built into the public network infras- tunnels and encrypt data. In addition, there are also various anonymous
tructure, that offers a secure and secret communication tunnel for users. technologies, such as the multi-hop anonymous communication model
It provide a temporary, private, and dedicated network channel in the used by Tor [6]. Traffic obfuscation will also increase the difficulty of
public network to meet the needs of mutual visits in different places, VPN traffic detection [7,8].
and achieve point-to-point interconnection. Due to the utilization of multi-hop and anonymity techniques within
 With the increasing importance placed on privacy by internet users, VPNs, traditional traffic classification methods struggle to be effective.
VPNs have found widespread application. However, there are also At present, the traffic classification method based on machine learning
malicious uses of VPN [2,3]. Hackers can hide their malicious behavior
 and deep learning has attracted the attention of most researchers.
through a VPN, making it difficult to trace the real address of the
 In recent years, machine learning and deep learning models coexists,
attacker. It is difficult for a firewall or intrusion detection system to
 but with distinct emphases. Machine learning methods are usually
detect these malicious behaviors. VPNs have acted as a protective shield
 combined with artificial analysis. By analyzing traffic flow and conagainst these malicious activities. Therefore, it is meaningful to detect
VPN traffic for cybersecurity. structing features, traditional machine learning models can be trained
 Due to its privacy and anonymity features, detecting VPN traffic to identify VPN traffic flow, such as naive Bayesian, random forest,
presents a significant challenge to investigators. There exists multi- and SVM [9,10]. However, the research on VPN traffic identification
ple issues during the detection process. The first and most important based on deep learning believes that there are obvious hidden dangers

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: wbl@hit.edu.cn (B. Wang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2023.109990
Received 15 March 2023; Received in revised form 16 August 2023; Accepted 20 August 2023
Available online 23 August 2023
1389-1286/© 2023 Published by Elsevier B.V.
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

in the use of artificial features during training. These features will protocol. Xue [18] proposes three fingerprinting identification methods
fail when the traffic flow changes. Therefore, the output of the deep for openVPN: opcode-based fingerprinting, ACK-based fingerprinting,
learning model is designed to use the common features extracted by and active server fingerprinting. These methods are very effective at
some stream feature extraction tools (NetFlow, Netmate, etc.)[11], or detecting openVPN traffic. The fingerprinting-based method can even
even directly intercept the source data of the data packet for end-to-end realize application-level traffic identification such as Appsniffer [19].
learning [12]. But these analyses require professionals staff to analyze traffic for VPN
 However, the problem of VPN traffic identification in the real protocols.
network environment is not a simple supervised learning problem. However, since the communication data was transmitted in an
In the process of identification, the following two issues need to be encrypted VPN tunnel, DPI technology could not be directly applied
considered: First of all, there are complex background traffic problems to identify this encrypted traffic flow. Therefore, machine learning or
in the public network environment. Background traffic includes normal deep learning technology is widely used to learn the difference betraffic, such as application traffic, file transfers, etc. And there is also tween VPN traffic and other encrypted traffic. Thus, machine learning
some abnormal traffic, such as network attacks. It is difficult for this or deep learning technology is being utilized to detect anonymous
background traffic to be fully included in the training dataset. Second, proxy tunnel traffic from typical encrypted communication. VPN trafthere is the issue of feature construction. Manually designed features fic identification based on traditional machine learning models relies
have limitations, which require a lot of labor costs, and can only be on the characteristics of manual analysis. This method of artificially
applied to some specific VPN traffic detection [13,14]. formulating features shows great adaptability to traditional machine
 In view of the above problems, this paper proposes a one-class learning models: on the one hand, the designed features are usually
classification model, AAE-DSVDD, to identify VPN traffic flow. The relatively low-dimensional; on the other hand, these features are alreason why this paper chooses a one-class classification model is as ready simplified and effective, and there is no need to use neural
follows: Firstly, the one-classification model only needs the training networks for further learning. The Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity
of the target class. It avoids the recognition bias brought on by the publicly released a dataset, ISCXVPN [15] that contains seven types of
background traffic data. Next, depending on the neural network, it can conventionally encrypted traffic and seven types of VPN traffic. They
automatically mine the communication features of VPN traffic flow extracted 23-dimensional features, including flow duration and arrival
to build a more accurate and effective detection model. This paper time interval, etc. Gupta [20] and others proposed to use deeply enconducts experiments on the ISCXVPN dataset [15] to verify the model hanced Naive Bayes combined with fuzzy k-means clustering to detect
proposed in this paper. This dataset comprises seven different traffic VPN traffic, and the F1 score for VPN traffic recognition reached 97.3%.
behaviors under two types of VPN and non-VPN, including VoIP, P2P, Based on traditional models, researchers have tried various traffic
etc. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: features to identify VPN traffic. Johan Mazel [10] focused on traffic
 meta-features, including transmission protocol, data packet quantity,
 1. This paper discusses the feature construction of VPN traffic flow duration, data packet size, and other features. Bagui [21] interested
 identification. Based on the ISCXVPN dataset, this paper dis- in time-dependent features. Both of them have tested a variety of
 cussed the validity of the time-related statistical characteristics traditional machine learning models implemented in Scikit-Learn, and
 and proposed using one-dimensional Convolutional Neural Net- the models used include random forests, decision trees, etc. In order to
 works (1dCNN) to mine the hidden features of original packet further improve the detection accuracy, the integrated learning model
 length and time interval to identify VPN traffic flow. is also applied to VPN traffic identification [22].
 2. This paper proposes an AAE-DSVDD model for VPN tunnel traffic Although the machine learning model has received extensive attenidentification. The model uses AAE to construct an aggregated tion from researchers, the need for artificially engineered features is
 posterior distribution close to the specified prior distribution in an unavoidable drawback. Thus, researchers gradually focused on deep
 the hidden space. Then it is used to constrain the output of learning. A neural network can automatically learn hidden features
 DSVDD to improve identification capability. through a complex network structure, and its classification accuracy
 3. AAE-DSVDD alleviates the hypersphere collapse problem. Bias is usually higher than that of the traditional machine learning model.
 terms and bounded activation functions can be used in neural Shane Miller [3] proposed an identification method using a multinetworks. layer perceptron neural network to distinguish OpenVPN tunnel traffic
 4. The model is demonstrated experimentally on the ISCXVPN from normal encrypted traffic. Guo [23] converted the payload to a
 dataset. Compared AAE-DSVDD with other one-class classifica- flow graph, and then automatically extracted image features through
 tion and supervised learning models to verify the effectiveness of CNN. The overall recognition accuracy rate reached 92.2%. Fu [11]
 the model. AAE-DSVDD achieved the best experimental results. proposed a VPN traffic detection method based on Bi-directional Long-
 Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM). They believed that there are obvious
 The structure of this paper is as follows: In the second part, the shortfalls in the process of training the model, whether using manually
related work of VPN tunnel detection is analyzed. In the third part, designed features or using automatic feature extraction based on deep
we introduce the AAE-DSVDD model in detail. In the fourth part, the learning. The artificial features depended on professional experience,
model is verified by an experiment on the ISCXVPN dataset; Finally, and the automatic extracted features required a large scale of input data
the sixth part summarizes the work of this paper and proposes future and high time complexity. Therefore, they use the data information
work. extracted by NetFlow as the input data. Tang [24] trusts that VPN
 traffic identification needs to combine time and space features, as
2. Related work proposed in Caps-LSTM. They use a capsule neural network to learn
 the spatial features, and a LSTM to learn the temporal features. The
 In the early stages, traffic identification was mainly based on port detection accuracy reaches 98%.
filtering or Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)[16]. DPI technology performs These supervised learning models have been validated in many
traffic identification by extracting the header information of the data studies to effectively identify known class data. However, there are
packet during the interaction process and matching it with the ex- many unknown classes of traffic that do not belong to any train
isting signature database information. However, some VPN protocols class. The supervised learning model will misclassify this traffic into a
still have distinguishable figure printing in actual operation, even if known class [25]. There are also unknown types of data in VPN traffic
some applications use obfuscation technology [17]. Some researchers detection, such as unknown background traffic or uncollected VPN
can design detection methods based on the fingerprint of the VPN protocol traffic. Thus, VPN traffic identification is a semi-supervised

 2
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

or even unsupervised learning problem in many situations. And one- Table 1
 Symbols and definitions used in this paper.
class classification models were introduced into traffic identification,
which has the potential to deal with zero-day traffic [26]. The one-class Symbols Definitions

classification pays attention to training a representation model of target 𝑝(𝑧) The predefine prior distribution of AAE
 𝑞(𝑧) The aggregated posterior distribution of AAE
data. It can avoid collecting complex background traffic. Van [27]
 𝑝𝜙(𝑥) (𝑧) The distribution of DSVDD output
proposed to detect DNS tunneling in mobile networks by One-Class 𝑋 The train dataset
Support Vector Machine (OCSVM). They discussed the performance of 𝑁 The size of train dataset
OCSVM under different kernel functions. The experimental results show 𝑠(𝑥) The Anomaly score of AAE_DSVDD
that OCSVM with the RBF kernel achieved the best performance, and it 𝑐, 𝑅 The center and radius of hypersphere
 𝛼 The weight of loss
has a very high recall rate. Nadler [28] use isolation Forest (iForest) to
 𝑣 The upper bound on the fraction of outliers
detect DNS tunnels. In their research, the iForest is trained on normal 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 , 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 The distribution constrain loss and original DSVDD loss
traffic. Esteban Rivera [29] detects VPN tunnels by profiling network 𝜇, 𝜎 The mean and standard deviation of prior distribution
latencies. In their work, an OCSVM and an one-shot Siamese neural 𝑤𝓁 The weights of the 𝓁 layer in neural network
network are designed to detect VPN tunnels. OCSVM achieves better 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑊 ) The function representation of DSVDD

detection performance than the neural network.
 One-class machine learning models such as OCSVM and iForest
have good interpretability, but these shallow methods cannot handle Assumption 1. DSVDD can achieve better performance by mapping
complex and diverse data, so they are usually bound with feature engi- the most samples of the target class with high confidence to the
neering. Therefore, researchers pay attention to deep learning. Autoen- hypersphere center and a small number of target class samples with
coder(AE) is an unsupervised method for data compression and data low confidence to the hypersphere edge.
feature representation. Ons Aouedi [30] proposed a semi-supervised
learning model based on stacked sparse autoencoders, which achieved Based on the above assumption, this paper designs the AAE-DSVDD
an accuracy rate of 95% on the ISCXVPN dataset. However, their work model. It can constrain the DSVDD output through the aggregated
only used the feature extraction ability of the AE, and added a softmax posterior distribution of AAE. Then it achieves the purpose of optilayer after the decoder to build a classifier. AE can also be used as an mizing the internal distribution of the hypersphere. The symbols and
anomaly detection model, and Wu [31] used this feature of AE to detect definitions used in this paper are shown in Table 1.
DNS tunnels.
 In a recent study, researchers attempted to combine shadow one- 3.2. Deep SVDD
class classification models with neural networks. Based on OCSVM and
SVDD, researchers proposed One-Class Neural Network(OC-NN)[32] SVDD [36] is a shadow one-class classification model. It is assumed
and DSVDD [33] by combining them with neural network models. that all training samples from the target class, X = {𝑥𝑖 ∈ 𝑅𝑑 ,y𝑖 = 1|𝑖 =
It retains the theoretical basis of the traditional model and can deal 1, 2, … , 𝑛}. 𝑑 denotes the dimension of features. There exists a hidden
with complex and high-dimensional data. However, these models are mapping 𝛷. 𝛷 can map all samples to the feature space, 𝛷 ∶ 𝑅𝑑 → 𝐅.
currently mainly used in traffic anomaly detection [34,35]. The goal of SVDD is to find the smallest hypersphere that contains
 all training samples in the feature space. In order to construct such a
3. Method
 hypersphere, SVDD need to solve the following optimization problems:

3.1. Motivation
 ⎧ ∑ 𝑛
 min 𝑅2 + 𝐶
 ⎪ 𝑐,𝑅,𝜉 𝜉𝑖
 The purpose of VPN traffic identification is to mine VPN tunnel ⎨ 𝑖=1 (1)
traffic from a large amount of background traffic. Therefore, it is ( )
 ⎪ ‖𝛷 𝑥 − 𝑐 ‖ ≤ 𝑅2 + 𝜉 , 𝜉 ≥ 0, ∀𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑛
 2
 ⎩ ‖
 ‖ 𝑖 ‖
 ‖ 𝑖 𝑖
usually treated as a supervised learning problem. By constructing two
types of labeled datasets of VPN traffic and background traffic, and The principle of DSVDD is the same as SVDD, and the purpose is to
training a binary classification model to realize VPN traffic identifica- find a minimum hypersphere in the feature space. But it achieves its
tion. However, the binary classification model may face the following purpose through a neural network. Write as 𝜙 ∶ 𝑅𝑑 → 𝐅. The neural
difficulties during identification. Assuming that Fig. 1(a) is the training network 𝜙 is also constrained by the objective function of SVDD. The
dataset, there is a bias in the training data collection. VPN traffic object function of DSVDD is as follows:
mainly collects web browsing data, and background traffic includes
 𝜆 ∑ ‖ 𝓁 ‖2
 𝐿
web browsing and VoIP. Other communication behaviors are ignored min 𝑅2 + ‖𝑤 ‖
during data collection, such as P2P, FTP, etc. The possibility of a 𝑅,𝑊 2 𝓁=1 ‖ ‖𝐹
 { } (2)
binary classification model trained on these labeled data may be as ∑𝑛
 ‖ ( ) ‖2
 +𝐶 max 0, ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 − 𝑐 ‖ − 𝑅2
shown in Fig. 1(b). When some Unseen samples from Known Classes ‖ ‖
 𝑖=1
(UKCs) are used for testing, the model has perfect recognition ability.
In the application scenario, the input of the model may contain some In Formula (2), 𝐿 denotes the number of layers in neural net-
Unseen samples from Unknown Classes (UUCs), such as FTP and VPN- work, 𝑤𝓁 denotes Weight of the 𝓁th layer of neural network, 𝑊 =
VoIP. Then it may appear as shown in Fig. 1(c), and the model cannot {𝑤𝓁 , 𝓁 = 1, 2, … , 𝐿}. The above objective function can be solved by
effectively detect UUCs. In VPN traffic identification, UUCs may be back-propagation, and the anomaly fraction is defined as the distance
some rare VPN traffic, or even some network attack traffic. Thus, this between 𝜙(𝑥𝑖 ) in the feature space and the center of the sphere 𝑐.
paper designs a VPN traffic detection model based on DSVDD. It is DSVDD uses a neural network to construct a map from sample space
expected to get a decision surface like that shown in Fig. 1(d), which to feature space, which makes SVDD take the advantages of the neural
will have a stronger capability to identify UUCs. networks. On the one hand, it can accept high-dimensional input data,
 Meanwhile, DSVDD is optimized in this paper to improve its identifi- and it can rely on neural networks for automated feature extraction
cation ability. DSVDD only shrinks the hypersphere based on the SVDD and mining of hidden features; on the other hand, the theoretical basis
model, and it does not consider the distribution of training data inside of the original SVDD is maintained, and the hypersphere constructed is
the hypersphere. This paper makes the following assumption to achieve the decision surface. It has good interpretability and is easy to calculate
a better detection capability: the anomaly score.

 3
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

Fig. 1. An example of supervised and semi-supervised learning, (a) denotes the labeled training data. (b) denotes the decision surface of the supervised learning model. (c) is the
scene where the supervised learning model recognizes UUCs. (d) is the expected one-class classification model.

 However, there is a defect named hypersphere collapse during AAE can match the aggregated posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) to the
training the neural networks. Hypersphere collapse means that the prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧). In this paper, the 𝑞(𝑧) is then used to constrain
radius of the hypersphere shrinks to zero. The map 𝜙 is a constant the output of DSVDD. Another purpose of using AAE is to utilize the
function. Therefore, the following settings need to be made during the AE trained in AAE. AE can be used as an anomaly detection model to
training process [33]: (1) Fix the center of the sphere when the model distinguish samples with high reconstruction loss as anomalies. These
is initialized; (2) Set the neural network to have no bias term; (3) Set samples will be considered low confidence samples and distributed
an unbounded activation function. at the edge of the prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧), which is in line with the
 assumptions of this paper.
3.3. Adversarial autoencoder

 AAE [37] is a kind of generation model, that makes up for the defect 3.4. AAE-DSVDD
of Generator Adversarial Network(GAN). The generator input of GAN
is random noise and has no semantic information at all. But the hidden In this part, we introduce the AAE-DSVDD model designed in this
vector is matched with a prior distribution to control the generation paper in detail. The structure of the AAE-DSVDD model is shown in
of data in AAE. AAE includes three schemes: unsupervised, semi- Fig. 3.
supervised and supervised. This article focuses on the unsupervised The key idea of the AAE-DSVDD model is as follows: First, train
model. an AAE model to get the encoding distribution. Let the aggregated
 The structure of AAE is shown in Fig. 2. The model consists of posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) close to the prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧). Then, the
three parts:Encoder, Decoder and Discriminator. The Encoder builds outputs of DSVDD are then constraint by 𝑞(𝑧). Through these two steps,
an aggregated posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) in Formula (3). Let 𝑥 be the we can achieve the purpose of Assumption 1. Finally, AAE-DSVDD
input and 𝐸(𝑥) = 𝑧 be the latent vector, and there is 𝑧 ∼ 𝑞(𝑧). The reaches its goal of improving the identification performance of the
decoder, which is the generator of the AAE, can decode 𝑧 to obtain the DSVDD model.
reconstructed sample 𝑥.
 The first stage is the training of an AAE model. In this stage, the
𝑞(𝑧) = 𝑞(𝑧|𝑥)𝑝(𝑥)𝑑𝑥 (3) prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧) is set to be a normal distribution. Then it is
 ∫𝑋 necessary to specify the parameters of the normal distribution of the
 During the training process, the Encoder and Decoder engage in an target, including the mean 𝑢 and standard deviation 𝜎. Through AAE
adversarial procedure. The purpose of the encoder is to generate an training, the data distribution of the Encoder output is close to the
aggregated posterior distribution that can fool the discriminator of the normal distribution, at this time 𝑧 ∼ 𝑁(𝜇, 𝜎).
confrontation network. The discriminator is to distinguish whether the The second stage is the optimized DSVDD model. The purpose of the
input 𝑧 is from real data 𝑞(𝑧) or fake data 𝑝(𝑧), as Formula (4). second stage is to add distribution constraints to DSVDD. Therefore, as
 {
 1 if𝑧 is real, i.e.,𝑧 ∼ 𝑝(𝑧) shown in Fig. 3, the optimized DSVDD will compare its output with
𝐷(𝐳) ∶= (4) the output of the Encoder. This constrains the output distribution of
 0 if𝑧 is generated, i.e.,𝑧 ∼ 𝑞(𝑧)

 4
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

Fig. 2. The network structure of AAE. The Encoder maps the training samples to the latent vector 𝑧, 𝑧 ∼ 𝑞(𝑧). Discriminator is used to distinguish 𝑧 and samples sampled from
𝑝(𝑧).

Fig. 3. The network structure of AAE-DSVDD. It contains two stages: (1) Train an AAE. This stage constructs the mapping of input samples to the aggregated posterior distribution
𝑞(𝑧) through AAE. (2) Train a DSVDD with distribution constraints. This stage constrains the output of DSVDD through 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 and 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 .

 5
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

DSVDD 𝑞𝜙(𝑥) (𝑧) by the aggregated posterior distribution 𝑝(𝑧) to achieve
the purpose of restricting the output distribution of DSVDD.
 As noted above, the objective function of the second stage of AAE-
DSVDD is as follows:
 { }
 1 ∑
 𝑛
 ‖ ( ) ‖2
min 𝑅2 + max 0, ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 − 𝑐 ‖ − 𝑅2
𝑅,𝑊 𝑣𝑛 𝑖=1 ‖ ‖
 (5)
 𝜆 ∑ ‖ 𝓁 ‖2
 𝐿
 ( )
 + 𝛼𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 (𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 , 𝐸(𝑥𝑖 )) + ‖𝑤 ‖
 2 ‖ ‖𝐹
 𝓁=1

 Among them, 𝛼 is the weight parameter, which is used to adjust the
weight of distribution constraints. 𝑣 is an upper bound on the fraction
of outliers and a lower bound on the fraction of samples being outside
or on the boundary of the hypersphere, 𝑣 ∈ (0, 1].
 AAE-DSVDD achieves the following goals by constraining the distribution of outputs: Firstly, it optimized the output distribution of
DSVDD. It uses the aggregated posterior distribution of AAE to con-
 Fig. 4. Rebuild features based on original traffic. The feature is composed of the load
strain the output of DSVDD. It also utilizes the anomaly detection length of each packet and the time interval between two packets.
ability of AE in AAE to treat samples with small reconstruction errors
as high-confidence samples. Next, it alleviated the hypersphere collapse
problem in DSVDD. This will be demonstrated in the following part of
 high confidence near the center of the hypersphere and scatter samples
this paper.
 with low confidence toward the edge of the hypersphere. AAE-DSVDD
 Loss Function. The training for AAE-DSVDD is divided into two
 can treat samples with high reconstruction loss as outliers and diverge
stages. The first stage is the training of the AAE model. Its training
 to the edge of the hypersphere. It fulfills the assumption of this paper.
process is the same as the unsupervised AAE [37]. In the second stage
 In summary, through the posterior aggregation distribution 𝑞(𝑧)
of AAE-DSVDD, the loss consists of two parts: the original DSVDD loss
 of AAE, the relative position of each training sample in the prior
and the measurement of the distribution difference between 𝑞(𝑧) and
 distribution 𝑞(𝑧) can be preliminary determined. And it ensure the
𝑞𝜙(𝑥) (𝑧). Therefore, the loss function of the DSVDD model is set as
 convergence of DSVDD training and the validity of constraints. AAEfollows:
 DSVDD constructs an aggregated posterior distribution with a fixed
𝐿′ = 𝛼𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 + (1 − 𝛼)𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 (6) output via AAE and identifies anomalies via the hypersphere shrinkage
 of DSVDD.
 Among them, 𝛼 is the weight parameter, which is used to control
the weight of the two-part loss function. 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 is the original DSVDD
 3.5. Normalization
loss, as shown in Formula (7). 𝑣 is an upper bound on the fraction of
outliers, 𝑣 ∈ (0, 1]. 𝑛 is the sample size of the training dataset. 𝜙(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑊 )
 All activation functions in the AAE-DSVDD model are unbounded.
is the function representation of DSVDD, and 𝑊 is the weights of the
 Consequently, there will be a problem with scale inconsistency. The
neural network.
 { } radius of the hypersphere will vary during the DSVDD training proce-
 1 ∑
 𝑛
 ‖ ( ) ‖2 dure, whereas the normal distribution in the AAE hidden space is fixed
𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 = max 0, ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 − 𝑐 ‖ − 𝑅2 (7)
 𝑣𝑛 𝑖=1 ‖ ‖ after the initial stage. Therefore, if compared 𝐸(𝑥) and 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑊 ) directly,
 distribution constraints may not be met and model training may fail to
 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 is the measurement of the distribution difference between
 converge.
the aggregated posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) and the DSVDD output distribution 𝑞𝜙 (𝑧). Next, the calculation process of 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 will be intro- In this paper, we design a normalization method to solve the probduced in detail in Section 3.5. lem of measurement. The main purpose of normalization is to unify
 AAE-DSVDD uses the trained DSVDD model to make predictions. It measurements. As shown in Fig. 4, assume that the mean value of the
divides the samples inside the hypersphere into target classes, and the prior probability 𝑝(𝑧) is 0, and the standard deviation is 1. There is
samples outside the hypersphere are considered anomalies. Thus, the 𝐸(𝑥) ∼ 𝑁(0, 1) after the first stage. However, during DSVDD training,
anomaly score is defined as follows: the radius may decrease to 0.01 or much less. At this time, it would
 be meaningless to directly calculate the distance between 𝐸(𝑥) and
 ‖ ( ) ‖2
𝑠(𝑥) = ‖𝜙 𝑥; 𝑤∗ − 𝑐 ‖ (8) 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑊 ). It need to be normalized, as shown by the dotted line in
 ‖ ‖
 Fig. 4. The normalization method proposed in this paper is shown in
 During the training process of AAE-DSVDD, a predefined prior prob- the Formula (9).
ability distribution 𝑝(𝑧) is not directly used to constrain the distribution
 𝐸(𝑥) − 𝜇 𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷(𝑥) − 𝑐
of DSVDD output. Instead, AAE is utilized to construct an aggregated 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 = 𝐿( , ) (9)
posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) that approximates 𝑝(𝑧). This process is based 𝜂𝜎 𝑅
on the following considerations: First of all, in order to ensure the where 𝜂 is a parameter to control the upper bound on the fraction of
convergence of the model. If we use 𝑝(𝑧) directly, we need to sample outliers in prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧). 𝜇 and 𝜎 are the mean and standard
from it as the targets of DSVDD’s output, and then calculate the KL deviation of the prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧). 𝑐 and 𝑅 are the center and
divergence of 𝑞𝜙 (𝑧) and 𝑝(𝑧). If we sample randomly from 𝑝(𝑧), it will radius of the hypersphere, respectively.
result in different targets for each epoch. It may affect the performance The concept of normalization is the same as that of z-score norof the model, and even cause it to fail to converge. Furthermore, if malization, which standardizes by mean and standard deviation. But,
we fixedly sample from 𝑝(𝑧), we will face the following problem: It is the normalization method proposed in this paper is slightly adjusted.
hard to determine whether a sample is an anomaly before training. A In the training process of DSVDD, 𝑣 controls the upper bound on the
fixed 𝑝(𝑧) should be the purpose of DSVDD training. Another reason fraction of outliers and a lower bound on the fraction of samples
is to ensure that the output satisfies the assumptions. It is difficult to that are outside or on the boundary of the hypersphere. Therefore,
construct a prior distribution 𝑝(𝑧) that satisfies the assumptions. The the normalization method uses the parameter 𝑒𝑡𝑎 to control the upper
purpose of the distribution constraint is to concentrate samples with bound on the fraction of outliers in the normal distribution. According

 6
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

to the principle of 3 − 𝜎, for a normal distribution 𝑁(𝜇, 𝜎), there are ISCXVPN. We analyzed some characteristics of these two types of data,
95.44% samples falling in the interval (𝜇 − 2𝜎, 𝜇 + 2𝜎), and 99.74% and the results are shown in Fig. 5. It shows the Cumulative Distrisamples falling in the interval (𝜇 − 3𝜎, 𝜇 + 3𝜎). Therefore, if 𝑣 is set bution Function (CDF) of some features in the VPN and non-VPN after
at 0.01, we can approximately set 𝜂 = 3. If 𝑣 is set at 0.05, we can z-score normalization. The CDF is the integral of the probability density
approximately set 𝜂 = 2. function, which can completely describe the probability distribution
 Finally, we use the mean squared error as the loss function. The loss of a random variable. The x-axis represents the value of the features,
calculation is shown in Formula (10). and the y-axis represents the probability that the feature is less than
 ‖ 𝐸(𝑥) − 𝜇 𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷(𝑥) − 𝑐 ‖2 its corresponding x-axis value. The figure shows the CDF of statistical
𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 = ‖
 ‖ 𝜂𝜎 , ‖
 ‖ (10) features in the original ISXCVPN dataset, including duration, FPsec,
 ‖ 𝑅 ‖
 FBsec, etc. These features of the distribution of VPN and non-VPN have
3.6. Hypersphere collapse the following characteristics: First, the distribution is concentrated.
 Among the features shown in the figure, almost all have a sharp
 Hypersphere collapse is a serious problem during DSVDD training. increase in probability, which means that the value of the feature is
It is defined as the radius of the hypersphere reducing to 0, and DSVDD concentrated in a small range. This will result in less variance between
becomes a trivial solution, 𝜙(𝑥) = 𝑐. In this paper, the distribution samples. Secondly, the similarity of the distribution is high, such as
constraint can effectively alleviate the problem of hypersphere collapse. mean_fiat, min_fiat and other features. The CDF function curves of
 To prove it, we calculate the partial derivative of the objective VPN and non-VPN almost coincide. The emergence of these features
function, as shown in Formula (11) and (12). also shows that VPN and non-VPN traffic have great similarity in
 𝜕𝑓 ∑ ∑ 𝜕𝜙 ‖ ( ) ‖ these statistical features, which will affect the detection performance
 = 𝐶 𝑛𝑖=1 𝜉(𝑥𝑖 ) + 𝛼 𝑛𝑖=1 2 ∗ 𝜕𝑊 ∗ ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 − 𝐸(𝑥𝑖 )‖ (11)
 𝜕𝑊 ‖ ‖ of one-class classification model.
 { We consider that feature engineering is the reason why the machine
 0 if 𝑥𝑖 outside the hypersphere learning model is limited because the feature set needs to be manually
𝜉(𝑥𝑖 ) = 𝜕𝜙 ‖ ( ) ‖
 2 ∗ 𝜕𝑊 ∗ ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 − 𝑐 ‖ if 𝑥𝑖 inside the hypersphere designed. Taking the ISCXVPN data set as an example, the flow statisti-
 ‖ ‖
 cal features need to be designed manually and need a feature processing
 (12) tool named ISCXFlowMeter to process them. However, in the feature
 If the neural network training reaches the all-zero weight solution. analysis of this paper, some features of VPN and non-VPN are extremely
Substitute 𝑅∗ = 0, 𝜙(𝑥; 𝑊 ∗ ) = 𝑐 into the Formula (11). Then we get: similar. Secondly, we believe that using statistical features to describe
 the overall properties of the flow will lose some communication details.
𝜕𝑓 ∑𝑛
 𝜕𝜙 ‖
 =𝛼 𝜂∗ ∗ ‖𝑐 − 𝐸(𝑥𝑖 )‖
 ‖ (13) Therefore, this paper directly uses the packet length and time
𝜕𝑊 𝑖=1
 𝜕𝑊 interval sequence without any processing. It utilized the automatic
 𝜕𝜙 feature extraction capability of the neural network to train the model
 There, 𝜕𝑊 = 0. Thus, the gradient of the objective function at the
 to achieve VPN traffic detection.
trivial solution equals zero. Therefore, AAE-DSVDD does not change the
 This paper reconstructs features based on the PCAP file in the
fact that all-zero weight is a local optimal solution.
 ISCXVPN dataset. From the previous analysis, there are differences in
 However, when the neural network is close to zero weight
‖ ( ) ‖ the arrival times of VPN and non-VPN traffic. Therefore, the features
‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 ′ − 𝑐 ‖ < 𝜀. For samples outside the hypersphere, gradients
‖ ‖ designed in this paper are shown in Fig. 6. The payload length and its
only come from distributional constraints to adjust the positions of samtime interval are used as the feature sequence. Then, we build a neural
ples within the hypersphere. For these samples outside the hypersphere,
 network model for automatic feature extraction.
we have:
 The following techniques are used to preprocess the PCAP file:
𝜕𝑓 ∑ 𝑛
 𝜕𝜙 ‖ ( ) ‖ Flow reorganization. The PCAP file contains a wide range of traffic
 ≤𝛼 2∗ ∗ ‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑊 ′ − 𝐸(𝑥𝑖 )‖
𝜕𝑊 𝜕𝑊 ‖ ‖ types, such as Chat, Streaming, VoIP. In order to achieve flow-level
 𝑖=1
 { } (14) traffic identification, this paper uses Tshark and Python to reorganize
 ∑ 𝑛
 𝜕𝜙
 +𝐶 max 0, 2𝜀 ∗ the flow in PCAP. In this paper, the flow reorganization is based on the
 𝜕𝑊
 𝑖=1 4-tuple, and a flow is marked with source IP, source port, destination IP,
 The first term on the left is significantly larger than the sec- and destination port. The processing method is to extract the 4-tuple,
ond term, and it dominates the gradient direction. In the first term, packet length, and arrival time through Tshark and then reorganize
‖ ( ) ‖
‖𝜙 𝑥𝑖 ; 𝑤′ − 𝐸(𝑥𝑖 )‖ is not zero when 𝜙(𝑥; 𝑤) = 𝑐. The neural network them through Python.
‖ ‖
will not converge on the trivial solution. Flow de-noising. During the experiment, we noticed that there exists
 When the model is near to the trivial solution 𝑝ℎ𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑐, the a large number of short streams (less than 5 packets) in the provided
distribution constraints will predominate the gradient direction. There- PCAP package. These short streams are usually simple requests, or
fore, it alleviated the DSVDD hypersphere collapse issue. AAE-DSVDD truncated streams. In this paper, these flows are treated as noise data.
relaxes the model configuration constraints. AAE-DSVDD is capable of We discarded all flows with fewer than 5 packets. Cause, some short
employing bias terms and bounded activation functions. flows, such as DNS query, do not match the behavior type marked by
 the PCAP file. For streams whose length is greater than 5 but less than
4. Data preparation the window size, we padded with zeros during processing.
 Flow split. As shown in Fig. 6, the packet window is used to split
 The ISCXVPN [15] dataset is used for experimentation. This dataset the flow, and the length of the packet window is set to 30 in this
is a network security data set published by the Canadian Institute for paper. Under this window, we split the long flow of the VPN tunnel.
Cybersecurity. It includes 14 types of traffic, including VoIP, VPN- And extract the payload length of data packets in the window and the
VoIP, P2P, VPN-P2P, etc. Meanwhile, a labeled dataset with extracted sequence of their time intervals as samples.
features is provided for training. The features provided by the original A new ISCXVPN dataset is reconstructed through the above tech-
ISCXVPN dataset include: duration, forward inter arrival time (Fiat), niques. The information on the final dataset is shown in Table 2. First
backward inter arrival time (Biat), flow inter arrival time (Flowiat), of all, in order to balance the data, we sample in the extracted data
etc. set to ensure the ratio of sample sizes of different categories is not
 The experiment revealed that it is challenging to distinguish be- greater than 2. The ISCXVPN data set provides seven types of traffic,
tween VPN and non-VPN traffic data using the features extracted by but only five of them are selected for feature extraction in this paper.

 7
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 5. The cumulative distribution function of some features in the original ISCXVPN dataset.

 Fig. 6. Rebuild features based on original traffic. The feature is composed of the load length of each packet and the time interval between two packets.

The two discarded classes are P2P and web browsing. The reason for Table 2
 ISCX dataset reconstructed features by packet length and time interval sequences.
abandoning P2P is that the PCAP files marked as bittorrent only appear
 VPN NonVPN Dim Included PCAP
in the VPN type. We dropped web browsing because it occurs in each
type of traffic and it is difficult for us to separate it. For instance, when VoIP 48858 97716 59 vpn_voipbuster1a.pcap,
 vpn_voipbuster1b.pcap,et.al
they captured voice calls using Hangouts, even though browsing is not Chat 2915 1625 59 vpn_aim_chat1a.pcap,
the main activity, browsing flows were still captured. vpn_facebook_chat1a.pcap, et.al
 Table 3 shows the difference between the feature set constructed in Streaming 32644 65288 59 vpn_youtube_A.pcap,
 vpn_netflix_A.pcap,et.al
this paper and the original ISCXVPN feature set. The first is the type of
 Email 474 948 59 vpn_email_2a.pcap,
detection. The original ISCXVPN builds features based on the flow and vpn_email_2b.pcap,et.al
uses the flow as the smallest detection unit. However, in this paper, FTP 6728 11934 59 vpn_ftp_A.pcap,
a sliding window is used to segment the flow, and the fragmentation vpn_sftp_A.pcap,et.al

within the window is used as the smallest detection unit. In terms of
data processing, this paper analyzes the PCAP data packets of ISCXVPN,
and filters some of the noise data through the packet length threshold,
such as Domain Name Service(DNS) query and refused connections.

 8
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

Table 3 Table 4
The comparison between original ISCXVPN and new ISCXVPN in this paper. The layer setting in neural network.
 Dataset Comparison Layer Setting
 Original ISCXVPN Minimum detection unit : flow. Conv1d Inchannel=1,out_channel=1,kernel_size=3,
 Feature set : Traffic flow statistic features. stride=2,active_func=LeakyReLU
 Data processing : Reorganized flow by 4-tuple, and Flatten –
 set the flow timeout to 15, 30, 60, 120s. Linear Input_dim=29, output_dim=512,active=LeakyReLU
 Sample example: Linear Input_dim=512, output_dim=512,active=LeakyReLU
 [𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝑚𝑎𝑥_𝑓 𝑖𝑎𝑡, 𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑓 𝑖𝑎𝑡, …] Linear Input_dim=512, output_dim=64
 New ISCXVPN Minimum detection unit : Slide packet window.
 Feature set : PKTlen and IAT sequence.
 Data processing : Reorganized flow by 4-tuple,
 Split flow by slide packet window,
 and set the minimum number of packets to filter noisy Table 5
 streams, such as DNS query and refused connections. Hyperparameter settings in of the compared model in
 Sample example: experiment.
 [𝑃 𝐾𝑇 𝑙𝑒𝑛, 𝐼𝐴𝑇 , 𝑃 𝐾𝑇 𝑙𝑒𝑛, 𝐼𝐴𝑇 , …] Model Hyperparameter Value
 AAE-DSVDD 𝑣 0.05
 kernel_size,stride 3,2
 batch_size 64
5. Experiment epochs 200
 weight_decay 1e−6
 𝛼 0.9
5.1. Baseline
 𝜂 1e−6
 𝜇, 𝜎 1.0, 0.5
 In the experiments in this paper, we simultaneously explore the DSVDD 𝑣 0.05
performance of supervised learning models and one-class classifica- weight_decay 1e−6
tion in VPN traffic detection. We selected some representative super- GANomaly 𝑤𝑒𝑛𝑐 , 𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑐 , 𝑤𝑎𝑑𝑣 1,10,1
 OCSVM gamma 0.1
vised learning models and one-class classification models as models for
 𝑣 0.05
comparison. iForest N_estimator 100
 Supervised learning model. We divide the supervised learning model
into two categories: machine learning and deep learning. In the machine learning model, we used Support Vector Machines(SVM), Random Forests, K-Nearest Neighbors(KNN), Gaussian Naive Bayes(GNB)[10]. The Decoder in AAE is the reverse of the network in the above table.
We also utilized two ensemble learning models, Random Forest [21] In particular, Conv1d is replaced by ConvTranspose1d in the Decoder
and Adaboost [10]. For the deep learning model, we used a fully to reverse the convolution. The activation function in the model is
connected deep neural network [9] and a CNN model with the same LeakyReLU. In addition, it needs to set bias=False for each of the above
network structure as the DSVDD model in this paper as a control layers when training DSVDD.
experiment. In this paper, the machine learning model is trained through scikit-
 One-class classification model. In order to verify the performance of learn1 and the neural network is built through PyTorch.2 Some pa-
AAE-DSVDD, this paper selects several of the most well-known one- rameter settings are shown in Table 5. First, the epochs is set to 200.
class classification models as baselines. These models are as follows: During the experiment, we observed that the losses of models such
First of all, OCSVM [38] and iForest [39]. OCSVM and iForest are the as DSVDD, AAE-DSVDD, and GANomaly all reached convergence after
two most well-known one-class models in traditional machine learning. 200 epochs. Second, the batch size of all neural networks is set to 64.
The second one is AE [40]. AE assumes the reconstructed sample will Due to the small amount of data in email and chat, we set batchsize
be more different from the original sample when facing anomalies. The to 64 to avoid having only one batch in a epoch. Third, the kernel
third one is GANomaly [41]. Ganomaly is an anomaly detection model size and stride in 1dCNN are set to 3 and 2, respectively. This can
based on generative adversarial networks. And it has been verified to ensure each convolution kernel corresponds to two packets and their
have good anomaly detection abilities. Finally DSVDD [33] combines time interval, as shown in the Fig. 7. Finally, 𝜇 and 𝜎 are set to 1.0
the SVDD model with the neural network. It has achieved outstanding and 0.5 through grid search experiments, see sensitivity analysis later
classification performance. in this paper. Parameters not mentioned in the table use the default
 parameters in scikit-learn and pytorch.
5.2. Neural network setting
 In addition, there is a trick to initialize the center of the hypersphere. In AAE-DSVDD, the purpose is to make the output distribution
 The purpose of AAE-DSVDD is to constrain the output distribution
 of DSVDD close to 𝑁(𝜇, 𝜎). Thus, this paper sets the center initialization
of DSVDD through the aggregated posterior distribution of AAE. Thus,
 equal to 𝑢 to ensure the rapid convergence of training.
the dimensions of DSVDD outputs are the same as those of the encoder
in AAE. In order to simplify the design, the Encoder is designed to have
the same network structure as DSVDD, and the parameters of each layer 5.3. Evaluate metrics
of the neural network are shown in Fig. 7.
 In this paper, we directly use the packet length and inter-arrival Confusion matrices are a common representation of evaluation mettime(IAT) sequence [𝑃 𝐾𝑇 𝑙𝑒𝑛, 𝐼𝐴𝑇 , 𝑃 𝐾𝑇 𝑙𝑒𝑛, …] as the input of the rics for classification issues. Each column in the confusion matrix
neural network. We set the first layer of the neural network as a 1dCNN represents the ground truth of the predicted class, and each row replayer. We set its kernel_size as 3 and stride as 2, which can ensure that resents the type of model prediction. The elements in the confusion
the content processed by each convolution kernel is two data packets matrix are the corresponding number of samples, as shown in the
and their time intervals, as shown in Fig. 7. And it is expected to Table 6.
mine out the deeper differences between VPN and non-VPN. After the
convolutional layer, we set up three fully connected layers to mine
the overall characteristics of the packet window. The final network 1
 https://scikit-learn.org/
 2
structure is shown in Table 4. https://pytorch.org/

 9
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 7. DSVDD network structure used in the experiment.

 Table 6 score is the distance from the output of the neural network to the center
 Confusion matrix.
 of the hypersphere, and the threshold is the radius. The AUC value can
 Positive Negative fully demonstrate the true performance of the model. Meanwhile, in
 Positive TP FN order to demonstrate the recognition ability of different classification
 Negative FP TN
 models under a predefined threshold, we used the precision and recall
 of the target class to describe the detection performance under the fixed
 threshold for comparison.
 The evaluation metrics of classification models can be derived from
the confusion matrix, including: 5.4. Comparisons experiment
 True Positive Rate(TPR), also known as Recall. It refers to the
proportion of positive samples detected by the classifier among all In this section, we use the original feature set and the reconstructed
positive samples. feature set to test the model. The results are taken as the average of
 𝑇𝑃 five independent and repeated experiments.
𝑇𝑃𝑅 = (15) As shown in the Table 3, four different data sets of 15s, 30s, 60s,
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁
 and 120s were constructed by setting different timeout in Original
False Positive Rate(FPR). It refers to the proportion of samples that the
 ISCXVPN. The experimental results of the original ISCXVPN dataset are
model incorrectly predicts to be positive among all samples that are
 shown in Table 7. The recognition performance is unqualified on all
actually negative.
 one-class classification models. The maximum AUC for identifying VPN
 𝐹𝑃 and non-VPN traffic is only 0.58, which comes from the AAE-DSVDD
𝐹𝑃𝑅 = (16)
 𝐹𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
 model in the 15s scenario. The minimum is only 0.43, which comes
Precision. It refers to the proportion of true labels that are positive from the iForest model in the 15s scenario. The AUC value of all models
among all samples that are detected as positive. fluctuates around 0.5. This means the one-class classification model has
 𝑇𝑃 only weak recognition abilities in the feature set provided by ISCXVPN.
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (17)
 𝑇 𝑃 + FP The experimental results verify the analysis of the features in Section
 A ROC curve is a graphical tool used to represent the performance 4.1. There are many samples that have a very high similarity between
of a classification model. It depicts the performance of the classifier at VPN and Non-VPN. However, there is a lack of negative examples
different thresholds by using FPR and TPR as the horizontal and vertical during the training of the one-class classification model. Those highly
coordinates. similar samples will be classified into one category.
 The AUC value is the area under the ROC curve, which can also From the results of each scenario, the AAE-DSVDD model proposed
be used to evaluate the performance of a classifier. The performance in this paper has achieved the best recognition performance in the three
is superior the greater the AUC value. When the AUC equals 0.5, the scenarios of the 15s, 30s, and 60s. and the AUC value has increased by
model closely resembles a random estimate. When the AUC is less than 1%–3%, which also verifies that the AAE-DSVDD model has stronger
0.5, the model has not been able to withstand testing. Even though the representational learning ability than DSVDD, AE, and other one-class
data is classified, the opposite results are obtained. classification models.
 In this article, we analyze and compare the performance of one-class Based on the features constructed in this paper, we conducted five
classification models. These models output an anomaly score when binary classification experiments to observe the feature extraction and
making predictions, and then use a threshold to judge whether the model recognition capabilities of the neural network under different
sample belongs to the target class. For example, in DSVDD, the anomaly behaviors. In this part of the experiment, we use a certain type of

 10
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 8. The precision and recall of one-class classification models on different traffic types.

 Table 7
 The AUC value of each model under the original ISCXVPN dataset.
 15 s 30 s 60 s 120 s
 OCSVM 0.5067 ± 0.0079 0.5006 ± 0.0061 0.4908 ± 0.0071 0.5457 ± 0.0752
 iForest 0.4306 ± 0.0089 0.4682 ± 0.0088 0.4982 ± 0.0168 0.5717 ± 0.0062
 AE 0.4915 ± 0.0149 0.4994 ± 0.0061 0.4968 ± 0.0049 0.548 ± 0.0041
 GANomaly 0.5095 ± 0.0521 0.5276 ± 0.0286 0.5184 ± 0.0737 0.5574 ± 0.0161
 DSVDD 0.566 ± 0.02688 0.5277 ± 0.0393 0.5026 ± 0.0185 0.5629 ± 0.0133
 AAE-DSVDD 0.5835 ± 0.0197 0.5314 ± 0.0365 0.5325 ± 0.0276 0.5373 ± 0.0275

 Table 8
 The AUC value of each model under the new ISCXVPN dataset.
 VoIP Chat Streaming Email FTP wtd. AUC
 OCSVM 0.7755 ± 0.0016 0.7971 ± 0.0122 0.9880 ± 0.0005 0.8555 ± 0.0027 0.8637 ± 0.0044 0.8584
 iForest 0.7731 ± 0.0085 0.5425 ± 0.0140 0.9287 ± 0.0072 0.5650 ± 0.0135 0.5949 ± 0.0038 0.8121
 AE 0.7694 ± 0.0017 0.5776 ± 0.0093 0.9916 ± 0.0001 0.7577 ± 0.0063 0.8073 ± 0.0049 0.8493
 GANomaly 0.7931 ± 0.0212 0.6632 ± 0.0216 0.9831 ± 0.0065 0.6622 ± 0.0989 0.8453 ± 0.0745 0.8627
 DSVDD 0.6769 ± 0.0681 0.6192 ± 0.0066 0.9218 ± 0.0834 0.7954 ± 0.0175 0.9417 ± 0.0106 0.7837
 AAE-DSVDD 0.7789 ± 0.0211 0.7116 ± 0.0060 0.9925 ± 0.0015 0.8598 ± 0.0033 0.9595 ± 0.0055 0.8682

training data, such as VPN-VoIP. And use both VPN-VoIP and non- application scenarios, a certain degree of false negatives of VPN traffic
VPN-VoIP in the test set to test the classification performance of the is generally tolerable. In general, models with higher precision are
model. preferred for VPN traffic identification.
 The experiment result is shown in Table 8. In terms of overall performance, it has better recognition abilities than the original features. 5.5. UKcs and UUCs identification
Especially for Streaming traffic, its recognition ability is close to 100%.
This is significantly improved compared with the original feature. In this paper, one-class classification models are applied to VPN
 We performed a weighted average on the AUC value, with the traffic identification. The main purpose is to make the model build a
weight set to the ratio of the sample size of the current class to the total representational learning model based on the target VPN traffic to avoid
sample size of all classes, in order to more accurately depict the average problems in the decision surface of the model caused by training, as
detection performance of the model. By averaging the previous exper- shown in Fig. 1.
imentation results, AAE-DSVDD has the greatest AUC value (0.8682), The experimental design in this part needs to demonstrate the
followed by GANomaly (0.8627) and OCSVM (0.8584). In conclusion, recognition ability of the model for UKCs and UUCs. Therefore, during
the AAE-DSVDD performs about 1% better than the other variants. the experiment, we will first select one class as the training dataset from
The previously mentioned experimental findings demonstrate that by VoIP, Chat, Streaming, Email, and FTP. Then, we use the remaining
restricting the distribution of the DSVDD high-dimensional space, the four classes as different UUCs to test the recognition ability of the
model’s identification capability can be marginally enhanced. In the trained model. In terms of data set division, we divide it into two
comparative model, it achieved the best performance. categories: VPN and non-VPN. We hold out 80% of the VPN data as the
 The Fig. 8 shows the precision and recall of one-class classification training set and combine the remaining 20% with the non-VPN data as
model on different traffic types. One-class classification based on deep the testing set.
learning usually returns an abnormal score, which requires manual set- We selected three classes of VoIP, chat, and Streaming to show
ting of the threshold to determine whether it is abnormal. For example, the detailed metrics of each UUCs test result, as shown in Fig. 9. The
AE uses the reconstruction error of the sample, and DSVDD uses the vertical axis is the class of data we choose as training data, and the
distance from the sample to the center of the hypersphere. We removed horizontal axis is the class of data we choose as training data. The
GANomaly from this part of the experiment because the selection diagonal line in the figure is the result of testing using UKCs, and the
method for the threshold is not directly given. The experimental results rest are the results of testing with UUCs. For example, VoIP on the
of the other five one-class models show that the AAE-DSVDD model abscissa indicates that the training data of the model is VPN-VoIP at
has achieved the highest precision, which shows that the AAE-DSVDD this time, and chat on the ordinate indicates the AUC values obtained
model is a better choice for VPN traffic detection than other one- by using VPN-chat and non-VPN-Chat as test data, respectively. The
class models. At the same time, all one-class models are also affected experiment result shows that the AAE-DSVDD model proposed in this
by the problem of data imbalance, so the recall of the model in the paper effectively improves the ability to identify UUCs. The AUC value
experimental results is much lower than the precision. However, in increased from 0.5496 of DSVDD to 0.9517 in the experimental result

 11
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 9. The AUC value of one-class models to identify UUCs. (a) Isolation Forest, (b) One-class SVM, (c) AE, (d) GANomaly, (e) DSVDD, (f) AAE-DSVDD.

 Table 9
 A comparison of the ability of supervised learning models and unsupervised learning models to identify
 UKCs and UUCs.
 Model wtd. AUC wtd. AUC Count
 (UKCs) (UUCs) (< 0.51)
 KNN 0.9711 0.6451 5
 LR 0.7602 0.4836 12
 Supervised learning
 SVM 0.9332 0.6152 8
 [10] (machine
 GNB 0.7201 0.4648 12
 learning)
 Random forest 0.9516 0.6421 4
 Adaboost 0.9602 0.6349 5
 Supervised learning DNN [9] 0.9578 0.5783 8
 (Deep learning) CNN 0.9743 0.5709 7
 OCSVM [38] 0.8594 0.7741 3
 iForest [39] 0.8121 0.6404 7
 One-class AE [40] 0.8493 0.6649 4
 classification GANomaly [41] 0.8627 0.6187 4
 DSVDD [33] 0.7837 0.7045 1
 AAE-DSVDD 0.8682 0.7781 1

of a model trained by VoIP and tested with Streaming. This part of the In the experiments in this paper, 5 types of traffic are used, and one
experiment shows that the AAE-DSVDD model proposed in this paper of the classes is selected as the training data for each experiment, so
effectively improves the generalization ability of the model, making the there are 5 groups of experiments using UKCs for testing and 20 groups
model more robust in the face of UUCs. of experiments using UUCs for testing.
 Furthermore, many studies report the detection capabilities of dif- The experimental result is shown in Table 9. We compared the
ferent models on the ISCXVPN dataset. Most of these studies use weighted average AUC values of supervised learning models under
supervised binary classification models, so we include a comparison of UKCs and UUCs, among which CNN achieved the highest value of
one-class models with supervised binary classification models in our 0.9743 on the UKCs test, and the AUC values of most models in
experiments. We divide these supervised binary classification models
 supervised learning are greater than 0.9. This value is significantly
into machine learning and deep learning and compare them with
 higher than those one-class classification models. But, these supervised
one-class classification models.
 learning models can hardly identify UUCs, and their AUC values are
 We set up two metrics for evaluation. The first one is the AUC value
 only between 0.5 and 0.7, which are only slightly better than random
of the model, and we take the weighted average of the AUC values of
all experimental results. The second is the number of experiments that guessing. The one-class classification model has a stronger ability to
lost recognition ability in testing. When the AUC value of the test is identify UUCs. The AAE-DSVDD model proposed in this paper mainless than or equal to 0.5, the prediction result of the model on the test tains the AUC value of UKCs recognition at 0.8682, while the AUC value
set tends to random guess or give the opposite prediction result. So in of UUCs recognition reaches 0.7781. And among the 20 experiments
this paper, when we use UUCs for testing, we set the threshold as 0.51. tested with UUCS, the AAE model only lost recognition on one UUC
When the AUC value of the model tested on an UUC is less than 0.51, test dataset.
we considered that the trained model lost recognition ability on current The above experiments based on UKCs and UUCs verify the limi-
UUC. tations of supervised learning models in traffic detection as shown in

 12
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 10. Distribution of different model outputs., (a) DSVDD, (b) AAE-DSVDD.

Fig. 1, which cannot handle unknown types of test data. Therefore, hypersphere collapse. The AUC is greater than 0.5. Therefore, this
this paper proposes to use one-class classification model for VPN traffic paper does not recommend setting too small an initial weight when
detection to deal with diverse background traffic. At the same time, training the AAE-DSVDD model to increase the standard deviation of
the AAE-DSVDD model proposed in this paper further improves the the output.
recognition ability of the model for UUC type data. The above experimental results verify the inference of hypersphere
 collapse in Section 3.6. AAE-DSVDD can use bias terms and bounded
5.6. Effectiveness of distribution constraint activation functions without hypersphere collapse.

 In this section, an experiment is designed to verify the effectiveness 5.8. Astringency
of distribution constraints in AAE-DSVDD. Therefore, this part of the
experiment compares the output of the DSVDD and the AAE-DSVDD. In the experiment in this part, we displayed the loss change of the
 The outcome is shown in Fig. 10. First of all, it can be seen that model at each epoch. The experimental results are shown in the Fig. 12.
the output of AAE-DSVDD basically meets the normal distribution. The x-axis represents epoch, and the y-axis represents log loss. The
Since we used the trick mentioned in Section 5.2, all features have the Fig. 12(a) shows the merge loss change in AAE-DSVDD. In the later
same mean. The center of the hypersphere is specified before training. stages of training, the model reaches a relatively stable state.
However, the center of DSVDD is set to initial network outputs. The The experimental results verify the convergence of the AAE-DSVDD
mean value of each feature in DSVDD is relatively scattered. Secondly, model. After adding distribution constraints, the model can still reach
on the single feature distribution, two different features of DSVDD and a convergent solution.
AAE-DSVDD are sampled, respectively. The distribution is shown in
the circle in Fig. 10. The features of DSVDD do not satisfy normal 5.9. Sensitivity analysis
distribution.
 In summary, the AAE-DSVDD model effectively meets distribution The predefined parameters required in the AAE model are the mean
constraints on the output data. and standard deviation of 𝑝(𝑧), and the loss weight 𝛼.
 Firstly, we analyze the impact of parameter 𝛼 settings on model
5.7. Hypersphere collapse performance. 𝛼 is used to control the weight of 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 and 𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 .
 In the experiment, the weight parameter 𝛼 grid searched from 0.1 to 1
 This section designs experiments to verify whether hypersphere with a step size of 0.1.
collapse occurs under different network settings. As mentioned above, The experimental results are shown in Fig. 13. In the nine ex-
DSVDD has experienced hypersphere collapse in three cases: (1) Fix periments, the AUC value reaches its highest when the 𝛼 is 0.9. We
the center of the sphere when the model is initialized; (2) Set the make the following explanation for the above experimental results: The
neural network to have no bias term; (3) Set an unbounded activation distribution constraint does not directly change the decision surface of
function. In the analysis in Section 3.6, AAE-DSVDD does not need to the model. The main identification ability of the model comes from
set a bias term and uses an unbounded activation function. Therefore, reducing of 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 . So when the weight of 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 is small, the
the experiment in this part verifies whether hypersphere collapse occurs identification ability of the model decreases. Therefore, this paper set
in these two cases. In order to intuitively display the collapse of the the weight at 0.9 in the previous experiment. It is worth mentioning
hypersphere, we initialize the weight of the neural network to a small that when training on voip, AAE-DSVDD tends to use a smaller 𝛼.
value, on the order of 0.01. Combined with Table 7, we analyze that the recognition ability of
 The experimental result is shown in Fig. 11. As Fig. 11-(a) shows, DSVDD on voip is poor, and the smaller weight can make AAE-DSVDD
the hypersphere collapse occurs when DSVDD sets the neural network focus on the abnormal detection ability of AE to obtain better detection
to have bias items. The AUC value has been fixed at 0.5 since the 80th performance.
epoch. This means 𝜙(𝑥) = 𝑐. As shown in Fig. 11-(b,c,d), the bias term, Then, we analyzed the influence of the mean and standard deviation
activation function, and weight initialization all affect the performance of 𝑝(𝑧) setting on the identification ability of AAE-DSVDD, and the
of the model. The performance of the model is best when using the results are shown in Fig. 14. Based on the FTP data, we set the mean 𝜇
bias term and the LeakyReLU activation function. This experiment also and standard deviation 𝜎 of 𝑝(𝑧) on five orders of magnitude, which are
verifies the analysis of the hypersphere collapse problem in Section 3.6. 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, and 100. We performed grid searches on two orders
AAE-DSVDD does not change the fact that the all-zero solution is of magnitude, 0.1 and 1.0, which have a high AUC value. Next, we
an optimal solution of the objective function. Therefore, when the analyze the impact of 𝜇 and 𝜎 on the performance of AAE-DSVDD.
weight is initialized to a smaller order of 0.01. It is difficult for the The first parameter is the mean of the prior distribution 𝜇. In the
model to converge to the optimal solution, but there is also not appear normalization proposed in Section 3.6 of this paper, the mean value

 13
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

Fig. 11. Roc curves of different epochs. (a) DSVDD, set bias=True in the neural network, (b) AAE-DSVDD, set bias=False in the neural network, (c) AAE-DSVDD, Set the sigmoid
activation function, (d) AAE-DSVDD, set bias=True and LeakyReLU activation function, and the magnitude of weight initialization is 0.1.

 Fig. 12. Loss of different epochs in AAE-DSVDD. (a) Change of loss with epochs for different types of data, (b) 𝐿𝐷𝑆𝑉 𝐷𝐷 &𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑒 changes during VoIP traffic training.

 Fig. 13. The AUC value of AAE-DSVDD under different weight 𝛼.

 14
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 Fig. 14. The variation of AUC value at different 𝜇 and 𝜎 of prior probability 𝑝(𝑧).

participates in the distribution constraint as a constant item. In theory, However, the AAE-DSVDD model proposed in this paper requires
the distribution constraint in AAE-DSVDD should not be affected by preprocessing. We filter some short streams in the data preprocessing
the change of 𝜇. From the experimental results, When 𝜇 is less than 2, stage. The reasons are as follows: First, from the perspective of VPN
the AUC value of the model is slightly affected. However, we observed tunnel traffic, the tunnels of OpenVPN will not disconnect because of
that when 𝜇 is greater than 2, the performance of the model drops network idleness. Therefore, tunnel traffic seldom appears to have a
sharply. The reason is that the AAE part of the AAE-DSVDD in this short flow. Second, the short flows in the ISCXVPN data set have no
paper cannot converge, which leads to the failure to construct the practical significance. It includes DNS query, refuce connections, and
aggregated posterior distribution 𝑞(𝑧) to meet our expectations. This some short connections without data transmission. They do not match
causes the trained model to fail to identify the test data, and the AUC the behavior marked by the PCAP file. The last reason is that our work
value is less than 0.5. uses a sliding window to split the flow. If there are a small number of
 Another parameter is the standard deviation of the prior distribution packets in the flow, the extracted sequence needs to be filled with a lot
𝜎. In this paper, the normalization is designed to be normalized accord- of meaningless values. It may affect the training of the model. Based on
ing to different levels of standard deviation and radius. Therefore, when the above reasons, these short streams are directly filtered in the data
the 𝜎 is small, the classification performance of the model is relatively preprocessing stage.
stable. When the sigma increases, the aggregated posterior distribution Finally, the ISCXVPN dataset is flawed. It uses an external VPN
gradually disperses. At this time, the distribution constraint will cause service provider and connects to it using OpenVPN to collect VPN trafthe performance of the DSVDD model to decline. But the recognition fic [15]. However, the dataset does not actually contain any OpenVPN
ability is maintained at a low level, and the AUC value is about 0.7. packets. This will cause the packet length and time interval sequence
 In summary, the settings of 𝜇 and 𝜎 will affect the performance of features used in this paper to be unable to represent the real OpenVPN
the model. When the order of magnitude is small, the normalization protocol traffic. Therefore, if AAE-DSVDD is applied to OpenVPN traffic
method proposed in this paper can effectively constrain the aggregated detection, it is necessary to re-collect actual OpenVPN traffic to train
posterior distribution 𝑝(𝑧) and the output of DSVDD 𝑝𝜙 (𝑧), and the the model.
identification ability of AAE-DSVDD is stable. When the magnitude
increases, the recognition ability of the model will decrease, or even 7. Conclusion
completely lose the recognition ability. Thus, we set 𝜇 and 𝜎 to 1.0
and 0.01 in above experiment. VPN traffic identification is a challenge for encrypted traffic identification. The difficulty lies not only in data encryption but also in the
6. Discussion fact that the traffic inside the VPN tunnel shows high similarity with
 non-VPN traffic. In this paper, we propose an one-class learning model
 According to research, most of the traffic on the Internet comes from called AAE-DSVDD for VPN traffic identification. It adjusts the output
unknown applications [42]. It is easily ignored by supervised learning distribution of DSVDD through the aggregated posterior distribution of
models [43]. Therefore, one-class classification models are more suit- AAE. It makes the assumption that concentrated samples are placed
able for VPN traffic detection than supervised learning models. This with high confidence in the center of the hypersphere and dispersed
paper proposes the AAE-DSVDD model for VPN traffic detection and samples are placed with low confidence at the edge of the hypersphere.
evaluates the performance of AAE-DSVDD on the ISCXVPN dataset. It effectively alleviates the hypersphere collapse problem. At the same
In the experiments, this paper compares the identification abilities of time, we analyzed and designed the features. We are using the packet
the supervised learning models and the one-class classification models length and time interval sequence and automatically extracting the
on UKCs and UUCs. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness deep features of this sequence through a convolutional neural network.
of the distribution constraints in AAE-DSVDD. It improves the ability Finally, experimental verification is carried out on the ISCXVPN, and
of DSVDD to identify UUCs. This effectively solves the problem of the AAE-DSVDD is compared with some one-class learning models
data collection bias that may occur in VPN traffic identification. For and some supervised learning models. The experimental results show
example, email traffic may be very low or even not collected in the that AAE-DSVDD has achieved an advanced one-class learning model.
train dataset. The AAE-DSVDD model can overcome this problem even The overall recognition performance has improved by about 1%. AAEif the collected data only obtains VPN-VoIP traffic, the trained model DSVDD also achieves the best performance when identifying classes
still maintains a certain level of identification ability for Email, Chat not included in the training data, even higher than the contrasting
and other behaviors. supervised learning models.

 15
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

 However, there are still some problems to be solved in VPN traffic [13] M. Zain ul Abideen, S. Saleem, M. Ejaz, Vpn traffic detection in ssl-protected
identification. First, with the escalation of confrontation, VPNs are channel, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2019 (2019) 1–17.
trying to use traffic obfuscation technology to masquerade traffic and [14] T. Yildirim, P. Radcliffe, Voip traffic classification in ipsec tunnels, in: 2010
avoid detection. Correspondingly, the detection of confusing traffic re- International Conference on Electronics and Information Engineering, vol. 1,
 IEEE, 2010, pp. V1–151.
quires a stronger detection model, that can detect samples with a higher
 [15] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization
similarity. Meanwhile, a more realistic problem is that the traffic in the
 of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd
VPN tunnel is far more complex than in the experimental environment. International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, ICISSP,
The seven types of traffic mentioned in ISCXVPN may be mixed in a 2016, pp. 407–414.
VPN tunnel. This is also the biggest challenge that needs to be solved [16] W.-b. Pan, G. Cheng, X.-j. Guo, S.-x. Huang, Review and perspective on
before VPN traffic identification can be used on real networks. encrypted traffic identification research, Journal on Communications 37 (9)
 (2016) 154–167.
CRediT authorship contribution statement [17] Q. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, D. Gu, Oh-Pwn-VPN! security analysis of
 OpenVPN-based android apps, in: Cryptology and Network Security: 16th Inter-
 Sicai Lv: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft. national Conference, CANS 2017, Hong Kong, China, November 30—December
Chao Wang: Data Curation, Methodology. Zibo Wang: Formal analy- 2, 2017, Revised Selected Papers, Springer, 2018, pp. 373–389.
 [18] D. Xue, R. Ramesh, A. Jain, M. Kallitsis, J.A. Halderman, J.R. Crandall, R.
sis, Investigation. Shuo Wang: Validation, Writing – review & editing.
 Ensafi, {OpenVPN} is open to {VPN} fingerprinting, in: 31st USENIX Security
Bailing Wang: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Yongzheng
 Symposium (USENIX Security 22), 2022, pp. 483–500.
Zhang: Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
 [19] S. Oh, M. Lee, H. Lee, E. Bertino, H. Kim, AppSniffer: Towards robust mobile app
 fingerprinting against VPN, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023,
Declaration of competing interest 2023, pp. 2318–2328.
 [20] A. Gupta, VPN-nonVPN traffic classification using deep reinforced naive Bayes
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- and fuzzy K-means clustering, in: 2021 IEEE 41st International Conference on
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
influence the work reported in this paper. [21] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S.C. Bagui, J. Sheehan, Comparison of
 machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN network traffic flow using
Data availability time-related features, J. Cyber Secur. Technol. 1 (2) (2017) 108–126.
 [22] J. Cao, X.-L. Yuan, Y. Cui, J.-C. Fan, C.-L. Chen, A VPN-encrypted traffic
 identification method based on ensemble learning, Appl. Sci. 12 (13) (2022)
 Data will be made available on request
 6434.
 [23] L. Guo, Q. Wu, S. Liu, M. Duan, H. Li, J. Sun, Deep learning-based real-time VPN
Acknowledgments
 encrypted traffic identification methods, J. Real-Time Image Process. 17 (2020)
 103–114.
 The work of this paper is supported by the National Natural Science [24] J. Tang, L. Yang, S. Liu, W. Liu, M. Wang, C. Wang, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, Caps-lstm:
Foundation of China (62272129). A novel hierarchical encrypted VPN network traffic identification using capsnet
 and LSTM, in: Science of Cyber Security: Third International Conference, SciSec
References 2021, Virtual Event, August 13–15, 2021, Revised Selected Papers, Springer,
 2021, pp. 139–153.
 [1] P.B. Gentry, What is a VPN? Inform. Secur. Tech. Rep. 6 (1) (2001) 15–22. [25] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, G. Xiong, Not afraid of the unseen: a
 [2] J. Cao, X.-L. Yuan, Y. Cui, J.-C. Fan, C.-L. Chen, A VPN-encrypted traffic siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic discovery, in: 2020 IEEE
 identification method based on ensemble learning, Appl. Sci. 12 (13) (2022) Symposium on Computers and Communications, ISCC, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
 6434. [26] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, J. Wu, Robust network traffic
 [3] S. Miller, K. Curran, T. Lunney, Multilayer perceptron neural network for classification, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 23 (4) (2014) 1257–1270.
 detection of encrypted VPN network traffic, in: 2018 International Conference on [27] V.T. Do, P. Engelstad, B. Feng, T. Van Do, Detection of DNS tunneling in mobile
 Cyber Situational Awareness, Data Analytics and Assessment (Cyber SA), 2018, networks using machine learning, in: Information Science and Applications 2017:
 pp. 1–8, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CyberSA.2018.8551395. ICISA 2017 8, Springer, 2017, pp. 221–230.
 [4] B.K. Chawla, O. Gupta, B. Sawhney, A review on IPsec and SSL VPN, Int. J. Sci. [28] A. Nadler, A. Aminov, A. Shabtai, Detection of malicious and low throughput
 Eng. Res. 5 (11) (2014) 21–24. data exfiltration over the DNS protocol, Comput. Secur. 80 (2019) 36–53.
 [5] J. Jones, H. Wimmer, R.J. Haddad, Pptp vpn: An analysis of the effects of a
 [29] E. Rivera, L. Tengana, J. Solano, A. Castelblanco, C. López, M. Ochoa, Risk-based
 ddos attack, in: 2019 SoutheastCon, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
 authentication based on network latency profiling, in: Proceedings of the 13th
 [6] K. Hogan, S. Servan-Schreiber, Z. Newman, B. Weintraub, C. Nita-Rotaru, S.
 ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, 2020, pp. 105–115.
 Devadas, ShorTor: Improving tor network latency via multi-hop overlay routing,
 [30] O. Aouedi, K. Piamrat, D. Bagadthey, Handling partially labeled network data: A
 in: 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), IEEE, 2022, pp.
 semi-supervised approach using stacked sparse autoencoder, Comput. Netw. 207
 1933–1952.
 (2022) 108742.
 [7] Y. He, L. Hu, R. Gao, Detection of tor traffic hiding under obfs4 protocol based
 [31] K. Wu, Y. Zhang, T. Yin, TDAE: Autoencoder-based automatic feature learning
 on two-level filtering, in: 2019 2nd International Conference on Data Intelligence
 method for the detection of DNS tunnel, in: ICC 2020-2020 IEEE International
 and Security, ICDIS, IEEE, 2019, pp. 195–200.
 Conference on Communications, ICC, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.
 [8] W. Xu, F. Zou, Obfuscated tor traffic identification based on sliding window,
 [32] R. Chalapathy, A.K. Menon, S. Chawla, Anomaly detection using one-class neural
 Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (2021) 1–11.
 networks, 2018, arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06360.
 [9] S. Miller, K. Curran, T. Lunney, Detection of virtual private network traffic
 using machine learning, Int. J. Wirel. Netw. Broadband Technol. (IJWNBT) 9 [33] L. Ruff, R. Vandermeulen, N. Goernitz, L. Deecke, S.A. Siddiqui, A. Binder, E.
 (2) (2020) 60–80. Müller, M. Kloft, Deep one-class classification, in: International Conference on
[10] J. Mazel, M. Saudrais, A. Hervieu, ML-based tunnel detection and tunneled Machine Learning, PMLR, 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 application classification, 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10371. [34] Y. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Cao, J. Hou, C. Wang, W. Guo, X. Li, Y. Xin, Z. Liu, L. Cui,
[11] P. Fu, C. Liu, Q. Yang, Z. Li, G. Gou, G. Xiong, Z. Li, NSA-Net: A NetFlow One-class LSTM network for anomalous network traffic detection, Appl. Sci. 12
 sequence attention network for virtual private network traffic detection, in: (10) (2022) 5051.
 Web Information Systems Engineering–WISE 2020: 21st International Conference, [35] X. Chen, C. Cao, J. Mai, Network anomaly detection based on deep support
 Amsterdam, the Netherlands, October 20–24, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 21, vector data description, in: 2020 5th IEEE International Conference on Big Data
 Springer, 2020, pp. 430–444. Analytics, ICBDA, IEEE, 2020, pp. 251–255.
[12] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traffic [36] D.M. Tax, R.P. Duin, Support vector data description, Mach. Learn. 54 (2004)
 classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE 45–66.
 International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI, IEEE, [37] A. Makhzani, J. Shlens, N. Jaitly, I. Goodfellow, B. Frey, Adversarial
 2017, pp. 43–48. autoencoders, 2015, arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05644.

 16
S. Lv et al. Computer Networks 236 (2023) 109990

[38] B. Schölkopf, R.C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, J. Platt, Support vector Zibo Wang is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the school
 method for novelty detection, Adv. Neural Inform. Process. Syst. 12 (1999). of Computer Science of Technology, Harbin Institute of
[39] F.T. Liu, K.M. Ting, Z.-H. Zhou, Isolation-based anomaly detection, ACM Trans. Technology, China. He received his master degree from
 Northeast Forestry University in 2017. His research inter-
 Knowl. Discov. Data (TKDD) 6 (1) (2012) 1–39.
 ests include industrial control system security and attack
[40] G. Andresini, A. Appice, D. Malerba, Autoencoder-based deep metric learning for
 behavior modeling.
 network intrusion detection, Inform. Sci. 569 (2021) 706–727.
[41] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, T.P. Breckon, Ganomaly: Semi-supervised
 anomaly detection via adversarial training, in: Computer Vision–ACCV 2018:
 14th Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Perth, Australia, December 2–6,
 2018, Revised Selected Papers, Part III 14, Springer, 2019, pp. 622–637.
[42] H. Kim, K.C. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, K. Lee, Internet
 traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, and the best practices, in: Shuo Wang is an undergraduate at School of life and
 Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conference, 2008, pp. 1–12. Pharmaceutical Sciences ,Dalian University of Technol-
[43] N. Fu, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, R. Wang, J. Xu, FlowCop: Detecting "Stranger" in net- ogy. His research interests include Network Security, and
 work traffic classification, in: 2018 27th International Conference on Computer Pharmaceutical Sciences.
 Communication and Networks, ICCCN, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.

 Sicai LV is currently studying at the Department of Computer Science, Harbin Institute of Technology. His research
 interests include encrypted traffic identification, intrusion
 detection. Wang Bailing received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science and Technology from Harbin Institute of Technology,
 China. He is currently a Professor at School of Computer
 Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology.
 His current research interests involve network security,
 information content security, industry internet security.

 Chao Wang is currently studying at the Department of Computer Science, Harbin Institute of Technology. His research
 interests include Industrial control intrusion detection,
 anomaly detection.
 Yongzheng Zhang has graduated from Harbin Institute of
 Technology, majoring in computer system structure and
 received a doctorate in engineering in 2006. His current research interests including network security situation
 awareness, threat detection.

 17