Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-023-01205-1

 ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Cybersecurity knowledge graphs construction and quality assessment
Hongyi Li1,2 · Ze Shi2 · Chengwei Pan3,4 · Di Zhao1,2 · Nan Sun2

Received: 28 January 2023 / Accepted: 4 August 2023 / Published online: 24 August 2023
© The Author(s) 2023

Abstract
Cyber-attack activities are complex and ever-changing, posing severe challenges to cybersecurity personnel. Introducing
knowledge graphs into the field of cybersecurity helps depict the intricate cybersecurity landscape and provides technical
support for threat identification and situational awareness. However, during the process of constructing knowledge graphs,
inevitable noise and conflicts may be introduced, leading to misleading inferences and decisions. This paper aims to address
the issues of constructing and assessing the quality of cybersecurity knowledge graphs. We manually constructed a dataset
of cybersecurity knowledge graphs (CS13K) and expanded the existing cybersecurity ontology, building a more versatile
ontology applicable to existing data features. Building upon this, we utilized Neo4j to construct the cybersecurity knowledge
graph. Furthermore, we propose an AttTucker model, based on Transformer, for assessing the quality of knowledge graphs.
By employing numerous self-attention heads, this model captures latent information among entities and relations. While
reducing the dimensionality of knowledge embeddings, the model achieves evaluation results comparable to high-dimensional
embeddings. Finally, we incorporate the path-level information between entities in the knowledge graph into the evaluation
of knowledge graph quality based on the AttTucker model. Experimental analysis on both generic datasets and cybersecurity
datasets demonstrates that our model significantly improves F1 value and accuracy in knowledge graph quality assessment
tasks, outperforming other models.

Keywords Cybersecurity · Knowledge graph · Quality assessment · Ontology construction · Attention mechanism

Introduction manner, such as vulnerability platforms, security information
 platforms, and security forums. However, these cybersecurity
In recent years, a vast amount of valuable cybersecurity knowledge fragments have not been effectively integrated
information is scattered across the internet in a fragmented and utilized, limiting their unique advantages of big data
 knowledge. Additionally, with the rapid evolution of the
Hongyi Li and Ze Shi are co-first authors of the article. cybersecurity landscape and the continuous innovation of
 attack methods, passive and static defense measures are
B Chengwei Pan no longer sufficient to meet the existing cybersecurity
 pancw@buaa.edu.cn
 needs. Therefore, proactive analysis of cybersecurity-related
B Di Zhao information has become a necessary approach to address
 zdhyl2010@163.com
 cybersecurity challenges. In light of the abundant and dis-
 Hongyi Li
 lihongyi@buaa.edu.cn persed data and the diverse and highly complex malicious
 attacks confronted in the field of cybersecurity, knowledge
 Ze Shi
 zb2039107@buaa.edu.cn graph technology is regarded as an effective solution. As
 an efficient knowledge management and reasoning tool,
1 School of Mathematical Sciences, Beihang University, knowledge graphs can automatically discover potential asso-
 Beijing 100191, China ciations between threat entities, provide valuable correlated
2 School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang information for cybersecurity situational awareness and risk
 University, Beijing 100191, China assessment, associate intrusion alerts with attack paths, and
3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, propose optimal mitigation measures. Moreover, in the pro-
 Beijing 100191, China cess of cyber-attack forensics, knowledge graphs can display
4 Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China

 123
1202 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

vulnerable attack paths that require special attention. Analyz- In this paper, we manually constructed a cybersecuing this associative information, cybersecurity professionals rity knowledge graph dataset called CS13K, which exhibits
can gain a better understanding of vulnerabilities and attack high knowledge quality. Building upon a subset of existmethods that adversaries may exploit, allowing them to ing cybersecurity ontologies, we developed a more versatile
strengthen defense measures and enhance overall cyberse- cybersecurity domain ontology that served as the foundation
curity protection. Therefore, constructing a comprehensive for constructing the cybersecurity knowledge graph. Inspired
and accurate cybersecurity knowledge graph has become a by the significant success of attention mechanisms in certain
necessary means to address cybersecurity challenges. deep learning tasks [1, 2], we propose a Transformer-based
 The construction of an ontology forms the foundation of model for evaluating the quality of knowledge graphs, named
building a cybersecurity knowledge graph. Acting as the AttTucker. This model utilizes numerous self-attention heads
knowledge system of the cybersecurity knowledge graph, to capture latent information between entities and relations.
cybersecurity ontology encapsulates the abstracted knowl- Furthermore, we incorporate the path-level information to
edge concepts of vulnerabilities, attackers, attack patterns, assess the quality of the constructed cybersecurity knowlattack consequences, and defensive strategies in the security edge graph. In summary, the key contributions of this paper
domain model. It can be utilized to represent, integrate, and are as follows:
share relevant cybersecurity knowledge, and can offer a formalized and unified terminology in the information security (1). We manually constructed a dataset of cybersecurity
field along with the interrelationships among these terms. knowledge graphs, named CS13K, which comprises 4494
Simultaneously, it also has ontology reasoning and querying entities, 12 relations, and 13,027 triples. CS13K represents
capabilities. Although several general-purpose ontologies in the first fully manually constructed knowledge graph dataset
the cybersecurity field have been constructed to date, their in the field of cybersecurity.
complete applicability to a broader range of data sources (2). We expanded the UCO ontology from 8 categories to
is hampered due to differing focuses on cybersecurity ele- 16 categories and developed a new cybersecurity ontology
ments. To address this issue, in this paper, we construct a new suitable for the CS13K dataset. Leveraging this ontology, we
cybersecurity ontology, based on the analysis of CS13K data constructed a cybersecurity knowledge graph that integrates
characteristics and the reuse of existing cybersecurity ontolo- diverse and heterogeneous cybersecurity data sources into
gies. This new ontology provides support for the construction semantically interpretable knowledge.
of a comprehensive and accurate cybersecurity knowledge (3). We proposed a Transformer-based model for evaluatgraph. ing the quality of knowledge graphs. Under the condition
 Knowledge graphs have played a crucial role in multiple of low-dimensional embeddings, this model achieves evaldomains, and an increasing number of software and applica- uation results comparable to high-dimensional embeddings,
tions are built upon them. However, when using knowledge thereby addressing scalability issues in large-scale datasets.
graphs, it is often assumed that the content within these
graphs is entirely error-free. If the content of the graph
itself is flawed, it can significantly undermine the effec- The remaining sections of this paper are organized as foltiveness of higher-level applications, leading to misleading lows: In Section “Related works”, we discuss the related
reasoning and decision-making. However, noise and conflicts works. In Section “Methods”, we introduce the cybersecurity
are inevitably introduced during the construction of knowl- knowledge graph dataset proposed in this study. We elaboedge graphs. With the widespread adoption of knowledge rate on the methodology used to construct the cybersecurity
graphs, there is a growing demand for verifying the knowl- knowledge graph and provide an overview of our model.
edge contained within them. In the early stages of knowledge In Section “Results and discussion”, we present the experigraph development, the scale requirements were relatively mental results and provide a detailed evaluation and analysis
low, allowing for manual inspection to determine the cor- of our model. Finally, we summarize the paper and discuss
rectness of the triples in the graph. Nowadays, real-world future research directions.
applications rely on large-scale and extensive knowledge
repositories, making manual fact-checking impractical. The
quality assessment of knowledge graphs plays a vital role in Related works
enhancing their effectiveness and reliability in various application domains. Based on this, we propose a novel method In this section, we reviewed the previous work in areas, such
for evaluating the quality of knowledge graphs, specifically as cybersecurity datasets, ontology construction, knowledge
focusing on assessing the quality of cybersecurity knowledge graph construction, and knowledge graph quality assessment.
graphs. We provided a comprehensive overview of research in these
 tasks within the field of cybersecurity.

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1203

Table 1 Information extraction and knowledge graph datasets in cybersecurity domain

Dataset Purpose Dataset size Year Remarks

 NER RE KG
 √
Ravendar [3] – – 46,300 tokens 2013 High-quality, manually annotated
 √
Robert [4] – – 15,192 sentences 2014 Low-quality, automatically annotated
 √
Kim [5] – – 498,000 tokens 2020 High-quality, large-scale
 √
Wang [6] – – 175,220 tokens 2020 High-quality, manually annotated
 √ √
Guo [7] – 13,262 sentences 2021 High-quality, manually annotated
 √
Rastogi [8] – – 40K triples 2021 Low-quality, automatically annotated
 √
 – – 3K triples 2021 High-quality, small-scale
 √ √
Ours (CS13K) – 13,027 triples 2022 High-quality, moderately large-scale

Cybersecurity datasets of 80.98%. However, due to extensive internal annotation
 work, the dataset has not been made publicly available.
Due to the high sensitivity and specialized nature of data The use of natural language processing and deep learning
in the field of cybersecurity, as well as the lack of large- methods for addressing cybersecurity issues is a relatively
scale specialized corpora, there has been limited research on emerging research area. The lack of large-scale datasets in
cybersecurity knowledge graph datasets. As shown in Table the cybersecurity field, coupled with the limited quality of
1, Robert et al. [4] constructed a cybersecurity entity recog- existing publicly available datasets, has become one of the
nition dataset using an automatic annotation method. They main obstacles restricting deep learning-based research in
collected data from 15,192 cybersecurity sentences and used the cybersecurity domain.
the “BIO” labeling scheme for data annotation. Kim et al.
[5] manually annotated an entity recognition dataset in the
cybersecurity domain, where domain experts labeled entities Cybersecurity ontology
in CTI reports. This dataset contains a total of 498,000 words
and was used for entity recognition research in the cyberse- The construction of ontology serves as the basis for building
curity field using Bi-LSTM-CRF, achieving an F1 score of a cybersecurity knowledge graph. Existing ontologies in the
75.05%. Wang et al. [6] manually annotated a dataset called field of cybersecurity can be difficult to apply comprehen-
DNRTI for named entity recognition research in the threat sively to the integration of broader data sources due to their
intelligence domain. The dataset was collected from over 300 varying focuses during the construction process [9]. The earthreat intelligence reports, and entities from 13 categories liest cybersecurity ontology was proposed by Undercoffer
were annotated. It contains a total of 175,220 words. Rastogi et al., with the aim of constructing an intrusion detection
et al. [8] employed an automated extraction method to col- system for threat identification [10]. Since then, numerous
lect data from 1100 threat intelligence reports, constructing a ontologies have been proposed in the field of cybersecurity.
malware knowledge graph dataset MT40K. This dataset con- Iannacone et al. [11] constructed a cybersecurity ontology
tains 27,354 entities and 34 types of relations, comprising a encompassing 15 types of entities and 115 attributes. Later,
total of 40,000 triples. As the extraction was automated, the Syed et al. [12] expanded this ontology, creating a more uniaccuracy of the triples in the dataset was not high. Based on versal cybersecurity ontology, UCO, which can be mapped
the MT40K dataset, the authors constructed another dataset, to the STIX format. The UCO ontology links a large num-
MT3K, using manual filtering and expert review. The MT3K ber of cybersecurity standards and ontologies, such as CVE,
malware knowledge graph dataset contains 3000 triples, and CCE, CVSS, CAPEC, and more. It mainly includes eight
while it boasts high triple accuracy, its smaller scale makes it types of entities, such as Attacker, Attack-Pattern, Conseless suitable for data-driven deep learning models. Guo et al. quences, and Indicator. In addition to mapping to STIX,
[7] manually constructed a cybersecurity information extrac- UCO extends several related cybersecurity standards and
tion dataset called OSINT by collecting information from ontologies, like CVE, CCE, CVSS, etc. Vorobiev et al. [13]
various sources, such as vulnerability databases, security built a Security Asset Vulnerability Ontology (SAVO) for
advisories, APT reports, security blogs, and hacker forums. modeling concepts, attributes, and interrelationships among
They used this dataset for joint extraction of entities and network threats, risks, and vulnerabilities. Pingle et al. [14]
relations in the cybersecurity domain, achieving an F1 score enhanced the UCO cybersecurity ontology by adding crucial
 classes, such as Campaign, Tool, Course-of-Action, and also

 123
1204 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

expanded the relations, thereby completing the extension of tracing, and provide new technical means for cybersecurity
the UCO ontology. situational awareness, threat identification, and prediction.
 The construction of ontology can avoid the generation of Currently, research on knowledge graphs in the field of
redundant triples and accelerate the triple generation process cybersecurity is still in its early stages, with limited studin the knowledge graph. Therefore, building a comprehen- ies on the overall technical framework for constructing and
sive, appropriately granular, and semantically rich ontology evaluating cybersecurity knowledge graphs. Yan et al. [23]
is crucial for constructing a cybersecurity knowledge graph. utilized machine learning methods to extract entities in the
 field of cybersecurity and proposed a knowledge graph con-
Knowledge graphs struction method applicable to the cybersecurity domain.
 Based on the constructed ontology, they completed the
In 2012, Google introduced the concept of a knowledge graph construction of a cybersecurity knowledge base. A cybersebased on the Semantic Web. Essentially, a knowledge graph curity situational analysis graph named Cygraph, launched
is a large-scale semantic network that encompasses various by MITRE, constructs a knowledge graph from four dimenentities, concepts, and the semantic relations between enti- sions: network infrastructure, security posture, cyber threats,
ties. Currently, knowledge graphs have become a research and mission readiness. It is utilized to support tasks, such
focus in areas, such as semantic search, question answer- as attack surface identification and attack situational undering systems, and recommendation systems [15, 16]. In this standing, for the protection of critical assets [24]. Kiesling
section, we first discuss the typical applications of knowledge et al. [25] constructed a cybersecurity knowledge graph that
graphs and then provide an overview of their applications in integrates critical information from various public sources
the field of cybersecurity. regarding vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and attack patterns.
 Their instance data is derived from designated standards and
Typical applications of knowledge graphs databases, such as CWE and CVE, by MITRE.

From an application perspective, knowledge graphs can be Knowledge graphs quality assessment
categorized into general knowledge graphs and domainspecific knowledge graphs. General knowledge graphs focus Knowledge graph quality assessment aims to quantitatively
on the breadth of knowledge and are widely used in intelligent evaluate the quality of knowledge within a knowledge graph.
search and recommendation scenarios. Typical examples of Common methods for evaluating knowledge graph quality
general knowledge repositories include Freebase, DBpedia, can be classified into two categories: detection methods using
YAGO, and Wikidata. On the other hand, domain-specific external data sources and detection methods based on internal
knowledge graphs prioritize the depth of knowledge and data within the knowledge graph.
serve specific query and analysis requirements within a Detection methods using external data typically rely on
particular knowledge domain. They have been extensively external ontologies or network knowledge data to identify
applied in domains, such as finance, healthcare, e-commerce, entity or relationship errors within the knowledge graph. For
and academia. example, DeFacto et al. [26] used the DBpedia knowledge
 base as their research object, transformed the knowledge data
Cybersecurity knowledge graphs into natural language statements, searched these statements
 in a browser, and determined the confidence values of the
Cybersecurity issues are complex and intertwined, and mul- knowledge data based on the number of retrieved pages.
tiple scholars have discussed security vulnerabilities [17, On the other hand, detection methods based on internal
18], attack patterns [19], and their corresponding solutions data of the knowledge graph typically model the knowlin various scenarios [20, 21]. Some scholars have also edge graph as a graph and record paths between two entities
utilized federated learning techniques to address various through techniques such as random walks. If there are mulcyber-attacks [22]. By introducing knowledge graphs into the tiple paths between two entities in the knowledge graph,
field of cybersecurity, multiple heterogeneous and massive it suggests a high likelihood of a relations between them.
cybersecurity data sources can be integrated into semanti- Some scholars have also used knowledge representation
cally interpretable knowledge. Researchers can gain intuitive learning methods to discover erroneous entities and relaunderstanding of cybersecurity entities and their relations, tions. Konstantinos et al. [27] compared the effectiveness
such as the exploitation relation between hacker organi- of graph embedding algorithms and path ranking algorithms
zations and vulnerabilities, the affiliation relation between and achieved good results by combining these algorithms
attackers and hacker organizations, and the inclusion rela- in the task of knowledge graph error detection. Xie et al.
tion between software and vulnerabilities. This integration [28] utilized the structural information within the knowledge
can play a role in target profiling, APT detection, attack graph for error detection. They introduced confidence scores

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1205

of triples into the knowledge representation learning process Table 2 Relation types in the CS13K dataset and their statistical charand proposed a confidence-aware knowledge representation acteristics
learning method. Experimental results demonstrated that this Relation Size Proportion (%)
method effectively captures the local and global structural
information of the knowledge graph for triple confidence BelongTo 989 7.59
evaluation. Mendes et al. [29] proposed a knowledge quality Cause 924 7.09
assessment method based on the LDIF framework, allow- Exploits 792 6.08
ing users to define quality assessment functions based on HasAttack Location 2068 15.88
their specific business requirements or determine the final
 HasAttackTime 688 5.28
score through comprehensive consideration of multiple eval-
 HasCharacteristics 951 7.30
uation methods. Jia et al. [30] constructed a knowledge graph
 HasVulnerability 1010 7.75
triple confidence evaluation model, assessing the confidence
 Indicates 443 3.40
of triples from three dimensions: the entity level, the relation
level, and the global level. They achieved good evaluation Mitigates 750 5.76
results on the FB15K dataset. Zhang et al. [31] employed Targets 2259 17.34
automated machine learning technology (AutoML) to auto- Use 1489 11.43
matically design scoring functions (SFs) suitable for the triple Associate 664 5.10
classification problem in the knowledge graph. By establish- Total 13,027 100.00
ing a unified SF representation and a search space, and using
a greedy algorithm for efficient search, they achieved commendable results in the triple classification task.
 Security who have good domain knowledge in cybersecurity. We named this dataset CS13K (Cybersecurity 13K). We
Methods will continue to update CS13K to expand its scale and scope,
 and reflect the true form of cybersecurity.
Figure 1 presents the framework for constructing and eval- The CS13K dataset includes a total of 4,494 entities
uating the cybersecurity knowledge graph in this paper. and 12 types of relations. These 12 types of relations
It primarily involves four components: dataset construc- are: belongTo, cause, exploits, hasAttackLocation, hasAttion, ontology construction, cybersecurity knowledge graph tackTime, hasCharacteristics, hasVulnerability, indicates,
construction, and quality assessment of the cybersecurity mitigates, targets, use, and associate. The dataset contains
knowledge graph. a total of 13,027 triples, each with corresponding documents
 and sentences, which provides a data source for future work in
Dataset areas, such as entity recognition and relation extraction. The
 statistical characteristics of the relation types in the dataset
Cybersecurity threat reports present the technical and social are shown in Table 2.
aspects of cyber-attack events in the form of unstructured For example, the relation between ThreatActor and Hacktext. The construction of a cybersecurity knowledge graph erGroup, Malware and MalwareFamily, malicious software
first involves extracting key information from these reports, and its type, and vulnerabilities and their type is denoted
which is not a straightforward task. The existing open-source as “belongTo”. The relation between vulnerabilities and the
knowledge graph datasets in the field of cybersecurity are aftermath of an attack is represented as “cause”. The relaobtained through automatic extraction, and the accuracy of tion between threat actors and vulnerabilities or weaknesses
triples is not high, which is insufficient to reflect the actual is represented as “exploits”. The relation between hacker
situation of cybersecurity. The only known cybersecurity groups and their attack locations, attack activities and their
knowledge graph dataset with a higher accuracy rate, MT3K, attack locations, and malicious software and their attack locais manually selected from MT40K. However, the scale of tions is represented as “hasAttackLocation”. The relation
triples in this dataset is only 3000, which is not suitable between hacker groups and their attack times, attack activfor data-driven deep learning models. To truly reflect the ities and their attack times, and malicious software and its
status of cybersecurity, we have collected data from more attack time is represented as “hasAttackTime”. The relation
than 440 public security reports and manually constructed a between malicious software and its features or functions,
cybersecurity knowledge graph dataset. Each security report hacker groups and their features or functions, and the feais issued by world-renowned security companies or govern- tures or functions of attack tools used by hacker groups is
ment agencies and is analyzed, extracted, and annotated by represented as “hasCharacteristics”. The relation between
several doctoral students from the Institute of Cyberspace hardware, operating systems, and software and their own

 123
1206 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Fig. 1 Framework for cybersecurity knowledge graph construction and quality assessment

security vulnerabilities is represented as “hasVulnerabili- tions between these classes. The relations and hierarchical
ty”. The relation between hacker groups and their aliases structure among the classes constructed in this paper are illusis represented as “indicates”. The relation between behav- trated in Fig. 2.
iors mitigating malicious software or vulnerabilities and By integrating and instantiating the associations depicted
the malicious software or vulnerabilities is represented as in Fig. 2a–f, we obtained the schematic diagram of the net-
“mitigates”. The relation between hacker groups, malicious work security ontology, as shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, it can
software, or vulnerabilities and their targets is represented as be observed that Hacker groups use Malware during attack
“targets”. The relation between attackers, attack activities, activities, and the Malware may exploit various vulnerabiliand the attack methods or tools they use are represented as ties present in operating systems or software, which can lead
“use”. Furthermore, when two entities have a relation but to a series of consequences. Typical consequences include
do not fit the previous eleven categories, the label is set as denial of service, destruction of backups, memory corruption,
“associate”. and privilege escalation. The cybersecurity domain ontology serves as the foundation for constructing the knowledge
 graph, making it crucial to build a more comprehensive and
Construction of cybersecurity ontology versatile ontology suitable for existing data sources.

Based on the UCO ontology, we initially classify the knowledge related to cybersecurity to express the cybersecurity Cybersecurity knowledge graph
knowledge completely. We expand the classes related to
cybersecurity attacks and preventive measures within the The knowledge graph can be defined as K G  (h, r , t),
UCO ontology to 16, the descriptions of which are presented where h and t denote the head and tail entity, respectively,
in Table 3. Subsequently, we define and constrain the rela- and r represents the relation between h and t. In this study, the

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1207

Fig. 2 Depiction of the schematic of relations among cybersecurity HackerGroup and the other related classes; d expresses the relations
objects. Specifically, a represents the relations between Campaign and between Malware and the other correlated classes; e displays the relathe other relevant classes; b presents the relations between CourseO- tions between ThreatActor and the other related classes; f shows the
fAction and the other related classes; c indicates the relations between relations between Vulnerability and the other related classes

Fig. 3 Diagram of cybersecurity ontology

graph database Neo4j is selected as the software for storing a graph, and proposing the best mitigation measures. Durcybersecurity knowledge data. Neo4j is currently the most ing the process of investigating cyber-attacks, it is possible
widely used and popular graph database software, organiz- to identify the paths that are vulnerable and require focused
ing and storing data in the form of nodes and edges. By attention and create an overall picture of the attack activities,
incorporating vulnerabilities, attacks, defense mechanisms, facilitating analysis, detection, classification, and attribution
etc., into the knowledge graph, it becomes possible to asso- of various cyber threats. Figure 4 is a partial diagram of the
ciate intrusion alerts with attack paths, visually presenting cybersecurity knowledge graph built using Neo4j.
attack methods, indicators, and consequences in the form of The knowledge graph offers a fresh perspective for understanding and addressing cybersecurity threats. For example,

 123
1208 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Fig. 4 Diagram of cybersecurity
knowledge graph

in the case of a common malware cyber-attack, the knowl- graphs under the condition of low-dimensional embedding.
edge graph can classify it into multiple subclasses (such as Existing knowledge representation models have achieved
Trojan, worm, spyware) and link it to specific attack strategies good results in many downstream tasks using high-
(such as ransomware, user data theft). Furthermore, it can dimensional embeddings, whereas the performance with
be associated with specific systems and applications at risk low-dimensional embeddings needs to be improved. This
(such as operating systems, web servers) and relevant defense has led to the scalability issue of existing models in largemeasures (such as firewall configurations, encryption, and scale datasets. Therefore, we propose a Transformer-based
intrusion detection systems). Analyzing the information in knowledge graph quality assessment model (AttTucker) that
the knowledge graph, cybersecurity experts can make more utilizes a large number of self-attention heads to capture
accurate predictions and prevent various cyber-attacks. latent information between entities and relations. Further-
 Moreover, taking automated threat detection and response more, we integrate path-level information into the AttTucker
as an example, the knowledge graph contains extensive model to evaluate the confidence of triples in the cybersecuinformation about past cyber-attacks, such as attack types, rity knowledge graph.
methods, affected systems, attack timestamps, and impact Based on the earliest research on attention mechanisms
of the attacks. Based on this information and the success [1], during the encoding phase, for each triple (h, r , t), we
achieved by intelligent computing [32], optimization algo- set the dimension of the head entity as dh , the dimension
rithms [33, 34], and machine learning algorithms in various of the tail entity as dt , and the dimension of the relation
scenarios and tasks [35, 36], we can train a machine learning as dr . To ensure the validity of tensor calculations in the
model based on this information. When new cyber activi- model, we consider setting dh  dt  dr  k. We define the
ties (such as log entries, cyber traffic) are inputted into the embeddings of the head entity h and the relation r as eh ∈ R k
model, it can identify threats that match the attack patterns in and er ∈ R k , respectively. The concatenated vector (eh ; er )
the knowledge graph. This enables us to provide early warn- is then constructed as the query Q∈ R 2k , value V ∈ R 2k , and
ing and response before the attacks pose a real threat to the key K ∈ R 2k . Based on the head entity h and the relation r ,
system. we can obtain the output matrix H ∈ R 2k as follows:

Quality assessment of cybersecurity knowledge
graphs
 
To the best of our knowledge, no model has attempted to QK T
address the problem of quality assessment of knowledge H  Ahr V  softmax √ V, (1)
 dk

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1209

Table 3 Classes related to cybersecurity and their descriptions where F F N (x)  max(0, x W1 + b1 )W2 + b2 , and
 W1 ∈ R k×dh , b1 ∈ R dh ,W2 ∈ R dh ×k , b2 ∈ R k are learnable
Class Description
 parameters.
AttackVectors A means or method through which hackers During the decoding phase, based on the simplicity and
 can gain access to a computer or network efficiency of the Tucker model [37], we construct the knowlserver edge graph quality assessment model on the basis of the
Backdoor A method of logging in to the system, which Tucker model. Let Houtput  ( eh ;  eh and
 er ), where er are the
 can bypass the existing security settings of output representations of the head h and the relation r . The
 the system
 scoring function for the triple (h, r , t) can be represented as:
Campaign A series of malicious activities targeted at a
 specific objective or launched within a
 certain period of time eh ×2
 ϕ(h, r , t)  W ×1 er ×3 et , (4)
Characteristics Characteristics of hacker organizations,
 attack activities, malware, etc where W ∈ R k×k×k is the core tensor, for each score
Consequence Consequences resulting from the exploitation ϕ(h, r , t), We apply the logistic sigmoid function to each
 of vulnerabilities score ϕ(h, r , t) to obtain the predicted probability p of a
CourseOfAction Measures employed to prevent or respond to triple being true:
 attacks
HackerGroup A group or organization engaged in
 malicious operations p  sigmod(ϕ(h, r , t) − th r ), (5)
Location The location where the cyber-attack takes
 place where th r is the threshold that partitions triples into positive
Malware Utilized to compromise the confidentiality, and negative examples, which is a relation-specific parameintegrity, or availability of the victim’s data ter. In the CS13K dataset, we have 12 different th r values.
 or systems When p≥ 0.5, the triple is judged as positive, and when p <
MalwareFamily Family of Malware 0.5, the triple is classified as negative.
OperatingSystem Operating system We use Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) loss to train the
Organization The target of an attack, such as an model, minimizing the following loss function.
 organization or company
Software Software 1 
 L− (yi log pi + (1 − yi )log(1 − pi )), (6)
ThreatActor Individuals who conduct malicious V
 operations i∈V

Tool Tools utilized by HackerGroup, Campaign,
 ThreatActor, etc., for carrying out attacks where V is the set of all entities, pi is the predicted probabilities of triples, and yi is the binary label.
Vulnerability A bug in the software that can be directly
 exploited by hackers to gain access to a In addition, based on the work in the literature [30], we
 system or network incorporate the path-level information into the AttTucker
 model (referred to as AttTuc-Path model). As shown in Fig. 5,
 we denote the triple confidence obtained from the AttTucker
where Ahr ∈ R 2k×2k are the attention matrices. When using model as pAttTucker , and the triple confidence obtained using
multiple attention heads, the multi-head attention can be rep- path-level information as pPath . We concatenate pAttTucker
resented as: and pPath to form a vector V , which is then fed into a
 multi-layer perceptron to obtain the final probability value
   p indicating the confidence of a triple being true.
MultiH (Q, K , V )  H1 , . . . , H j W O , (2)
 V  [ pAttTucker ; pPath ], (7)
 Q Wi K )
where Hi  softmax( (QWi √)(K )(V Wi V ). Wi Q ∈ R k×dk ,
 dk 
Wi K ∈ R k×dk , Wi V ∈ R k×dv , and W O ∈ R hdv ×k are projec- h n  σ W h n V + bh n , (8)
tion matrices, and h is the number of heads.
 Furthermore, we use a token-wise feed-forward to gener- p  α(Wo h n + bo ), (9)
ate the final output representation Houtput for each triple of
the knowledge graphs:
 Here, h n represents the n-th hidden layer, Wh n and bh n
 denote the learnable parameters in the n-th hidden layer. Wo
Houtput  F F N (MultiH (Q, K , V )), (3) and bo are the learnable parameters of the output layer.

 123
1210 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Fig. 5 The AttTuc-Path model
for knowledge graph quality
assessment

Table 4 The parameter numbers and time complexity Here, X is a third-order tensor, G is a core tensor, and A,
 B, and C are factor matrices. A and C have dimensions (E,
Models Numbers of parameters Time complexity
 k), B has dimensions (R, k), and G has dimensions (k, k,
TransE Ek + Rk O(k) k). This means that A and C represent entity embeddings,
TransH Ek + 2Rk O(k)
 B represents relation embeddings, and G captures the interaction between these embeddings. Therefore, the parameter
TransD 2Ek + 2Rk O(k)
 count of the Tucker decomposition is:
TransR Ek + Rk(k + 1) O(k 2 )
Tucker Ek + Rk + k 3 O(k 3 )
AttTucker Ek + Rk + 3k 2 +k 3 O(k 3 ) Params T ucker  Ek + Rk + k 3 . (11)

 The main cost here is the core tensor G, which has a size
Time complexity and parameter numbers analysis of k 3 , and can become computationally expensive when k is
 large. The costs of A and C are proportional to the number
We conducted an analysis of the model complexity and of entities E, and the cost of B is proportional to the number
parameter numbers. Table 4 presents the parameter numbers of relations R.
and time complexity of the Tucker and AttTucker mod- In the multi-head self-attention mechanism, for each attenels developed in this study, as well as the baseline models tion head, we have three weight matrices: query (Q), key (K ),
TransE, TransH, TransD, and TransR. In the table, E rep- and value (V ). Assuming we have h heads, a model embedresents the number of entities in the knowledge graph, R ding dimension of k, and each head has a dimension of dk ,
represents the number of relation types, and k represents the then for each attention head, the sizes of the Q, K , and V
embedding dimension. From Table 4, it can be observed that matrices are all (dk , k).
the parameter numbers of the baseline models exhibits a cer- Therefore, the parameter numbers of a single selftain correlation with the number of entities, the number of attention head is 3 ∗ d k ∗ k, and since there are h heads,
relations, or the embedding dimension. the total parameter count for self-attention is:
 In the task of knowledge graph quality assessment, we
represent the triples in the knowledge graph in the form of a
third-order Tucker decomposition: Params attention  3 ∗ d k ∗ k ∗ h (12)

X  G×1 A×2 B×3 C, (10)  3k 2 .

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1211

 Therefore, the total parameter numbers of the AttTucker Table 5 Main parameter settings for the AttTucker model
model, including both the Tucker decomposition and multi-
 Batch size 2000
head self-attention parameters, can be represented as:
 Learning rate 0.015
ParamsAttTucker  ParamsTucker + Paramsattention (13) Epochs 3000
 Number of heads 128
 Ek + Rk + 3k 2 +k 3 . Encoder dropout 0.7
 Position feed-forward dropout 0.7
 As a result, the time complexity of the Tucker and Att- Multi-heads attention dropout 0.1
Tucker models developed in this study is O(k 3 ). The time Dimension embeddings 100
complexity of TransE, TransH, and TransD is O(k), and the
time complexity of TransR is O(k 2 ). It can be observed
that, under the assumption of fixed embedding dimen- otherwise it is classified as a negative sample. During the
sions for entities and relations, our model contains more prediction process, there are four possible scenarios:
parameters. However, in the case of low-dimensional embeddings, our model can achieve evaluation results comparable 1. When the actual label is negative and the prediction is also
to those with high-dimensional embeddings. Furthermore, negative, it is a true negative (T N ).
when dealing with large-scale datasets, the parameter count 2. When the actual label is negative but the prediction is
introduced by the embedding dimension is negligible com- positive, it is a false positive (F P).
pared to the number of entities and relations. Therefore, our 3. When the actual label is positive but the prediction is negmodel addresses the scalability issue to some extent in large- ative, it is a false negative (F N ).
scale datasets. 4. When the actual label is positive and the prediction is also
 positive, it is a true positive (T P).

Results and discussion Therefore,

In this section, we evaluate the quality assessment perfor- TP +TN
 Accuracy  , (14)
mance of the Tucker, AttTucker, and AttTuc-Path models T P + T N + FP + FN
on the general-domain knowledge graph dataset FB15K. We TP
also verify the performance of our model on the cybersecurity Precision  , (15)
 T P + FP
dataset CS13K.
 TP
 Recall  , (16)
Experimental settings and evaluating metrics T P + FN
 2Precision ∗ Recall
The FB15K dataset is a widely used general-domain knowl- F1  . (17)
 Precision + Recall
edge graph dataset, consisting of 14,951 entities and 1345
relations. Since the FB15K dataset does not contain negative We use Accuracy and F1 score as evaluation metrics, and
triples, we adopt the method proposed in reference [38] to analyze the Precision and Recall values to better reflect the
construct negative triples by replacing either the head or tail model’s ability to distinguish between positive and negaentity, simulating the construction of real-world knowledge tive samples. The main parameter settings for the AttTucker
graphs. To investigate the impact of noise ratios in the knowl- model are shown in Table 5.
edge graph on model performance, we construct datasets with
noise ratios of 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50%, denoted as Experimental results and evaluation
FB15K-N10, FB15K-N20, FB15K-N30, FB15K-N40, and
FB15K-N50, respectively. Similarly, for the cybersecurity Performance on general knowledge graph dataset
dataset CS13K, we also construct datasets with noise ratios
of 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50%, denoted as CS13K-N10, On the FB15K dataset, we compared our model with other
CS13K-N20, CS13K-N30, CS13K-N40, and CS13K-N50, baseline models, including NTN, CKRL, TransT, DistMult,
respectively. For all datasets, we divide them into training Analogy, ComplEx, SimplE, TransE, TransR, and others.
and testing sets in a 4:1 ratio. Accuracy and F1 score are The results are shown in Table 6. It can be observed that
used as evaluation metrics. For a given triple, it is classified both the Tucker and AttTucker models outperform all the
as a positive sample if the predicted probability p ≥ 0.5, baseline models in terms of accuracy and F1 value. Notably,

 123
1212 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Table 6 Results of different models on FB15K Table 7 Impact of noise ratio on model performance in the FB15K
 dataset
Models Accuracy F1 value
 Models Datasets Accuracy F1 value
NTN [38] 0.665 –
CKRL(LT) [28] 0.818 – Tucker FB15K-N10 0.971 0.973
CKRL(LT + PP) [28] 0.819 – FB15K-N20 0.968 0.970
CKRL(LT + PP + AP) [28] 0.817 – FB15K-N30 0.962 0.964
TransT (TT) [39] 0.822 – FB15K-N40 0.954 0.955
TransT (TT + DT) [39] 0.824 – FB15K-N50 0.945 0.948
DistMult [31] 0.808 – AttTucker FB15K-N10 0.979 0.980
Analogy [31] 0.821 – FB15K-N20 0.974 0.975
ComplEx [31] 0.818 – FB15K-N30 0.969 0.971
SimplE [31] 0.815 – FB15K-N40 0.961 0.963
AutoSF [31] 0.827 – FB15K-N50 0.955 0.956
TransE [30] 0.868 0.876
TransH [30] 0.912 0.913
TransD [30] 0.913 0.913
 our model is still able to maintain relatively stable perfor-
TransR [30] 0.902 0.904 mance, demonstrating its robustness to noisy triples.
Tucker 0.945 0.948 To validate the effectiveness of the AttTucker model in
AttTucker 0.955 0.956 the knowledge graph quality assessment task, we conducted
 a visual analysis of the evaluation results of the AttTucker
 model on the FB15K-N50 testing sets, as shown in Fig. 6.
 Similar results can also be obtained when using the Tucker
the TransE model does not achieve high evaluation results model. Figure 6a illustrates the confidence evaluation results
due to its limitations in handling 1-to-N, N-to-1, and N-to- for negative triples, while Fig. 6b shows the confidence eval-
N relations. By introducing more complex relation-specific uation results for positive triples. By observing Fig. 6a, we
parameters, models, such as TransH, TransR, and TransD, can see that negative triples generally have low confidence
have achieved better evaluation results than the TransE values, and these values are mostly below 0.5. Conversely,
model. The AttTucker model achieves an F1 value of 0.956 Fig. 6b demonstrates that positive triples generally have
on the FB15K dataset, which is 5.2% higher than the F1 value high confidence values, and these values are mostly above
of the TransR model. This indicates that modeling the knowl- 0.5. Such visual analysis helps us intuitively understand the
edge graph as a core tensor and three factor matrices, along model’s predictive ability for triple confidence in the knowlwith the introduction of multi-head attention mechanism, edge graph, further confirming the superiority and reliability
enables the model to better capture the complex relations of the AttTucker model in the task of knowledge graph qualin the knowledge graph and improve its accuracy. ity assessment.
 Furthermore, we analyzed the impact of the proportion of
noisy triples in the knowledge graph on the model’s performance, and the results are shown in Table 7. From Table 7, it Performance on the cybersecurity dataset
can be observed that as the proportion of noisy triples in the
knowledge graph increases from 10 to 50%, both the Tucker In addition, we evaluated the performance of Tucker and Attand AttTucker models show a decrease in evaluation perfor- Tucker models on the cybersecurity knowledge graph dataset
mance. The reason for this could be that as the proportion CS13K. The results are shown in Table 8. From Table 8, it
of noise increases, the triples in the knowledge graph may can be observed that for the TransE model, as the noise ratio
become more inconsistent. For example, there may be noisy increases, the accuracy and F1 value gradually decrease. The
triples that contradict other correct triples. This inconsistency noise ratio affects the performance of the TransE model on
can confuse the model during inference and prediction, lead- the cybersecurity dataset, resulting in lower accuracy and F1
ing to a decrease in its performance. It is evident from Table value. The Tucker model demonstrates higher accuracy and
7 that although the model’s performance decreases with the F1 value on the CS13K dataset at different noise ratios. In
increase in the proportion of noise, the evaluation results contrast, the AttTucker model exhibits better performance
remain at a good level. This indicates that while the presence on the CS13K dataset at different noise ratios. Although the
of noise does have some impact on the model’s performance, accuracy and F1 score of the AttTucker model decrease with

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1213

Fig. 6 Confidence distribution of
positive and negative triples of
FB15K-N50

Table 8 Impact of noise ratio on model performance in the CS13K Table 9 The quality evaluation results for different relation types
dataset
 Relations Precision Recall F1 value
Models Datasets Accuracy F1 value
 BelongTo 0.868 0.883 0.875
TransE CS13K-N10 0.881 0.882 Cause 0.916 0.931 0.923
 CS13K-N20 0.870 0.872 Exploits 0.882 0.836 0.858
 CS13K-N30 0.864 0.866 HasAttackLocation 0.893 0.898 0.895
 CS13K-N40 0.859 0.860 HasAttackTime 0.953 0.946 0.949
 CS13K-N50 0.854 0.855 HasCharacteristics 0.913 0.906 0.909
Tucker CS13K-N10 0.951 0.952 HasVulnerability 0.911 0.906 0.908
 CS13K-N20 0.935 0.938 Indicates 0.902 0.913 0.907
 CS13K-N30 0.922 0.923 Mitigates 0.893 0.907 0.900
 CS13K-N40 0.911 0.913 Targets 0.956 0.948 0.952
 CS13K-N50 0.893 0.894 Use 0.917 0.899 0.908
AttTucker CS13K-N10 0.965 0.968 Associate 0.909 0.926 0.917
 CS13K-N20 0.950 0.951 Average 0.909 0.908 0.909
 CS13K-N30 0.938 0.940
 CS13K-N40 0.925 0.926
 CS13K-N50 0.908 0.909

 “belongsTo” and “exploits” have relatively lower precision
 and recall. This indicates that the model’s quality assessment
increasing noise ratio, it maintains stronger robustness com- capability varies for different relation types, possibly due to
pared to the TransE model, enabling it to maintain higher variations in sample features among different relations in the
performance in noisy environments. dataset.
 We also reported the precision, recall, and F1 value of the Similarly, we visualized the confidence evaluation results
AttTucker model for each specific relation type. We used the of the AttTucker model on the CS13K-N50 testing sets, as
CS13K-N50 dataset, which has a higher noise ratio, for the shown in Fig. 7. Figure 7a illustrates the confidence evalquality evaluation. The results are shown in Table 9. By ana- uation results for negative triples, while Fig. 7b shows the
lyzing the precision, recall, and F1 value for each relation confidence evaluation results for positive triples. From Fig. 7,
type, we can gain deeper insights into the model’s qual- we observed similar results as in the general dataset: the conity assessment performance across different relation types. fidence values for negative triples are generally low, with
We found that the model exhibits varying precision and most values below 0.5. In contrast, the confidence values for
recall across different relation types. For example, relation positive triples are generally high, with most values above
types, such as “hasAttackTime” and “targets”, have rela- 0.5. This indicates that the model performs well in quality
tively higher precision and recall, while relation types like assessment of cybersecurity knowledge graphs.

 123
1214 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Fig. 7 Confidence distribution of
positive and negative triples of
CS13K-N50

Fig. 8 a Precision and recall values for different thresholds. b The Recall–Precision curves

 Moreover, we utilized precision and recall curves to repre- scores as negative, thereby improving precision. However,
sent the model’s evaluation performance of triple confidence this also leads to some positive triples being mistakenly classcores. The threshold used for triple confidence discrimi- sified as negative, resulting in lower recall.
nation is adjustable, where triples with confidence scores On the other hand, the Recall–Precision curve in Fig. 8b
higher than the threshold are classified as positive, and those shows that when the recall is less than 0.8, as the recall
below it are classified as negative. As depicted in Fig. 8a, as increases, precision remains almost constant and maintains
the threshold increases, precision continually improves while a high value. This may be due to the model’s cautious selecrecall decreases. At lower thresholds, recall is higher, but as tion of positive triples at lower recall rates to ensure higher
the threshold increases, recall decreases. When the threshold precision. However, as the recall increases, the model begins
surpasses 0.5, recall starts to decline significantly, and the to classify more triples as positive, including some triples
closer the threshold is to 1, the more rapid the decline. This with lower confidence scores, leading to a rapid decrease in
indicates that the confidence scores of positive samples in precision. The balancing point of the curve is approximately
the CS13K-N50 dataset are generally above 0.5, and when around a recall of 0.90, indicating that at this point, the model
the threshold is higher than 0.5, precision remains at a high achieves high precision while maintaining a good recall rate.
level, indicating that the model has good capability to iden- The use of attention mechanisms to capture interactions
tify negative samples in the CS13K dataset. Further analysis and dependencies between entities and relations in the knowlof this phenomenon suggests that the higher precision and edge graph is a key aspect of the AttTucker model. Therefore,
lower recall results may stem from stricter discrimination we investigated the impact of multi-head attention on the
requirements for negative samples. With higher thresholds, model’s performance. As shown in Fig. 9, within a certain
the model tends to classify triples with lower confidence range, increasing the number of attention heads enhances the

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1215

 model at the dimension of 100. This suggests that the addition
 of the attention mechanism can compensate for some information loss under low dimensions and significantly enhance
 the model’s performance. Furthermore, we observed that at
 the dimension of 64, the evaluation accuracy of the AttTucker
 model surpasses that of the Tucker model at the dimension
 of 75. This further validates the effectiveness of the attention
 mechanism in improving the model’s performance under low
 dimensions.
 Besides, we also tested the impact of path-level information between entities in the knowledge graph on the
 performance of the knowledge graph quality assessment
Fig. 9 The impact of the number of heads on the model’s accuracy model. In this experiment, we again selected the CS13K-
 N50 dataset with a higher noise ratio for evaluation and
 used the accuracy as the evaluation metric. We specifically
accuracy of the model for knowledge graph quality assess- focused on examining the performance of path-level informament. However, we also observed that as the number of heads tion in knowledge graph quality assessment. The evaluation
continues to increase, the performance improvement of the results are presented in Table 11, where “Path” represents the
model gradually diminishes until reaching a saturation state. evaluation accuracy considering only the path-level infor-
This phenomenon may be attributed to the working principle mation from the CS13K-N50 dataset, and “AttTuc-Path”
of the multi-head attention mechanism. A smaller number of represents the final knowledge graph quality assessment
heads may not fully capture the complex interaction relation- accuracy obtained by integrating the AttTucker model with
ships in the knowledge graph, limiting the expressive power the path-level information.
of the model. Increasing the number of attention heads can From Table 11, it can be observed that combining pathenhance the model’s modeling capability for different enti- level information with the AttTucker model significantly
ties and relations, thus improving the accuracy. However, improves the model’s predictive performance. By incorpobased on the results in Fig. 9, we observed that after the rating path-level information, the model is able to comprenumber of heads reaches 128, further increasing the number hensively consider the semantic associations between entities
of heads does not lead to significant performance improve- within the knowledge graph, thereby enhancing the model’s
ments. This suggests that the effective range of the multi-head predictive and assessment capabilities for triple confidence
attention mechanism has been reached, and additional heads scores in the knowledge graph. The introduction of pathdo not provide additional information gain. These findings level information enriches the model’s modeling capability
provide guidance for further optimization and design of atten- for complex associations between entities in the knowledge
tion mechanisms to achieve better knowledge graph quality graph, aiding in more accurate judgment of triple confidence.
assessment performance. Although the detailed investigation of path-level informa-
 Additionally, we also verified the effectiveness of the tion is not the primary focus of this study, this approach does
model under low-dimensional embeddings to demonstrate provide an effective means to enhance the accuracy of knowlits scalability when evaluating large-scale knowledge graphs. edge graph quality assessment.
Table 10 displays the evaluation results of the Tucker model
and the AttTucker model on the CS13K-N50 dataset at different embedding dimensions. It can be observed that as the Conclusions and future works
embedding dimension increases, the evaluation accuracy of
the model gradually improves. When the dimension is below During the construction process of knowledge graphs, it
100, increasing the embedding dimension further enhances is inevitable to introduce noise and conflicts. In response
the model’s accuracy. Moreover, the comparative results also to the quality assessment problem of cybersecurity knowlshow that, at the same embedding dimension, the AttTucker edge graphs, we manually built a cybersecurity knowledge
model outperforms the Tucker model in terms of evaluation graph dataset called CS13K. Subsequently, we extended the
accuracy. This indicates that the attention mechanism can UCO ontology and created a new ontology specifically for
indeed better capture the interaction information between the cybersecurity domain. Using this extended ontology,
entities and relations, thereby improving the evaluation accu- we leveraged Neo4j to construct the cybersecurity knowlracy of the model under low-dimensional embeddings. It is edge graph, providing support for cybersecurity situational
worth noting that at the dimension of 75, the AttTucker model awareness, threat identification, and prediction. Lastly, we
achieves a accuracy level comparable to that of the Tucker proposed a Transformer-based model for knowledge graph

 123
1216 Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217

Table 10 The impact of
embedding dimensions on the Model Dimension k
model’s performance
 32 64 75 100 150

 Tucker 0.671 0.837 0.860 0.894 0.893
 AttTucker 0.720 0.877 0.899 0.908 0.908

Table 11 The evaluation results
of each model Dataset Metrics AttTucker Path AttTuc-Path

 CS13K-N50 Accuracy 0.908 0.889 0.947

quality assessment, which demonstrated good evaluation per- permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyformance under low-dimensional embeddings, showcasing right holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
 ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
the scalability of our model in large-scale knowledge graph
datasets. Additionally, experimental results revealed that
incorporating path-level information significantly enhanced
the effectiveness of knowledge graph quality assessment.
Specifically, on the CS13K-N50 dataset, our model achieved References
an accuracy of 0.947. In future, we will further expand
our cybersecurity knowledge graph to encompass a broader 1. Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez A
range of cyber-attacks and threats. Moreover, we will explore (2017) Attention is all you need. NIPS. https://doi.org/10.48550/
methods for better integration of other types of data and infor- arXiv.1706.03762
 2. Wang J, Li X, An X (2022) Modeling multiple latent information
mation, such as cyber traffic data and intrusion detection graph structures via graph convolutional network for aspect-based
system reports, to enhance the utility and comprehensive- sentiment analysis. Complex Intell Syst. https://doi.org/10.1007/
ness of our knowledge graph. We will also investigate more s40747-022-00940-1
efficient knowledge representation algorithms to improve 3. Lal R (2013) Information extraction of security related entities and
 concepts from unstructured text. Dissertations & Theses - Gradthe performance of our knowledge graph quality assessment works
model. 4. Bridges RA, Jones CL, Iannacone MD, Testa KM, Goodall JR
 (2013) Automatic labeling for entity extraction in cyber security.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank all the anonymous
 Comput Sci. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1308.4941
reviewers for their contribution in improving this manuscript.
 5. Kim G, Lee C, Jo J, Lim H (2020) Automatic extraction of named
Funding This work was supported by the National Natural Science entities of cyber threats using a deep Bi-LSTM-CRF network. Int
Foundation of China (Grant no. 61771001). J Mach Learn Cybern 11(10):2341–2355. https://doi.org/10.1007/
 s13042-020-01122-6
Data availability For the FB15K dataset used in the paper, it can be 6. Wang X, Liu X, Ao S, Li N, Zhang X (2020) DNRTI: a largeaccessed through the following link: https://github.com/zqhead/TransE/ scale dataset for named entity recognition in threat intelligence.
tree/master/FB15k. Additionally, the CS13K dataset is available from TrustCom. https://doi.org/10.1109/TrustCom50675.2020.00252
the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 7. Guo, Y, Liu, Z, Huang, C, Liu, J, Jing, W, Wang, Z, Wang Y
 (2021) CyberRel: joint entity and relation extraction for cybersecurity concepts. In: International Conference on Information and
Declarations Communications Security (pp. 447–463). https://doi.org/10.1007/
 978-3-030-86890-1_25
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of 8. Rastogi N, Dutta S, Christian R, Gridley J, Zaki M, Gittens A
interest. (2021) Predicting malware threat intelligence using KGs. https://
 doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.12526.54083, arXiv:2102.05571
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 9. Smith, B, (2012) Ontology. In: The furniture of the world. Brill.
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap- p. 47–68
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as 10. Undercofer J, Joshi A, Finin T, Pinkston J (2003) A target-centric
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the ontology for intrusion detection. In: Workshop on ontologies in
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indi- distributed systems.
cate if changes were made. The images or other third party material 11. Iannacone M, Bohn S, Nakamura G, Gerth J, Goodall J (2015)
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, Developing an ontology for cyber security knowledge graphs. The
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material 10th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research Conference.
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your https://doi.org/10.1145/2746266.2746278
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the 12. Syed Z, Padia A, Finin T, Mathews L, Joshi A (2016) UCO: A
 unified cybersecurity ontology. In: Workshops at the thirtieth AAAI
 conference on artificial intelligence

123
Complex & Intelligent Systems (2024) 10:1201–1217 1217

13. Vorobiev A, Bekmamedova N (2007) An ontological approach 28. Xie R, Liu Z, Lin F, Lin L (2018) Does william shakespeare really
 applied to information security and trust. ACIS 2007 Proceedings, write hamlet? Knowledge representation learning with confidence.
 114 Proc AAAI Conf Artif Intell 32(1). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
14. Pingle A, Piplai A, Mittal S, Joshi A, Holt J, Zak R (2019) Relext: 1705.03202
 relation extraction using deep learning approaches for cybersecu- 29. Mendes PN, Mühleisen H, Bizer C (2012) Sieve: linked data
 rity knowledge graph improvement. In: Proceedings of the 2019 quality assessment and fusion. In: Proceedings of the 2012 joint
 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Net- EDBT/ICDT workshops116–123
 works Analysis and Mining. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905. 30. Jia S, Xiang Y, Chen X, Wang K (2019) Triple trustworthiness
 02497 measurement for knowledge graph. In: The World Wide Web Con-
15. Xie L, Hu Z, Cai X, Zhang W, Chen J (2021) Explainable ference 2865–2871. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1809.09414
 recommendation based on knowledge graph and multi-objective 31. Zhang Y, Yao Q, Dai W (2020) AutoSF: searching scoring functions
 optimization. Complex Intell Syst 7(3):1241–1252. https://doi.org/ for knowledge graph embedding. 2020 IEEE 36th International
 10.1007/s40747-021-00315-y Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE, 433–444. https://
16. Verma S, Bhatia R, Harit S, Batish S (2022) Scholarly knowledge doi.org/10.1109/ICDE48307.2020.00044
 graphs through structuring scholarly communication: a review. 32. Dash S, Chakraborty C, Giri SK (2021) Intelligent computing on
 Complex Intell Syst. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40747-022-00806-6 time-series data analysis and prediction of COVID-19 pandemics.
17. Andola N, Prakash S, Gahlot R (2022) An enhanced smart card and Pattern Recogn Lett 151:69–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.
 dynamic ID based remote multi-server user authentication scheme. 2021.07.027
 Clust Comput 25(5):3699–3717. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586- 33. Sarkar A, Khan MZ, Singh MM (2021) Artificial neural synchro-
 022-03585-4 nization using nature inspired whale optimization. IEEE Access
18. Andola N, Gogoi M, Venkatesan S (2019) Vulnerabilities on hyper- 9:16435–16447. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3052884
 ledger fabric. Pervasive Mobile Comput 59:101050. https://doi.org/ 34. Tao H, Cheng L, Qiu J (2022) Few shot cross equipment fault diag-
 10.1016/j.pmcj.2019.101050 nosis method based on parameter optimization and feature mertic.
19. Andola N, Raghav YVK (2021) SpyChain: a lightweight Measurement Sci Technol 33(11):115005. https://doi.org/10.1088/
 blockchain for authentication and anonymous authorization in IoD. 1361-6501/ac8368
 Wireless Pers Commun 119:343–362. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 35. Aziz RM, Hussain A, Sharma P (2022) Machine learning-based
 1277-021-08214-8 soft computing regression analysis approach for crime data pre-
20. Zhang Z, Song X, Sun X (2023) Hybrid-driven-based fuzzy secure diction. Karbala Int J Modern Sci 8(1):1–19. https://doi.org/10.33
 filtering for nonlinear parabolic partial differential equation sys- 640/2405-609X.3197
 tems with cyber attacks. Int J Adapt Control Signal Process 36. Aziz RM, Baluch MF, Patel S (2022) A machine learning based
 37(2):380–398. https://doi.org/10.1002/acs.3529 approach to detect the Ethereum fraud transactions with limited
21. Wang W, Han Z, Alazab M (2022) Ultra super fast authentication attributes. Karbala Int J Modern Sci 8(2):139–151
 protocol for electric vehicle charging using extended chaotic maps. 37. Balažević I, Allen C, Hospedales T M (2019) Tucker: Tensor fac-
 IEEE Trans Ind Appl 58(5):5616–5623. https://doi.org/10.1109/ torization for knowledge graph completion. arXiv preprint arXiv:
 TIA.2022.3184668 1901.09590. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1522
22. Alazab M, RM SP, Parimala M (2021) Federated learning for 38. Wang Z, Zhang J, Feng J, Chen Z (2014) Knowledge graph embedcybersecurity: concepts, challenges, and future directions. IEEE ding by translating on hyperplanes. In: Proceedings of the AAAI
 Transact Industrial Inform 18(5):3501–3509. https://doi.org/10. conference on artificial intelligence
 1109/TII.2021.3119038 39. Zhao, Y. Feng H, Gallinari PJE (2019) Embedding learning with
23. Jia Y, Qi Y, Shang H, Jiang R, Li A (2018) A practical approach triple trustiness on noisy knowledge graph 21(11):1083
 to constructing a knowledge graph for cybersecurity. Engineering
 4(1):53–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2018.01.004
24. Harley E, Purdy S, Limiero M, Lu T, Mathews W (2018) CyGraph:
 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisbig-data graph analysis for cybersecurity and mission resilience.
 dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
 MITRE CORP MCLEAN VA
25. Kiesling E, Ekelhart A, Kurniawan K, Ekaputra F (2019) The
 SEPSES knowledge graph: an integrated resource for cybersecurity. In: International Semantic Web Conference 198–214. https://
 doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30796-7_13
26. Lehmann J, Bühmann L (2010) ORE-a tool for repairing and
 enriching knowledge bases. In: International Semantic Web Conference 177–193. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17749-1_12
27. Bougiatiotis K, Fasoulis R, Aisopos F, Nentidis A, Paliouras G
 (2020) Guiding Graph Embeddings using Path-Ranking Methods
 for Error Detection innoisy Knowledge Graphs. https://doi.org/10.
 48550/arXiv.2002.08762

 123