Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Intelligent Systems with Applications
 journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/intelligent-systems-with-applications

Darknet traﬃc detection and characterization with models based on
decision trees and neural networks ✩
Mateus Coutinho Marim a , Paulo Vitor Barbosa Ramos a , Alex B. Vieira a , Antonino Galletta b ,
Massimo Villari b , Roberto M. de Oliveira a , Edelberto Franco Silva a,∗
a
 Graduate Program in Computer Science (PPGCC), Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Juiz de Fora (UFJF), Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil
b
 Universita degli Studi di Messina, MIFT Department, Viale F. Stagno D’Alcontres 31, 98166, Messina, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: The Darknet is a set of networks and technologies, having as fundamental principles anonymity and security. In
Traﬃc classiﬁcation many cases, they are associated with illicit activities, opening space for malware traﬃc and attacks to legitimate
Darknet services. To prevent Darknet misuse is necessary to classify and characterize its existing traﬃc. In this paper, we
Security
 characterize and classify the real Darknet traﬃc available from the CIC-Darknet2020 dataset. In that sense,
Deep web
 we performed the feature extraction and grouped the possible subnets with an n-gram approach. Furthermore,
Neural networks
Benchmark we evaluated the relevance of the best features selected by the Recursive Feature Elimination method for the
 problem. Our results indicate that simple models, like Decision Trees and Random Forests, reach an accuracy
 above 99% on traﬃc classiﬁcation. Our methodology represents a gain of up to 13% in comparison with the
 state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction digital content. In a general way, the objective of the Darknet is to carry
 out secure communication between peers, preserving the conﬁdential-
 Internet presents a diversiﬁed niche segregated by the level of avail- ity and completeness of their interactions and keeping the anonymous
ability and anonymity of the services. One of the Internet layers is the
 sharing nature. With this, the Darknet becomes a secure repository for
Surface Web, this reduced part is the one widely available by search
 any individual to establish activities regardless of their nature, ensuring
indexers and commonly used by users looking for so-called common
 the advantage of diﬃcult traceability.
services and applications. The Deep Web, a set generally “encrypted”
 As these properties from the Darknet are highly used for malicious
and sought after by those looking for peculiar services, makes available
 purposes, the malicious traﬃc from the Darknet is potentially dangerthe results not indexed by conventional search engines. This set has
 ous for computer networks. So, the classiﬁcation of the traﬃc origin
its principles based on the continuous change of hosting and establishing connections through secure peers, Peer-to-Peer (P2P). the Darknet and categorization of the type of application in these cryptographic
is a subset of the Deep Web that expands these principles and further situations is one way to prevent damage from Darknet traﬃc, and it
restricts peer connection (Mirea et al., 2019). is one of the objectives of the study of the Traﬃc Classiﬁcation prob-
 Darknet demonstrates the highest level of security techniques to lem. The objective of determining certain classes analyzing the data
ensure the anonymity of groups and service providers, preserving the traﬃc, i.e., checking connection duration patterns, information about
identity of the subjects involved in the relationships. Examples include the origin and destination of this data, connected ports, and the type
selling products on the black market, negotiating services, and exchang- of application related to the analyzed ﬂow is useful for many security
ing information. Although these are some of the activities that are on applications. For instance, in intrusion detection, Quality of Service manthe side of illegality, Darknet demonstrates a heterogeneous network agement in scalability, preventing the spread of malware or (Parchekani
established on principles founded on privacy in the midst of sharing et al.) service attacks. The methods available in the literature vary and

 ✩
 This work has been partially supported by the Department for drug policies of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers (Italian Government) through the
project InstradaME (CUP F49I20000100001) and the National Operational Programme Metropolitan Cities 2014-2020(PON METRO) through the project MeSm@rt
(CUP F41I18000230006).
 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: angalletta@unime.it (A. Galletta), mvillari@unime.it (M. Villari), edelberto@ice.ufjf.br (R.M. de Oliveira).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iswa.2023.200199
Received 13 September 2022; Received in revised form 26 December 2022; Accepted 9 February 2023
Available online 17 February 2023
2667-3053/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

may be linked to the analysis of ports and payload or inserting statistical et al., 2020) and (Montieri et al., 2020), can be cited, focusing on the
inferences to classify the record under analysis (Medeiros et al., 2019). correlation between privacy-preserving and traﬃc classiﬁcation.
 It is possible to ﬁnd few eﬀorts to detect and characterize Darknet Recently, in work published by Gurdip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari
traﬃc using Deep Learning (DL), such as Deep Image Learning (Gurdip (2020), a database was made available that is the union of the other two
Kaur & Habibi Lashkari, 2020), there are notable eﬀorts to identify traf- mentioned above, called CIC-Darknet2020. This work performs the clas-
ﬁc from the same set using traditional machine learning techniques. siﬁcation of applications from Surface Web and Darknet, respectively,
This demonstrates that state-of-the-art is being developed for complex which is deﬁned as the benign origin and Darknet. In this case, the Darksystems, but there is still the need for studies evaluating the eﬃciency
 net traﬃc was encrypted using VPN and Tor. In addition to publishing
of simpler models.
 the database, the author presented an accuracy of 92% for identifying
 In this regard, the present work approaches the traﬃc classiﬁcathe origin of the traﬃc and 86% for its categorization in their classition problem of Darknet using a representative database – the CIC-
Darknet2020 (Gurdip Kaur & Habibi Lashkari, 2020). The main con- ﬁcation model using deep neural networks, using a technique called
tributions and results of our work can be summarized as follows: Deep Image Learning. Something important to note is that although the
 database provides information about the traﬃc source and destination
 • Higher-performing machine learning models to the traﬃc classiﬁca- Internet Protocol (IP)s, it is not possible to detect its real origin. It oction area in Darknet, with an improvement of up to 13% concern- curs since the traﬃc that passes through Tor makes its way through
 ing the state-of-the-art. Furthermore, we have shown that complex intermediary networks in order to hide the user’s real location. As for
 models are not always necessary for the addressed tasks; the traﬃc coming from VPNs, the detection of the origin is not possible
 • Is shown the importance of careful analysis and preprocessing of because they are fake IPs or bogons.
 the attributes to identify how data quality can be improved and, In Draper-Gil et al. (2016), the authors address the classiﬁcation of
 consequently, the performance of the models created with them; the traﬃc via VPN on the dataset ISCXVPN2016 in two stages with the
 • From the analysis of the existing ﬁelds, new features are created usage of neural networks. The ﬁrst, using MLP as the activation funcaiming for the best performance of the traﬃc origin detection and tion for the second stage, a Recurrent Neural Network to identify the six
 the characterization of the application;
 classes employed by the dataset. Establishing two application catego-
 • We analyze the results of the models created with the Decision
 rization scenarios, the authors use the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and
 Tree (DT), Random Forest (RF), and Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
 C4.5 DT models for the task. They present an accuracy above 80%, emto verify their applicability in the proposed problems and to comphasizing the C4.5, which had better precision measurement results.
 pare them through the McNemar statistical test to determine the
 existence of a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between them; In Lotfollahi et al. (2020), using the same dataset, the author
 • Finally, we also perform a feature selection process with the al- presents the Deep Packet framework approach for the traﬃc classiﬁcation
 gorithm Recursive Feature Elimination to analyze the features’ rele- problem. The framework comprises two deep learning methods, a convovance in their respective tasks. The validation resulted in an ac- lutional neural network, and an autoencoder, both for the classiﬁcation
 curacy of 99.89% for the traﬃc source classiﬁcation task using and characterization tasks. With accuracy and precision results above
 only 30 attributes. For the application categorization task, with 50 90%, the work played an important role in supporting other methods
 attributes, the resulting accuracy was 98.62%, indicating that re- besides the one used to solve the problem. In Crotti et al. (2007) aumoving a signiﬁcant part of these characteristics does not aﬀect thors propose alternative approaches for the classiﬁcation problem by
 the overall performance. using ports, not recommended as it has low classiﬁcation rates, payload inspection, and the use of a statistical approach. It demonstrates
 The remainder of this article is structured as follows: works re- an accuracy of around 91% for the classiﬁcation of Hypertext Transfer
lated to traﬃc classiﬁcation using diﬀerent approaches are discussed Protocol (HTTP), Post Oﬃce Protocol (POP3), and Simple Mail Transin Section 2. Section 3 describes the dataset used for classiﬁcation and
 fer Protocol (SMTP) protocols and 87% for File Transfer Protocol (FTP),
characterization of traﬃc on Darknet, and describes the pre-processing
 Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), Secure Shell (SSH), and TELsteps that we adopted to improve the quality of the data used in the
 NET Protocol (TELNET).
training of models. In addition, we also describe the extracted attributes
 The works of (Lotfollahi et al., 2020) and (Draper-Gil et al., 2016),
based on those existing in the dataset. The creation and performance
analysis of the DT, RF, and MLP, models are described in Section 4. In although they have contributed to the categorization of the applicaaddition, we also perform a model selection by estimating their perfor- tion by traﬃc, are not focused on data from Darknet. Gurdip Kaur and
mance and comparing them with statistical tests in Section 5, and we Habibi Lashkari (2020) addresses categorization with deep learning in
perform a feature selection to analyze the importance of attributes in two layers, the ﬁrst related to origin classiﬁcation and the second in
traﬃc classiﬁcation tasks. Finally, the conclusions and future work of relation to traﬃc coming from Darknet, checking the attributes of the
this article are presented in Section 6. dataset most important for ranking. Even with an accuracy of 86% for
 the problem, the authors do not compare it with simpler classiﬁcation
2. Related work models.
 Diﬀerent from the aforementioned works, our proposal uses simple
 Before showing diﬀerent solutions to the Traﬃc Classiﬁcation prob- and easy-to-apply models, such as DT, RF, and MLP, in order to compare
lem, it is necessary to understand the deﬁnition of the problem, which the results of the traﬃc origin classiﬁcation models with the categoconsists of using traﬃc data between sender and receiver to classify and rization of the application of data from Darknet. Furthermore, we verify
categorize the application used. One of the main challenges is to carry the inﬂuence of the creation of new attributes by comparing the modout this task using encrypted data, an approach made in two databases
 els to verify whether there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in performance.
provided by the University of New Brunswick, the ISCXVPN2016 (Draper-
 Through this comparison, the models used, although simple, allowed
Gil et al., 2016) and ISCXTor2016 (Lashkari et al., 2017), which, reresults close to 100% of overall accuracy, unlike the Deep Learning
spectively, provide traﬃc over networks using Virtual Private Network
 models found in state-of-the-art. Thus, the database provided by Gur-
(VPN) and The Onion Router (Tor).1 Other related works, like (Bovenzi
 dip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020) is chosen to achieve the proposed
 objectives, expanding it with new features, inserting information on the
 1
 https://www.torproject.org/. source and destination IP addresses, dividing them into n-grams (Wress-

 2
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Table 1
 Related work summary.

 Proposal Dataset Attributes ML/DL Acc.

 Gurdip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020) CIC-Darknet2020 VPN, Tor Deep Image Learning 86%
 Draper-Gil et al. (2016) ISCXVPN2016 VPN MLP, KNN, C4.5 80%
 Lotfollahi et al. (2020) ISCXVPN2016 All CNN + AutoEnconder 90%
 Crotti et al. (2007) CIC-Darknet2020 HTTP, POP3, SMTP, FTP, IMAP, SSH, TELNET Statistical 91%
 This work CIC-Darknet2020 All + n-grams DT, RF, MLP 99.89%

negger et al., 2013), and manipulating the original records.2 These
changes and comparisons allow the evolution of both the base and the
highlighted theme (Table 1).

3. Dataset and methodology

3.1. Dataset

 The CIC-Darknet2020 dataset is utilized for the development of
classiﬁcation models. It has records of traﬃc from the surface web and
from both the datasets ISCXTor2016 and ISCXVPN2016 (Gurdip Kaur
& Habibi Lashkari, 2020), containing Tor and VPN traﬃc data, respectively. CIC-Darknet2020 considers as Darknet traﬃc the data that
comes from Tor and VPN networks. The dataset establishes two classi-
ﬁcation tasks related to the traﬃc classiﬁcation problem. The ﬁrst task
is the origin detection of the traﬃc, in which the classes are Benign,
 Fig. 1. Distribution by the data source.
representing surface web traﬃc, and Darknet. Fig. 1 shows the data
distribution regarding the traﬃc origin. The other task is the characterization of the traﬃc in 8 labels. These labels are the applications 3.2.1. Labels correction
that originate the traﬃc, being them: browsing, email, chat, audio- The dataset comes with duplicate labels on both label types made
streaming, video-streaming, ﬁle-transfer, VoIP (Voice Over IP), and P2P available by the dataset. Through label inspection, it is possible to ob-
(Peer-to-Peer). serve a lack of standardization on label names and redundancy. To
 The dataset has a variety of ﬁelds for analysis, bringing information approach this issue, we standardize the names by choosing one of the
about the origin and destination IPs, ports, duration of packet traﬃc, duplicates. For example, records with the labels AUDIO-STREAMING
and other related measures. There are 141.528 records, of which 24.310 (capital letters) were replaced by Audio-Streaming.
come from the Darknet and 117.218 were from benign networks. This
proportion diﬀerence comes from the fact that the services found on the 3.2.2. Features encoding
Darknet are not indexed by search engines. Besides, they need special Most machine learning models only work on numeric data. Howapplications, like Tor, to access them (Gurdip Kaur & Habibi Lashkari, ever, frequently datasets include categorical variables representing, as
2020). Fig. 2 shows the distribution of the applications that originate the name says, categories or labels. Unlike numerical variables, values
the traﬃc. It is clear that streaming, audio, and chat applications are on a categorical variable can not be ordered; that is, its magnitude is not
the most common for data from Darknet, while for benign networks, relevant to the task in question. The categories usually are not numeric;
they are the minority. therefore, it’s necessary to apply an encoding method to transform them
 into numbers. One of the possibilities is the simple mapping from each
3.2. Data preparation category to integers; however, the resulting numbers can turn out to be
 orderable between them, something that is not desirable for category
 The performance of data-based models is greatly aﬀected by the values (Zheng & Casari, 2018).
quality of the data used during their creation. This challenge increases The value of a subnet regarding another is irrelevant to the problem,
when using large datasets from the real world, which usually has so features corresponding to IP addresses on the dataset are examples
quality-related problems due to missing, inconsistent data. There are of categorical variables. Since the value of a subnet does not necessarily
several reasons for the low quality of datasets in the real world, which indicate the origin of the traﬃc or its generating application. The concan be caused by human or computer error, incorrect data submitted cept of n-grams models approaches the problem of IP address encoding
by users, and faulty data collection instruments, among other problems with a more generic mapping. Initially, these models were proposed for
that may occur. Data pre-processing techniques aim to improve data natural language processing and currently are the dominant represenquality and may improve the eﬃciency of subsequent processes (Han tation in many detection systems (Wressnegger et al., 2013).
et al., 2011). The following subsections present the pre-processing tech- One of the possible applications of n-gram models is the direct capniques applied in this paper to improve the learning eﬃciency and the ture of IP address subnets. The RFC 950 (Mogul et al., 1985) deﬁnes a
accuracy of machine learning models in the tasks of detection and char- 3-level interpretation model for internet addresses, where the highest
acterization of Darknet traﬃc. level represents the internet as a whole, the level below are the individual networks, and the last level represents the subnets that are useful
 for networks belonging to moderately large organizations. Thus, each
 2 CIC-Darknet2020 Internet Traﬃc dataset (Gurdip Kaur & Habibi Lashkari, of these IP addresses interpretation levels can be represented with the
2020) records bi-directional ﬂows represented by a ﬂow-id and its attributes, utilization of unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams models, in an attempt to
e.g., IP Address, Src Port. capture the traﬃc subnet of origin.

 3
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 2. Occurrence probability of the traﬃc related to service.

 Fig. 3. Feature encoding with One Hot Encoding.

 Table 2 purpose, we applied the standard scaling method to all features. This
 IPs addresses division in grams example. technique works by subtracting the feature mean from values and scal-
 IP Unigram Bigram Trigram
 ing them, so the features have a unitary variance (Zheng & Casari,
 2018).
 172.168.15.14 172 172 168 172 168 15
 182.170.224.79 182 170 224 182 170 224
 3.2.3. Feature extraction
 The dataset provides information about the origin and destination
 Table 2 exemplify the division of the IP addresses in grams, allowing IP addresses, enabling the extraction of more features related to the
us to observe how the process is similar to what the subnet mask does network traﬃc. One of the possibilities is the application of one-hot
for subnet identiﬁcation but, as we do not have access to the subnet encoding. However, the usage of n-grams can help in decreasing the
masks, we use the grams for each possible interpretation level. With percentage of false positives on predictions. Hence, the dataset was
these new attributes, a machine learning model can be able to learn the extended using the IP addresses, fragmenting them into unigrams, bimost common preﬁxes or subnets for a traﬃc type as a piece of relevant grams, and trigrams. Furthermore, were used information from hosting,
information for new traﬃc predictions. geolocation, and bogons (false addresses), between other features with
 The ﬁrst encoding is applied to the unigrams, bigrams, and trigrams the aid of the IpInfo library.
created from the IP addresses. We used the hashing encoding technique Another feature extracted was the time that the traﬃc data capture
to create 100 new features named with the preﬁx 𝑐𝑜𝑙_ followed by the
 started from the traﬃc timestamp. Fig. 4 shows the relationship between
attribute ID generated by the method. As noted by Weinberger et al.
 the capture time for both labels related to the origin of the traﬃc us-
(2009), the hashing encoding technique enables attributes encoding reing TCPDump and Wireshark. It is possible to verify that two diﬀerent
garding one hot encoding. One hot encoding does categorical feature
 patterns take place in the traﬃc generation behavior for each label, beencoding by transforming each of the categories into new binary feaing possible to observe that these patterns on traﬃc time can be used
tures indicating if that category belongs to the corresponding dataset
 by the models in the learning phase, making the traﬃc time a relevant
example, as shown in Fig. 3. This could lead to a large number of new
features depending on the number of unique categories on a categorical feature for traﬃc classiﬁcation.
variable. On the other hand, the hashing encoding has the disadvantage Besides being possible to see the timetable distinction, this time rethat the new features can not be easily interpreted as the generated fea- lation allows seeing when there is a high probability of utilization of
tures can not be mapped back to their original values. Furthermore, as each network. For the Benign network, can be observed a high traﬃc
we could extract the country of origin from the network addresses, this density between 7 am, and 12 am, with some peaks at dawn. On the
information is used as a feature for model training after applying an Darknet traﬃc side, the traﬃc distribution is sparser, having a high utiordinal encoding transformation. lization peak at dawn and two smaller peaks in the afternoon. These
 One of the most important transformations applied to data is fea- relations are almost an exclusive disjunction; that is, there is a considture scaling. Generally, few machine learning models have good per- erable probability of not having high traﬃc on the Darknet at the same
formance with features with diﬀerent scales. Therefore, it is necessary time of Benign networks, which allows smoother learning of these patto transform feature values to have the same numeric range. For this terns on classiﬁcation models.

 4
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 4. Traﬃc density in a given hour.

 𝑇𝑃
 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = (2)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁
 • F-score: can be viewed as a weighted average of the precision and
 recall. It reaches its best value at one and the worst at zero. Both
 precision and recall have the same contribution to the F-score.
 2 × (𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 × 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙)
 𝐹 − 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (3)
 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙

 One of the ways to approach the model selection problem is by selecting the model with fewer errors using k-fold. However, k-fold only
 provides an estimate of the error in the actual population of the future data. Although the model errors appear to be diﬀerent between
 them, this diﬀerence may not be statistically signiﬁcant. To determine
 whether the diﬀerence in the error means it is statistically signiﬁcant,
 we need to employ a statistical signiﬁcance test. Thus, we can state that
 the means cannot vary outside a conﬁdence interval with future sam-
 Fig. 5. K-fold illustration with k = 5 (Fedotenkova, 2016). ples (Han et al., 2011).
 The choice of the statistical test must be made carefully, to avoid
 misinterpretation of the models. In (Dietterich, 1998), ﬁve commonly
3.3. Model evaluation
 used statistical tests are compared with the objective of determining
 the one with the slightest error of the type I, that is, the one with the
 With the variety of classiﬁcation models available, metrics are
 most negligible probability of detecting a diﬀerence when it does not
needed to assess their performance in a given task so that it is possiexist. The authors conclude that for algorithms that can be executed
ble to choose the best model. This process is called model selection.
 only once, the use of the McNemar test is recommended. However, for
Two common methods for accuracy assessment are the holdout and the
 algorithms that can be executed ten times, they recommend the 5x2 cv
random subsampling methods. The holdout method works by randomly
 test (cross-validation)) as it has the smallest error of type I.
partitioning two independent sets, training and a test set, and the accuracy is deﬁned as the number of hits on the test set. The random
 4. Evaluation
subsampling is similar to the holdout method, but the holdout method
is repeated k times, and the accuracy is the average of the accuracies
 The evaluated models are based on decision trees and a simple neuobtained in each iteration (Han et al., 2011).
 ral network selected due to their simplicity and ease of interpretation.
 To estimate the accuracy of the models, stratiﬁed k-fold cross-
 In addition, it conducts a selection of characteristics to estimate the
validation is used where the k-fold has 𝑘 = 10. This method divides the
 importance of attributes according to their inﬂuence on classiﬁcation.
data into k groups of approximately equal size and distribution of la-
 Next, the chosen models (Géron, 2019) are brieﬂy described.
bels, where the ﬁrst 𝑓 𝑜𝑙𝑑 is used as the validation set, and the method
is trained on the remaining 𝑘 − 1 folds. Unlike the holdout and random
 • Decision Trees (DT): non-parametric supervised learning models
subsampling methods, here, each sample is used the same number of
 that can be used for classiﬁcation and regression. It works by learntimes for training and once for testing. Accuracy with k-fold is deﬁned as
 ing simple decision rules inferred from the data to predict the target
the average accuracy of all training and validation pairs combinations;
 variable. They are simple models to understand and interpret, and
Fig. 5 illustrates the procedure. Precision, recall and F-score (Géron,
 the generated trees can be visualized. Some advantages of decision
2019) are used as metrics in both classiﬁcation tasks. The equations
 trees are: Simple to understand and interpret, and possible to be
of the evaluation metrics used are listed below, where TP, TN, FP, and
 visualized. Non-require data normalization or hard work for data
FN are the classiﬁcation of true positives, true negatives, false positives,
 preparation. Its cost is logarithmic in the number of data points
and false negatives, respectively.
 used to train the tree. Moreover, it is considered easy to interpret
 and explain by a boolean logic supported by a white-box model.
 • Precision: can be thought of as a measure of exactness, i.e., the
 However, the disadvantages of decision trees include the followpercentage of examples labeled as positive are actually such;
 ing: DT can create over-complex trees that do not generalize the
 𝑇𝑃 data well. This is called overﬁtting. It can be unstable, consider-
 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (1)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃 ing its small variations in the data might result in a completely
 • Recall: is a measure of completeness, i.e., the percentage of positive diﬀerent tree being generated. By the way, it is possible to mitisamples labeled as such, the same as sensitivity; gate almost all of these problems. Fig. 6 presents a DT with green

 5
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Table 3
 Models evaluation metrics summary.

 Precision Recall F-score 10-fold

 DT 0.9964 0.9971 0.9967 99.89%
 RF 0.9987 0.9947 0.9967 99.9%
 MLP 0.9992 0.9915 0.9953 99.84%

 Table 4
 Confusion matrix labels.

 Initials Label Initials Label

 AS Audio Streaming P P2P
 B Browsing FT File Transfer
 VS Video Streaming C Chat
 Fig. 6. Typical architecture of a DT model. V VOIP E Email

 nodes selected by the decision tree algorithm based on boolean
 logic. The entropy concept is used by DT, where the 𝑝+ is the prob- traﬃc detection. It is possible to observe that, for both classes, the vast
 ability of a positive class, in contrast to the 𝑝− probability of a majority of them are correctly classiﬁed. Through the confusion matrinegative class in a subset of the training example, as is possible to ces of Fig. 9 it is possible to see that for the class Darknet, there is a
 see on 𝐸(𝑆) = −𝑝(+) 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(+) − 𝑝(−) 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑝(−) . percentage of 0.45% wrongly classiﬁed as Benign, and for the opposite,
 • Random Forest (RF): is a ensemble model that uses DTs as weak clas- 0.02%. In an application in which the correct detection of Darknet trafsiﬁers in order to generate a robust classiﬁer. The RF trains each of ﬁc is more important, MLP is the most suitable as it has a lower number
 the DTs with the Bagging technique to generate a classiﬁer with bet- of false positives among the analyzed models.
 ter performance than its individual components. RFs are frequently The Table 3 summarizes the metric values of each model in the clasused as “black box” models in computational intelligence solutions. siﬁcation between the labels Benign and Darknet, with the values in bold
 They generate reasonable predictions across a wide range of data as the best results obtained for comparison between the models. Furwhile requiring trim conﬁguration. However, RFs, in general, are thermore, the model achieved an accuracy of 99.89% in 10-fold and
 more complex compared to DTs. In this case, RF is an excellent good generalization, thus better results than the literature, where Gurway to conduct more extensive experiments with more data, even dip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020) achieved an accuracy of 94% in
 losing the comfortable model interpretability oﬀered by DT. Fig. 7 the detection of Darknet traﬃc.
 shows a set of DTs used to create the RF model.
 • Multilayer Perceptron (MLP): is a class of feedforward artiﬁcial neu- 4.2. Darknet traﬃc characterization
 ral networks (ANN). It is composed of an Input layer, one or more
 layers of perceptrons, also called Hidden layers, and an Output Fig. 11 lists, in polar coordinates, the complement values of the prelayer responsible for the ﬁnal classiﬁcation. Except for the input cision, recall, F-score, and also the classiﬁcation error for the DT models,
 layer, every MLP node is a perceptron model and a non-linear acti- RF and MLP respectively, for traﬃc characterization. The complements
 vation function. Fig. 8 shows the architecture of an MLP. Its advan- of these metrics were presented to provide better visualization. It is
 tages are adaptive learning, a huge number of possible applications, possible to verify that only the class Browsing had a discrepant distance
 and do not assume the underlying probability density functions from the maximum value of the metrics. In addition, among all models,
 or other probabilistic information about the pattern classes under DT had the best results in all metrics, while MLP and RF had worse valconsideration compared to other probability-based models. But, its ues in more labels, in addition to Browsing, RF also had worse results in
 disadvantages can be mentioned by the hidden layers with a non- relation to Video-Streaming, while MLP had worse results on P2P, Email,
 convex loss function where more than one local minimum exists. Video-Streaming and Browsing tags. The confusion matrices of Figs. 10a,
 Therefore, diﬀerent random weight initializations can lead to dif- 10b, and 10c, respectively corresponding to DT, RF, and MLP, and the
 ferent validation accuracy and require tuning several hyperparam- acronyms of the rows and columns correspond to the Table 4 labels, it
 eters, such as hidden neurons, layers, and iterations. To conclude, is evident that the common errors are related to traﬃc with Chat and
 MLP is sensitive to feature scaling. Keeping it in mind, the MLP can Audio-Streaming labels, which may indicate that there is some similarity
 be a good neural network for any problem, mainly for temporal in the traﬃc corresponding to these labels, which can cause confusion
 series. in the models.
 Fig. 11d shows the errors obtained by the models in the classiﬁ-
 However, a disadvantage of the models used is that they cannot be cation of each type of service associated with the traﬃcs, making it
trained online. In other words, they cannot learn from a new exam- evident that the classes that obtained more signiﬁcant classiﬁcation erple unless the model is retrained with all the previous data and the rors are those least represented in the dataset. RF and MLP attenuated
new examples. All experiments were done with the sklearn library, in the errors of these classes. Therefore, they are more suitable models for
the Python programming language, on a computer with a Intel Core i5- traﬃc classiﬁcation, assuming that the addition of new examples fol-
7200U processor with 4 2.5 GHz cores, 20 GB of RAM, and the Ubuntu lows the same training set probability distribution and that the traﬃc
20.04 operating system. Each one of the models were trained keeping corresponding to these labels is not of great importance for the applithe default parameters deﬁned by sklearn. cation of the model. We obtained a minor classiﬁcation error with the
 DT even in classes with less representation. So, the model proposed by
4.1. Darknet traﬃc detection Gurdip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020) using deep learning obtained
 an overall accuracy of 86% against 99.03% of our DT’s model. Consid-
 In Figs. 9a, 9b, and 9c corresponding to the DT, RF, and MLP mod- ering it, we achieved an improvement of 13.03%, which may indicate
els it is possible to observe the models confusion matrices on the task of that the problem of characterization of Darknet traﬃc is better solved

 6
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 7. Typical architecture of an RF model.

 Table 5
 10-10-fold estimated accuracy for darknet traﬃc
 detection and characterization.

 DT RF MLP

 Detection 99.905 99.907 99.837
 Characterization 99.154 98.754 97.731

 Table 6
 p-values for traﬃc detection and characterization models
 comparison.

 DT vs RF DT vs MLP MLP vs RF

 Detection 0.095 0.286 0.389
 Characterization 0.013 0 0.001

 Fig. 8. Typical architecture of an MLP model (Géron, 2019).
 performance of the models, it is necessary to run the 5x2 cv to see if
 these results are statistically signiﬁcant.
with simpler and easier-to-interpret models without the need to resort Figs. 12a and 12b summarize the accuracy of the models in the deto more complex models and that demands more computing resources. tection and characterization tasks of Darknet traﬃc in boxplots. It is
However, in applications where it is necessary to update the model as evident that in both classiﬁcation tasks, the DT obtained better results.
new examples arrive, MLP is the most suitable model as it is the only We also observed that the MLP had a greater variance in the estimates
one that allows online learning. than the other models. To verify whether the diﬀerence in the accuracy
 estimates of the models is statistically signiﬁcant, we conduct statistical
 tests.
5. Evaluation
 As a null hypothesis for the statistical tests, we consider that the
 models do not signiﬁcantly diﬀer. We also assume that the conﬁdence
5.1. Model evaluation margin for the statistical test result is 95%. If the p-value is less than
 the 𝛼 threshold of 0.05, the value used as a convention (Dahiru, 2008),
 As the models trained in this paper can be run ten times, we chose then the null hypothesis is rejected, and there is a statistically signiﬁ-
5x2 cv as the test for model selection. In 5x2 cv, there are ﬁve exe- cant diﬀerence between the compared models. Table 6 the p-values are
cutions of cross-validation with 2 folds. In each execution, the data is summarized by comparing the models from 2 to 2 to see if there is any
randomly partitioned into two sets of approximately equal size, where diﬀerence between them. The results indicate that there is no statiseach of the models is trained on one set and tested on the other. Af- tically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the models for detecting darknet
ter the results are generated, a paired student’s t test is performed to traﬃc, while all models for characterization have a statistically signiﬁ-
generate the ﬁnal statistics (Dietterich, 1998). cant diﬀerence between them.
 Table 5 summarizes the accuracies estimated by the 10-10-fold with Despite the results favoring DT as the best model for both classiﬁcaall models for the traﬃc detection and characterization tasks. The accu- tion tasks, essential points must be considered. The DT is a model that
racies are estimated as the average of the accuracies obtained in all does not allow us to update it after its training. Every time a sample or
10-fold runs. As it is possible to observe, all models obtained very a set of them arrives, it is necessary to retrain the entire model to consimilar results for traﬃc detection. For the characterization, the deci- sider the new samples. As the problem of interest consists of data that
sion tree had better results than the random forest and the multilayer can come as a stream, it would be interesting to update the model as
perceptron. However, although there are noticeable diﬀerences in the new samples appear. This type of update is called online learning. Thus,

 7
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 9. Confusion matrices of Darknet traﬃc detection.

 Table 7 Table 8
 Summary of attribute selection results. Characterization.

 # attributes Final validation 10-fold Attribute Relevance

 Detection 28 99.95% 99.91% col_91 0.7628
 Characterization 73 99.12% 98.94% col_49 0.1205
 Bwd Init Win Bytes 0.0418
 col_24 0.0408
in the context in which real-time traﬃc analysis is needed, MLP is the Idle Min 0.0141
best as it is the only one used in this work that allows an online update. col_96 0.0034
 Idle Std 0.0021
5.2. Feature importance analysis col_45 0.0018
 hour 0.0017
 Feature selection algorithms aim to select, according to some crite- Average Packet Size 0.0015
rion, a subset from the original set of problem attributes by removing Flow IAT Std 0.0011
irrelevant or redundant attributes in order to maintain the same, or
 col_1 0.0009
nearly the same, results (Villela et al., 2011). As the models analyzed in
 Idle Mean 0.0009
this work already have almost optimal performance, selecting attributes
 Flow IAT Min 0.0008
mainly reduces the computational cost of the model. This process also
 Fwd Packet Length Max 0.0008
aids us on the analyzes the most critical attributes of the problem.
 FIN Flag Count 0.0007
 In this work, we use the Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE)
method that works by recursively removing a ﬁxed number of attributes Src Port 0.0006

and retraining the model. We used stratiﬁed cross-validation with 10- FWD Init Win Bytes 0.0006
fold to assess the quality of the subsets generated by the RFE. Thus, the Fwd IAT Total 0.0005
subset with the highest accuracy and the lowest number of attributes Flow Duration 0.0004
is selected at the end of the execution. Due to the results, we show col_71 0.0004
in Section 5.1, we decided to use the Random Forest model as the in- Fwd Packets/s 0.0004
ternal classiﬁer of the RFE. Another reason for using RF is that it also
allows knowing the importance of attributes, called Gini importance,
after training the model. Thus, after selecting the features, we also analyze the essential attributes considering the new attributes inserted in sidered an approximation of the optimal subset of attributes. In Table 7
the dataset. As the purpose of this work is not to classify the traﬃc in we summarize the results. The attributes were selected based on the
real-time, there is no problem in keeping attributes that can only be 10-fold, and a validation set was also separated with 33% of the samobtained at the end of the ﬂow, such as the Flow Duration. ples with stratiﬁed random sampling. It is possible to see that there was
 Due to the random nature of RFE, each run may generate a subset of a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of attributes of the dataset withdiﬀerent attributes. Consequently, The resulting subset should be con- out any loss in classiﬁcation accuracy in both tasks. In the ﬁrst one, for

 8
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 10. Models confusion matrix for Darknet traﬃc detection.

instance, we obtained a reduction of 83% of the total attributes, and in performed a feature selection process with the RFE algorithm. We verthe traﬃc characterization, the number of attributes is reduced by 72%. iﬁed that the newly generated features are relevant for the prediction
 Tables 8 and 9 show the twenty-two most important attributes in of the models. This makes it evident that, in some cases, it is preferable
the sets selected by RFE in both classiﬁcation tasks. It is evident that in to process features that, at ﬁrst sight, have little relevance instead of
both sets, the attributes inserted by data pre-processing are in the ﬁrst just removing them. Furthermore, it was possible to obtain a signiﬁcant
place concerning their importance for the models’ classiﬁcation. As we reduction in the number of attributes of the original dataset without
can see, some of the new features have higher ranks than the original losing prediction performance.
features, for example, the features col_91 and col_ 76 have, respec- It is evident that simple machine learning algorithms, such as detively, relevances of 0.7628 and 0.4287 in their respective tasks. This cision tree-based ones, are good candidates for obtaining competitive
indicates that the new attributes may encode pieces of information that results for real-world problems. In this work, we observed that DT, RF,
are relevant to their tasks and that it is more advantageous to process and MLP obtained a result up to 13% higher than the model presented
the attributes than to remove them when they do not appear to be rel- in Gurdip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020), in addition to its eﬃciency
evant, as done in Gurdip Kaur and Habibi Lashkari (2020). being improved with a careful pre-processing of existing attributes.
 Through McNemar’s statistical test, it was possible to observe that all
6. Conclusion models obtained equivalent performance for the traﬃc detection task.
 However, for the traﬃc characterization, the best model was the DT,
 In this work, we approach the problems of detection and charac- and the MLP had the worst performance concerning the unbalanced
terization of traﬃc coming from Darknet through the use of learning labels in the dataset. Although MLP has the worst performance, it is the
models based on decision trees, being DT, RF, and MLP capable of clas- most suitable for applications that need to analyze traﬃc in real-time as
sifying new records of traﬃc with an accuracy greater than 97% for it can be updated as new examples arrive. In future work, it is necessary
each of the classiﬁcation tasks. to analyze techniques to improve the performance of MLP concerning
 New features were also extracted from the original dataset by search- unbalanced labels through methods, for example, that generate artiﬁcial
ing for information on the source and destination IPs of the traﬃc and data for the minority classes.
encoding them with hashing encoding. Another feature generated was As future research directions are possible to conduct experiments
the time when the traﬃc occurred by the timestamp included in the to classify ﬂows inside cryptographic tunnels. A candidate to help in
dataset. Our initial analysis showed the potential to contribute to the this way is the framework presented by Bovenzi et al. (2020). Another
eﬃciency of the trained models due to the trend of occurrence of in- way is to involve Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) as enrichment for data
ternet traﬃc common and Darknet, at diﬀerent times. Finally, we also analysis.

 9
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Fig. 11. Evaluation metrics for the models in polar coordinates.

 Fig. 12. Boxplot of accuracies estimated by 10-10-fold.

7. List of acronyms FTP File Transfer Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
 HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
DL Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 IMAP Internet Message Access Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
DPI Deep Packet Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 IP Internet Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2
DT Decision Tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 KNN K-Nearest Neighbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

 10
M. Coutinho Marim, P.V.B. Ramos, A.B. Vieira et al. Intelligent Systems with Applications 18 (2023) 200199

 Table 9 Data availability
 Traﬃc detection.
 Data will be made available on request.
 Attribute Relevance

 col_76 0.4287 References
 hour 0.1455
 Bwd Packet Length Min 0.1262 Bovenzi, G., Aceto, G., Ciuonzo, D., Persico, V., & Pescapé, A. (2020). A big data-enabled
 hierarchical framework for traﬃc classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Network Science
 Idle Max 0.0517
 and Engineering, 7(4), 2608–2619. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2020.3009832.
 Fwd Header Length 0.0338 Crotti, M., Dusi, M., Gringoli, F., & Salgarelli, L. (2007). Traﬃc classiﬁcation through sim-
 Idle Min 0.0335 ple statistical ﬁngerprinting. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 37(1),
 col_58 0.0312 5–16.
 Dahiru, T. (2008). P-value, a true test of statistical signiﬁcance? A cautionary note. Annals
 Packet Length Max 0.0245 of Ibadan Postgraduate Medicine, 6(1), 21–26.
 Flow Duration 0.0158 Dietterich, T. G. (1998). Approximate statistical tests for comparing supervised classiﬁcacol_75 0.0142 tion learning algorithms. Neural Computation, 10(7), 1895–1923.
 Draper-Gil, G., Lashkari, A. H., Mamun, M. S. I., & Ghorbani, A. A. (2016). Characterizacol_11 0.0128
 tion of encrypted and vpn traﬃc using time-related. In Proc. of the int. conference on
 col_21 0.0112 information systems security and privacy (ICISSP) (pp. 407–414).
 col_45 0.0107 Fedotenkova, M. (2016). Extraction of multivariate components in brain signals obtained
 during general anesthesia. Ph.D. thesis, Université de Lorraine.
 Src Port 0.0083
 Géron, A. (2019). Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow: Con-
 Dst Port 0.0078 cepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems. O’Reilly Media.
 Flow IAT Max 0.0053 Gurdip Kaur, A. R., & Habibi Lashkari, A. (2020). aDIDarknet: A contemporary approach
 Fwd Seg Size Min 0.0042 to detect and characterize the darknet traﬃc using deep image learning. In 10th
 international conference on communication and network security (ICCNS 2020).
 Flow IAT Min 0.0039 Han, J., Pei, J., & Kamber, M. (2011). Data mining: Concepts and techniques. Elsevier.
 col_91 0.0037 Lashkari, A. H., Draper-Gil, G., Mamun, M. S. I., & Ghorbani, A. A. (2017). Characteriza-
 FWD Init Win Bytes 0.0029 tion of tor traﬃc using time based features. In Proc. of the int. conference on information
 systems security and privacy (ICISSP) (pp. 253–262).
 Subﬂow Fwd Bytes 0.0029
 Lotfollahi, M., Siavoshani, M. J., Zade, R. S. H., & Saberian, M. (2020). Deep packet: A
 Fwd IAT Max 0.0026 novel approach for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation using deep learning. Soft Computing, 24(3), 1999–2012.
 Medeiros, D., Cunha Neto, H., Andreoni Lopez, M., Magalhaes, L., Silva, E., Vieira, A.,
MLP Multilayer Perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 Fernandes, N., & Mattos, D. (2019). Análise de dados em redes sem ﬁo de grande
 porte: Processamento em ﬂuxo em tempo real, tendências e desaﬁos. Minicursos do
P2P Peer-to-Peer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
 Simpósio Brasileiro de Redes de Computadores-SBRC, 2019, 142–195.
POP3 Post Oﬃce Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 Mirea, M., Wang, V., & Jung, J. (2019). The not so dark side of the darknet: A qualitative
RF Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 study. Security Journal, 32(2), 102–118.
RFE Recursive Feature Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Mogul, J., et al. (1985). Internet standard subnetting procedure.
SMTP Simple Mail Transfer Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 Montieri, A., Ciuonzo, D., Bovenzi, G., Persico, V., & Pescapé, A. (2020). A dive into
 the dark web: Hierarchical traﬃc classiﬁcation of anonymity tools. IEEE Transactions
SSH Secure Shell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
 on Network Science and Engineering, 7(3), 1043–1054. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.
TELNET TELNET Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2019.2901994.
Tor The Onion Router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 Parchekani, A., Naghadeh, S. N., & Shah-Mansouri, V. Classiﬁcation of traﬃc using neural
VPN Virtual Private Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 networks by rejecting: A novel approach in classifying vpn traﬃc. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2001.03665.
 Villela, S. M., Xavier, A. E., & Neto, R. F. (2011). Seleção de características com busca
CRediT authorship contribution statement ordenada e classiﬁcadores de larga margemCOPPE, programa de engenharia de sistemas e
 computação. Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
 Mateus Coutinho Marim: Proposal, experiments and text. Weinberger, K., Dasgupta, A., Langford, J., Smola, A., & Attenberg, J. (2009). Feature
 Paulo Vitor Barbosa Ramos: Proposal, experiments, and text. hashing for large scale multitask learning. In Proc. of the 26th annual international
 conference on machine learning (pp. 1113–1120).
 Alex B. Vieira: Review the methodology, the results of the experi-
 Wressnegger, C., Schwenk, G., Arp, D., & Rieck, K. (2013). A close look on n-grams in
ments, and the text. intrusion detection: Anomaly detection vs. classiﬁcation. In Proc. of the 2013 ACM
 Edelberto Franco Silva: Review the methodology, the results of the workshop on artiﬁcial intelligence and security (pp. 67–76).
experiments, and the text. Zheng, A., & Casari, A. (2018). Feature engineering for machine learning: Principles and
 techniques for data scientists. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
 Roberto M. de Oliveira: Review the methodology and evaluation
conduction.

Declaration of competing interest

 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.

 11