Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Information Fusion
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus

Full length article

DFMKE: A dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph embedding framework
for entity alignment
Jia Zhu a , Changqin Huang a ,∗, Pasquale De Meo b
a Zhejiang Normal University, China
b
 University of Messina, Italy

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Entity alignment is critical for multiple knowledge graphs (KGs) integration. Although researchers have made
Knowledge graph significant efforts to explore the relational embeddings between different KGs, existing approaches may not
Entity alignment describe multi-modal knowledge well in some tasks, e.g., entity alignment. In this paper, we propose DFMKE, a
Neural networks
 dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph embedding framework, to address entity alignment. We first devise
Multi-modal knowledge
 an early fusion method for fusing features of multi-modal entity representations of a KG. Simultaneously,
 multiple representations of various types of knowledge are generated independently by various techniques
 and fused by a low-rank multi-modal late fusion method. Finally, the outputs of early and late fusion methods
 are combined using a dual fusion scheme. DFMKE provides an ultimate fusion solution by leveraging the
 advantages of early and late fusion methods. Extensive experiments on two public datasets show that the
 DFMKE outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin achieving at least 10% more regard to
 Hits@n and MRR metrics.

1. Introduction embedding of two input KGs, SEA constructs and optimizes a suitable
 objective function that contains both labeled and unlabeled entities.
 Entity alignment is critical for integrating distinct knowledge graphs A further exciting approach is KECG (Knowledge Embedding model
(KGs) by connecting entities that refer to the same real-world object. and Cross-Graph model), proposed in [8]. The KECG approach for-
Because most KGs are created with a specific purpose, different KGs mulates the problem of aligning entities as an optimization problem
showcase different representations for the same concepts [1]. in which the objective function is the sum of two components. The
 Early studies on entity alignment primarily focus on attribute simi- first component of the objective function to optimize is related to the
larity [2,3], which frequently suffers from attribute heterogeneity, mak- so-called cross-graph model, which captures inner KG structures and
ing entity alignment error-prone [4]. Subsequently, other approaches alignments between entities in different KGs. The cross-graph model
to aligning entities in KGs required human intervention [5], or extra- applies an attention mechanism, and, in particular, it is built utilizing
resources [6], that is, a description of involved entities and their an extended GAT as an encoder: in this way, the KECG system can
relations. The methods above require many examples to work in down- ignore unimportant nodes. We observe that KECG uses both labeled
stream tasks correctly, but obtaining a sufficiently large number of and unlabeled examples in the cross-graph model construction process;
examples in real-life applications is challenging and expensive. More thus, it has to be regarded as a semi-supervised approach. The second
recently, some authors suggested semi-supervised models perform en- component of the objective function to optimize uses the TransE algotity alignment in KGs; that is, they sought new algorithmic approaches rithm to learn the embedding of entities and relations in different KGs,
which benefit from both labeled and unlabeled entities [7,8]. and then it aligns these representations into a unified vector space.
 For instance, [7] proposed the SEA (Semi-supervised Entity Align- SEA and KECG have achieved excellent performance on a range of
ment) framework. The SEA framework extends the popular TransE popular datasets, but they cannot handle multi-modal KGs: in other
embedding method [9] to deal with the degree difference of entities. words, KGs are often populated by heterogeneous data such as texts,
SEA, in particular, applies adversarial training to prevent entities with numbers, or images to describe the same piece of reality. Distinct
a similar degree of popularity are aggregated in the same region of knowledge forms play a crucial role as auxiliary data to complete KGs
the embedding space during the training step. After generating the and perform entity alignment; thus, we are strongly motivated to design

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: jiazhu@zjnu.edu.cn (J. Zhu), cqhuang@zju.edu.cn (C. Huang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2022.09.012
Received 23 July 2021; Received in revised form 11 September 2022; Accepted 14 September 2022
Available online 20 September 2022
1566-2535/© 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 Fig. 1. Illustration of entity alignment between multi-modal knowledge graphs.

new entity matching algorithms that can exploit their full potential • We prove the performance of the DFMKE by conducting expermulti-modal data. iments on two public multi-modal datasets, and we compared
 Fig. 1 provides an example of entity alignment for multi-modal KGs, DFMKE with several state-of-the-art entity alignment methods.
and it clarifies the peculiarities arising from the presence of multi- DFMKE works well even when no seed entities are available to
modal data in a KG. Here, the images associated with the entity ‘‘THU’’ initialize the training process. We also offer interpretable analysis
indicate that the type of this entity is ‘‘university’’ in this case. However, in our work by conducting ablation studies on early and late
leveraging multi-modal knowledge to perform entity alignment is not fusion modules’ contributions.
trivial. The inevitable heterogeneity among different modalities makes
the entity alignment task challenging. For example, in Fig. 1, it is The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly
difficult to conclude that the ‘‘Tsinghua University’’ entity in KG1 and discusses the main existing works; Section 3 introduces the technical
the ‘‘THU’’ entity in KG2 refer to the same object using only images or details of the work; Section 4 reports and comments on the experimentext information. tal results according to various benchmarks; Section 5 concludes this
 Recent studies [10–12] have put forth several models that combine paper.
multi-modal data from KGs into a joint embedding and enable the
alignment model to modify modality weights automatically. However, 2. Related literature
the approaches above did not consider modal correlation at the feature
level, and thus, these approaches may achieve poor results if multiple KGs are a powerful tool to efficiently organize, manage and retrieve
modalities are highly correlated. In addition, most existing works do a large body of information which is usually represented as a collection
not work well when seed entities, a list of labeled entities across KGs of RDF triplets of the form (head, predicate, tail) [13].
to initialize the training process, are not broadly available. Two core problems in the KG research area are: (a) Link Prediction,
 To address the issues above, we propose a dual fusion multi-modal i.e., we aim at completing triplets of the form (head?, predicate, tail)
knowledge graph embedding framework (DFMKE) for modeling the (in which the head is not specified) or (head, predicate, tail?) (in which
entity associations of multi-modal KGs and locating entities referring to the tail is not specified); (b) Entity Matching, i.e., given two KGs, we
the same real-world identity. Specifically, we propose an early fusion wish to find pair of entities (one from each KG) which correspond to
strategy to perform feature fusion among different modalities, which the same entity (and, thus, entities are related by a sameAs predicate).
can exploit correlations between low-level features of each modality. Our work mainly falls in two areas, entity alignment and multi-
Then, we discriminatively generate knowledge representations for each modal knowledge graphs; in what follows, we describe the main apmodality and design a late fusion method based on low-rank weight proaches related to ours.
decomposition to leverage knowledge from multiple modalities for the
entity alignment task. This work offers three contributions: 2.1. Entity alignment in knowledge graphs

 • To alleviate the inconsistency of original data in each modality, Entity alignment (also known as entity matching or entity resoluwe propose a dual multi-modal knowledge graph embedding tion) refers to the task of identifying pairs of entities from different
 framework called DFMKE that can incorporate the advantages of KGs that refer to the same object in the real world.
 both early fusion and late fusion techniques for entity alignment Early approaches to dealing with the entity alignment problem in
 with joint training. The main idea of DFMKE is to integrate KGs use discriminative features such as names, descriptive annotations,
 knowledge representations of multiple modalities from separate and relational structures in each KGs [3,6,14–16]. For instance, Raispaces to a shared spaces. mond et al. [15] proposed a method called LD-Mapper to utilize entity
 • We present a novel late fusion method for multi-modal fusion nearest neighbor similarity and string similarity. Later, it was suggested
 using modality-specific low-rank factors. This method can easily to use SILK to calculate string equality and similarity, numeric simcombine the output features from the early fusion method and ilarity, and other metrics to determine how similar entities are. The
 reduce the computational complexity caused by input transfor- linguistic and schematic heterogeneity between independently created
 mation into a tensor. KGs was the main challenge the systems above needed to deal with.

 112
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 More recently, embedding-based methods have been considered an the entity space and extract useful characteristics from images. (2) It
effective approach to handling the entity alignment problem [17–22]. applies an attention module to learn the representation of an entity,
Embedding-based methods map KGs onto vectors of a low-dimensional given the image instances associated with that entity, and (3) It applies
space so that the embedding space’s geometrical structure can reveal a translational-based method to learn a representation of triplets and
semantic relatedness between pairs of entities [9]. For example, Zhu images jointly.
et al. [23] proposed IPTransE, an iterative method through joint knowl- A further exciting approach to dealing with multi-modal KG is the
edge embedding. Li et al. [24] used the unaligned entities to improve MKBE (Multimodal Knowledge Base Embeddings) system discussed by
performance by being aware of the degree of difference in adversar- Pezeshkpour et al. [39]. The MKBE system applies a specific encoder
ial training. Concerning the lack of aligned entities for training, Pei for each type of data (for instance, bidirectional GRU to encode short
et al. [25] proposed a semi-supervised entity alignment method with texts [41] and the last hidden layer of VGG pre-trained network on
a cycle-consistency-based translation loss to leverage the unaligned Imagenet [42] coupled with by compact bilinear pooling [43] to ementity instead of only using labeled aligned entities. Later, Li et al. [26] bed images). Obtained embeddings are thus combined with learning
proposed a semi-supervised entity alignment method called KECG that embeddings of the entities and multi-modal data. Learned embeddings
utilized an extended graph attention network for encoding heteroge- (along with suitable different neural decoders) are at the basis of the
neous KGs and performing entity alignment by propagating alignment multi-modal imputation model, which can create missing multi-modal
information over the entire graphs. Their experiments proved that the values from information in the KG.
method does not require a sufficient number of aligned entities. How- Later, an MMKG (Multi-Modal Knowledge Graphs) dataset was proever, These methods have not been proven suitable for multi-modal posed in [44]: such a dataset is a collection of three knowledge graphs
KGs. to experimentally assess the effectiveness of link prediction and entity
 We can identify three main categories of approaches to performing alignment algorithms in multi-modal knowledge graphs. In the three
KG embedding, namely: proposed knowledge graphs, all entities are associated with numerical and visual data; the three knowledge graphs contain matchings
 1. Translational Models [9,27,28] between entities from different KGs’ sameAS relations, linking entities
 2. Semantic Matching Models [29–31] belonging to different knowledge graphs. Liu et al. [44] also extended
 3. Deep Models [32,33] the learning framework described in [45] and, thus, it can manage
 queries such as (head?, sameAs, tail) and (head, sameAs, tail?); such
 We refer to [34] for a detailed survey of existing approaches. Often, a task can be considered something in between the link prediction and
KGs contain multi-modal data (text, images, and so on). Thus, it is the entity matching problem.
convenient to consider these data as a tool to improve the accuracy Zhang et al. [12] introduced a multi-view KG embedding framework
of an approach to finding matching entities. In the next section, we for entity alignment. This framework learns entity embeddings from
introduce related literature on multi-modal KGs. three typical KG views by combining view-specific embeddings using
 three different algorithms. By creating entity representations for rela-
2.2. Multi-modal knowledge graphs tional, visual, and numerical knowledge and fusing these representations via a multi-modal knowledge fusion module, Chen et al. [10] sug-
 Holzinger et al. [35] recently observed that the direct involvement gested the MMEA approach to deal with the issue of entity alignment
of a human-in-the-loop can be enormously helpful when constructing in a multi-modal view.
a KG as an initial connector, especially because it bridges the gap Liu et al. [11] described EVA (Entity Visual Alignment), a system
to the increasingly important topic of explainability and causability. that uses images as pivots to align entities from different KGs. EVA
We can successfully map explainability with causability through KGs operates both in semi-supervised (i.e., it makes use of a small set of
if we can develop a human–AI interfaces that allow domain experts labels provided by humans) and unsupervised fashion (i.e., it creates
to ask questions interactively to gain deep insight into the underlying an initial seed dictionary by using the visual resemblance of entities).
independent factors of a result. However, to develop such a system, Therefore, both in semi-supervised and unsupervised environments,
there are many issues we need to resolve, such as link prediction and iterative learning (IL) is used to increase the number of training pivots.
entity matching problems. Most of the previous research work mainly In real-world datasets, the correlation between multiple modalities
uses the relational structure of a KG to address the link prediction can be significant; thereby, such a correlation is a precious tool for
and entity matching problems. Thus, they neglect crucial auxiliary embedding a multi-modal KG. Unfortunately, the approaches cited
information such as text, numerical values, and images associated with above do not consider the correlation between different modalities at
entities [36–38]. the feature level, and thus, they may be less effective in calculating
 To this end, an increasing number of approaches combine the embeddings.
relational structure of a KG with other types of information to better Unlike previous literature, our approach describes a method to
manage the link prediction and entity matching problems. KGs contain- perform multi-modal KG embedding consisting of two main phases. We
ing various data types such as numerical attributes, texts, and images call our approach DFMKE, dual fusion multi-modal knowledge graph
are often called multi-modal knowledge graphs [39]. One of the early embedding: as we will detail below, we perform feature fusion across
examples of multi-modal KG is the VisualGenome project [36]. The different modalities in the first phase (called early fusion). In this way,
main output of the VisualGenome project is a KG based on Word- each modality has its representation. Thus, in the second phase (called
Net, which provides annotations of categories, attributes, and relation late fusion), we consider a low-rank weight decomposition algorithm
types for each available image. In line with the work of [36], Onoro that enables us to benefit from knowledge associated with different
et al. [37] described IMAGEGRAPH as a publicly available KG in which modalities to perform entity alignment.
entities are associated with images. They considered a novel class of
queries to pose against a KG in which images are treated as arguments 3. Proposed framework
of the query itself.
 Xie et al. [38] suggest using rich information embodied in images in In this section, we first formulate the problem and then describe the
constructing a KG. Xie et al. [38] describes a method called IKRL, which technical details of the proposed framework. A multi-modal KG can be
consists of the following steps: (1) It applies a neural image encoder viewed as a tuple 𝐺 = (, , , ), where , , ,  denote the sets of
(based on the AlexNet neural network [40]) on every entity image as entities, images, relations and attributes, respectively. Given a pair of
input. The image encoder aims to generate picture representations in entities 𝑒𝑠 ∈ 𝑠 from source KG 𝐺𝑠 and 𝑒𝑡 ∈ 𝑡 from target KG 𝐺𝑡 , the

 113
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

task of entity alignment is to match entities describing the same object algorithm, which considers a relation to be a translation vector from
in different KGs. the head to the tail of an entity. We use the following scoring function
 To tackle the entity alignment task, we propose a framework called with the 𝐿2 -norm to calculate the structural similarity for a fact (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡):
DFMKE to learn a function 𝑓 that can estimate the similarity of 𝑒𝑠 and
𝑒𝑡 , and such a similarity should be high if 𝑒𝑠 and 𝑒𝑡 refer to the same ‖ ‖
 𝑓rel (𝐡, 𝐫, 𝐭) = − ‖𝐡(2) + 𝐫 − 𝐭 (2) ‖ . (5)
object. ‖ ‖
 As illustrated in Fig. 2, the DFMKE consists of two critical parts: Then we apply the logistic loss function to learn the relation emmulti-modal KG embeddings and dual multi-modal knowledge fusion. beddings 𝑒𝑚𝑏 as below:
In the following, we will introduce the technical details of these two ∑ ( ( ))
steps. 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑅 = log 1 + exp 𝛼𝑓rel (𝐡, 𝐫, 𝐭) , (6)
 (ℎ,𝑟,𝑡)∈ + ∪ −

3.1. Multi-modal KG embeddings where 𝛼 is the label of (ℎ, 𝑟, 𝑡) whose value is 1 or -1; the symbol
  + = 𝑎 ∪ 𝑏 denotes the set of positive relation facts in the source and
 In the multi-modal KG embeddings part, we generate the knowledge target KGs while  − denotes the set of negative samples obtained by
representations of entities from three data modalities, including a rela- replacing the head or tail entities of positive relation facts with random
tional triple with entity associations, visual data, and entity attributes, ones. The goal is to maximize the probability of the prediction being
for instance, numerical attributes and descriptions of entities. Besides, positive and the probability of the negative prediction. That is to say,
we model the structure of KG to capture both entity and relation prox- each sample prediction must obtain the maximum probability, and the
imity to compute the structural similarity of 𝐺𝑠 and 𝐺𝑡 . The following probability of all the samples after the prediction is multiplied to get the
sections will go into further detail about each knowledge embedding. maximum likelihood function. This loss function can guarantee better
 KG Structure Embedding. For KG structure embedding, we de- generalization ability with higher efficiency than the original TransE
sign an embedding model based on graph convolutional networks design.
(GCNs) [46] and our previous work [47]. Compared to traditional GCN- Attribute Embedding. According to [51], modeling attributes with
based methods for graph embedding, we treat the KG as an undirected deep neural networks might pollute entity representations due to noise
bipartite graph and use additional nodes to represent the relationships from neighbors. Thus, because in this work we focus on attribute
between two entity nodes. For example, assume a triplet (𝑒1 , 𝑟, 𝑒2 ), we embedding (including numerical attributes), we employ a feed-forward
assign relation vertices 𝑟1 and 𝑟2 for this triplet as (𝑒1 , 𝑟1 ) and (𝑒2 , 𝑟2 ). network for mapping attribute features into a low-dimensional space:
Each relation vertex will be assigned a unique one-hot representation.
 We then use the feature vector generated by Deepwalk [48] to 𝑒𝑚𝑏 = 𝐖 ⋅ 𝐀 + 𝐛 , (7)
represent each entity vertex and the unique one-hot representation for
 where 𝑒𝑚𝑏 is the attribute embedding; 𝐖 is the weight matrix and
each relation vertex as input channels of GCN on this newly constructed
 𝐛 is the bias vector. In this way, we can improve computing efficiency
graph. The relation vertices indicate how many neighbors with the
 with sound results.
same relation information exist between two entity vertices.
 After 𝑙 convolutional layers encoding, we can obtain a representa-
 3.2. Dual multi-modal knowledge fusion
tion learned from the graph, including the information of entity vertices
and relation vertices. Thus, each layer of GCN can be written as a
non-linear function: We introduce an efficient dual fusion scheme to incorporate the
 ( ) advantages of features combination and outputs of embedding models
𝐻 (𝑙+1) = 𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 , (1) from different modalities. To describe our dual fusion scheme approach,
 we begin by observing that multi-modal data sources have been exwhere 𝐻 (0) is the input matrix, 𝐻 (𝐿) is the output matrix, 𝐿 is the
 tensively used in Machine Learning applications: in fact, each data
number of layers, and 𝑀 is the adjacency matrix of KG. We then set
 source (or modality) provides a different type of information about
the following propagation rule:
 the same piece of reality and, if we were able to integrate single
 ( ) ( )
𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 𝑀𝐻 (𝑙) 𝑊 (𝑙) , (2) modalities effectively, then we could reduce the impact of noisy data.
 The ultimate purpose of multi-modal data fusion approaches is to
where 𝑊 (𝑙) is a weight matrix for the 𝑙th network layer, and ReLU is
 design more accurate and robust-to-noise Machine Learning algorithms.
the activation function. Note that the multiplication by 𝑀 only sums
 A critical problem in multi-modal data fusion is the correlation
up all attributes of all neighbor vertices, not the vertex itself. Therefore,
 among different modalities: broadly speaking, the term correlation
we need to add the identity matrix 𝐼 to 𝑀, and Eq. (2) is updated as
 specifies how one input modality varies if another modality varies
follows [46]:
 ( 1 ) too. In many situations, the correlation between modalities provides
 ( ) 1
𝑓 𝐻 (𝑙) , 𝑀 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 𝐷̂ − 2 𝑀 ̂ 𝐷̂ − 2 𝐻 (𝑙) 𝑊 (𝑙) , (3) essential clues to deciding how to fuse two modalities [52].
 Feature correlation is, in our opinion, extremely important to adwhere 𝑀 ̂ = 𝑀 + 𝐼 and 𝐷̂ is the diagonal vertex degree matrix of 𝑀.̂ dress the entity alignment problem for multi-modal KGs: two entities
As the KG structure embedding 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑘𝑔 , we use the output of the final in two independent multi-modal KGs could be provided with a small
layer. amount of data, each encoded in a particular form (e.g., texts in the
 Visual Knowledge Embedding. For image embedding, we use a first KG and images in the second KG). If we could capture correlations
pre-trained RESNET model [49] as the feature extractor for all images among features, we could cleverly perform the fusion task, and thus,
and use the output of the last layer to represent the image. Compared we could be more confident in deciding if the two entities represent
to the other classical model VGG16 [50], RESNET proposed a residual the same thing.
network to solve the degradation problem in a deep network. The The above observations motivate us to design a fusion scheme
extracted feature is processed using the equation below to obtain the that can capture correlations between modalities. We recall that the
image embedding 𝑒𝑚𝑏 : fusion method can be roughly classified into early and late fusion,
 and we recall that early fusion methods are particularly appealing in
𝑒𝑚𝑏 = 𝐖 ⋅ RESNET() + 𝐛 . (4)
 capturing correlations between modalities; due to these reasons, our
 Relation Embedding. A KG’s fundamental component is its rela- fusion scheme combines an early with a late fusion method to achieve
tions, which connect the entities. We use the well-known TransE [9] the best of the two methods.

 114
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 Fig. 2. Overview of DFMKE Framework.

 Specifically, we first adopt early fusion to combine various features
of multi-modal data. In light of the observations above, an early fusion
step aims to exploit correlations between low-level features of each
modality. Though this step cannot make full use of the complementary
between modalities, it can alleviate the inconsistency between the
original data in each modality which is beneficial for later steps.
 After that, late fusion is carried out to fuse the early fusion module’s
output and the multi-modal representation computed via the classical
low-rank multi-modal fusion model (LMF), which has been proved
efficient to leverage knowledge from multiple modalities [53].
 In this section, we will give the technical details about the early and
late fusion methods and their combination strategy.
 Early Fusion. Before feeding into a model, early fusion is combining feature representations at the input level, which can better capture
the relationship among features [54]. We fuse multiple features for
various data modalities in this work by using standard early fusion
techniques. To combine learned feature representation for images from
the final fully-connected layer of the RESNET with features from the
other modalities, we create a straightforward fully connected neural
network model (NN) as shown in Fig. 3. The early fusion module maps Fig. 3. Early fusion model architecture.
heterogeneous features in a shared space. After that, the output vector
ℎ𝑒 of the NN will be combined with the output representation of LMF
for late fusion. Tensor representation is one of the successful methods for multi-
 Late Fusion. As we mentioned earlier, early fusion can only ensure modal fusion. Prior to calculating the outer product, by adding 1s to the
data consistency between different modalities but cannot guarantee the uni-modal representations, the input tensor  formed by the uni-modal
 ⨂𝑀 𝑑𝑚 [56], where
complementary between data features. Based on these premises, we representation is computed as  = 𝑚=1 𝑧𝑚 , 𝑧𝑚 ∈ R
 ⨂𝑀
introduce the late fusion module in the proposed framework, which ad- 𝑚=1 denotes the tensor outer product over a set of vectors indexed
dresses the complementary problem by fully exploiting the correlations by 𝑚. Then,  ∈ R𝑑1 ×𝑑2 ×⋯𝑑𝑀 can be integrated as an order-𝑀 tensor
among data features. with the weight  using a linear layer as ℎ =  ⋅  + 𝑏. However,
 Late fusion combines outputs of models for different modalities to the weight tensor’s number of parameters will grow exponentially as
mine the complementary [55]. The multi-modal fusion can be formu- well, requiring a lot of computation and putting the model in danger
lated as a multi-linear function𝑓 ∶ 𝑉1 × 𝑉2 × ⋯ × 𝑉𝑀 → 𝐻, where of over-fitting.
 By breaking down the weight into a collection of low-rank factors,
𝑉1 , 𝑉2 , … , 𝑉𝑀 are the vector spaces of input modalities and 𝐻 is the
 the LMF solves the computational issues outlined above. Using the fact
output vector space. ⨂
 { }𝑀 that  = 𝑀 𝑚=1 𝑧𝑚 , the computation for the vector representation ℎ𝑙 can
 Given a set of vector representations, 𝑧𝑚 𝑚=1 , which are encoding
 be simplified as:
uni-modal information of the 𝑀 different modalities, the goal of multi- [ 𝑟 ]
modal fusion is to combine the uni-modal representations into one ⋀𝑀 ∑
 ℎ𝑙 = 𝐰(𝑖)
 𝑚 ⋅ 𝑧𝑚 , (8)
compact multi-modal representation. 𝑚=1 𝑖=1

 115
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 ⋀
where 𝑀 𝑚=1 denotes the element-wise product over a sequence of 3.3. Training details
tensors, 𝑟 is the rank of the tensor and 𝐰(𝑖) 𝑚 is the corresponding lowrank factors for each modality 𝑚. (Compared to the)original computation We design a training stage that learns all multi modalities embed-
 ∑𝑟 ⨂𝑀 (𝑖) dings and iteratively optimizes the shared space learning during an
method in the LMF, where ℎ𝑙 = 𝑖=1 𝑚=1 𝐰𝑚 ⋅ , in the proposed
framework, we may compute ℎ𝑙 without actually generating the tensor epoch. To regularize embedding vectors, we limit all entity embeddings
 from the input representations 𝑧𝑚 by making use of the parallel with 𝐿2 normalization. The parameters are initialized with Xavier inidecomposition of both  and  in this simplification (Eq. (8)). In tializer, and the loss functions are optimized with Adadelta to simplify
 the calculation. Every embedding has dimensions set to 100. We use the
doing so, we eliminate the weight-lifting associated with computing the
 mini-batch technique with a 1000 batch size. All learning rates were
massive input tensors  and .
 set to 0.01, except shared space learning, which was set to 0.001. In
 To achieve the complementary of heterogeneous data, LMF imaddition, 200 epochs are the maximum allowed.
plicit access to high-dimensional tensors to obtain the data common-
 On top of the 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 for all entities, we estimate the similarity of all
alities of different modalities in a high-dimensional space while the
 bi-graph entity pairs and align them using a loss function 𝐿𝑒𝑎 because
unimodal representations are integrated into a compact multi-modal
 the similarity should be high if two entities refer to the same object
representation.
 (the far right of Fig. 2).
 Moreover, in this work, as we tend to perform joint training with
 Let 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑠𝐹 and 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑡𝐹 denote embeddings of the source and target
the early fusion module further, the computation is still heavy if 𝑟 is too entities 𝑠 ⟨ and 𝑡 ⟩respectively. We compute their cosine similarity
big. Therefore, we update Eq. (8) by swapping the order of summation matrix 𝐒 = 𝐅𝑠𝐽 , 𝐅𝑡𝐽 ∈ R|𝑎 |×|t | , where the cosine similarity between
and the element-wise product as below: the 𝑖th item in 𝑠 and the 𝑗th entity in 𝑡 is represented by each entry
 [𝑀 ]
 ∑𝑟 ⋀[ ] 𝑆𝑖𝑗 . The loss function of the whole entity alignment framework 𝐿𝑒𝑎 can
 ℎ𝑙 = 𝐰(1)
 𝑚 , 𝐰(2)
 𝑚 , … , 𝐰(𝑟)
 𝑚 ⋅ 𝑧
 ̂ 𝑚 be formulated as below [57]:
 𝑖=1 𝑚=1 𝑖
 (9) ∑ (1 ( ∑ )
 𝑒𝑎 = 𝑁1 𝑁 𝑖=1 𝛼 log 1 + 𝑚≠𝑖 𝑒
 𝛼S𝑚𝑖 +
 ∏𝑀
 1 ( ∑ ) ( )) , (11)
 s.t. 𝑟≤ 𝑚=1
 ∑𝑀 , 𝛼
 log 1 + 𝑛≠𝑖 𝑒𝛼𝑆𝑖𝑛 − log 1 + 𝛽𝐒𝑖𝑖
 𝑚=1

where [⋅]𝑖 indicates the 𝑖th slice of a matrix, the Restriction can ensure where 𝛼 and 𝛽 are temperature scales; 𝑁 is the number of seeds.
the decomposition exists in an acceptable range to reduce the compu- Before obtaining the 4096-dimensional embeddings for each entity, we
tation. In other words, it allows us to early stop the calculation, thus train RESNET image embeddings. We then train relation embedding
achieving relevant computational savings. This change also allows us to from TransE for all triplets. At each training step, the parameters are
 updated by 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑅 , the loss function of dual fusion scheme 𝑒𝑙 and
parameterize the model with order-𝑀 tensors rather than a collection
 𝑒𝑎 . Once the training process converges, we perform alignment by
of vectors, which means we can do the calculation in a parallel fashion
 the nearest-neighbor search based on 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 . Due to the convexity and
in practice is also beneficial from a computational standpoint.
 additive nature of the functions to be optimized, we employ stochastic
 Combination. We then design a strategy to combine ℎ𝑙 with ℎ𝑒
 gradient descent (SGD) to optimize all of the aforementioned loss
from the early fusion model. This combination strategy participates in
 functions. In other words, the SGD can converge to the optimal solution
the joint training of early fusion and late fusion modules. In this way,
 using a single iteration to renew the model parameters, significantly
multiple modalities benefit from each other by inducing an orthogonal
 accelerating the convergence rate.
mapping matrix from each embedding space to shared space. Let 𝐇𝑒
and 𝐇𝑙 be the combined embedding matrices obtained by storing 4. Experiments
vectors ℎ𝑒 and ℎ𝑙 for each entity, respectively. The goal is to maximize
the agreement between 𝐇𝑒 and 𝐇𝑙 in a unified embedding space to In this part, we assess DFMKE using two real-world datasets and
obtain the final multi-modal embeddings 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 . The loss function 𝐿𝑒𝑙 show how it may be used to attain cutting-edge performance by utilizto learn 𝑒𝑚𝑏𝐹 is designed as follows: ing multi-modal knowledge in the entity alignment task.
 ∑𝑁 ( )
 ‖ 𝑖 (𝑖) ‖2 ‖ ‖2 4.1. Experimental settings
𝑒𝑙 = ‖𝐇𝑒 − 𝐇𝑙 𝐙(𝑖) ‖ + ‖𝐈 − 𝐙(𝑖)⊤ 𝐙(𝑖) ‖ , (10)
 ‖ ‖𝐹 ‖ ‖𝐹
 𝑖=1
 Datasets. We use two public multi-modal datasets in the experiwhere 𝑁 is the number of entities, 𝐙(𝑖) serves as the mapping from the
 ments, FB15K-DB15K and FB15K-YAGO15K [44]. The FB15K subset
𝑖th entity embedding space to the shared space for entity alignment in
 was extracted from the Freebase knowledge base as a representative
the next step.
 subset. We chose DB15K from DBpedia and YAGO15K from YAGO to
 We observe that the loss function 𝑒𝑙 is additive, and, in addition,
 keep an approximate entity number aligned with FB15K. The statistics
each term appearing in the sum is, itself, the sum of the squares of two
 for multi-modal data are shown in Table 1.
norms. Consequently, the function 𝑒𝑙 is convex because it is the sum Evaluation Metrics. To calculate the similarity between two entiof convex functions. As described earlier, the early fusion module pro- ties, we use cosine similarity. We use three popular indicators, Hits@n,
duces a vector (ℎ𝑒 ) that ensures data consistency in different modalities, MR, and MRR, as metrics to evaluate model performance. Hits@n
while the late fusion model produces a vector (ℎ𝑙 ) that ensures data denotes the rate at which correct entities rank in the top 𝑛 entities based
is complementary across different modalities. With this strategy, the on the similarity computation. The terms MR and MRR in the parameter
fusion of low-level features and high-dimensional tensors mapped back stand for the mean rank and mean reciprocal rank of correct entities,
to a low-dimensional output vector space is implemented, which means respectively.
the information of modal correlations at the feature level is employed. Comparative Methods. We have chosen various types of state-of-
It is worth observing that Eq. (10) depends only on matrices 𝐇𝑖𝑒 and 𝐇𝑙(𝑖) the-art models to demonstrate the performance of the DFMKE framefor 𝑖 ∈ [1, 𝑁] and, thus, it does not require to specify in advance seed work, including two typical translation-based methods, TransE [9], and
entities, that is pairs of entities from two KGs which represent the same IPTransE [23]; two straightforward late fusion methods, MMKG [44],
entity. Consequently, Eq. (10) defines a measure of similarity between and MMEA [10]; and two recently proposed methods, that is Mulentities that can be computed in a fully unsupervised fashion. tiKE [12], and EVA [11].
 From a practical standpoint, we have many efficient options to We employ their reported results for those methods using the same
optimize 𝑒𝑙 , and to this extent, the stochastic gradient descent method datasets. To replicate their experiments, we followed the same hyis the most convenient strategy. In the following subsection, we give perparameters setting for other methods mentioned in the original
details on how the training phase was performed. papers.

 116
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

Table 1
Statistics of multi-modal datasets.
 Datasets Entities Relations Attributes Relational triples
 FB15K 14951 1345 116 592213
 DB15K 12842 279 225 89197
 YAGO15K 15404 32 7 122886

 Fig. 7. Ablation study on FB15K-YAGO15K dataset (MRR).

 baseline methods on both datasets. For example, DFMKE exceeds 10%
 more than EVA, which is the second-best method regarding the Hits@n
 indicator on both datasets. Regarding the MRR indicator, DFMKE
 is the only model that can exceed 0.5 on both FB15K-DB15K and
 Fig. 4. Ablation study on FB15K-DB15K dataset (Hits@10). FB15K-YAGO15K datasets.
 Additionally, we found that multi-modal knowledge outperforms
 those that just use one modality, e.g., TransE and IPTransE, the worstperforming models that use only relation knowledge. The experimental
 findings demonstrated that DFMKE is more successful for multi-modal
 knowledge than other fusion approaches.
 Analysis of Unsupervised Entity Alignment. This task intends
 to evaluate the performance of the DFMKE to align entities without
 seed entities. As found in [58], seed entities are vital to learning KG
 embeddings from relation facts. However, annotated seeds may not
 be widely available across KG for entity alignment. Therefore, we
 considered a variant of our approach – called ‘‘DFMKE w/o seed’’ – in
 which we assumed no seed entities were available. We compared the
 DFMKE w/o seed method with the well-known semi-supervised entity
 alignment method KECG [26] we already introduced in Section 2 on
 multi-modal KGs. For fairness, we adjusted the architecture of KECG to
 Fig. 5. Ablation study on FB15K-DB15K dataset (MRR).
 handle the situation that there are no seed entities.
 As shown in Table 3, DFMKE w/o seed still achieves acceptable
 results, which means the framework does not heavily rely on seed
 alignment as supervision. At the same time, the relation and attribute
 views can benefit from early and late fusion during training, even if no
 seed entity alignment is given. This experiment reveals that DFMKE has
 good robustness and can alleviate seed alignment reliance. As expected,
 the HITS@10 and MRR scores achieved by the DFMKE w/o seed
 approach degrade compared with the DFMKE model in both FB15K-
 DB15K and FB15K-YAGO15K datasets, but such a worsening appears
 to be limited. Consequently, we can conclude that lack of seed entities
 has a negligible impact on the accuracy of the DFMKE approach.
 We also point out that DFMKE w/o seed achieves better performance than that observed for KECG in both Hits@10 and MRR metrics;
 this behavior depends on the fact that the relation and attribute views
 Fig. 6. Ablation study on FB15K-YAGO15K dataset (Hits@10).
 can benefit from early and late fusion during training, even if no
 seed entity alignment is given. Therefore, we can conclude that the
 experiment presented in this section shows that the DFMKE approach
 displays good robustness and slightly relies on seed entities.
4.2. Experimental results
 Ablation Study. To further validate the effectiveness of DFMKE,
 we design two variants for the ablation study, namely DFMKE-E and
 To compare the outcomes of each model, we divide up the datasets. DFMKE-L. DFMKE-E is a variant of DFMKE using the early fusion
We use 20% of each dataset’s data as training sets because this setting method only, and DFMKE-L is a variant of DFMKE using the late fusion
can better demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of all methods, method only.
as many existing works prove. The remaining data are treated as testing In this experiment, we further evaluate DFMKE, DFMKE-E, and
sets. DFMKE-L with different test splits on FB15K-DB15K and FB15K-
 Performance Comparison. On the FB15K-DB15K and FB15K- YAGO15K datasets using Hit@10 and MRR indicators. For instance,
YAGO15K datasets, Table 2 provides all model results with 20% align- 80% means we use the 80% dataset as the training dataset, and the
ment information. In general, the proposed DFMKE outperforms all rest of 20% is the test dataset.

 117
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

 Table 2
 Results of unsupervised entity alignment.
 Models FB15K-DB15K FB15K-YAGO15K
 Hits@1 Hits@10 MR MRR Hits@1 Hits@10 MR MRR
 TransE [9] 7.81 24.11 442.47 0.13 6.36 20.25 522.54 0.11
 IPTransE [23] 3.99 17.27 387.51 0.08 3.08 14.43 522.23 0.07
 MMKG [44] 12.01 25.62 148.82 0.17 10.91 24.14 168.88 0.15
 MMEA [10] 26.48 54.11 124.81 0.36 23.39 48.11 147.44 0.32
 MultiKE [12] 28.82 56.35 110.85 0.42 28.55 50.25 129.65 0.39
 EVA [11] 30.25 59.85 99.65 0.48 32.68 58.65 110.56 0.45
 DFMKE 33.82 65.45 89.66 0.55 36.78 64.55 102.53 0.51

 Table 3 public datasets showed the robustness and efficiency of the suggested
 Results of entity alignment. approach for multi-modal entity alignment, which significantly beat
 FB15K-DB15K FB15K-YAGO15K state-of-the-art baseline techniques. In the future, we plan to investigate
 Hits@10 MRR Hits@10 MRR the adaptation of the DFMKE for cross-lingual entity alignment in
 KECG [26] 60.11 0.48 58.55 0.46 multi-modal KGs.
 DFMKE w/o seed 63.21 0.53 62.75 0.49
 DFMKE 65.45 0.55 64.55 0.51 Declaration of competing interest

 Table 4 The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela-
 Ablation study of DFMKE based on 20% alignment data. tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
 FB15K-DB15K FB15K-YAGO15K Zhu JIA reports financial support was provided by National Natural
 Hits@10 MRR Hits@10 MRR Science Foundation of China.
 w/o structure 40.85 0.41 40.68 0.38
 w/o image 62.33 0.52 60.32 0.47 Data availability
 w/o relation 61.45 0.51 59.78 0.46
 w/o attribute 61.66 0.52 59.93 0.47 Data will be made available on request.

 Acknowledgments
 As illustrated in Figs. 4 to 7, DFMKE outperforms DFMKE-E and
DFMKE-L, revealing that DFMKE provides insights to take advantage This work was supported by the Key Laboratory of Intelligent Eduof multi-modal knowledge compared to early or late fusion modules. cation Technology and Application of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Nor-
Moreover, early fusion complements the information absence of feature mal University, Zhejiang, China, the Key Research and Development
 Program of Zhejiang Province (No. 2021C03141), and the National Natcorrelation to improve its overall performance through its performance
 ural Science Foundation of China under Grant (62077015, 61877020
is much worse than late fusion. Finally, we discover that the perforand 62037001).
mance of all three models on both indicators improved if the amount
of training data increased.
 References
 In summary, all the above experiments demonstrate that the DFMKE
framework can locate entities referencing the same real-world identity [1] D. Wijaya, P.P. Talukdar, T. Mitchell, PIDGIN: ontology alignment using web text
from various KGs by fully utilizing multi-modal knowledge to reach as interlingua, in: ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
cutting-edge performance for entity alignment. Management, 2013, pp. 589–598.
 Last but not least, we also perform experiments to verify the impact [2] J. Bleiholder, F. Naumann, Data fusion, ACM Comput. Surv. 41 (1) (2009) 1–41.
 [3] J. Volz, C. Bizer, M. Gaedke, G. Kobilarov, Discovering and maintaining links
of each modality on the DFMKE. As shown in Table 4, we have ‘‘w/o on the web of data, in: Proceedings of International Semantic Web Conference,
x’’ methods in this experiment, where ‘‘x’’ represents the modality we 2009, pp. 650–665.
remove. For instance, according to the results, dropping KG structure [4] B.D. Trisedya, J. Qi, R. Zhang, Entity alignment between knowledge graphs
embedding decreases Hit@10 from 65.45 to 40.85 on FB15K-DB15K, using attribute embeddings, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, 2019, pp. 297–304.
which means the modality remains the most important for our frame- [5] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, F. Suchanek, Yago3: A knowledge base from mulwork. The other three modalities are of equal importance, around tilingual wikipedias, in: 7th Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems
a 4%–7% drop for each modality on both datasets. Note that we Research, CIDR Conference, 2014.
initialize the same weight for each modality at the beginning of the [6] W. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Qu, A self-training approach for resolving object coreference
 on the semantic web, in: Proc. of the 20th International Conference on World
training. This experiment proves the effectiveness and innovation of our
 Wide Web, Hyderabad, India, 2011, pp. 87–96.
work, especially in the fusion part, as the proposed dual multi-modal [7] S.C. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X.L. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via
knowledge graph embedding framework can leverage knowledge from knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: Proceedings
multiple modalities to achieve better results for entity alignment. of the World Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136.
 [8] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity alignment
 via joint knowledge embedding model and cross-graph model, in: Proceedings
5. Conclusions of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
 and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
 In this paper, we propose a dual fusion multi-modal KG embedding EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 2723–2732.
 [9] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. García-Duran, J. Weston, O. Yakhnenko, Translatframework that integrates several representations of various types of ing embeddings for modeling multi-relational data, in: Proceedings of Neural
information based on knowledge embedding for the entity alignment Information Processing Systems, 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
task. We first introduce an early fusion method for fusing features of [10] L. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Wang, T. Xu, Z. Wang, E. Chen, MMEA: Entity alignment for
multi-modal entities. Moreover, an efficient late fusion method using multi-modal knowledge graph, in: Proceedings of International Conference on
 Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management, 2020, pp. 134–146.
modality-specific low-rank factors was designed through shared space [11] F. Liu, M. Chen, D. Roth, N. Collier, Visual pivoting for (unsupervised) entity
learning with the output vectors from early fusion to migrate fea- alignment, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
tures under different knowledge spaces. Extensive experiments on two 2021, pp. 1–9.

 118
J. Zhu et al. Information Fusion 90 (2023) 111–119

[12] Q. Zhang, Z. Sun, W. Hu, M. Chen, L. Guo, Y. Qu, Multi-view knowledge [35] A. Holzinger, B. Malle, A. Saranti, B. Pfeifer, Towards multi-modal causability
 graph embedding for entity alignment, in: Proceedings of the International Joint with graph neural networks enabling information fusion for explainable AI, Inf.
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019, pp. 5429–5435. Fusion 71 (2021) 28–37.
[13] G. Klyne, Resource description framework (RDF): Concepts and abstract syntax, [36] R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata, J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y.
 2004, http://www.w3.org/tr/2004/rec-rdf-concepts-20040210/. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D.A. Shamma, et al., Visual genome: Connecting language
[14] A. El-Roby, A. Aboulnaga, ALEX: Automatic link exploration in linked data, in: and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations, Int. J. Comput. Vis.
 Proc. of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of 123 (1) (2017) 32–73.
 Data, Melbourne, Australia, 2015, pp. 1839–1853. [37] D. Oñoro-Rubio, M. Niepert, A. García-Durán, R. González-Sánchez, R.J. López-
[15] Y. Raimond, C. Sutton, M. Sandler, Automatic interlinking of music datasets on Sastre, Representation learning for visual-relational knowledge graphs, 2017,
 the semantic web, in: Proceedings of LBOW, 2008, pp. 1–8. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02314.
[16] F.M. Suchanek, S. Abiteboul, P. Senellart, PARIS: probabilistic alignment of [38] R. Xie, Z. Liu, H. Luan, M. Sun, Image-embodied knowledge representation learnrelations, instances, and schema, Proc. VLDB Endow. 5 (3) (2011) 157–168. ing, in: Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
[17] M. Chen, Y. Tian, M. Yang, C. Zaniolo, Multilingual knowledge graph embeddings 2017, pp. 3140–3146.
 for cross-lingual knowledge alignment, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Sixth International [39] P. Pezeshkpour, L. Chen, S. Singh, Embedding multimodal relational data for
 Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Melbourne, Australia, 2017, pp. knowledge base completion, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
 1511–1517. Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018, pp. 3208–3218.
[18] Y. Cao, Z. Liu, C. Li, Z. Liu, J. Li, T. Chua, Multi-channel graph neural [40] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton, ImageNet classification with deep
 network for entity alignment, in: Proc. of the 57th Conference of the Association convolutional neural networks, in: Proc. of the International Conference on
 for Computational Linguistics, ACL, Association for Computational Linguistics, Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS 2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United
 Florence, Italy, 2019, pp. 1452–1461. States, 2012, pp. 1106–1114.
[19] M. Chen, Y. Tian, K. Chang, S. Skiena, C. Zaniolo, Co-training embeddings of [41] P. Verga, D. Belanger, E. Strubell, B. Roth, A. McCallum, Multilingual relation
 knowledge graphs and entity descriptions for cross-lingual entity alignment, extraction using compositional universal schema, in: Proc. of TheConference of
 in: Proc. of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
 Intelligence, IJCAI 2018, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 3998–4004. Human Language Technologies, The Association for Computational Linguistics,
[20] S. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via San Diego, California, USA, 2016, pp. 886–896.
 knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: The World [42] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-
 Wide Web Conference, WWW 2019, San Francisco, CA, USA, May 13-17, 2019, scale image recognition, in: Proc. of the International Conference on Learning
 ACM, 2019, pp. 3130–3136. Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, California, USA, 2015.
[21] Z. Sun, W. Hu, Q. Zhang, Y. Qu, Bootstrapping entity alignment with knowledge [43] Y. Gao, O. Beijbom, N. Zhang, T. Darrell, Compact bilinear pooling, in: Proc.
 graph embedding, in: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
 Artificial Intelligence, 2018, pp. 4396–4402. 317–326.
[22] Y. Wu, X. Liu, Y. Feng, Z. Wang, R. Yan, D. Zhao, Relation-aware entity [44] Y. Liu, H. Li, A. Garcia-Duran, M. Niepert, D. Onoro-Rubio, D.S. Rosenalignment for heterogeneous knowledge graphs, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Eighth blum, MMKG: multi-modal knowledge graphs, in: Proceedings of the European
 International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, Semantic Web Conference, 2019, pp. 459–474.
 China, pp. 5278–5284. [45] A. García-Durán, M. Niepert, KBlrn: End-to-end learning of knowledge base
[23] H. Zhu, R. Xie, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Iterative entity alignment via joint knowledge representations with latent, relational, and numerical features, in: Proc. of the
 embeddings, in: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Thirty-Fourth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2018,
 Intelligence, 2017, pp. 4258–4264. Monterey, California, USA, 2018, pp. 372–381.
[24] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity alignment [46] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-seupervised classification with graph convolutional
 via knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: networks, 2017, pp. 1–14.
 Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136. [47] J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, M. Yang, G.P.C. Fung, Y. Tang, A semi-supervised model for
[25] S. Pei, L. Yu, R. Hoehndorf, X. Zhang, Semi-supervised entity alignment via knowledge graph embedding, Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 34 (2019) 1–20.
 knowledge graph embedding with awareness of degree difference, in: The World [48] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, S. Skiena, Deepwalk: Online learning of social represen-
 Wide Web Conference, 2019, pp. 3130–3136. tations, in: Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
[26] C. Li, Y. Cao, L. Hou, J. Shi, J. Li, T.-S. Chua, Semi-supervised entity Discovery and Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710.
 alignment via joint knowledge embedding model and cross-graph model, in: [49] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition,
 EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019, pp. 2723–2732. in: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
[27] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, Z. Chen, Knowledge graph embedding by translating 2016, pp. 770–778.
 on hyperplanes, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial [50] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
 Intelligence, AAAI Press, Québec City, Québec, Canada, 2014, pp. 1112–1119. image recognition, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Learning
[28] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Y. Liu, X. Zhu, Learning entity and relation embeddings Representations, 2015, pp. 1–14.
 for knowledge graph completion, in: Proc. of the Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference [51] H.-W. Yang, Y. Zou, P. Shi, W. Lu, J. Lin, X. Sun, Aligning cross-lingual entities
 on Artificial Intelligence, January, AAAI Press, Austin, Texas, USA, 2015, pp. with multi-aspect information, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
 2181–2187. Methods in Natural Language Processing and the International Joint Conference
[29] B. Yang, W. Yih, X. He, J. Gao, L. Deng, Embedding entities and relations on Natural Language Processing, 2019, pp. 4422–4432.
 for learning and inference in knowledge bases, in: Proc. of the International [52] P. Atrey, M. Hossain, A.E. Saddik, M.S. Kankanhalli, Multimodal fusion for
 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, 2015. multimedia analysis: a survey, Multimedia Syst. 16 (6) (2010) 345–379.
[30] M. Nickel, L. Rosasco, T.A. Poggio, Holographic embeddings of knowledge [53] Z. Liu, Y. Shen, V.B. Lakshminarasimhan, P.P. Liang, A.B. Zadeh, L.P. Morency,
 graphs, in: Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli- Efficient low-rank multimodal fusion with modality-specific factors, in: Proceedgence, February 12-17, 2016, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, AAAI Press, 2016, pp. ings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018,
 1955–1961. pp. 2247–2256.
[31] Z. Sun, Z. Deng, J. Nie, J. Tang, Rotate: Knowledge graph embedding by [54] Z. zhong Lan, L. Bao, S.-I. Yu, W. Liu, A.G. Hauptmann, Multimedia classification
 relational rotation in complex space, in: 7th International Conference on Learning and event detection using double fusion, Multimedia Tools Appl. 71 (1) (2014)
 Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2019. 333–347.
[32] B. Shi, T. Weninger, Proje: Embedding projection for knowledge graph com- [55] C.G.M. Snoek, M. Worring, A.W.M. Smeulders, Early versus late fusion in
 pletion, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, semantic video analysis, in: ACM International Conference Multimedia, 2005,
 2017. pp. 399–402.
[33] T. Dettmers, P. Minervini, P. Stenetorp, S. Riedel, Convolutional 2D knowledge [56] A. Zadeh, M. Chen, S. Poria, E. Cambria, L.-P. Morency, Tensor fusion network
 graph embeddings, in: Proc. of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial for multimodal sentiment analysis, in: Proceedings of Empirical Methods in
 Intelligence, AAAI-18, AAAI Press, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 2018, pp. Natural Language Processing, 2017, pp. 1103–1114.
 1811–1818. [57] F. Liu, R. Ye, X. Wang, S. Li, HAL: Improved TextImage matching by mitigating
[34] Q. Wang, Z. Mao, B. Wang, L. Guo, Knowledge graph embedding: A survey visual semantic hubs, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 of approaches and applications, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 29 (12) (2017) Intelligence, 2020, pp. 11563–11571.
 2724–2743. [58] Z. Wang, Q. Lv, X. Lan, Y. Zhang, Cross-lingual knowledge graph alignment via
 graph convolutional networks, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
 Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018, pp. 349–357.

 119