164 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 Encrypted TLS Traffic Classification
 on Cloud Platforms
 Xiaochun Yun , Yipeng Wang , Member, IEEE, Yongzheng Zhang, Chen Zhao ,
 and Zijian Zhao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Nowadays, encryption technology has been widely both academia and industry over the past decade, and the conused to protect user privacy. With the explosive growth of mobile tinuous evolution of advanced traffic analysis approaches, such
 Internet, encrypted TLS traffic rises sharply and occupies a great as [4]–[14] justifies this lasting interests. Nowadays, encrypshare of current Internet traffic. In reality, the classification of
 encrypted TLS traffic on cloud platforms brings a new challenge tion technology has been widely used to protect user privacy.
 to traditional encrypted traffic classification methods, because With the explosive growth of mobile Internet, encrypted TLS
 some information such as certificates in the TLS flows is no traffic rises sharply and occupies a great share of current
 longer effective. In this paper, we apply deep learning technology Internet traffic. In reality, the classification of encrypted TLS
 to the problem of encrypted TLS traffic classification on cloud traffic on cloud platforms brings a new challenge to traditional
 platforms, and propose NeuTic, which takes the packet sequence
 of each TLS flow as the input, and effectively classifies raw TLS encrypted traffic classification methods.
 flows generated by many “cloud” applications. Our approach
 is able to automatically capture the long-range dependencies
 between elements in the packet sequences for robust and accu-
 B. Limitation of Prior Art
 rate encrypted TLS traffic classification. In NeuTic, we first This paper concerns the accurate classification of TLS1
 convert each TLS flow into three attribute sequences. Then, flows for different mobile applications on the cloud platform.
 we train a multi-application traffic classification model using
 For a mobile application that uses TLS as its encryption basic,
 our newly designed deep learning model. Finally, we use the
 well-trained classification model to classify new incoming TLS the real traffic generated by the application is hidden in the
 flows. We conduct comprehensive experiments on real-world message of TLS protocol by the encryption algorithm, and
 application traces covering multiple “cloud” applications from the content of the application traffic is not plaintext informathree different companies. In addition, we compare our experi- tion any more. Recently, Chen et al. propose MAAF [15],
 mental results of NeuTic with two deep learning-based methods
 which uses X.509 certificates embedded in the handshake
 for encrypted traffic classification. NeuTic outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches in classification accuracy. of encrypted TLS flows to classify the encrypted flows of
 different applications. Specifically, Chen et al. use the “organi-
 Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, cloud platform,
 self-attention mechanism, network security.
 zationName” filed and the “commonName” field in the X.509
 certificate of each TLS flow for application classification.
 We find that MAAF is very effective for classifying mobile
 I. I NTRODUCTION applications from different companies. In practice, we notice
 A. Background and Motivation that different applications developed by the same company
 provide their corresponding services for users on the same
 A PPLICATION traffic classification refers to the task of
 associating application traffic with their generating applications, and it has many practical uses in the area of networkcloud platform. At the same time, the certificate information
 embedded in the TLS flows of these “cloud” apps is usually
 ing and network security, such as quality-of-service (QoS), the same. Take “Alipay”, “Amap”, “Taobao”, “Tappiaopiao”,
 network measurement, tunnel detection and intrusion detection and “Youku” five apps from the Alibaba corporation as an
 and prevention etc [1]–[4]. For network management, network example. By parsing the X.509 certificates of the TLS flows
 operators need to understand and classify the traffic mixed for the above apps, we notice that many certificates in the TLS
 by different applications for a better QoS of networks and flows of these applications have the same “commonName”
 network provisioning, such as different priority strategies. The field and the “organizationName” field, such as “*.alicdn.com”
 research in this field has attracted the widespread attention in for the “commonName” field and “Alibaba (China) Technology Co., Ltd.” for the “organizationName” field. Therefore,
 Manuscript received 24 May 2020; revised 12 April 2022 and 25 May MAAF cannot make a right distinction to such TLS flows on
 2022; accepted 22 June 2022; approved by IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON
 N ETWORKING Editor K. Ren. Date of publication 19 July 2022; date of the cloud platform.
 current version 16 February 2023. (Corresponding author: Yipeng Wang.) An alternative is that we can use the packet type sequence or
 Xiaochun Yun, Yongzheng Zhang, and Chen Zhao are with the Institute the message type sequence of a TLS flow to perform encrypted
 of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093,
 China. traffic classification. Different from directly inspecting the
 Yipeng Wang and Zijian Zhao are with the Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: 1 TLS, Transport Layer Security, is a fundamental cryptographic protocol
 yipeng.wang1@gmail.com). suite widely used in the secure communication of today’s Internet and mobile
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNET.2022.3191312 Internet.
 1558-2566 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 165

 content generated by mobile applications, the methods that
 based on sequence information attempt to understand the generation mechanism of different application traffic by observing the state transitions in each TLS flow. However, prior
 sequence-based methods also have some limitations. (1). First,
 some sequence-based methods only have short-term memory
 but no long-term memory for elements in a given sequence.
 For example, some sequence-based methods use first-order
 or second-order homogeneous Markov chain models to construct application fingerprints for classifying SSL/TLS traffic
 [16]–[18]. The Markov chain models for each application are
 built from ordered SSL/TLS packet/message sequences. Recall
 that the state transitions in first-order/second-order homoge- Fig. 1. Architecture of NeuTic.
 neous Markov chain can only consider two/three adjacent
 states. Apparently, it is difficult to capture long-term relationships between states in a given SSL/TLS flow using such the TLS traffic classification model generated by the training
 a low-order Markov chain model. Therefore, these models phase to assign a proper application label to the TLS flow to
 do not perform very well in the task of encrypted traffic be classified.
 classification. (2). Second, in recent years, methods based
 on recurrent neural network (RNN) have been applied to
 encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification. However, learning D. Novelty and Advantages of Our Approach
 long-range dependencies in sequential data is still a challeng- NeuTic is composed of a newly designed neural network,
 ing problem for RNNs. Theoretically, advanced RNN models, and the design logics of NeuTic is based on the following
 such as LSTMs and GRUs, can have long-term memory. How- two considerations. First, NeuTic extracts different raw fields
 ever, in practice, we find that this kind of long-term memory from the IP packets of each flow, and uses them as the input
 may become blurred as the distance between elements in the to the neural network model. The designed neural network
 sequential data increases. model can autonomously choose inputs that are more helpful
 in classifying encrypted TLS traffic. Second, NeuTic attempts
 to establish a relationship between any two elements in a given
 C. Proposed Approach sequence in order to obtain better classification features. The
 In this paper, we propose NeuTic, a NEUral network-based prior state-of-the-art approaches can capture the relationship
 TLS TraffIc Classification method, which takes the packet between adjacent elements in a given sequence, but it is
 sequence of each TLS flow as the input, and effectively difficult for them to establish the relationship between distant
 classifies raw TLS flows generated by many “cloud” appli- elements. Those methods have a limited ability to characterize
 cations. In practice, we notice that packet sequences can more sequential data, and thus miss the opportunity to achieve more
 accurately reflect how the application flow is generated than accurate classification results. In contrast to these methods,
 message sequences. In addition, NeuTic is based on a newly NeuTic aims to better capture the relationships between eledesigned deep neural network, and the major structure of the ments in an input sequence.
 neural network model includes four key components, including input embedding, multi-kernel convolution, sequence self-
 E. Key Contributions
 attention, and classification output. NeuTic aims at classifying
 encrypted TLS flows. As shown in Fig. 1, NeuTic has two We highlight our key contributions as follows.
 phases, (i) the training phase, and (ii) the classification phase. • We propose a novel deep learning-based method, NeuTic,
 Specifically, the training phase aims to build a TLS traffic clas- for encrypted TLS traffic classification. NeuTic is purely
 sification model for all target applications, and it has two major based on the packet sequence of each TLS flow, and
 modules, including (1) flow processing, and (2) neural training. thus it does not need to assemble IP packets into TLS
 First, the flow processing module converts each labeled TLS messages. NeuTic is very robust for application flows that
 flow into a packet sequence, where each packet sequence is use TLS as the encryption protocol.
 composed of three attribute sequences. Then, according to • We design a novel neural network model that is equipped
 the input sequences, the neural training module builds a TLS with a multi-kernel convolution that is able to flexibly
 traffic classification model. In addition, the classification phase produce variable-length features for sequential inputs,
 aims to classifies new incoming TLS flows, and it also has two and also equipped with a sequence self-attention mechmajor modules, including (1) flow processing, and (3) neural anism that is able to learn long-range dependencies
 classification. Specifically, to classify a new incoming TLS between elements in sequential data. Through the above
 flow, the flow processing module in the classification phase two design considerations, our proposed neural netalso first extracts three attribute sequences from the packet work model can automatically learn robust features
 sequence of each TLS flow. Then, the neural classification from raw sequential inputs for accurate TLS traffic
 module works on the three attribute sequences and leverages classification.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 166 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 • We try to understand and explain what features and what B. Deep Learning-Based Approaches
 packets are more helpful to identify the fingerprints of In recent years, deep learning techniques have achieved
 encrypted TLS traffic. great success in many fields, such as speech recognition, com-
 • We implement NeuTic and carry out extensive eval- puter vision and machine translation. Therefore, some people
 uations on real-world TLS flows generated by many begin to consider using deep learning technology to solve the
 mobile “cloud” applications. We compare NeuTic with problem of encrypted traffic classification.
 two state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classification meth- In 2017, Schuster et al., bring a seminal research work
 ods, RBRN [19] and FS-Net [20], both of which are to the networking and network security community, using
 deep learning-based methods. Our experimental results deep learning technology to carry out network traffic analyshow that NeuTic outperforms the existing methods in sis [21]. Schuster et al., develop a novel video identification
 terms of classification accuracy for encrypted TLS traffic methodology based on convolutional neural networks. The
 classification. evaluation results on video titles streamed by YouTube, Net-
 The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, flix, Amazon and Vimeo prove that the method has excellent
 we review related work. In Section III – Section V, we present identification performance for videos. In 2019, Liu et al.,
 the technical details of each component of NeuTic. Next, propose FS-Net [20], which is a recurrent neural network
 in Section VI, we evaluate the whole method with real-world based approach to encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification.
 application traces. We compare NeuTic with two existing Specifically, FS-Net takes the packet length sequence of each
 methods in Section VII. Finally, we conclude our work in flow as the input, and classifies it to recognize the mobile
 Section VIII. application carried by each TLS flow. FS-Net adopts a multilayer encoder-decoder structure, and thus it is a novel deep
 II. R ELATED W ORK learning-based method in this field. In 2020, Rezaei et al.,
 design a novel deep learning model [22], which uses adjacent
 This paper focuses on the accurate classification of flows to learn the order and patterns of multiple flows to better
 encrypted TLS traffic. Prior methods for encrypted traffic clas- classify the mobile applications that generate these flows.
 sification generally fall into two categories: traditional machine Also, in 2020, Zheng et al., propose RBRN [19], a network
 learning-based methods and deep learning-based methods. traffic classification model based on convolutional neural networks (CNN). RBRN learns representative features from the
 A. Traditional Machine Learning-Based Approaches raw flows and then classifies them in a unified framework.
 In 2021, Xiao et al., propose EBSNN [23], an extended byte
 In 2014, Korczyński et al., propose FOSM [16], which segment neural network to classify network traffic. EBSNN
 first introduces the concept of Markov chain fingerprints to is built based on the recurrent neural networks with the
 conduct encrypted SSL/TLS traffic classification. The basic attention mechanism, and it can classify flows by examining
 idea of FOSM is to model possible sequences of message the first few packets. Also in 2021, Nascita et al., propose
 types observed in single-directional SSL/TLS sessions based MIMETIC-ENHANCED, an evolved multimodel deep learnon first-order homogeneous Markov chains. Notice that each ing architecture for network traffic classification at biflow
 application corresponds to a Markov chain fingerprint, and level [24]. In 2022, Wang et al., propose Ulfar [25], a multi-
 FOSM identifies the parameters of the application fingerprint scale feature attention approach to network traffic classificafrom observed training application traces. For an encrypted tion. Ulfar takes the byte sequence of each TCP/UDP flow
 flow to be classified, FOSM compares its message sequence as the input, and uses convolutional neural networks (CNN)
 with all fingerprints, and takes the fingerprint with the greatest as the building block for building the deep learning models.
 probability as the classification result for the flow. In 2017, Also in 2022, Zhao et al., propose Festic [26] a few-shot
 Shen et al. extend the concept of Markov chain fingerprints to learning based approach to network traffic classification. Fesbuild more distinctive application fingerprints [17]. They pro- tic adopts a hierarchical convolution structure, and thus it
 pose an attribute-aware encrypted traffic classification method can extract both packet-level and flow-level classification
 called SOB, which is designed based on the second-order features.
 Markov Chains. Compared to FOSM, SOB introduces the
 certificate packet length and the packet length of the first
 C. Discussions
 application data in a session, in addition to the consideration
 of possible sequences of message types. In 2018, Liu et al., The above work has made important research contributions
 propose a classification system called MaMPF [18], which is to the field of encrypted traffic classification. However, these
 designed to build multi-attribute application fingerprints based researches do not pay enough attention to the network traffic
 on first-order homogeneous Markov chains for encrypted generated by a large number of “cloud” applications in the
 SSL/TLS traffic classification. Specifically, MaMPF separately Internet, and the new challenges that the “cloud” application
 uses sequences of message types observed in single-directional traffic brings to encrypted traffic classification.
 SSL/TLS sessions and sequences of transformed packet length
 of the corresponding encrypted flows to build application III. F LOW P ROCESSING
 fingerprints. Note that, in [18], MaMPF uses random forest As shown in Fig. 1, the flow processing module takes the
 as its application classifier. packet sequence of each TLS flow as the input, and it aims to

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 167

 Fig. 2. Structure of neural training.

 extract three attribute sequences (i.e., packet length sequence, IV. N EURAL T RAINING
 packet window size sequence and packet TCP flag sequence) As shown in Fig. 2, the input to the neural training module
 of each TLS flow for the next neural training module. are the labeled TLS flows, where the packet sequence of each
 flow is extracted by the flow processing module, and the output
 A. Our Findings of the neural training module is the predicted application
 Recall that the TLS packet sequences generated by each labels of these TLS flows. The neural training module has
 mobile application are controlled by its application state four key components, including input embedding, multi-kernel
 automata, and each application maintains its own application convolution, sequence self-attention, and classification output.
 state automata. To this end, classifying TLS flows from the Next, we introduce each key component of our neural network
 packet sequences is an effective method in practice. In this in detail. The source code is available at: https://github.com/
 paper, instead of using the message type sequences in prior auto-ctrl/NeuTic.
 arts [16]–[18], we propose to use the packet sequence to
 effectively characterize the state transitions of each TLS flow. A. Input Embedding
 The advantage of using the packet sequences is that we do not
 For each flow, the purpose of input embedding is to fuse
 need to assemble IP packets into TLS messages. Therefore,
 the three attribute sequences from the flow processing module
 our flow processing scheme allows more scalable analysis in
 into one feature sequence. First of all, as shown in Fig. 2,
 practice.
 for flow F , we feed Slen , Swin , and Sf lag three attribute
 sequences into three embedding layers, respectively. Notice
 B. Packet Sequence of a TLS Flow that the embedding layer can embed each element in an input
 Let p1 , p2 , · · · , pi , · · · , ph denote the packet sequence of sequence into a vector. Therefore, we will obtain three new
 a TLS flow (denoted F ). Notice that we cannot directly use embedding sequences, denoted Elen , Ewin and Ef lag . Specifthe packet sequence for deep learning modeling. Therefore, ically, taking packet length sequence Slen as an example,
 for any packet pi (i ∈ [1, 2, · · · , h]), this module first extracts Slen = {len1 , len2 , · · · , leni , · · · , lenh } and it has h elethree important fields from each packet, including the “Total ments. The corresponding embedding layer converts each ele-
 Length” field in the IP header, and the “Window Size” field ment leni (i ∈ [1, h]) into a d-dimension vector ei . For Slen ,
 and the “TCP Flags” filed in the TCP header. For packet pi , the embedding layer outputs an embedding sequence Elen =
 we use leni to denote its packet length, wini to denote its {e1 , e2 , · · · , ei , · · · , eh }, where ei ∈ Rd (i ∈ [1, h]). In this
 window size, and f lagi to denote its TCP flags. Then, for flow paper, the embedding dimensions of all the three embedding
 F , it can be represented into three new sequences, Slen , Swin layers are set to be d. Then, we concatenate these outputs (i.e.,
 and Sf lag , where Slen = {len1 , len2 , · · · , leni , · · · , lenh }, Elen , Ewin and Ef lag ), and apply a linear transformations to
 Swin = {win1 , win2 , · · · , wini , · · · , winh }, and produce the following tensor I ∈ Rh×d .
 Sf lag = {f lag1, f lag2, · · · , f lagi , · · · , f lagh }. In this I = (Elen ⊕ Ewin ⊕ Ef lag ) · W I + bembed (1)
 paper, we extract the above three attribute sequences for
 each TLS flow to represent the packet sequence of the where W I ∈ R3d×d is the parameter matrix of linear trans-
 TLS flow. These three attribute sequences (Slen , Swin formation, bembed ∈ Rh×d is the bias parameter of linear
 and Sf lag ) will be fed into the subsequent module, neural transformation, and ⊕ is the concatenation operator. Finally,
 training. different from recurrent neural networks and convolutional

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 168 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 neural networks, the neural networks used in this paper are 1) Multi-Head Self-Attention Mechanism: Given the input
 based on the self-attention mechanism [27], which cannot nat- sequence F = f1 , f2 , · · · , fi , · · · fh from the multi-branch
 urally make use of the position information of the elements in convolution, where fi ∈ Rd be the d-dimensional vector,
 a given input sequence. Note that without position information, the multi-head self-attention mechanism [27] outputs a new
 the output of the self-attention network would be the same if sequence of continuous representations O = o1 , o2 , · · · , oi ,
 two elements in the input sequence exchange their positions. · · · , oh , where oi ∈ Rd . The miracle here is that the multi-
 For example, “a → b → c → d → e → f ” and “a → b → head self-attention mechanism can achieve the construction
 f → d → e → c”. Therefore, we use “positional encodings”, and extraction of the relationship between any two elements
 which explicitly encode the relative/absolute positions of the in an input sequence through three transformations of the
 inputs as vectors. In the paper, we use the following equation input itself, named “Query”, “Key” and “Value”. Specifically,
 to compute the positional encodings (P E): to begin with, this mechanism transforms the input F into
 three matrixes Q (Query), K (Key) and V (Value) using
 P E(pos,2j) = sin(pos/100002j/d) three trainable parameter matrixes (i.e., W Q , W K and W V ),
 P E(pos,2j+1) = cos(pos/100002j/d) (2) respectively. Q, K and V can be formulated as follows:
 ⎧
 ⎨
 ⎨Q = F · W
 Q
 where “pos” denotes the position index in the input sequence,
 K = F · WK (4)
 and “j” denotes the dimension index. In addition, “sin” and ⎨
 ⎩
 “cos” represent the sine and cosine functions, respectively. V = F ·W V

 Finally, the “positional encodings” will be added to I, and Notice that W Q , W K , and W V are the model parameters
 the new result is denoted by I  . that this sub-layer needs to train. For the above parameter matrices, we have W Q ∈ Rd×dq , W K ∈ Rd×dk and
 W V ∈ Rd×dv , where dk = dq . In general, an attention
 B. Multi-Kernel Convolution function can be described as mapping query Q and key-value
 The following component is multi-kernel convolution. For pairs (K, V ) into a new output O  . Next, according to K and
 flow F , multi-kernel convolution takes I  from input embed- Q, we can compute attention matrix A ∈ Rh×h , and A can
 ding as the input, and this component outputs a new sequence be computed as follows.
  
 tensor F . Specifically, multi-kernel convolution is composed Q · KT
 of 3 parallel 1D-convolutional branches, one gate convolu- A = Sof tmax √ (5)
 dk
 tion, and one residual connection. First of all, multi-kernel
 convolution uses 3 parallel 1D-convolutional branches to pro- where “Sof tmax” denotes the softmax activation function.
 duce three different feature maps for flow F , denoted Brn1 , It is worthy to notice that attention matrix A reflects the
 Brn2 and Brn3 , where the k-th branch is composed of an relationship between every two elements in input sequence
 1D-convolutional layer of kernel size 2 ∗ k − 1 and stride F . Finally, we use attention matrix A to extract information
 1 as illustrated in Fig. 2. The advantage of the parallel con- from V to form output O  , and the new output sequence
 volutions is that they help to consider each input sequence at O  ∈ Rh×dv can be formulated as follows:
 different scales. Then, multi-kernel convolution concatenates
 O  = Attention(Q, K, V ) = A · V (6)
 these outputs (i.e., Brn1 , Brn2 and Brn3 ), and applies a gate
 
 convolution layer to produce the following tensor G ∈ Rh×d . In practice, we can generate a series of O (i.e., O1 , O2 ,
 
 · · · , Ohead ) using different parameter matrixes in parallel, and
 G = Conv1d(Brn1 ⊕ Brn2 ⊕ Brn3 ) (3) concatenate them together to form the final output O, which
 increases the expressive power of our neural network. The
 where ⊕ is the concatenation operator. The gate convolution output sequence O of the multi-head self-attention mechanism
 layer is actually another 1-D convolutional layer, and its input can be formulated as follows:
 is 3 ∗ d channels and its output is d channels. For the final 
 O = (O1 ⊕ O2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Oi ⊕ · · · ⊕ Ohead ) · WO (7)
 result of multi-kernel convolution, we introduce a residual
 connection layer, which adds G and I  to get the output F . where W ∈ R O (head×dv )×d
 and head × dv = d. In addition,
 we have Oi = Attention(Qi , K i , V i ).
 2) Fully Connected Feed-Forward Network: The sub-layer
 C. Sequence Self-Attention following the multi-head self-attention mechanism is the
 fully connected feed-forward network, which takes the output
 Notice that sequence self-attention aims to establish the
 O = o1 , o2 , · · · , oi , · · · , oh (oi ∈ Rd ) of the previous sub-layer
 relationship between any two elements in a given sequence,
 as the input. The fully connected feed-forward network is
 and it is composed of a stack of L identical layers, where each
 a two-layer fully-connected neural network consisting of an
 layer contains two sub-layers. The first sub-layer is a multiinner hidden layer of dimensionality df f = 2048 and a dhead self-attention mechanism, and the second sub-layer is a
 dimensional output layer activated by ReLU [28]. The fully
 fully connected feed-forward network. We show the structure
 connected feed-forward network can be formulated as follows.
 of sequence self-attention in Fig. 2. Next, we introduce the
 two sub-layers in detail. F F N (O) = max(0, O · W1 + b1 )W2 + b2 (8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 169

 In addition, as shown in Fig. 2, notice that there is an TABLE I
 Add&Norm layer between each sub-layer, which involves D ATASET-I
 a residual connection [29] followed by a layer normalization [30]. Specifically, the residual connection provides a
 shortcut path between sub-layers, and it is basically just taking the input and adding it to the output of the sub-layer.
 The residual connection is used for an additional gradient
 path when building deeper neural network models. The layer
 normalization is a normalization method similar to batch normalization [31], and it is commonly used in deep learning,
 especially in recurrent neural networks.

 D. Classification Output
 The last component of our neural network is classification
 A. Data Set
 output, which consists of one flatten layer and two linear layers
 (that is the fully-connected layers). In this paper, we have selected multiple mobile applications
 1) Flatten Layer: In NeuTic, we use a linear layer to do a from three companies, i.e., Alibaba, Baidu and ByteDance,
 R-way classification, where R denotes the number of appli- to evaluate the effectiveness of NeuTic. Next, we report our
 cation labels. Notice that the linear layer only accepts 1- datasets in detail.
 dimension vectors as its input. However, our current output 1) Dataset-I: In Dataset-I, we collect a variety of TLS traffrom sequence self-attention is a 2-dimension tensor. There- fic generate by 15 mobile applications from three corporations,
 fore, before going through the linear layer, we first flatten and the three corporations are Alibaba, Baidu, and ByteDance.
 our 2-dimension outputs into 1-dimension. Specifically, in our Specifically, (1). first, for mobile applications designed by
 neural network, the output (shape (h, d)) from sequence Alibaba, we select 5 popular mobile applications, which are
 self-attention is flattened into vectors of shape (1, h × d). Amap, Eleme, Taobao, Taopiaopiao and Youku. The type of
 2) Linear Layers: Before the linear layers, we do a dropout these applications include map, food ordering, online shopoperation with a rate of 0.3 to avoid over-fitting. The outputs ping, short video and video. These applications comprise a
 to the two linear layers are R1 , and R, respectively, where we variety of categories, and see Table I for details. (2). Sechave R1 = 512 and R is adjusted according to the specific ondly, for mobile applications designed by Baidu, we choose
 classification task. The final linear layer uses “Softmax” as the a total of 6 popular mobile applications, including Baidumap,
 activation function. Duxiaoshi, Haokan, Baidusearch, Youjia and Baiduyuedu. The
 type of these applications include map, short video, video,
 V. C LASSIFICATION P HASE search, etc. All of these are well-known applications developed
 Recall that as shown in Fig. 1, the classification phase aims by Baidu corporation. (3). Thirdly, for mobile applications
 at classifying new incoming TLS flows according to the TLS designed by ByteDance, we choose 4 popular mobile applicatraffic classification model produced in the training phase. tions, including Dongchedi, Douyin, Ixigua and Toutiao. The
 There are two key functional components in the classification type of these applications include video, short video, news,
 phase, including the flow processing module and the neural etc. For each application trace, we report the total amount of
 classification module. flows, packets, bytes and its main use in Table I.
 First, the flow processing module also extracts the “Total 2) Dataset-II: Dataset-II aims to evaluate the classification
 Length” field, the “Window Size” field, and the “TCP Flags” performance of NeuTic on mobile applications with the same
 field information from the first h packet of each TLS flow, and usage category. In Dataset-II, we use TLS traffic generate by
 converts them into corresponding sequences. Then, the neural 6 mobile applications, including Taopiaopiao, Youku, Duxiclassification module uses the TLS traffic classification model aoshi, Haokan, Douyin and Ixigua. The main uses of all these
 generated by the neural training module to make decisions on mobile applications are short video sharing or video. In addieach new TLS flow, so that each unlabeled TLS flow can be tion, Taopiaopiao and Youku are from Alibaba, Duxiaoshi and
 assigned a proper application label. Haokan are from Baidu, and Douyin and Ixigua are from
 ByteDance. It is worth noting that the two applications from
 VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION the same company are similar applications developed under
 In this section, we aim at assessing the effectiveness of the same certificate. For each application trace, we report its
 NeuTic in the classification of encrypted TLS traffic on cloud main use, the number of flows and the company it is affiliated
 platforms. To this end, we introduce real-world application with in Table II.
 traces for the evaluation. In the following subsections, we first 3) Summary: For all the above applications, we collect our
 introduce the application traces used in our experiments. Then, application traffic traces under a controlled operating environwe define proper metrics to evaluate the performances of our ment. Specifically, our in-laboratory test-bed setup for data
 method and other prior approaches. Finally, we investigate collection is as follows. Firstly, we use three smartphones as
 how NeuTic’s performance is affected by different parameter the end devices to generate mobile application traces, includsettings. ing one iPhone SE2 (running on iOS 14.0), one iPhone 11

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 170 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 TABLE II where R denotes the total number of applications for applica-
 D ATASET-II tion classification. Furthermore, we also need to present our
 experimental results of multi-application classification through
 a Confusion Matrix, a visualization tool commonly used in the
 field of artificial intelligence, where each column of the matrix
 represents instances in a predicted class label, and each row
 of the matrix represents instances in an actual class label. It is
 quite convenient to see if the proposed method confuses two
 classes (i.e., one class is erroneously marked as the other) by
 means of a Confusion Matrix.
 (running on iOS 13.7), and one iPhone 11 (running on iOS
 14.3). We execute each mobile application on the smartphones
 separately. Secondly, our smartphones are connected to a C. Parameter Selection
 workstation over an access point. The workstation directly The training phase of NeuTic involves the following
 connects to the Internet, and it acts as the gateway device. parameters:
 Thirdly, we run tcpdump on this workstation to record the
 (h): The number of the first few packets of a TLS flow
 traffic generated by each mobile application.
 used for classification.
 As with the previous works, in this paper, we consider
 (d): The dimension of the embedding vector for the
 the unidirectional flows, that is, flows that from a server to
 embedding layer.
 a client as well as flows that from a client to a server. For
 (L): The number of times sequence self-attention is
 each application in the datasets above, we randomly pick 10K
 repeated.
 TLS flows. We notice that the TLS versions used by the TLS
 flows we captured are either TLS1.2 or TLS1.3. Therefore, Next, we present our experimental results for varying values
 we have a total of 150,000 samples for Dataset-I, and a total of the above parameters h, d and L.
 of 60,000 samples for Dataset-II. For all the two datasets, 1) Number of the First Few Packets of a TLS Flow Used for
 we carry out 5-fold cross validation to enhance the reliability Classification, (h): In NeuTic, remember that we use the first
 of our experiments. In addition, for each dataset, the ratio of h packets of a TLS flow for application traffic classification.
 the training set, the validation set and the testing set is 3:1:1. Notice that the parameter h affects the performance of NeuTic
 in two ways. First, the accuracy values of NeuTic generally
 B. Evaluation Metrics for Effectiveness decrease for lower values of h. Second, we also notice that
 Once an application traffic classification model has been the time overhead of the application classification model also
 designed, its performance must be evaluated, and proper eval- increases with the number packets considered per TLS applicauation metrics must be defined. For a specific application r tion flow. Taking into account the time overhead and the clasunder analysis, we define the following metrics for further sification accuracy, in our following evaluation experiments
 analysis: for NeuTic, we vary the range of parameter h ∈ {4, 8, 12, 16}
 • T Pr , True Positives for application r: the set of flows as a convenient trade-off.
 where each flow is classified by NeuTic as belonging to 2) Dimension of the Embedding Vector for the Embedding
 application r and is indeed generated by application r. Layer, (d): Recall that in Section IV, we have three embedding
 • F Pr , False Positives for application r: the set of flows layers in input embedding. For each embedding layer, we use
 where each flow is classified by NeuTic as belonging to d to denote the dimensions of the embedding vector for the
 application r but is not generated by application r. embedding layer. In practice, we experimentally find that the
 • F Nr , False Negatives for application r: the set of flows parameter d has an impact on the classification performance of
 where each flow is classified by NeuTic as not belonging NeuTic. Therefore, in the following evaluations, we vary the
 to application r but is indeed generated by application r. ranges of d ∈ {128, 256, 512, 1024} to investigate how Neu-
 Next, we define the following three metrics for application Tic’s performance is affected by different parameters settings.
 r to quantitatively evaluate the effectiveness of NeuTic: 3) The Number of Times the Sequence Self-Attention Is
 |T Pr | Repeated, (L): The depth of the neural network is very
 recallr = , important for classification, and the classification accuracy can
 |T Pr | + |F Nr |
 gain from considerably increased depth. In practice, we can
 |T Pr |
 precisionr = (9) stack one sequence self-attention on top of another sequence
 |T Pr | + |F Pr | self-attention to build a deeper classification model. For Neurecallr ∗ precisionr Tic, we use parameter L to denote the number of times
 F −measurer = 2 ∗ (10)
 recallr + precisionr sequence self-attention is repeated. Notice that, with a small
 In addition, for the scenario of multi-category classification, value of L, it looks like that we may not have enough model
 we need to define the accuracy metric to assess the perfor- parameters and therefore will suffer from an under-fitting
 mance of the whole method. problem. With a larger value of L, we may have too many
 R
 recallr model parameters and we encounter an over-fitting problem.
 Accuracy (ACC) = r=1 (11) Therefore, in the following evaluations, we carry out our
 R
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 171

 Fig. 3. Accuracy (%) on the validation set of Dataset-I (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

 Fig. 4. Accuracy (%) on the testing set of Dataset-I (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

 experiments for L ∈ {1, 2, 3} to investigate how NeuTic’s those of L = 1 and L = 3. In addition, we also notice
 performance is affected by different parameters settings. that when h = 12, the classification accuracy is relatively
 4) Other Settings: We have trained our neural networks with stable, and increasing the value of h does not significantly
 Adam (adaptive moment estimation) optimizer with a mini- improve the classification accuracy. In Fig. 4, we present
 batch of 1024 to optimize the loss function. In addition, the the experimental evaluation results of all the neural network
 initial value of our learning rate is 1e(−4), and the patience models on the testing set under different parameter settings.
 value of the model on the validation set is 30 epoches, then The accuracy values vary in the range of 83.35(±0.16)% –
 the learning rate is adjusted to 1/10 of the original, and the 95.00(±0.05)%. Based on the above analysis and considering
 minimum learning rate is 1e(−5). In this paper, the optimal the classification effectiveness and classification efficiency, we
 epoch we choose for the training of each deep learning model choose d = 1024, h = 12, and L = 2 to carry out subsequent
 is the number of epochs for which each model has a maximum evaluation experiments.
 accuracy value on the validation set. Next, for all the 15 applications from Alibaba, Baidu and
 ByteDance, we report NeuTic’s confusion matrix of the classification results on Dataset-I in Fig. 5 in the case of d = 1024,
 D. Effectiveness Results for Dataset-I h = 12, and L = 2. As shown in the figure, we notice
 Fig. 3 plots the accuracy values for varying values of that NeuTic’s recall values vary in the range of 84.15% –
 parameter h, d, and L on the validation set of Dataset-I. 99.28% for all the applications. Furthermore, NeuTic achieves
 Specifically, Fig. 3(a), Fig. 3(b), and Fig. 3(c) three figures an average ACC of 94.92% on Dataset-I. From the confusion
 plot the accuracy values for varying values of h and d for matrix, we have two important findings. (1). First, as shown
 L = 1, L = 2 and L = 3, respectively. For different parameter in Fig. 5, for applications from different companies, we notice
 settings, we report that the accuracy values vary in the range that NeuTic has a very good classification performance. That
 of 83.41(±0.20)% – 95.09(±0.12)%. As shown in Fig. 3, is to say, NeuTic will not mistake TLS flows generated by
 we clearly notice that the accuracy values generally degrade one company’s (such as Alibaba) application for TLS flows
 for lower values of h for all possible values of d and L. In addi- generated by another company’s (such as Baidu) application.
 tion, we also observe that the accuracy of NeuTic generally (2). Second, for apps from the same company, NeuTic perdegrades for lower values of d. Next, let’s take a closer look formed very well in classifying TLS flows generated by appliat the detailed experimental results in Fig. 3. For any fixed cations from Alibaba and Baidu, while NeuTic’s classification
 values of d and h, we observe the trend that the classification performance for TLS flows generated by applications from
 performance of NeuTic with L = 2 in most cases outperforms ByteDance decreases slightly. For example, Ixigua and Toutiao

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 172 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 Fig. 7. Confusion matrix of NeuTic on Dataset-II.

 Fig. 5. Confusion matrix of NeuTic on Dataset-I. evaluations, we only vary the ranges of parameter d and
 parameter h on Dataset-II. More concretely, Fig. 6(a) and
 Fig. 6(b) show the plots of accuracy for varying values of
 h and d on the validation set and the testing set of Dataset-
 II, respectively. From Fig. 6(a), we observe that the accuracy
 values vary in the range of 70.77% – 97.47% for all possible
 values of h and d. For Dataset-II, the optimal parameter values
 on the validation dataset are h = 12 and d = 1024, and the
 corresponding accuracy value is 97.47%. Notice that, like the
 trend on Dataset-I, we observe that NeuTic’s accuracy values
 on Dataset-II also generally degrade for lower values of h
 and d. We also find that compared with h = 8, 12, 16, the
 classification accuracy for h = 4 drops a lot for all possible
 values of d. In addition, the parameters (h = 12, d = 1024)
 that perform best on the validation set achieves an average
 ACC of 97.26% on the testing set.
 In Fig. 7, we report the confusion matrix of the classification results on the testing dataset of Dataset-II. Specifically,
 we notice that the Recall values are 99.0% for Taopiaopiao,
 99.1% for Youku, 99.1% for Duxiaoshi, 98.0% for Haokan,
 93.2% for Douyin, and 95.1% for Ixigua. From the figure,
 we have two findings. (1). We find that the confusion matrix
 on Dataset-II has good diagonalization performance, which is
 consistent with our excellent accuracy results. Although the
 six categories of applications in Dataset-II are all video or
 short video applications, NeuTic’s classification performance
 is still very good. (2). Furthermore, compared to the other four
 applications, we find that NeuTic performs slightly worse on
 Douyin and Ixigua, and the TLS flows of these two types
 confuse each other.
 Fig. 6. Accuracy (%) on Dataset-II (in the form of mean±standard deviation).

 F. Interpretability of Our Proposed Method
 from ByteDance, we observe that Ixigua traffic is sometimes
 confused as Toutiao traffic and vice versa, where Ixigua has a In this subsection, we use “Lime” [32] to help us to underrecall of 91.08% and Toutiao has a recall of 84.15%. stand what features are more helpful to identify the fingerprint of encrypted TLS traffic. Lime is an open source tool,
 which can explain the predictions of any classier. Specifically,
 E. Case Study for Video Applications the input to our neural network model is the three attribute
 Recall that Dataset-II is a data set of TLS flows generated sequences of each flow, including the packet length sequence,
 by six video/short video mobile applications. Based on the the packet window size sequence, and the packet TCP flag
 experience gained on Dataset-I, in this part we choose a sequence. Lime analyzes our neural network model and gives
 fixed value for L, where L = 2. Therefore, in the following the importance value of each element in the three attribute

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 173

 TABLE III
 A N E XAMPLE OF L IME ’ S I NTERPRETATION FOR THE PACKET S EQUENCE OF “E LEME ”

 Fig. 8. The importance of different features.

 sequences to encrypted traffic classification. The higher the 2) Which Packets Are More Important?: In Fig 9, for all
 importance value, the greater the contribution of this element the 15 applications, we separately show the importance of
 to encrypted traffic classification. In this part of the study, the first 12 packets of the flow for classifying encrypted TLS
 we use the first 12 packets of each flow, so the packet sequence traffic.
 of each flow has a total of 36 elements ( = 12 packets * 3 From Fig. 9, we have the following three findings: (1).
 attributes). In Table III, we give an example of the results First of all, the importance of packets in the flows varies
 interpreted using Lime. For the packet sequence of each flow, from application to application. (2). Secondly, the first four
 we select the elements with the top 12 importance values to packets are very important for encrypted TLS traffic classificacarry out follow-up experimental analysis. Next, we try to tion. This finding is consistent with our previous experimental
 interpret the classification results of our neural network model results, where using only the first four packets of each flow can
 on Dataset-I. achieve a classification accuracy of about 83% on Dataset-I.
 1) Which Features Are More Important?: In Fig. 8, we show (3). Thirdly, the packets after the first four packets are also
 the importance of three different features (i.e., packet length, helpful for encrypted TLS traffic classification. Increasing the
 packet window size, and packet TCP flag) for each application. value of parameter h within a certain range can improve the
 From the above figure, we have the following three find- classification accuracy.
 ings: (1). First of all, for most applications, the packet length
 feature has a more important classification contribution than G. Dealing With Traffic Obfuscation
 the other two features. Therefore, the packet length feature In practice, one way to obfuscate a TLS flow is to pad all
 should be considered first when designing an encrypted traffic the packet lengths of the flow to the same length, such as the
 classification model. (2). Secondly, the packet window size MTU (Maximum Transmission Unit) value. In this subsection,
 feature and the packet TCP flag feature are also very helpful we test NeuTic for its ability to identify such obfuscated TLS
 for encrypted TLS traffic classification. For different appli- flows. We adjust NeuTic to adapt the detection of obfuscated
 cations, the classification contributions of these two features TLS flows. Specifically, we feed the output of the last layer
 are different, that is, the packet window size feature is more of our neural network into a softmax layer. The output of
 important for some applications (such as Amap and Youku), the softmax layer is an R-dimensional tensor, and we select
 and the packet TCP flag feature is more important for other a maximum value in the tensor, denoted as valuemax. Then,
 applications (such as Eleme and Taobao). (3). Thirdly, we find we set a threshold τ . For each flow to be tested, if valuemax
 that the packet TCP flag feature is not important for maps (e.g. is greater than τ , NeuTic considers the flow to be a flow of a
 Amap and Baidumap) and videos (e.g. Taopiaopiao, Youku, known class, and if valuemax is less than τ , NeuTic considers
 Duxiaoshi and Hankan) from Alibaba and Baidu. However, the flow to be a obfuscated flow.
 for mobile applications from ByteDance, the packet TCP flag In the experiment, we convert all the TLS flows in DataSet-I
 feature is still important. into obfuscated flows, denoted as DataSet-I-confusion. We use

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 174 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 Fig. 9. The importance of different packets in a flow.

 TABLE IV VII. C OMPARISONS W ITH E XISTING
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF D EALING S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS
 T RAFFIC O BFUSCATION
 In this section, we compare the performance of NeuTic with
 two existing state-of-the-art methods, including RBRN [19]
 and FS-Net [20]. Furthermore, we still use the evaluation
 metrics introduced in Section VI-B to quantitatively evaluate
 the experimental performances of difference methods.

 DataSet-I and DataSet-I-confusion to test NeuTic’s ability A. Comparison With RBRN
 to identify obfuscated TLS flows. For threshold τ , in our First of all, we compare NeuTic with the classification
 experiment, we set a tentative value of 0.99. The evaluation algorithm proposed in RBRN. Notice that RBRN uses the
 results are shown in Table IV. We notice the recall, precision, byte information in each flow to perform encrypted traffic
 and F-measure of NeuTic for the obfuscated flows are 90.81%, classification. Specifically, RBRN converts the byte sequence
 86.66%, and 88.62%, respectively. It can be seen from the information of each flow into a 2D tensor image and feeds it
 experiment that NeuTic can accurately reject most of the into the designed deep neural network model. In our compariobfuscated TLS flows. This is only a preliminary attempt, and son experiments, consistent with NeuTic, we also consider the
 the future work direction is to design a better obfuscated flow first 12 packets of each flow for RBRN and evaluate RBRN’s
 filtering algorithm. classification performance on Dataset-I. In addition, we mask
 the IP addresses (both source and destination IP addresses) and
 TCP port numbers (both source and destination port numbers)
 H. Discussion in the packets. For Dataset-I, columns 2 to 4 of Table V
 If the developer changes the flow style of a mobile applica- report the cross-validation results of Recall, P recision and
 tion, which usually means a major upgrade to the version of F −measure three metrics of RBRN for each mobile applithis application, then our proposed approach may also lose the cation. Specifically, the cross-validation results of the Recall
 ability to directly classify the traffic generated by this newly values vary in the range of 51.79% – 92.84% for different
 upgraded application. Researchers can consider using DNS applications, the cross-validation results of the P recision valresolution records to associate the flow of the upgraded appli- ues vary in the range of 53.25% – 95.69% for different application with the flow of the original application. The research cations, and the cross-validation results of the F −measure
 on the classification of new applications is a cutting-edge issue values vary in the range of 51.72% – 94.22% for different
 in this field. applications. We notice that RBRN has an average Recall

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 175

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISONS OF N EU T IC , RBRN, AND FS-N ET ON D ATASET-I

 of 75.28(±5.48)%, an average P recision of 75.90(±5.11)%,
 and an average F −measure of 75.36(±5.44)%.
 In addition, we report the classification confusion matrix of
 RBRN on Dataset-I in Fig. 10. Let’s take a closer look at the
 detailed experimental results for each application. We notice
 that RBRN’s classification approach to improving Recall for
 some applications may reduce Recall for other applications.
 In addition, the classification results of RBRN are not good
 enough for the following reason. In the design of the deep
 learning model for encrypted traffic classification, RBRN
 adopts a neural network structure based on CNN. It is worth
 noting that the CNN model is good at dealing with the local
 features of the data. However, it is worth noting that for a flow,
 the relationship between packets is difficult to be described
 by local features. As a result, RBRN does not perform well in
 modeling the relationship between packets in a flow, especially
 the relationship between distant elements in a packet sequence.
 Compared to RBRN, NeuTic significantly improves the effec- Fig. 10. Confusion matrix of RBRN on Dataset-I.
 tiveness of encrypted TLS traffic classification, where the
 average F −measure increases by about 19.56% on Dataset-I.
 In addition, RBRN is a very complex neural network, which In this part, we evaluate the classification performance of
 contains dozens of neural network layers, so the algorithm FS-Net on Dataset-I. For Dataset-I, columns 5 to 7 of Table V
 complexity of RBRN is very high, and the whole training report the cross-validation results of Recall, P recision and
 process is also very slow. F −measure three metrics of FS-Net for each mobile application. Specifically, the cross-validation results of the Recall
 B. Comparison With FS-Net values vary in the range of 81.72% – 98.72% for different
 Remember that FS-Net classifies TLS flows by using the applications, the cross-validation results of the P recision
 packet length sequence of each flow as classification features. values vary in the range of 81.92% – 99.27% for

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 176 IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 31, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2023

 [5] A. Finamore, M. Mellia, M. Meo, and D. Rossi, “KISS: Stochastic
 packet inspection classifier for UDP traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1505–1515, Oct. 2010.
 [6] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Xiang, “Internet traffic
 classification by aggregating correlated naive Bayes predictions,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 5–15, Jan. 2013.
 [7] A. Tongaonkar, R. Torres, M. Iliofotou, R. Keralapura, and A. Nucci,
 “Towards self adaptive network traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 56, pp. 35–46, Feb. 2015.
 [8] J. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and A. V. Vasilakos, “An
 effective network traffic classification method with unknown flow detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 133–147,
 Jun. 2013.
 [9] Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, P. P. C. Lee, Y. Liu, and G. Xie, “Toward unsupervised protocol feature word extraction,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
 vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1894–1906, Oct. 2014.
 [10] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust network traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 23, no. 3,
 pp. 1257–1270, Aug. 2015.
 [11] D. M. Divakaran, L. Su, Y. S. Liau, and V. L. L. Thing, “SLIC: Selflearning intelligent classifier for network traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 91,
 pp. 283–297, Nov. 2015.
 Fig. 11. Confusion matrix of FS-Net on Dataset-I. [12] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, and T. Zang, “Rethinking
 robust and accurate application protocol identification,” Comput. Netw.,
 vol. 129, pp. 64–78, Dec. 2017.
 [13] N. Hubballi and M. Swarnkar, “BitCoding: Network traffic classifidifferent applications, and the cross-validation results of cation through encoded bit level signatures,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 the F −measure values vary in the range of 81.81% – vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2334–2346, Oct. 2018.
 99.00% for different applications. We notice that FS-Net [14] N. Hubballi, M. Swarnkar, and M. Conti, “BitProb: Probabilistic bit
 signatures for accurate application identification,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 has an average Recall of 93.31(±0.12)%, an average Service Manage., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1730–1741, Sep. 2020.
 P recision of 93.34(±0.10)%, and an average F −measure [15] Y. Chen, T. Zang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Rethinking
 of 93.31(±0.11)%. In addition, we report the classification encrypted traffic classification: A multi-attribute associated fingerprint
 approach,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Netw. Protocols (ICNP),
 confusion matrix of FS-Net on Dataset-I in Fig. 11. Compared Oct. 2019, pp. 1–11.
 with FS-Net, NeuTic works much better, where the average [16] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 F −measure increases by about 1.61%. In addition, we also encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM),
 Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 notice NeuTic outperforms FS-Net on the F −measure for
 [17] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
 all the 15 mobile applications. The main reasons why NeuTic traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
 performs better than FS-Net in classification accuracy are: bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 (1) NeuTic considers some other fields of each packet to help pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
 [18] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 classify encrypted TLS traffic, and 2) the deep learning model Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probain NeuTic has stronger memory ability for sequence data. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
 [19] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, Learning to Classify: A Flow-
 VIII. C ONCLUSION Based Relation Network for Encrypted Traffic Classification. New York,
 This paper represents a novel attempt to construct a TLS NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, pp. 13–22.
 [20] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
 traffic classification method for network traffic generated on network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comcloud platforms using advanced deep learning techniques. Our put. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 approach is purely based on the packet sequence of each TLS [21] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer, “Beauty and the burst:
 Remote identification of encrypted video streams,” in Proc. 26th
 flow, and thus it does not need to assemble IP packets into USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2017, pp. 1357–1374.
 TLS messages. Our experimental results on real-world datasets [22] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identifishow that NeuTic has the ability to achieve an excellent clas- cation using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
 sification performance. In addition, NeuTic outperforms the [23] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H.-T. Zheng, and S.-T. Xia, “EBSNN:
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,”
 state-of-the-art methods on encrypted TLS traffic classification IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Aug. 2, 2021,
 with better classification effectiveness. doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3101311.
 [24] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescape, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 R EFERENCES improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 [1] C. Kreibich, “Design and implementation of netdude, a framework for Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
 packet trace manipulation,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf, 2004, [25] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and X. Liu, “A multi-scale feature
 pp. 1–10. attention approach to network traffic classification and its model expla-
 [2] V. Paxson, “Bro: A system for detecting network intruders in real-time,” nation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 875–889,
 Comput. Netw., vol. 31, nos. 23–24, pp. 2435–2463, 1999. [Online]. Jun. 2022.
 Available: https://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/paxson98bro.html [26] Z. Zhao, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, W. Jia, and H. He, “A few-shot learning based
 [3] M. Roesch, “SNORT: Lightweight intrusion detection for networks,” in approach to IoT traffic classification,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26,
 Proc. 13th Syst. Admin. Conf. (LISA), Nov. 1999, pp. 229–238. no. 3, pp. 537–541, Mar. 2022.
 [4] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “A semantics-aware approach [27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 to the automated network protocol identification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Process. Syst., vol. 30. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017,
 Netw., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 583–595, Feb. 2016. pp. 1–11.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 YUN et al.: ENCRYPTED TLS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION ON CLOUD PLATFORMS 177

 [28] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio, “Deep sparse rectifier neural Yongzheng Zhang received the B.S. and Ph.D.
 networks,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statistics, 2011, degrees from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
 pp. 315–323. China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is cur-
 [29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for rently a Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor at the Instiimage recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. tute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. of Sciences (CAS), China. His research interests
 [30] J. Lei Ba, J. Ryan Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016, include network security, particularly cyberspace
 arXiv:1607.06450. security situational awareness. He was honored with
 [31] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating the First Prize of the Chinese National Award for
 deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” 2015, Science and Technology Progress in 2011.
 arXiv:1502.03167.
 [32] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should i trust
 you?’: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2016,
 pp. 1135–1144.

 Xiaochun Yun received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 from the Harbin Institute of Technology, China, in
 1993 and 1998, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chen Zhao received the B.E. degree in information
 Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), China. His management and information system from Tianjin
 research interests include network and information University and the Ph.D. degree in cyber secusecurity. He is a member of Advisory Committee for rity from the Institute of Information Engineering,
 Chinese State Informatization and a member of Sub- Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Her
 ject Matter Expert Group of Information Security research interests include network traffic analysis
 Technology for National High Technology Research and DNS security issues.
 and Development Program of China. He was honored with the First Prize of the Chinese National Award for Science and
 Technology Progress in 2002 and 2011.

 Yipeng Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree in computer science from the Institute
 of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
 Sciences (CAS), in 2014. He is currently an
 Associate Professor with the Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing University of Technology.
 He has published more than 40 research papers
 in international journals and conferences, such as
 IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, Zijian Zhao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F OREN - received the B.S. degree in computer science from
 SICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON the Beijing University of Technology, Beijing,
 N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, and IEEE I NTERNATIONAL C ON - China, where he is currently pursuing the M.S.
 FERENCE ON N ETWORK P ROTOCOLS . His research interests are in network- degree in computer technology with the Faculty
 ing, network security and machine learning, in particular network protocol of Information Technology. His research interests
 inference. He has won the Best Paper Award at ICNP for his work on include network traffic classification and artificial
 protocol format inference. He serves as a Regular Reviewer for IEEE/ACM intelligence.
 T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS
 IN C OMMUNICATIONS, Computer Networks (Elsevier), and Neurocomputing
 (Elsevier).

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 02:17:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.