1224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 Flow-Based Encrypted Network Traffic
 Classification With Graph Neural Networks
 Ting-Li Huoh , Yan Luo , Member, IEEE, Peilong Li , Member, IEEE, and Tong Zhang

 Abstract—Classifying encrypted traffic from emerging applica- for managing system functionality in network management
 tions is important but challenging as many conventional traffic and security. In the early days, conventional network trafclassification approaches are ineffective, thus calling for novel fic classification methods, such as port-based approaches and
 methods for identifying encrypted network flows. Recent machine
 learning and deep learning-based approaches are severely limited DPI, mainly focused on packet-level analysis. Port-based
 by their feature selection and inherent neural network archi- approaches use merely the port information to identify packtecture. More importantly, they overlook the opportunity to ets, and therefore quickly become obsolete due to networking
 capture latent information in the temporal dimension of pack- technology advancements, such as dynamic ports assignment
 ets. As network data by nature are of non-Euclidean distance and network address translation (NAT) [2]. On the other hand,
 space and carry abundant chronological and temporal relations,
 we are inspired to utilize geometric deep learning that simul- DPI inspects the payload information to classify network
 taneously takes into account packet raw bytes, metadata and packets [1], yet this method violates user privacy to a signifipacket relations for classifying encrypted network traffic. Our cant extent. Meanwhile, with the ever-increasing security level
 proposed graph neural network (GNN) model outperforms the and volume of Internet services, applying DPI to encrypted
 two reference methods, convolutional neural networks (CNN) and network traffic analysis also becomes ineffective [2].
 recurrent neural networks (RNN) quantitatively as indicated by
 three metrics: sensitivity, precision and F1 score. Subsequently, researchers begin to adopt machine learning approaches in network traffic analysis. Machine learning
 Index Terms—Encrypted network traffic analysis, network approaches rely heavily on predefined input features and
 traffic classification, deep learning, graph neural networks,
 multimodal deep learning. require domain knowledge for feature engineering, which is
 the process of extracting hand-crafted features from raw data.
 I. I NTRODUCTION As a result, much effort has been expended on discovering
 critical flow statistical features at the flow-level, rather than at
 DENTIFYING network traffic is a vital task to enable the
 I functionalities of governing systems in network management and network security. Network traffic classification has
 the packet-level, and evaluating their effectiveness using various machine learning-based classifiers [3], [4], [5], [6], such
 as support vector machine (SVM) and random forest (RF) on
 been intensively explored in light of current improvements network traffic classification.
 in computer networking. While ongoing research covers a With the rapid development of neural networks, deep
 wide range of topics, such as malware detection, intrusion learning-based methods have become state-of-the-art across
 detection, and application prediction, the common goal is to a wide range of applications, including network traffic analaccurately and effectively differentiate network traffic, which is ysis [7]. For flow-level network traffic classification tasks,
 evidently difficult due to the dynamics and complexity of emerg- convolutional neural networks (CNN) and recurrent neuing network applications. Additionally, when the volume of ral networks (RNN) models perform exceptionally well in
 encrypted network data grows, many conventional techniques, predicting 1D or 2D Euclidean space datasets. However, the
 such as deep packet inspection (DPI) [1], become inefficient, disadvantage is that when data is mapped into the Euclidean
 and it is particularly crucial for privacy concerns to classify spaces, valuable latent information derived from packet relaencrypted network flows without decrypting the traffic. tions in the flow data is lost. Hence, we introduce a concept for
 Extensive research has been conducted on network traf- mapping network traffic flows into non-Euclidean graph repfic classification, as classifying network traffic is critical resentations with packet relations that preserves data integrity
 Manuscript received 30 April 2022; revised 1 September 2022; accepted to the greatest extent possible, as well as a methodology for
 7 November 2022. Date of publication 9 December 2022; date of current ver- classifying network traffic in the non-Euclidean domains.
 sion 6 July 2023. This work is supported by NSF No.1738965 and a grant from We utilize graph format as input to our graph neural
 Intel Corporation. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
 and approving it for publication was N. Stakhanova. (Corresponding author: networks (GNN) architecture. Then we design an end-to-end
 Yan Luo.) flow-based GNN model with an encoder and decoder struc-
 Ting-Li Huoh and Yan Luo are with the Department of Electrical and ture to classify both function types and application types of
 Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts at Lowell, Lowell, MA
 01854 USA (e-mail: tingli_huoh@stuedent.uml.edu; yan_luo@uml.edu). encrypted network traffic flows, and train our GNN model
 Peilong Li is with the Department of Computer Science, Elizabethtown using a dataset with VPN encryption protocols. We leverage
 College, Elizabethtown, PA 17022 USA. the DeepMind Graph Nets library [8], which is a library for
 Tong Zhang is with the Network Platforms Group, Intel Corporation, Santa
 Clara, CA 95054 USA. building graph neural networks in TensorFlow and Sonnet,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3227500 to build our GNN model, and the network architecture design
 1932-4537 
 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1225

 TABLE I
 N OTABLE R ELATED W ORKS U SING D EEP L EARNING IN N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION TASKS

 details are presented in Section III-C. In order to show the via- dataset, ISCXVPN2016 [15], and demonstrate the
 bility and applicability of the proposed graph-based approach, GNN’s proof-of-concept for classifying network traffic
 apart from training the GNN model using encrypted dataset flows according to their function and application types,
 to classify network function types and application types of and establish a foundation for future graph-based studies
 encrypted flows, we also train our GNN model with a hybrid on network traffic flow classification problems.
 of encrypted and non-encrypted dataset. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section II,
 Accordingly, the main contributions of our work can be we survey the evolution of approaches and literature in
 summarized as follows: network traffic classification, and explain the rationale behind
 • We leverage a novel geometric learning framework [8] our research. In Section III, we describe and demonstrate the
 and propose a multimodal graph-based deep learning proposed approach using graph neural networks for encrypted
 approach for flow-based encrypted network traffic clas- network traffic classification. Our experimental results and
 sification, which can effectively differentiate application main findings are reported in Section IV. In Section V, we disand function types in encrypted traffic. Among existing cuss the strengths and limitations, and present future directions
 studies on network traffic prediction tasks, the state- of our work. Last, we summarize our work in Section VI.
 of-the-art methods train deep learning-based networks
 with raw bytes in the Euclidean domains [9], [10],
 [11], [12], [13], [14], whereas our proposed GNN model II. R ELATED W ORK
 accepts arbitrary graph inputs that can embody data in A. Deep Learning for Network Traffic Classification
 the non-Euclidean domains, preserving data integrity to Because of the fast growth of neural networks, deep
 the greatest extent possible. learning-based approaches have become state-of-the-art across
 • In terms of network inputs for our GNN model, we a broad variety of applications, including network traffic
 present a notion to map network traffic flows into graph analysis [7]. Unlike machine learning-based methods, deep
 representations. Apart from taking raw bytes as inputs, a learning-based methods, namely neural networks, which are
 merit of our work is that we further enhance our GNN by capable of discerning important hidden features and represupplementing the second modality of data, where meta sentations from their input data, can be applied directly to
 features are served as graph-level attributes, and packet learn raw data without any extra feature extraction steps.
 relations are served as additional variables that include Related works that use deep learning approaches in network
 temporal information and chronological relationship. traffic classification are summarized in Table I. As shown in
 • Furthermore, we experimentally compare the Table I, recent works in network traffic classification with deep
 performance with different combinations of network learning-based methods have explored different types of neuinputs to validate our proposed approach using a public ral network architectures [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [19],

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 [20], [21], such as convolutional neural networks and long Our previous work has translated network traffic flows into
 short-term memory (LSTM). CNNs rely on kernels and per- graph representations and demonstrated the proof-of-concept
 form convolution operations to exploit local information under of the graph neural network for encrypted network applicathe receptive field, while LSTMs are one of recurrent neu- tion classification [18]. Likewise, in [17], Pang et al. also
 ral network members that are capable of learning long-term presented a chained graph representation to capture the causal
 dependencies and temporal information. Experiments from relationship for the raw network traffic data. Different from
 existing work [9], [10], [11], [20], [21] have demonstrated our previous work [18], Pang et al. [17] only considered
 consistently better classification results with deep learning- packet raw bytes and the adjacency relationship between
 based methods than with conventional or machine learning- packets within a network traffic flow, whereas we simultanebased methods. It is widely known that CNNs are very ously take packet raw bytes, meta features and chronological
 productive when solving problems in images which are natu- relationship between packets into account. Shen et al. [16]
 rally Euclidean and own the property of translational invari- focused on decentralized applications (DApps) identification
 ance [22]. In many network traffic studies, researchers map using graph neural networks, and in their work, the clientnetwork traffic data into the Euclidean domains and then use server interactions in terms of packet lengths and directions
 the Euclidean-based data to train a CNN model [9], [11], [23]. within a network flow are encapsulated in the traffic interaction
 In terms of the network inputs for flow-based network traffic graph (TIG).
 classification, the main drawback of CNN models is that all In terms of network architecture, there are three major difinputs are limited to a fixed shape once their architectures are ferences between graph networks and common deep learning
 determined. For instance, when mapping traffic flows into the architectures. First, GNNs can be directly applied to graphs,
 Euclidean spaces, the CNN is restricted to take a fixed number meaning that the geometric deep learning methods can deal
 of packets for each flow. with data in non-Euclidean space, which can preserve more
 For studying encrypted network traffic classification using original looks and characteristics of data. Secondly, CNN
 deep learning-based methods, ISCXVPN2016 [15], a well- and RNN models, due to their network structure constraints,
 known public network traffic dataset that contains numerous require zero padding or data trimming to keep input data shape
 encrypted traces, has been widely used in many research stud- identical during training and validation process. Unlike CNN
 ies [9], [10], [11], [12], [14], [19]. For instance, using the or RNN models, GNNs can obviate this limitation and allow
 same network traffic dataset, Wang et al. [9] presented a 1D- arbitrary input shapes for each subject within a dataset. Last,
 CNN model to predict encrypted network traffic, Yao et al. [10] for each input graph, additional graph-level attributes can be
 proposed an LSTM-based model with attention mechanism, and assigned as a universal information for each graph, while CNN
 Zeng et al. [12] proposed an encrypted network traffic classifier and RNN models can only accept elements with the same data
 utilizing both CNNs and LSTMs. According to their quantitative type for an input.
 results, the studies reported that employing bi-directional flows The basic computation unit in the Graph Networks framewith all raw bytes as network inputs leads to better performance. work is a graph network (GN) block [8], which takes a graph
 Nevertheless, there are studies use merely flow features or as an input, performs message passing through update and
 flow-based statistical information as network inputs [11], [19], aggregation functions, and yields a graph as an output. An
 [20], [21]. Subsequently, a multimodal deep learning approach input graph is composed of a set of nodes and edges with
 has been proposed for network traffic classification tasks. graph-level attributes. The nodes describe the vertices of a
 Aceto et al. [13] reported that multimodal approaches are graph, and the directed edges indicate the connections between
 able to leverage network traffic data according to various types nodes. Properties associated with nodes and edges are defined
 of network inputs, where the multimodal deep learning clas- as node attributes and edge attributes respectively. As shown
 sifier could capitalize the heterogeneity of both intra- and in Fig. 1a, when a kernel from a CNN slides over a gridinter-modality dependencies of network traffic data [14]. structured input to examine matching features, the center of
 the kernel can determine all the resulting convolved neighbors. As a contrast in Fig. 1b, we can use the edges within
 B. Graph Neural Networks non-Euclidean graph structures to determine the neighbors of
 Recently, geometric deep learning has drawn a lot of atten- each nodes so that GNNs can use the information in the
 tion as it aims to generalize neural network models to the neighborhood of a node to compute the updated value.
 non-Euclidean domains, such as social networks, transporta- Our previous work on network traffic classification utilize
 tion networks, and brain networks. While widely-used deep deep learning-based approach [18], and this work is an extenlearning architectures, such as CNNs and RNNs, are capa- sion of the effort. With the aforementioned salient properties of
 ble of exploiting hidden features of data in the Euclidean graphs and GNNs, in [18], we presented a notion to translate
 domains, they cannot handle non-Euclidean data that is rep- network traffic flows into graph representations as network
 resented as graphs. As a result, a few studies have been inputs that include raw bytes, meta features, and chronologdevoted to encrypted network traffic classification employing ical relationship between packets. Additionally, we extended
 graph neural networks, and are listed in Table I. The studies network traffic classification task to a geometric learning model
 have shown the approach that leverages the information-rich using graph neural networks, and showed GNN has the potential
 graph representation of network traffic flows is competitive to to solve problems in differentiating function types of encrypted
 other common deep learning-based methods [16], [17], [18]. network traffic flows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1227

 A. Data Description
 In this study, we select the UNB ISCX Network
 Traffic VPN-nonVPN (ISCXVPN2016) dataset [15] for our
 experiments. It is a public dataset with virtual private
 network (VPN) encryption protocols that has been widely
 adopted in the research area of network traffic classification
 recently [9], [10], [11], [14]. A VPN is a secured network that
 allows for secure data transmission, and a VPN encryption protocol is a process used to establish a securely encrypted path
 between two endpoints. With VPN service, network users’ data
 will pass through an encrypted VPN tunnel to reach the VPN
 server that acts as a gateway to the public Internet. The original
 ISCXVPN2016 dataset has a total amount of 25 GB of data
 stored in the network packet capture (PCAP) format, which
 contains a regular session and a session over VPN that are
 Fig. 1. (a) 2D-CNN: kernel sizes to determine the red grid’s neighbors. captured using Wireshark and Tcpdump. Application-wise, the
 (b) GNN: edges to define neighbors for the red node.
 dataset contains several function types of network traces such
 as email, file transfer, and streaming traces; and encryption-
 In accordance with the discourse in Section II, the high- wise, the dataset consists of VPN traces and non-VPN ones. In
 lights of the additional effort compared to our earlier work this study, we will use the two subsets of the ISCXVPN2016
 are summarized in the following. In this work, a public dataset; the subset of VPN traces will be referred to as VPNdataset, ISCXVPN2016 [15], is employed to validate our GNN dataset, and the subset of non-VPN traces will be referred
 model. Port numbers are removed to prevent biased conclu- to as NonVPN-dataset. Within the VPN-dataset, there are
 sions or misleading classification outcomes as stated in [14], six network traffic types across fourteen different applicaand more experiments are conducted to demonstrate the viabil- tions. As for the NonVPN-dataset, there are six different
 ity and applicability of the proposed graph-based approach. In types of network traffic across sixteen different applications.
 addition to classifying function types, experiments for clas- A complete list of the included network function types and
 sifying application types of network traffic flows are also application types for VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset can
 provided. Furthermore, investigations are also conducted in be found in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b, respectively.
 which the GNN model is trained using both encrypted and
 non-encrypted traces. Additionally, we use multimodal deep
 learning by supplying raw bytes and flow features into our B. Network Input
 GNN model as network inputs. Instead of merely encapsulat- Since the GNN takes in a graph as an input, it is imperative
 ing the chronological relationship into edges [18], the temporal to translate network traffic data into graph-structured represeninformation, which is the inter-arrival time between packets tations, which consist of three building blocks: a set of nodes
 within a network traffic flow, is collected as an additional (Node) and edges (Edge) with graph-level attributes (Global).
 network input to the GNN, as inter-arrival time is considered In the following, we describe data preprocessing steps which
 as valuable information for network traffic classification [6]. includes data segmentation and masking out biased fields of
 As such, we demonstrate the mapping of a network traffic packets, as well as how we translate a network flow into a
 flow to a graph-structured representation in which each packet graph as network input.
 is assigned to a node, packet relations are encapsulated in 1) Data Preprocessing: One of the prior works [9] shows
 edges with the chronological relationship serving as the edge that leveraging bi-directional flows, also known as sessions,
 direction and temporal information serving as the edge weight, help achieve better performance comparing to unidirectional
 and meta features of a flow are assigned to global attributes. flows, as a result, we employ bi-directional flows in our work.
 The detail of the complete graph inputs will be presented in To extract flow-based data, data segmentation technique is per-
 Section III-B. formed to obtain flow samples from the original PCAP files. A
 bi-directional flow, also known as session, can be identified by
 the criteria of 5-tuple where the source and destination can be
 III. M ETHODS transposed. The 5-tuple consists of source IP address, source
 In this section, we present the detailed implementation of port, destination IP address, destination port, and transport prothe end-to-end geometric deep learning model for encrypted tocol. After the extraction, VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset
 network traffic classification. The contents include intro- have 13,341 and 16,646 bi-directional flows in total, respecducing the experiment dataset, presenting how the data is tively. For each bi-directional flow, it consists of a sequence
 preprocessed and translated into graph representations for of packets where every packet contains a byte stream up to
 GNN, describing the experimental design and details, explain- maximum transmission unit (MTU) size of 1,500 bytes, and
 ing our GNN architecture and the procedures of network prior research [10] shows that most of the flows consist of
 training and validation, and the evaluation metrics being fewer than 5 packets in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset. Fig. 2a
 used. shows the distribution of flows for each function type and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 Fig. 2. Distribution of flow diagrams by function type in two datasets: (a) VPN-dataset, and (b) NonVPN-dataset.

 Fig. 3. (a) The architecture of a network flow. (b) A graph-structured representation of a flow’s overall structure, as well as detailed information on the
 node, edge, and global attributes.

 application type in VPN-dataset, and Fig. 2b shows the distri- where L is set to 1,500, as the quantitative results in prior
 bution of flows for each function type and application type in works [9], [10], [18] have shown that the model’s performance
 NonVPN-dataset. For both VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset, can be more accurate and reliable when taking full raw data
 the extracted flows are split into two parts that 60% is for the as network inputs.
 training dataset and the remaining is for validation. 2) Graph Representation Generation: Fig. 3b illustrates a
 As the original dataset was captured manually, it is possi- general graph-structured representation. Each flow is transble that the collected network traces have common hosts and formed to a graph representation in our work. A graph is
 servers. Hence, to avoid carrying biased information which composed of a collection of nodes and edges, and it is also
 might favor the deep learning model during the training pro- capable of containing global properties. The details of how a
 cess, for every packet, both the Ethernet header that contains network traffic flow is mapped to each graph entity is presented
 Media Access Control (MAC) addresses and the source and in the following.
 destination IP addresses that are embedded in the IP datagram a) Node: Within a network traffic flow, each packet is
 header are removed. Also, port numbers are removed to avoid mapped to a node, denoted as ni , where i = {1..k }, and k is
 biased conclusions or inflated classification outcomes as men- the total number of packets or nodes. In each node, it stores
 tioned in [14]. After the above-mentioned data preprocessing the raw bytes as node attributes, where each byte is normalized
 steps, as shown in the Fig. 3a, the structure of a flow con- to [0, 1]. The dimension of the node attributes is set to 1,500,
 sists of packets, denoted as p1..k , where k is the total number which corresponds to the MTU size.
 of packets in a flow, and L is our desired lengths of packet b) Edge: Edges can be assigned to show the relationship
 bytes. Each bytes’ values are normalized such that they fall between nodes. In this work, the edges are used to indicate
 inside the interval [0, 1]. Rather than only covering the header the chronological relationship and the temporal information
 fields, in this work, full raw data are taken as network inputs, between packets. As Fig. 3b shows, chronological relationship

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1229

 representations. As shown in Fig. 5a, the end-to-end GNN is
 constructed using encode-process-decode scheme [8] and is
 comprised of an encoder block (GNenc ), a string of N core
 blocks (GNcore ), where N is set to 5 in this work, and a
 decoder block (GNdec ). To be specific, the GNenc maps the
 input graph, denoted as G, to a latent domain. The GNcore
 takes the latent space representation, denoted as Glatent , as
 
 input to generate the output, denoted as Glatent . The GNdec
 
 then maps the latent space representation, Glatent , back to
 generate the final output, which is denoted as G  .
 The GN block’s structure contains three 5-layer multilayer
 perceptron (MLP) networks as shown in Fig. 5b, where each
 layer contains 128 neurons and is followed by a ReLU activation function except for the output layer, as update functions
 Fig. 4. Instances of graph inputs with different flow packet sizes, ranging
 from 2 to 5.
 for Edge, Node, and Global. In addition, all the MLP networks
 are followed by a batch norm layer except for the decoder
 between packets is viewed as directed edges, denoted as es,r . block’s, which stabilizes the network training process. As
 Packet’s timestamps are denoted as ti , where i = {1..k }, and k shown in Fig. 5c, the relation of the three update functions
 is the total number of packets or nodes. Temporal information, in the encoder and the decoder blocks are independent. The
 which is the inter-arrival time between packets and can be cal- three update functions will construct a latent graph from the
 culated by tr − ts , is stored as the weight of the edge, denoted input graph and extract information from a latent graph respecas ws,r . In this scenario, s is the sender node index and r tively. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 5d, the three update
 is the receiver node index. For instance, as Fig. 3b shows, functions in the core block are linked for message-passing,
 the time difference between packet nk −1 and packet nk are which is a process of sending information between nodes via
 assigned to edge attributes, denoted as w(k −1),k while the the edges.
 direction of edge from nk −1 to nk , denoted as e(k −1),k , are Regularization is a crucial component of the network trainused to express the chronological relationship between pack- ing stage, as it prevents networks from overfitting and favorets. The packet timestamp is used to allocate edges. Each node ing certain majority classes as a result of data imbalance.
 is connected to the nodes whose packets arrive earlier through We deploy two common approaches, penalized weights and
 arriving traversing edges and to the nodes whose packets arrive dropouts, in the GNN architecture. For a multi-class classilater via leaving traversing edges. Fig. 4 depicts, with different fication task, the network performance is usually vulnerable
 flow packet sizes ranging from 2 to 5, how nodes are con- to a data imbalance issue. Thus, we incorporate the inverse
 nected using edges. In the message passing algorithm, each category frequency (ICF) weighting scheme in the loss funcnode is updated by aggregating messages provided from sur- tion. Furthermore, every time a batch of data is gathered, the
 rounding nodes through arriving traversing edges. We design numbers of samples of each class may be different in the
 our GNN to consider all previous packets/nodes while process- batch. Therefore, the frequencies and weights are calculated
 ing the current packet/node, and those former packets/nodes and applied within each batch during network training procan directly deliver messages to the current node, boosting cess, so that samples of each class can be learned equally
 message passing speed. by the network. In addition, we consider our GNN trained
 c) Global: Lastly, meta features of a flow are stored in with the batch-level ICF will tend to have better adaptability
 the field of global attributes, denoted as g, which are shared when tested on various validation sets with different class disacross a graph. In [5], the most important flow features of tributions. For neural networks, dropout regularization is an
 ISCXVPN2016 dataset are reported, hence, we select and efficient regularization method [24], in which partial of the
 assign five common meta features of a flow to global attributes neurons will be switched off randomly during each training
 accordingly, which includes payload length mean, standard iteration so that it can reduce chance of overfitting and help
 deviation of payload length, packet length mean, standard networks learn more hidden features.
 deviation of packet length, and duration of flow. These meta All the aggregation functions used for this GNN architecfeatures can be obtained through an open source network anal- ture are summation. The loss function selected for training our
 ysis tool, Tcpdump. The meta features are normalized to [0, 1] GNN is cross-entropy loss function, which is expressed as:
 before assigning to global attributes.
 As such, we can incorporate raw bytes, packet relations, and   
 
 metadata as graph network inputs by mapping network traffic loss(ŷ, y) = α[y] −ŷ[y] + log exp(ŷ[i ]) (1)
 flow into a graph-structured representation. i

 C. End-to-End GNN Architecture where ŷ and y are vector prediction results and class true
 The fundamental of our geometric learning model is a labels respectively, and α is the vector of penalized weights
 graph neural network that supports various graph-structured computed from the ICF weighting scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 Fig. 5. (a) The proposed end-to-end GNN architecture for network traffic classification. (b) MLP network architecture. (c) The GNN encoder and decoder
 architecture. (d) The GNN Core architecture (the yellow circle represents a node-level edge aggregation function, the blue circle represents a global-level node
 aggregation function, and the green represents a global-level edge aggregation function).

 TABLE II
 E XPERIMENTAL S TUDIES AND I NPUT DATA

 D. Experimental Design may comprise encrypted or non-encrypted flows from vari-
 In the following, we describe nine experimental studies and ous sources. Hence, Study 8 and Study 9 are trained using
 two deep learning-based comparison methods, a CNN [9] and both VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset, and are trained for
 an LSTM [10] model. Experiments using various datasets, Function-type classification and Application-type classificaclassification tasks, and graph input element combinations are tion, respectively. As for the two reference methods, same
 aimed to evaluate our proposed approach. The classification as Study 1, both the CNN and the LSTM models take only
 of function types and application types will be represented raw bytes as network inputs and are trained for Function-type
 by the terms Function-type and Application-type, respec- classification of network traffic flows using VPN-dataset.
 tively. The experimental studies are summarized in Table II. 1) Study 1: In Study 1, the GNN takes only Node as a
 To be specific, Study 1 to Study 6 are GNN models trained network input. We train GNN using raw data with a packet
 using VPN-dataset for Function-type classification. The first length of 1,500 bytes. The GNN model is trained for Functionsix studies are intended to evaluate the effects of network type classification of network traffic flows using VPN-dataset.
 inputs on GNNs, and hence each study uses an unique com- Via Study 1, we would like to observe and make comparison of
 bination of graph input components, including Node, Global, the performance of our GNN model and the two deep learningand Edge. Similarly, to assess the generality of GNNs across based baseline methods, CNN and LSTM, which also take
 classification tasks, Study 7 is a GNN model trained on the only raw bytes as network inputs.
 VPN-dataset but specifically for Application-type classifica- 2) Study 2: In Study 2, we would like to evaluate the
 tion. Studies 8 and 9 are intended to study circumstances performance of our GNN model, which takes only Global as
 in which network traces obtained at a particular endpoint network inputs. The GNN model is trained for Function-type

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1231

 classification of network traffic flows using VPN-dataset. and NonVPN-dataset. The GNN model is assessed by testing
 Moreover, by making a comparison to Study 4 that takes meta on the validation sets of VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset
 features and raw bytes as network inputs, we can observe how separately, and also jointly. We would like to examine whether
 meta features supplements the GNN model. the GNN model that trained with both encrypted and non-
 3) Study 3: In Study 3, the GNN takes only Edge as encrypted traces can have the ability to classify Function-type
 network inputs, and the GNN model is trained for Function- of network traffic flows.
 type classification of network traffic flows using VPN-dataset. 9) Study 9: The GNN model in Study 9 has the same
 We would like to evaluate the performance of the GNN model network input types as Study 6, Study 7, and Study 8,
 when it takes only Edge as network inputs, and also make a and is trained for Application-type classification as Study 7.
 comparison to Study 5 to see how Edge element supplements Similar to Study 8, the GNN model is trained using both
 the GNN model. VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset. Six common categories
 4) Study 4: As for Study 4, the input graph to our GNN of applications across VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset with
 model consists of both Node and Global. The GNN model is sufficient samples are chosen to include in the classificatrained for Function-type classification of network traffic flows tion task. Same categories of applications being used from
 using VPN-dataset. This study helps to compare with Study 1 Study 7 are selected, which includes Facebook, Hangouts,
 and the two deep learning-based baseline methods, which both Skype, Email, Torrent, and Voipbuster. The GNN model is
 take only raw bytes as their network inputs. We would like to assessed by testing on the validation sets of VPN-dataset and
 investigate whether GNN can benefit from the additional meta NonVPN-dataset separately, and also jointly. Via Study 9, we
 features that belongs to Global elements. would like to examine whether the GNN model that trained
 5) Study 5: In Study 5, the input graph to our GNN model with both encrypted and non-encrypted traces can classify
 consists of both Node and Edge, and the GNN model is trained Application-type of network traffic flows effectively. We also
 for Function-type classification of network traffic flows using like to show how the proposed approach can generalize on
 VPN-dataset. Similar to Study 4, the underlying reason to con- different classification task through the study.
 duct this study is to make comparisons between studies that 10) Deep Learning-Based Reference Methods: Our baseare trained with raw bytes only, such as Study 1 and the two line approaches are based on two state-of-the-art deep learning
 reference methods. Via Study 5, we would like to evaluate architectures, an 1D-CNN by Wang et al. [9] and an attentionwhether GNN can benefit from the Edge element, where the based LSTM network by Yao et al. [10]. As in Study 1,
 temporal information and the chronological relationship of the both the CNN and the LSTM models take only raw bytes as
 network traffic data are preserved. network inputs and are trained for Function-type classification
 6) Study 6: The GNN in Study 6 takes a graph that includes of network traffic flows using VPN-dataset. In their methods,
 Node, Edge, and Global as network inputs. The GNN model while the LSTM model uses the first 1,500 bytes of the first
 is trained for Function-type classification of network traffic 10 packets within a bi-directional flow, which is the optimal
 flows using VPN-dataset. In this case, the GNN will simul- heuristic configuration in [10], as the network input, the CNN
 taneously take a combination of network inputs into account, model uses only the first 784 bytes of each bi-directional flow
 which include raw bytes, packet relations, and meta features. as the network input. In its original, unaltered form, the CNN
 With Study 6, we would like to observe if GNN can gain model performs poorly in our initial experiments. To make
 benefit from a graph input when additional meta features and it more competitive and ensure a fair comparison, we make
 edge information are also included and preserved in addition two major changes to the CNN model: (1) we utilize the first
 to raw bytes. 1,500 bytes of the first 10 packets inside a flow; and (2) we add
 7) Study 7: In Study 7, the GNN takes a graph which 8 more convolutional layers to accommodate more hidden feaincludes Node, Edge, and Global as network inputs, and tures. For each input sample, the surplus packets are trimmed
 is trained using VPN-dataset. However, different from the when a flow has more than 10 packets, and zero padding is
 aforementioned experimental studies, the GNN model in applied when a flow has fewer than 10 packets. Also, we
 Study 7 is trained for Application-type classification rather employ the same data preprocessing steps as in our work,
 than Function-type classification of network traffic flows. Six and the biased information has been removed to avoid biased
 common categories of applications in VPN-dataset with suffi- conclusions or inflated classification outcomes as mentioned
 cient samples are chosen to include in the classification task. in Section III-B1.
 The selected applications include Facebook, Hangouts, Skype,
 Email, Torrent, and Voipbuster. Via Study 7, we would like to
 evaluate whether the proposed GNN model can generalize on E. Model Training and Validation
 different classification task. The graph network is implemented on Tensorflow 2.0 using
 8) Study 8: In Study 8, the GNN also takes a graph which the DeepMind Graph Nets library [8] and trained with an
 includes Node, Edge, and Global as network inputs, and is NVIDIA V100 graphics card. The extracted network traffic
 trained for Function-type classification of network traffic flows flows of VPN-dataset are split into two portions that 60% is
 as Study 6. In most cases, the network traces being received for the training dataset, and the remaining is for validation. The
 at a certain endpoint may contain encrypted or non-encrypted graph network accepts an input graph that contains meta feaflows from different sources. Hence, different from Study 6, tures in the form of global attributes, raw bytes in the form of
 the GNN model in Study 8 is trained using both VPN-dataset node attributes, and packet relations in the form of edges, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

 generates and returns a graph with a prediction of Function- 2) Sensitivity: The sensitivity is also known as recall, and
 type or Application-type stored in Global. The parameters of it measures, within samples which have the same label, the
 the graph network are updated by minimizing the network loss ratio of number of the correctly predicted samples to the total
 using Adam optimizer with the learning rate 0.0003. The ICF number of the samples and is defined as:
 cross-entropy loss is computed by comparing the prediction TPi
 with the ground truth labels, and the learning rate is a hyper- Sensitivityi = , (3)
 TPi + FNi
 parameter that controls the pace of updating neural networks.
 The batch size is set to 128, where it is the sample size from 3) Precision: The precision measures, within samples
 the training dataset that will be used to calculate a loss for which are classified as the same label, the proportion of numupdating the weights once. With these hyper-parameters, we ber of the correctly predicted samples to the total number of
 train our graph network for 300 epochs. the samples and is defined as:
 TPi
 Precisioni = , (4)
 F. Evaluation Metrics TPi + FPi
 The performance metrics used for evaluating our proposed where FP is the number of false positive samples.
 GNN model are sensitivity, precision, F1 score, and overall 4) F1 Score: The F1 score is a metric that computes the
 accuracy. While the overall accuracy is the most commonly harmonic mean of the sensitivity and the precision, and is
 used benchmark for evaluating a model, it may not be con- a widely used evaluation metric for models trained with an
 sidered the only and the most important metric, as real-world imbalanced dataset and is defined as:
 datasets are normally imbalanced, and a high overall accu- Sensitivityi × Precisioni
 racy can be achieved easily when a network is trained to F1i = 2 × . (5)
 Sensitivityi + Precisioni
 favor the major categories that have more samples. Therefore,
 micro metrics are also provided to show prominence to each IV. R ESULTS
 category’s performance, and additionally, the full confusion
 A. VPN-Dataset Function-Type Classification Results
 matrices across our experimental studies and the two reference methods are also reported. Through the given confusion The performance metrics used for evaluating our proposed
 matrices, we can comprehend how much a network predicts GNN models are tabulated in Table III. Fig. 6 shows a comcorrectly for each label in terms of network robustness. parison of the confusion matrices for Studies 1 to 6 and the
 1) Overall Accuracy: The overall accuracy can be com- two reference methods. In terms of sensitivity, precision, and
 puted as the total number of samples that are correctly F1 score, Study 1 is similar to, and even slightly better than,
 classified by the network model divided by the total number the two reference approaches, the CNN [9] and the LSTM [10]
 of samples and is defined as: models, when only raw bytes are used. When the confu-
  sion matrix pairs (Study 1, CNN) are compared, it is clear
 Overall accuracy =  i TPi , (2) that Study 1 significantly improves the performance of File
 i (TP i + FNi ) and Streaming, as indicated by the orange boxes, and when
 where TP is the number of true positive samples, FN is the the confusion matrix pair (Study 1, LSTM) is compared, it
 number of false negative samples, and i indicates the class index. shows that Study 1 substantially improves the performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1233

 Fig. 6. VPN-dataset Function-type classification. Confusion matrices for eight studies: (a) Study 1: the GNN input is a graph consisting of Node (raw bytes)
 only; (b) Study 2: the GNN input is a graph consisting of Global (meta features) only; (c) Study 3: the GNN input is a graph consisting of Edge (time
 information) only; (d) Study 4: the GNN input is a graph consisting of Node (raw bytes) and Global (meta features); (e) Study 5: the GNN input is a graph
 consisting of Node (raw bytes) and Edge (time information); (f) Study 6: the GNN input is a graph consisting of Node (Raw bytes), Edge (time information),
 and Global (meta features); (g) The CNN model: the input is raw bytes; (h) The LSTM model: the input is raw bytes.

 of Streaming, as indicated by the orange box. One of the padding is needed when a flow has fewer packets, which may
 underlying reasons for the GNNs’ ability to take flow data harm network performance; when a flow has more packets
 with an arbitrary number of packets as network inputs is that than the predefined shape, the flow will be truncated resulting
 the GNNs can give network input shape flexibility, allowing in losing the fidelity of data.
 the form of each sample to be different throughout the train- Study 1 is trained with raw bytes, whereas only meta feaing and validation processes. When mapping traffic flows into tures are used in Study 2. Comparisons of the confusion matrix
 graph representations, all packets in a flow may be kept with- pairs (Study 1, Study 2) show that Study 1 outperforms Study 2
 out redundancy, which benefits the network. The CNN or the significantly in every category, and the result is consistent with
 LSTM model’s inputs are restricted to a fixed number of pack- the prior research [25] that claims neural network models are
 ets for each flow once the architectures are determined. Zero appropriate to be trained with raw data because the nature

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF S TUDY 7

 of deep learning methods is to seek hidden features from the
 given inputs by itself.
 The confusion matrix pair (Study 1, Study 4) shows that
 Study 4 has better performance almost in every category
 based on the number of correct predictions, and the yellow box in Study 4 indicates that the sensitivity of Email
 increases by approximately 5.1% comparing to the green box
 in Study 1. In terms of the performance measures presented in
 Table III, Study 4 shows an increase in the overall sensitivity,
 precision, and F1 score, indicating that Study 4 outperforms
 Study 1. The results indicate that the GNN can benefit from
 the additional input of meta features, which are difficult to
 decoded or learn from raw data since they require domain
 knowledge.
 The GNN model in Study 3 takes only the Edge element as
 network inputs, and the confusion matrix of Study 3 is shown Fig. 7. VPN-dataset Application-type classification. A confusion matrix for
 Study 7.
 in Fig. 6c. As expected, the number of correct predictions of
 each categories are significantly lower than other experimental
 studies because the network takes merely the information of minor categories, whereas the GNN model with ICF (Study 6)
 packet relations without knowing the raw bytes or meta fea- tends to learn samples from each class equally.
 tures as network input. However, as shown in the confusion
 matrix derived from Study 5 (Fig. 6e), where the GNN model B. VPN-Dataset Application-Type Classification Results
 is trained using raw bytes with time information supplemented,
 the sensitivities of each categories are higher than or equal In Section IV-A, we demonstrate several experiments with
 to Study 1 that is trained using raw bytes only. According to different combination of graph input elements, and assess the
 the quantitative results, the provided temporal information and impacts of network inputs on GNN. We also make comchronological relationship between packets within a flow has parisons of the performance of our GNN model and the
 the efficacy to boost the performance of the GNN model. two deep learning-based baseline methods, the CNN and the
 Furthermore, according to Table III, Study 6, our proposed LSTM, and show our proposed approach that incorporating
 approach, which considers meta features, raw bytes, and raw bytes, metadata, and packet relations into the GNN model
 packet relations as GNN inputs at the same time, outper- is advantageous. We apply the proposed approach to a differforms all GNN variants and the two reference methods in ent classification task in this subsection to see whether the
 terms of the overall accuracy, has the highest sensitivity val- proposed GNN model can generalize to other classification
 ues in every category, and four out of the six categories tasks. Hence, Study 7 is conducted and trained for Applicationhave the highest precision and F1 score values. The eval- type classification rather than Function-type classification of
 uation result indicates that the GNN model’s performance network traffic flows using VPN-dataset. The performance
 is improved by obtaining additional information from the metrics used for validating Study 7 are tabulated in Table IV,
 Global, which can include system-level properties of flow and the confusion matrix of Study 7 is showcased in Fig. 7. In
 represented by global attributes, and the Edge, which is terms of overall accuracy, we observe that the GNN model in
 used to indicate the chronological relationship and temporal Study 7 can maintains its performance by comparing with the
 information. performance of Study 6 (Fig. 6f). Also, by looking at the con-
 In addition, we conducted an additional experiment in which fusion matrix in Fig. 7, five out of six categories’ sensitivities
 the GNN model is trained without the ICF weighting scheme are around or above 95%, and the remaining Email category
 for Study 6 The sensitivities for each category are as follows: also has a sensitivity of 91.6%. According to the quantita-
 Chat: 0.972, Email: 0.907, File: 0.925, Streaming: 0.875, P2P: tive results, the GNN demonstrates its effectiveness and broad
 0.949, and VoIP: 0.988. By comparing the experiment with- application for various classification tasks.
 out ICF to the one with ICF (Fig. 6f), the sensitivities of the
 three categories with minor samples, Email, Streaming, and C. Hybrid Dataset Results
 P2P, have decreased by 5.9%, 9.9%, and 1.1%, respectively. 1) Study 8 — Function-Type Classification: The GNN
 One important finding is that the GNN model without ICF is model in Study 8 was trained using both VPN-dataset and
 relatively incompetent to recognize and learn samples from the NonVPN-dataset. Fig. 8 shows the confusion matrices derived

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1235

 Fig. 8. Hybrid dataset: Function-type classification. Confusion matrices for Study 8 using various validation datasets derived from: (a) VPN-dataset,
 (b) NonVPN-dataset, and (c) both VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset.

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF S TUDY 8

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF S TUDY 9

 from Study 8, which were created by testing the GNN only 2) Study 9 — Application-Type Classification: The GNN
 using the validation sets of VPN-dataset, NonVPN-dataset, and model in Study 9 was trained using both VPN-dataset and
 a joint dataset of both, respectively. The performance metrics NonVPN-dataset, and the performance metrics of Study 9 is
 of Study 8 is tabulated in Table V. By comparing Study 8 tabulated in Table VI. Fig. 9a, Fig. 9b, and Fig. 9c are the
 that the GNN model is validated only on VPN-dataset with confusion matrices derived from Study 9, which were created
 Study 6 (Fig. 6f), the red boxes from Study 8 (Fig. 8a) shows by testing the GNN using the validation sets of VPN-dataset,
 the sensitivities of Email, File, and VoIP have a decrease of NonVPN-dataset, and a joint dataset of both, respectively. By
 4.2%, 3.9%, and 9.9% respectively. However, the sensitivities comparing Study 9 that the GNN model is validated only
 of rest of the categories still remain high. The quantitative on VPN-dataset with Study 7 (Fig. 7), the pink boxes from
 results show the GNN model in Study 8 can classify Function- Study 9 (Fig. 9a) shows the sensitivities of Skype, Email,
 type of network traffic flows in VPN-dataset effectively even and Voipbuster have a decrease of 7.5%, 3.4%, and 6.5%
 when the GNN model is trained using both encrypted and respectively, while the sensitivities of Facebook, Hangouts,
 non-encrypted traces. As for Fig. 8b where the GNN model and Torrent still remain high. Also, similar to the trend occuris validated only on NonVPN-dataset, although the sensitivi- ring in Study 8, as shown in Fig. 9b, the GNN model in
 ties of all the categories except for Email are relatively lower Study 9 has lower sensitivities of all the categories when it
 than the one validated on VPN-dataset (Fig. 8a), the features is validated only on NonVPN-dataset instead of VPN-dataset
 of non-encrypted traces still can be preserved in our trained (Fig. 9a). Overall, according to the quantitative results, the
 GNN model to a certain extent. GNN model in Study 9 shows its efficacy in classifying

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 1236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 Fig. 9. Hybrid dataset: Application-type classification. Confusion matrices for Study 9 using various validation datasets derived from: (a) VPN-dataset,
 (b) NonVPN-dataset, and (c) both VPN-dataset and NonVPN-dataset.

 Application-type even though the model is trained with a mix by the majority of supervised learning models. Only VPNof encrypted and non-encrypted traces. dataset and NonVPN-dataset are used to train and validate the
 GNN. When the input flows are based on a different encryption
 V. D ISCUSSION protocol than the datasets used for training, it is anticipated
 Study 6 proved that using GNNs for network traffic that the GNN’s performance may decrease or become biased.
 classification outperforms the two reference methods, the In our future work, we’ll characterize how the GNN performs
 CNN-based and the LSTM-based model, using a VPN- under various encryption protocols. One possible approach is
 dataset. We extracted VPN-dataset based on Function-type to utilize transfer learning to retrain the GNN with a much
 (i.e., Chat, Email, File, Streaming, P2P, and VoIP) rather than smaller training dataset comprising flow inputs with different
 Application-type (i.e., Skype, YouTube, and Facebook). This encryption methods. Another more sophisticated strategy is
 increased the complexity of the classification problem, which to use domain adaptation via adversarial training [26], which
 aims to classify Function-type of network traffic flows across aims to train a neural network on a source dataset and achieve
 different applications. Additionally, the GNN model is trained high accuracy on a target dataset that differs significantly from
 with a hybrid of encrypted and non-encrypted dataset to the source dataset. In this case, the task of the source and tardemonstrate its efficacy in classifying both Function-type and get domains is the same, but the source and target domains,
 Application-type. A key contribution of this work is to lever- data representation, or distribution are different.
 age a novel geometric learning framework [8] for predicting
 network traffic flows. While ordinary CNNs and LSTMs VI. C ONCLUSION
 accept only raw bytes as network inputs, our GNN allows us In this work, we proposed and implemented a flow-based
 to incorporate raw bytes, packet relations, and meta features geometric learning model for the classification of encrypted
 that are assigned as node attributes, edge attributes and global network traffic. We introduced the concept of mapping
 attributes, respectively, to our network inputs. Importantly, our network traffic flows to graph representations, where data
 GNN accepts arbitrary graph inputs that contain any number integrity can be preserved more effectively than when mapping
 of packets. Hence, regardless of memory, the GNN can obvi- from the original data. GNN models demonstrated superiority
 ate the needs of data truncation and zero padding, which are in executing multi-class classification on encrypted network
 required by CNN-based and LSTM-based models. If memory traffic flows by utilizing packet relationships, combining raw
 consumption is constrained, it is possible to define a thresh- bytes and meta features as input graphs, and overcoming the
 old for the amount of packets that will be fed into the GNN constraint of using the same data size. Then, in nine indepenas a graph. In this scenario, the memory used by the GNN dent studies, we compared various combinations of network
 will be equivalent to or less than that required by the CNN or inputs and classification tasks for our GNN model. In terms
 the LSTM models. Additionally, because the GNN can accept of overall accuracy and F1 score metrics, the results show that
 many relational-based inputs, investigations into potential fac- our GNN, which utilizes raw bytes, meta features, and packet
 tors in terms of packet relations need further exploration for relations as network inputs, outperforms other GNN variants
 robustness. and the two reference methods. As part of our future work, for
 One potential limitation of our research is that the network robustness, we will further validate our GNN model using a
 traffic flows generated or captured by scripts are more likely larger dataset that contains flows with various encryption proto display deterministic behavior. Another limitation is that the tocols, investigate more useful and meaningful packet relation
 trained GNN may not be applied to inputs with traffic flow information, and study possible metrics for a comprehensive
 characteristics (e.g., encryption protocols) that differ signifi- assessment of our GNN model in multi-class classification
 cantly from those used for training. This is a drawback shared tasks.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 HUOH et al.: FLOW-BASED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH GNNs 1237

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [23] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
 The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers. lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
 [24] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and
 R EFERENCES R. Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
 from overfitting,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958,
 [1] R. T. El-Maghraby, N. M. A. Elazim, and A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, “A survey 2014.
 on deep packet inspection,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Eng. Syst. [25] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
 (ICCES), 2017, pp. 188–197. no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
 [2] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future direc- [26] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation by backtions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, propagation,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 37, 2015,
 Jan./Feb. 2012. pp. 1180–1189. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/
 [3] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, ganin15.html
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc.
 ICISSP, 2017, pp. 253–262.
 [4] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S. C. Bagui, and J. Sheehan,
 “Comparison of machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN
 network traffic flow using time-related features,” J. Cyber Security Ting-Li Huoh received the first M.S. degree in
 Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 108–126, 2017. technology management from National Chengchi
 [5] O. Barut, R. Zhu, Y. Luo, and T. Zhang, “TLS encrypted application University in 2018, and the second M.S. degree
 classification using machine learning with flow feature engineering,” in in computer engineering from the University of
 Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Security, 2020, pp. 32–41. Massachusetts Lowell in 2022, where she is cur-
 [6] M. Jaber, R. G. Cascella, and C. Barakat, “Can we trust the inter-packet rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer
 time for traffic classification?” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), engineering. Her research interests include com-
 2011, pp. 1–5. puter networking, deep learning, big data analyt-
 [7] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classifica- ics, blockchain technology, and artificial intelligence
 tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, with a focus on network traffic analysis and network
 May 2019. traffic classification.
 [8] P. W. Battaglia et al., “Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and
 graph networks,” 2018, arXiv:1806.01261.
 [9] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI), Yan Luo (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 2017, pp. 43–48. degree in computer science from the University
 [10] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification of California at Riverside in 2005. He is a
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term Professor with the Department of Electrical and
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022. Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts
 [11] J. Zhang, F. Ye, and Y. Qian, “Intelligent and application-aware network Lowell, where he directs the laboratory of Advanced
 traffic prediction in smart access gateways,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, Computer Architecture and Network Systems. His
 pp. 264–269, May/Jun. 2020. current research interest centers on machine/deep
 learning-based data analytics of network flows
 [12] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “Deep-Full-Range: A deep learning
 and biomedical data, heterogeneous computing, and
 based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection
 embedded sensor systems. He has served on the ediframework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190, 2019.
 torial board of several peer-reviewed journals and as the program chair of
 [13] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
 several IEEE conferences. He is a member of ACM.
 encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
 [14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
 Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985. Peilong Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 [15] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, degree in computer engineering from the University
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related of Massachusetts Lowell in 2016. He is an
 features,” in Proc. ICISSP, 2016, pp. 1–8. Assistant Professor with the Department of
 [16] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- Computer Science, Elizabethtown College. His
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using research interests include heterogeneous and
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, parallel computer architecture, big data analytics
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. with distributed computing framework, and data
 [17] B. Pang, Y. Fu, S. Ren, Y. Wang, Q. Liao, and Y. Jia, “CGNN: Traffic plane innovation in software-defined networking.
 classification with graph neural network,” 2021, arXiv:2110.09726.
 [18] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, and T. Zhang, “Encrypted network traffic classification using a geometric learning model,” in Proc. IFIP/IEEE Int. Symp.
 Integr. Netw. Manage. (IM), 2021, pp. 376–383.
 [19] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE Tong Zhang received the B.S. degree in electrical
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. engineering from Tsinghua University and the Ph.D.
 [20] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2Img: A sequence-to-image degree in electrical engineering from the University
 based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional neu- of Southern California. She is a Principal Engineer
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), 2017, and a Lead Architect on AI and analytics with
 pp. 1271–1276. the Network Platforms Group, Intel Corporation.
 [21] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, She has been leading the architecture efforts for
 “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural Machine Learning and Deep Learning solutions for
 networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050, network domain use cases. Before joining Intel, she
 2017. was a Principal Scientist with Hewlett-Packard Labs,
 [22] S. Khan, H. Rahmani, S. A. A. Shah, and M. Bennamoun, “A guide to where she led over a dozen projects related to media
 convolutional neural networks for computer vision,” Synthesis Lectures analytics systems and products. She has over 50 granted U.S. patents and more
 Comput. Vis., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–207, 2018. than 70 publications to her credit.

Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on August 19,2025 at 01:42:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.