Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Information Sciences
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ins

Graph based encrypted malicious traﬃc detection with hybrid
analysis of multi-view features
Yueping Hong a , Qi Li a,∗ , Yanqing Yang a , Meng Shen b
a
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, No. 10 Xitucheng Road, Haidian District, Beijing, China
b
 Beijing Institute of Technology, No. 5 Yard, Zhong Guan Cun South Street, Haidian District, Beijing, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: At present, the TLS cryptographic protocol is widely deployed. While protecting the security
Malicious traﬃc and integrity of transmitted information, it also makes the detection of malicious behavior
Encrypted traﬃc more diﬃcult. In recent years, researchers have proposed many encrypted malicious traﬃc
SSL/TLS
 detection methods. However, the existing approaches have some shortcomings. Firstly, although
Multi-view features
 researchers have extracted multi-view features from diﬀerent aspects, which can be divided into
 vectorized features based on feature engineering and image features based on original data,
 existing methods cannot fully integrate the features of diﬀerent forms of expression. Secondly,
 most of the existing methods do not fully analyze the correlation between diﬀerent encrypted
 traﬃc. Thirdly, the existing methods based on correlation analysis have low processing eﬃciency
 and cannot be applied to real networks. In the paper, we present MalDiscovery, a novel technique
 to discover encrypted malicious traﬃc to address all the above issues. For encrypted malicious
 traﬃc, MalDiscovery constructs an attribute KNN graph, in which encrypted sessions are used
 as nodes to construct a KNN graph according to the similarity of image features, and vectorized
 features are used as attributes of corresponding nodes. After that, the GraphSAGE model is used
 to collect relevant node information through correlation analysis to enrich the embeddings of
 each node. Finally, we achieve the accurate binary classiﬁcation of nodes in the graph based
 on richer embeddings. We use extensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method, and the
 experiment results show that MalDiscovery can achieve an accuracy of about 99.9%, signiﬁcantly
 outperforming all compared methods.

1. Introduction

1.1. Background

 To protect security during data transmission, cryptographic protocols have gradually developed and are currently becoming
mature. According to the Google Transparency report [1], the proportion of encrypted traﬃc on the Internet has increased from
48% in 2014 to 99% in 2022. However, under the cover of cryptographic protocols, threat activities such as malware delivery,
command-and-control channels, and data exﬁltration, pose a serious threat to cyberspace security [2–4].

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: liqi2001@bupt.edu.cn (Q. Li).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2023.119229
Received 8 January 2023; Received in revised form 6 April 2023; Accepted 22 May 2023
Available online 1 June 2023
0020-0255/© 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Among various cryptographic protocols, TLS protocol has been widely deployed in real networks since it can well protect the
security and integrity of transmitted data and is the most representative protocol among cryptographic protocols. Besides, attackers
are increasingly utilizing TLS-encrypted channels for the delivery and distribution of malware payloads, and for communication
between infected hosts and command and control (C&C) servers. According to the MITRE ATT&CK report [5], many cyberattacks
in the past few years have been related to port 443 of the TLS protocol. In addition, most of the existing public encrypted traﬃc
datasets collected encrypted traﬃc data based on the TLS protocol, while paying little attention to other cryptographic protocols.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to design an encrypted malicious traﬃc detection method for the TLS cryptographic protocols.

1.2. Shortcomings of existing approaches

 As researchers increasingly focus on encrypted malicious traﬃc detection, many approaches have been proposed. Initially, traditional methods were mostly based on signatures. However, such methods cannot detect unseen malicious traﬃc while violating
user privacy. Therefore, in recent years, researchers have chosen to use machine learning and deep learning methods to identify
encrypted malicious traﬃc [6]. These approaches extract a variety of features from encrypted traﬃc and regard encrypted traﬃc as
sample nodes, then use machine learning or deep learning models to detect the maliciousness of each node respectively according
to the features of encrypted traﬃc itself. However, these methods have two drawbacks. First, existing methods extract a variety of
encrypted traﬃc features from diﬀerent aspects. These features can often be referred to as multi-view features by researchers, and
they are divided into two categories: vectorized features and image features according to the representation form. Many researchers
believe that multi-view features extracted from diﬀerent aspects can complement each other and assist sample classiﬁcation from
diﬀerent perspectives under appropriate feature fusion methods [7,8]. Nevertheless, existing studies usually use only one type of
feature that ignore the supplementary information or directly concatenate several features that can destroy the correlation information of the image and introduce noise to vectorized features. Second, with the development of adversarial technology, attackers can
easily interfere with the eﬀect of the models by modifying features and other methods [9]. Fortunately, malicious threat activities
are usually realized by multiple infected hosts jointly initiating network communication, and there must be rich correlations between
these encrypted malicious sessions. Using this correlation information can help us more accurately detect encrypted malicious traﬃc.
Nevertheless, most of the existing methods do not consider the analysis of the correlation between encrypted traﬃc. To fully analyze
the correlation between encrypted traﬃc, researchers introduced graph-based models and proposed many methods. In these studies,
encrypted traﬃc samples are constructed into a graph based on the correlation between diﬀerent samples, and correlation-analysis
models such as RandomWalk [10], GCN [11], etc. are utilized to discover the malicious sample nodes in the graph, so that realize
the malicious detection of samples. However, these methods are ineﬃcient in the phase of testing unknown traﬃc since they use
transductive graph-based models. Therefore, it is an urgent problem to design a method that can achieve appropriate feature fusion,
correlation analysis, and high eﬃciency.

1.3. Solution

 Considering the detection of encrypted malicious traﬃc, three problems need to be solved. (1) How to eﬀectively utilize the
multi-view features of encrypted traﬃc samples to learn a uniﬁed embedding? (2) How to consider the correlation information
of encrypted traﬃc samples in the testing phase? (3) How to improve detection eﬃciency? To address these issues, we make the
following contributions:

 • To fuse multi-view features skillfully, we construct an attributed KNN graph, in which we analyze the correlation between
 samples through the similarity of image features and combine the vectorized features as the attribute of each node in the KNN
 graph.
 • To exploit the correlation for detection, we propose MalDiscovery, which utilizes a GNN model which can capture the correlation information between diﬀerent nodes in the attributed KNN graph.
 • To improve detection eﬃciency, we abandon the transductive models such as GCN [11] and utilize the inductive model Graph-
 SAGE [12] for correlation analysis.

 Our approach not only realizes the fusion of multi-view features and the analysis of the correlation between encrypted traﬃc, but
also has high processing eﬃciency, which can be deployed in the real network environment.

2. Related work

 Malicious traﬃc detection is important for establishing a secure and reliable computer network architecture. With the development of encryption technology, attackers also use it to evade the detection against their malicious activities, which brings a great
challenge to intrusion detection systems [13]. Presently, researchers pay more attention to detecting encrypted malicious traﬃc. The
research on encrypted malicious traﬃc detection has gone through a long period of development, which can be roughly divided into
three stages: signature-based studies, ML-based & DL-based studies, and correlation-based studies.
 Signature-based studies are based on the matches between the identiﬁcation signatures and the actual information in encrypted
traﬃc payloads. The signatures include the universal characteristics of an application protocol and are built via two sources: from

 2
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

the standard protocol speciﬁcations and documentation, or manual observation and analysis. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) [14–16]
is the most well-known method for this type of research. These approaches are essentially a man-in-the-middle attack [17], which
intercept encrypted traﬃc during transmission, detect malicious activities by using DPI through decrypted ciphertext information,
then re-encrypt and forward traﬃc. However, these approaches destroy the secure channel in the procedure of decryption, which
seriously violates the user’s privacy. In addition, decryption and re-encryption are computationally expensive. In order to detect
encrypted malicious traﬃc without decryption, some researchers have tried to extract information from outside the payload and use
traditional machine learning (ML) or deep learning (DL) to analyze encrypted traﬃc samples.
 Machine Learning-based (ML-based) & Deep Learning (DL-based) studies have gradually matured in the last decade, and these
methods input the extracted encrypted traﬃc features into the models to determine the maliciousness of the samples. The extracted
features can be divided into vectorized features and image features according to their representation form. ML-based methods rely
on a large amount of prior knowledge to extract features and train shallow machine learning models on this basis to make full
use of the observable features introduced by encryption mechanisms to distinguish encrypted malicious traﬃc. In this process, the
features extracted by researchers through feature engineering are usually represented in the form of vectors, so these features are
usually referred to as vectorized features in subsequent works. Anderson et al. [2–4] have long focused on encrypted malicious traﬃc
detection and deﬁned the detection granularity as a single encrypted session. Their works mainly focused on two statistical features
of encrypted traﬃc: handshake information (version, cipher suite, extension, certiﬁcate, etc.) and session metadata (packet length
sequence, packet time interval sequence, etc.). Wang et al. [18] extracted the features from HTTPS traﬃc and then fed them into
shallow machine-learning models to detect encrypted malicious traﬃc. Shen et al. [19] proposed an attribute-aware encrypted traﬃc
classiﬁcation method based on the second-order Markov Chains to deal with the problem that the existing encrypted traﬃc classiﬁ-
cation methods have low classiﬁcation accuracy for traﬃc with similar ﬁngerprints. Dai et al. [20] proposed an encrypted malicious
traﬃc detection method using multi-view features for SSL protocol. They extracted features from multiple aspects, including ﬂow
statistics, SSL handshake ﬁelds, and certiﬁcates, to retain the original key information, and used four machine learning models as
classiﬁers to achieve the highest accuracy in the XGBoost model. Liu et al. [21] proposed a detection structure called MalDect for
encrypted malicious traﬃc and uses the method of online random forest to detect the traﬃc before illegal operation. Shen et al. [22]
proposed FineWP, a novel ﬁne-grained webpage ﬁngerprinting method, which extracts length information of packets and feeds into
machine learning models for classiﬁcation. Dong et al. [23] extracted packet length sequences and constructed MLTree for each
encrypted session to analyze the malicious traﬃc behavior. However, the detection accuracy of these approaches greatly depends on
prior knowledge. If the traﬃc packet changes or is confused by attackers, the eﬀect of this method will be greatly reduced [24]. DLbased studies get rid of the limitation of prior knowledge [25] by converting the original encrypted traﬃc data into images and then
automatically discovering malicious encrypted traﬃc with deep learning approaches. The images extracted during this process are
called the image features of encrypted traﬃc by researchers, which can completely contain the information of the encrypted traﬃc.
Wang et al. [26] proposed an end-to-end encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation method with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,
which is the ﬁrst time to apply an end-to-end method for the encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation domain. Shapira et al. [27] proposed an
approach to transforming encrypted traﬃc into an intuitive picture and then using convolutional neural networks (CNN) to identify
the traﬃc category. Lin et al. [28] converted packets into images and used CNN to generate corresponding embeddings, and then fed
each image into a bidirectional LSTM in time order to obtain a classiﬁcation of a ﬂow. Bazuhair et al. [29] proposed an image-based
encrypted traﬃc embedding method based on Berlin noise, which uses Perlin noise to encode the given connection features into the
image to train the deep learning model for binary classiﬁcation of connection ﬂows. Wang et al. [30] proposed an encrypted traﬃc
application identiﬁcation method using a stack type of automatic encoder. Shao et al. [31] proposed a traﬃc data encoder based
on deep learning to extract traﬃc representation and classify the traﬃc. However, ML-based and DL-based methods have certain
drawbacks. Firstly, since in the ﬁeld of encrypted traﬃc where the payload is not visible, the features that can be extracted and
exploited are very limited, the analysis from the perspective of a single encrypted traﬃc feature cannot accurately detect malicious
traﬃc. Secondly, with the development of adversarial technology, attackers have been able to modify the key features and disguise
malicious traﬃc as normal traﬃc to evade detection.
 Correlation-based studies are emerging ideas in the current encrypted malicious traﬃc detection research. With the increasing
attention to correlation in the ﬁeld of encrypted traﬃc research in recent years, researchers have tried to construct encrypted traﬃc
data into a graph and use the models related to graph research to detect encrypted malicious traﬃc. Shen et al. [32] proposed a traﬃc
interaction graph structure and utilized the graph classiﬁcation method to identify distributed applications based on encrypted traﬃc.
Wang et al. [33] presented a graph method on botnet analysis to show that the correlation between traﬃc is crucial information
that must be carefully analyzed in malicious traﬃc detection. Cui et al. [34] proposed an approach that uses Siamese Heterogeneous
Graph Attention Network to measure whether two IPv6 client addresses belong to the same user even if the user’s traﬃc is protected
by TLS encryption. Pham T D et al. [35] focused on Android encrypted traﬃc and designed a communication graph and utilized
the graph model to realize the identifying mobile apps based on network traﬃc. The nodes in the communication graph are deﬁned
by tuples of IP addresses and ports of the services connected by the app, and edges are established by the weighted communication
correlation among the nodes. However, these methods currently do not consider the fusion of traﬃc features, and most of the graph
models they used are transductive, which does not have good generalization.

 3
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 1. Overview of MalDiscovery.

3. Methodology

3.1. Overview

 Fig. 1 shows the overall framework of MalDiscovery. We can be divided the proposed approach into two relatively independent
links: oﬄine training and online testing. The reason we designed MalDiscovery like this is to prevent the slower training phase
in the model from aﬀecting the detection eﬃciency of the model. An excellent model structure should be able to save time and
space complexity in the running of the program. Our method has the advantage of high testing eﬃciency, which is derived from the
inductive model GraphSAGE we use. During the oﬄine training phase, we can collect a large amount of training data, which allows
the system to use a lot of time to complete the training of the model. In the online testing phase, diﬀerent from other models, we
will complete the eﬃcient processing of samples to meet the eﬃciency requirements of online traﬃc detection.
 From another view, our approach is mainly consisting of four modules: feature extraction module, attributed KNN graph construction module, GraphSAGE module, and detection module. In the feature extraction module, we extract the image features and
vectorized features of encrypted traﬃc; in the attributed KNN graph construction module, to fully integrated these two types of features, we construct the attributed KNN graph structure of encrypted traﬃc based on graph modeling method, in which the similarity
of image features is used to construct an undirected KNN graph, and the vectorized features are used as the attributes of the nodes
in the graph; in GraphSAGE module, due to the relevant sample features extracted through the correlation information between
nodes have signiﬁcant reference value for the malicious detection task of the target node, we explore the correlation information of
encrypted traﬃc samples through random neighbor sampling and neighbor attributes aggregation to obtain rich node embeddings
of encrypted traﬃc. In this procedure, the GraphSAGE model shows a more appropriate computing cost and time cost than GCN.
Since node embeddings are generated by GraphSAGE analysis of correlations and aggregated relevant information, they can more
comprehensively portray the encrypted sessions, and then make our approach achieves more accurate maliciousness detection. Finally, in the detection module, we feed the embeddings of nodes into a classiﬁer to perform binary classiﬁcation of the nodes in
the attribute KNN graph by an MLP classiﬁer. Since the nodes in the attributed KNN graph correspond to encrypted sessions, the
binary classiﬁcation of the nodes in the graph by MLP is equivalent to the binary classiﬁcation of whether the encrypted session
is malicious. In addition, if researchers want to migrate our method to other cryptographic protocol scenarios, they only need to
replace the feature extraction module with the feature extraction module based on other cryptographic protocols. It means that our
model is not limited to the analysis of TLS-encrypted traﬃc.
 In this paper, we implement the detection task of encrypted malicious traﬃc at the session level. On the one hand, the bidirectional
ﬂow solves the problem of distinguishing between client and server. On the other hand, the session contains more abundant traﬃc
information and more detailed labels. After deﬁning the session as the granularity of the encrypted malicious traﬃc detection task,
we need to complete the feature extraction of the encrypted sessions.

3.2. Feature extraction

 In the existing works on encrypted traﬃc, researchers have extracted a variety of features of encrypted traﬃc from diﬀerent
aspects. These features are often presented in two forms, namely, vectorized features and image features. The vectorized features

 4
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Table 1
 Extracted vectorized features.

 Feature Log Description

 ADoC conn Average Duration of the Connection
 SDoD conn Standard Deviation of Duration
 MIToC conn Minimum Inter-arrival Time of Connection
 AIToC conn Average Inter-arrival Time of Connection
 MIToC conn Maximum Inter-arrival Time of Connection
 NoBiU conn Number of Bytes in Upstream
 NoBiD conn Number of Bytes in Downstream
 RoDBaAB conn The ratio of Downstream Bytes
 IPN conn Inbound Packets Number
 OPN conn Outbound Packets Number
 RoIaOB conn The ratio of Inbound to Outbound Bytes
 MVoFPL conn Mean Value of the Forward Packet Length
 MVoBPL conn Mean Value of Backward Packet Length
 RoHSSL SSL The ratio of SSL connections that use the high version-TLS
 APKL SSL Average Public Key Length
 RoSNI SSL The Ratio of SSL connections that has SNI (Server Name Indication) extension
 ISNIIP SSL Indicates if SNI IP is the same as destination IP
 RoSSLC SSL The ratio of SSL connections that has certiﬁcate
 NoDC Cert Number of Diﬀerent Certiﬁcates
 ACL Cert Average Certiﬁcate Length
 AAoC Cert Average Age of Certiﬁcates
 AoCV Cert Average of Certiﬁcate Validity
 SDoCV Cert The standard deviation of certiﬁcate validity
 RoSSCC Cert The ratio of SSL connections that use Self-Signed-Certiﬁcate

take the encrypted traﬃc information extracted based on feature engineering as the value in the vector. The image features are
to process all the information in the traﬃc into binary form, and each byte is corresponding to a grayscale image pixel. These
two categories of features can be said to cover all the features in encrypted traﬃc research. Even if new encrypted traﬃc feature
extraction methods are proposed, the extracted features can still belong to one of these two categories.
 Vectorized Feature
 The Vectorized features are extracted based on feature engineering, including handshake information and session metadata. The
handshake information includes the communication conﬁguration, such as the version, and extension, which usually varies from site
to site. Session metadata contains packet length sequence, packet time interval sequence, and other information, which can reﬂect
the communication behavior of the encrypted session. Since the research on this category features [36] is very mature and there are
many extraction tools for vectorized features, we directly use the tool Zeek [37] to analyze encrypted traﬃc samples and generate
log ﬁles for each session including conn.log, ssl.log, and x509.log. When processing each connection, the tool will allocate a unique
index for each session and generates the corresponding log ﬁles. The relationships between log ﬁles can be connected by the unique
index. The conn.log ﬁle contains information about the connection, such as source IP address, destination IP address, port, connection
duration, and number and size of upstream and downstream packets. The ssl.log ﬁle contains information about SSL / TLS, such as
timestamp, version, key, server name, etc. The x509.log ﬁle contains information about the connection certiﬁcate, such as certiﬁcate
serial number, version, issuer, validity period, server DNS, the type of key, and the length of the key, etc. Therefore, the extracted
features can be divided into three categories: connection features, SSL/TLS features, and certiﬁcate features. These three features
complement each other and retain enough original information, to represent session-level encrypted traﬃc. The vectorized features
extracted in our paper are shown in Table 1.
 Image Feature
 Since the image features are derived from the raw data of encrypted traﬃc, they can retain the original content of traﬃc to the
greatest extent. During TLS communications, plaintext data of handshake is exchanged between the client and server to negotiate the
parameters used in subsequent encrypted connections, such as the version, cipher suite, extensions, and certiﬁcate. Previous studies
have demonstrated that these pieces of information are eﬀective in encrypted malicious traﬃc detection. Therefore, image features
have received much attention and utilization in encrypted malicious traﬃc detection research. However, in encrypted traﬃc, the
image generated by the application data after the handshake has a lot of noise, so the selection of image size M is particularly
important in the process of extracting image features. If the selected content is too small, the image will not fully describe the
sample information, and if the selected content is too large, the information redundancy will aﬀect the accuracy and eﬃciency of the
detection model. To completely retain the handshake information and appropriate application data, we select the ﬁrst 784 bytes of
the original encrypted session for gray image generation after suﬃcient experiments, which are divided into three important stages:
traﬃc segmentation, session cleaning, and image generation.

 a) traﬃc segmentation
 In this process, we use the session as the granularity of segmentation, and the continuous original encrypted traﬃc is divided
 into multiple session ﬁles, which are saved as pcap ﬁles.
 b) session cleaning

 5
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 2. Image Patterns for diﬀerent types of applications.

 We anonymized the MAC address and IP address in the data link layer and network layer to remove the speciﬁc messages that
 interfere with the classiﬁcation results; and then, we deleted empty ﬂow and duplicate data that may lead to misjudgment of
 the model.
 c) image generation
 Firstly, we deal with the cleaned session ﬁles with uniform lengths in the same size, which is 784 bytes. When the length of the
 ﬁle is greater than 784 bytes, it will be intercepted. If it is less than 784 bytes, it will be supplemented with 0x00 at the end
 of the ﬁle. Since each byte can be converted into an integer in the range of [0, 255], each byte can correspond to a gray pixel
 value. After that, we reshaped the byte sequence into a matrix of 28 × 28 pixels, and further construct it into a gray image with
 the size of 28 × 28.

3.3. Attributed KNN graph construction

 For fusing diﬀerent types of features, the most direct method is to use diﬀerent individual learning models and use heterogeneous
integrators. However, it has the following disadvantages: (1) each type of feature is learned independently, which cannot get more
abundant embeddings of encrypted traﬃc; (2) it ignores the relationship between encrypted traﬃc sample data; (3) heterogeneous
integrator method based on diﬀerent types of individual classiﬁers is time-consuming. To solve these problems, we designed an
attributed KNN graph construction module, which can fuse the image features and vectorized features at the session level, and
integrally describe the correlation information between encrypted sessions.
 Image features contain complete encrypted session information, including encrypted session handshake information and application data. The handshake information can reﬂect the speciﬁc conﬁguration of the encrypted session, and these conﬁgurations are
often reused in the encrypted sessions participated by the same server. And application data can reﬂect the type of network application to a certain extent. As shown in Fig. 2, since diﬀerent malware families and applications have diﬀerent image patterns, we
construct KNN graphs based on the similarity between image features.
 The speciﬁc process of converting the encrypted traﬃc into a KNN graph with node attributes is shown in part B of Fig. 1, where
the KNN graph can be understood as a form of a similarity matrix . By measuring the distance between any sessions through image
features, the similarity between the closer sessions is higher, and the similarity between the farther sessions is lower, even negligible.
The conversion process is as follows:
 According to image features, each session of encrypted traﬃc is regarded as a node in high-dimensional space, and Heat Kernel
is used to calculate the similarity between image features of diﬀerent encrypted sessions to construct a similarity matrix .
 The similarity between session samples 𝑖 and 𝑗 calculated by Heat Kernel is shown as eq. (1).
 ||𝑥𝑖 −𝑥𝑗 ||2
 𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑒− 𝑡 (1)
where 𝑡 is the time parameter in the heat conduction equation.
 According to the similarity matrix , the ﬁrst 𝐾 similar session samples of each sample are selected as its neighbor nodes to
construct an undirected KNN graph. In this way, we can abstract the graph structure of encrypted traﬃc from non-graph data, which
can be represented by adjacency matrix .
 Then, an 𝑁 × 𝑑 attributed matrix  is constructed by using vectorized features, where 𝑁 is the number of encrypted sessions, 𝑑
is the dimension of each vectorized feature, and 𝑖-th row of  is the attribute and initial embedding vector of the 𝑖-th session node
in KNN graph.
 So far, we have successfully constructed the undirected attributed graph by using the image features and vectorized features
of encrypted traﬃc, and  can be deﬁned as  = (, , ), where  = {𝑣1 , 𝑣2 , … , 𝑣𝑁 } is the node set;  = {𝑒𝑖𝑗 , 𝑒𝑝𝑞 , 𝑒𝑥𝑦 , … } is the
undirected edge set;  = {𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , … , 𝑥𝑁 } is the node attribute set. Graph  skillfully integrates the vectorized and gray image features
of encrypted traﬃc, and clearly represents the relationship between encrypted traﬃc nodes.

3.4. GraphSAGE

 The basic idea of GCN is to aggregate the attributes of neighbor nodes to generate the embeddings of target nodes. Inspired by this
idea, GraphSAGE is applied to encrypted malicious traﬃc detection. However, diﬀerent from GCN, which belongs to the transductive

 6
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 3. Process of GraphSAGE.

model, GraphSAGE, which belongs to the inductive model, has better generalization ability. GCN must use the same graph during
training and testing, in other words, GCN can only detect nodes that already exist in the graph at the time of training, and needs to
be retrained when encountering nodes that have not been seen. While GraphSAGE can utilize its node sampling strategy during both
the training and testing phases to generate subgraphs that are used to aggregate node representations. Therefore, when GraphSAGE
encounters nodes that have not been seen during testing, it only needs to generate a subgraph to calculate the node representation
without retraining the model, thus achieving higher detection eﬃciency than GCN. The GraphSAGE model mainly contains two key
strategies: random neighbor sampling and neighbor attribute aggregation (see Fig. 3).
 On the one hand, the random neighbor sampling strategy can capture the low-order and high-order correlation information of
encrypted sessions. The low-order correlation information refers to the direct relationship between encrypted sessions, while the
high-order correlation refers to the multi-hop relationship that imposes similarity constraints on data samples. Taking the secondorder correlation as an example, for two nodes without a direct relationship, if they have a common neighbor, they should still
have a similar embedding. Therefore, it is not enough to extract the low-order correlation information of encrypted sessions, and the
capture of high-order relations is also important.
 On the other hand, in the neighbor attributes aggregation mechanism, it is worth noting that, we train an aggregation function,
which aggregates information from diﬀerent hops to generate the embedding of the target node, instead of directly training a diﬀerent
embedding vector for each node. Then, the embeddings of nodes can be used for downstream classiﬁcation tasks.
 Here, we describe how to obtain the embedding ℎ𝑙𝑣 of encrypted session node 𝑣 in layer 𝑙 based on random neighbor sampling and
neighbor attributes aggregation mechanism. Taking the second-order neighbor as an example, we ﬁrst obtain the ﬁrst-order neighbor
 1 and the second-order neighbor set 𝑁 2 of node 𝑣. Speciﬁcally, the hyperparameter 𝑆 is used as the sampling rate of each
set 𝑁(𝑣) (𝑣) 𝑙
node in the 𝑙-layer, that is, the 𝑙-layer sampling neighbors of each node cannot exceed 𝑆𝑙 .
 After that, the neighbor attributes aggregation mechanism is performed layer by layer. We aggregate the embeddings of the
second-order neighbors to get the embeddings of the ﬁrst-order neighbors and then aggregate the embeddings of the ﬁrst-order
neighbors to get the embedding of node 𝑣. Take the 𝑙-layer embedding of node 𝑣 obtained by aggregating the neighbors of layer 𝑙 = 1
as an example. The speciﬁc aggregating operations are as follows:
 Firstly, for each node 𝑣 ∈ , the features of its neighborhood nodes 𝑁(𝑣) are integrated by aggregation operation, which is
expressed as follows:

 ℎ𝑙𝑁 ← 𝐴𝑔𝑔({ℎ𝑙−1
 𝑢 , ∀𝑢𝑖 ∈ 𝑁(𝑣) }) (2)
 (𝑣) 𝑖

 The features of the upper layer of the central node ℎ𝑙−1
 𝑢 are concatenated with the aggregated neighborhood features ℎ𝑙𝑁 . Then
 𝑖 (𝑣)
the concatenated vector is input into the single-layer network with a nonlinear activation function to obtain the 𝑙-layer embedding
of the central node 𝑣. The calculation process is as follows:

 ℎ𝑙𝑣 ← 𝜎(𝑊 𝑙 ⋅ 𝐶𝑂𝑁𝐶𝐴𝑇 (ℎ𝑙−1 𝑙
 𝑣 , ℎ𝑁(𝑣) )) (3)

where 𝑊 𝑙 is the weight matrix of 𝑙-layer, and 𝜎 is the Sigmoid function.
 After regularizing the embeddings of nodes, it can be used in the next iteration.

 ℎ𝑙𝑣 ← ℎ𝑙𝑣 ∕||ℎ𝑙𝑣 ||2 , ∀𝑣 ∈  (4)
Once getting the last embeddings of nodes, we input it into the supervised classiﬁer of detection module to identify the encrypted
malicious traﬃc.

3.5. Optimization objectives

 Through the above algorithm, we can aggregate multi-hop neighbor information through the message-passing mechanism based
on the correlation between nodes, so as to obtain the embedding of encrypted session nodes with a certain aggregation depth,
which contains the attribute information of the target node and its low-order and high-order neighbor information. Then, we feed
the embeddings of encrypted session nodes into the MLP classiﬁer and softmax function to perform binary classiﬁcation on the

 7
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

corresponding encrypted session nodes. Since the nodes in the attribute KNN graph directly correspond to the encrypted session
data, the binary classiﬁcation of the nodes in the graph is equivalent to the binary classiﬁcation of the encrypted session. When the
classiﬁcation result is 1, it means that the encrypted session is malicious, and if it is 0, then indicates that it is a benign encrypted
session.

 𝑍𝐶 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑚𝑙𝑝(ℎ𝑙𝑣 )) (5)
 As shown in the eq. (6), we choose the cross-entropy loss function to guide the optimization of the model, so that the model can
learn a better aggregation function and then aggregate the neighbor information to get better embeddings of nodes.
 𝑁
 1 ∑∑
 1
 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠 = − 𝑦 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑍𝐶 ) (6)
 𝑁 𝑛=1 𝐶=0 𝐶

Where 𝑁 is the total number of encrypted sessions, 𝑦 is the label, 𝐶 = 0 is benign encrypted sessions, and 𝐶 = 1 is encrypted malicious
sessions.

4. Experiment

4.1. Datasets

 We extracted encrypted traﬃc samples from two experimental datasets, CTU-13 and MCFP, and evaluated the detection performance of the proposed method. We published a portion of our code and the dataset extracted from CTU-13 and MCFP to Github.1
 CTU-13 [38] is a dataset of traﬃc generated by speciﬁc malware captured in 13 diﬀerent scenarios at the Czech Technical
University (CTU) in Prague. In each scenario, CTU executed a speciﬁc piece of malware that uses multiple protocols and is capable
of multiple diﬀerent operations to generate malicious traﬃc. This malware includes Dridex-A, Kazy, Upatre, Zbot, Neris, Rbot, etc.,
all of which can be detected by multiple detection engines on VirusTotal [39]. Whereas normal traﬃc comes from data transfers,
social network communications, and the use of browsers. As early as 2008, botnet attacks began to use traﬃc cryptographic protocol
to hide the maliciousness of network behavior on a large scale to evade traditional security protection and detection. Therefore,
in 2011, a certain amount of encrypted traﬃc data was collected in the CTU-13 dataset. We extracted 2619 malicious encrypted
sessions from the CTU-13 dataset.
 MCFP [40] dataset was released by the Czech Technical University in Prague (CTU) between 2013 and 2018 in its Malware
Capture Facility Project to capture and analyze persistent malware traﬃc. It serves a large amount of botnet attack traﬃc and benign
traﬃc that communicates using TLS protocol. In the early years, this dataset only contained a small amount of encrypted traﬃc,
but as cryptographic protocols were widely deployed, it is more and more inclined to collect encrypted traﬃc in the update of
the MCFP dataset. In recent years, the proportion of encrypted traﬃc in MCFP has gradually increased, which contains far more
encrypted traﬃc than CTU-13. During the experiment, we only kept the complete encrypted session for analysis and extracted 6
malicious pcap-ﬁles from CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-153-1, CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-173-1, CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-
240-1, CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-241-1, CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-275-1, CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-322-1 in the MCFP
dataset, which contained 61,101 malicious encrypted sessions. For benign samples, we extract 13 pcap-ﬁles from CTU-Normal-20 to
CTU-Normal-32 of MCFP, including 69358 benign encrypted sessions.
 After collecting the encrypted traﬃc data, we process the data extracted from the CTU-13 and MCFP datasets at the session level
and label the corresponding encrypted session in the pcap-ﬁle according to the label of the pcap-ﬁle in the dataset to obtain the
explicit label of the encrypted sessions. In our experiments, we label encrypted malicious traﬃc as 1 and normal traﬃc as 0. Since
background traﬃc involves user privacy, it is not used as an experimental dataset in this paper. As a result, we obtained 63720
encrypted malicious traﬃc and 69358 encrypted benign traﬃc as the dataset for this experiment, 80% of which are used as the
training dataset, 10% are used as the veriﬁcation dataset, and 10% are used as the test dataset. The speciﬁc data distribution of
malicious encrypted traﬃc is shown in Table 2.

4.2. Baselines

 We selected several common machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) models in the ﬁeld of encrypted traﬃc research
and three state-of-the-art models published in recent years as baselines. (1) SVM [41]: it is a typical shallow learning method based
on vectorized features and is often used to detect malicious traﬃc. (2) Linear Regression (LR) [4]: a generalized linear regression
analysis model. (3) Decision Tree (DT) [42]: a basic classiﬁcation method based on a tree structure, and its input is usually vectorized
features. (4) Random Forest (RF) [43]: an integrated classiﬁer containing multiple decision trees, which is very ﬂexible and has low
computational overhead. (5) AdaBoost [44]: an iterative algorithm whose core idea is to combine several weak classiﬁers to form a
stronger ﬁnal classiﬁer. (6) CNN: it is one of the representative algorithms of deep learning and is widely used in the ﬁeld of image
processing. Shapira et al. [27] converted traﬃc into images and utilized CNN for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation. (7) TSCRNN: It is a
method proposed by Lin et al. [28] It uses CNN to generate the embeddings of the images corresponding to packets, and then uses

 1
 http://github.com/NatsuHB/MalDiscovery.

 8
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

Table 2
The composition of malicious encrypted traﬃc samples.

 Dataset Pcap Encrypted sessions TCP sessions

 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-42 137 12469
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-43 81 21495
 CTU-13 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-44 2227 32151
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-46 141 852
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-47 33 4533

 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-153-1 2504 3095
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-173-1 18478 20048
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-240-1 11085 11233
 MCFP
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-241-1 8752 8943
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-275-1 8226 8683
 CTU-Malware-Capture-Botnet-322-1 12056 16086

bi-directional LSTM to process multiple embeddings to realize the classiﬁcation of the ﬂow. (8) DeepWalk: is a basic algorithm for
network embedding learning and a classiﬁcation method based on graph structure, which was mentioned in the work of Fu et al. [10]
(9) GCN: is a classic GNN model. Pham T D et al. [35] constructed a communication graph and utilized GCN to realize encrypted
traﬃc classiﬁcation (10) MalDiscovery: the proposed method.
 Among them, machine learning-based (ML-based) methods, such as SVM, LR, DT, RF, and Adaboost, are commonly utilized in
existing works. CNN and TSCRNN are deep learning-based (DL-based) methods proposed in recent years. And the DeepWalk and
GCN are often utilized for correlation analysis in the ﬁeld of encrypted traﬃc.
 Diﬀerent baseline methods have diﬀerent requirements on the form of their input data. To comprehensively evaluate the eﬀect
of the proposed attribute KNN graph in feature fusion while satisfying the input requirements of diﬀerent methods, we design the
input into ﬁve forms. Among them, F1 represents the vectorized features of encrypted traﬃc, F2 represents the simple concatenating
of vectorized features and image features, F3 represents the image features, F4 represents the correlation information of sample
data, and F5 represents the attributed KNN graph of encrypted traﬃc datasets. The “concatenating” here means to encode the
image features in bytes and ﬂatten them into a one-dimensional numerical vectors with each element value between 0-255. And the
“correlation information” in F4 means to keep only the graph structure constructed based on correlation between sessions, where
nodes correspond to encrypted sessions and nodes do not have attributes.

4.3. Parameter and metrics

 For baselines, we set them as the default parameter of the model. For MalDiscovery, the dimension of the node embeddings we
obtain through GraphSAGE is set to 100, and the learning rate to 0.001. For the convenience of experimental observation, we set that
the sampling number 𝑆𝑙 of each layer is equal, and use 𝑆 to refer to it. We also select the best-performed hyper-parameters 𝑆 = 10,
𝐾 = 15, and MeanPooling aggregation function on the validation set. In addition, we adopt ACC, Precision, Recall, and macro-F1 as
evaluation indexes.

4.4. Experiment result

 Fig. 4 shows ACC, precision, recall, and macro-F1 of diﬀerent methods we use to detect encrypted malicious traﬃc. Note that
MalDiscovery is signiﬁcantly better than the other baselines in almost all four indicators, indicating the eﬀectiveness of our proposed
model.
 For the baseline method, we have the following observations. Firstly, the performance of end-to-end detection based on image
features is better than that of shallow machine learning detection based on vectorized features. The reason is that with the introduction of encryption technology, the features of feeding shallow machine learning models are artiﬁcially designed based on encryption
protocol, which has the problem of missing information. The end-to-end model based on image features makes full use of the original
information of encrypted traﬃc. Secondly, the performance of shallow machine learning methods that use new features directly
concatenated from two categories of features is far inferior to the shallow machine learning method using only vectorized features.
The reason is that the method ﬂattens the image features directly, which destroys the correlation information of the grayscale image and introduces the noise from the image, which aﬀects the eﬀect of the shallow machine learning model. At the same time,
the method does not consider the relationship between samples. In addition, we can observe that the detection performance of the
DeepWalk method is the worst because DeepWalk only considers the relationship between encrypted traﬃc data samples and ignores
the attribute features of the data itself. The TSCRNN performs better than the simple CNN in the experiments. The reason is that
TSCRNN inputs the embeddings into RNN according to the time order of the packets after using CNN to generate embeddings for
each packet according to the image features. This method can take into account the temporal correlation between encrypted traﬃc.
Finally, the Mappgraph method fully analyzes the rich correlation information contained in the attributed KNN graph by using GCN
and achieves a performance second only to MalDiscovery.
 After that, by comparing the results of MalDiscovery and other methods, we believe that the proposed encrypted malicious traﬃc
detection approach based on GraphSAGE is an eﬀective method to fuse the image features and vector features of encrypted traﬃc.

 9
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 4. Performance of Diﬀerent Methods.

 Firstly, Fig. 4 shows that the performance of MalDiscovery is signiﬁcantly better than that of the method using only one type
of feature, which means that the fusion of multi-view features is beneﬁcial to improve the performance of encrypted malicious
traﬃc detection. Secondly, the performance of concatenating directly method is not improved or even declined. This kind of mixing
operation may introduce noise, which greatly aﬀects the judgment of the model. Therefore, it is necessary to design an end-to-end
encrypted malicious traﬃc detection model integrating various types of features.
 In addition, we use diﬀerent parameters to train our approach and show the training results in Fig. 5.

4.5. Aggregator selection

 We compared four variants of GraphSAGE using diﬀerent aggregator functions. To provide a fair comparison, all models share the
same implementation of their small batch iterators, loss functions, and neighborhood samplers. We select the attributed KNN graph
generated by various 𝐾 and 𝑆 values as input, and diﬀerent types of aggregators are used to train the model. The macro-f1 values of
diﬀerent aggregators are shown in Fig. 6. We can see that all aggregators except LSTM can achieve better performance since LSTM is
not an inherent symmetric model, its inputs are processed in order, but the vectorized features of node attributes used in the fusion
process have no temporal characteristics.

4.6. 𝐾 sensitivity analysis

 Since the number of nearest neighbors 𝐾 is an important parameter of the KNN graph structure. This experiment is mainly to
prove that our model is 𝐾-insensitive. Therefore, we compare the inﬂuence of the diﬀerent numbers of neighbors 𝐾 on the macro-f1
values of the model. It can be seen from Fig. 7(a) that the F1 score of the same sampling values and same aggregators can basically
reach a higher level in the case of 𝐾 = {5, 10, 15, 20}, which proves that MalDiscovery can learn useful correlation information and
obtain stable results on attributed KNN graphs with diﬀerent values of nearest neighbors.

4.7. Sampling values analysis

 The number of neighbor sampling will also aﬀect the learning process of the graph model. To verify this, we adopted GS-
Meanpooling as the aggregation function of the model, and observe the change of macro-f1 with the sampling value at the same

 10
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 5. Performance of MalDiscovery with Diﬀerent Parameters.

 Fig. 6. F1-Score on Diﬀerent Aggregators.

number of neighbors 𝐾. As can be seen from Fig. 7(b), another result is that when 𝑆 = 𝐾 or 𝑆 = 1, the performance will decrease
signiﬁcantly. It is because when 𝑆 = 1, the KNN graph contains less correlation information, and when 𝑆 = 𝐾, the communities in
the KNN graph overlap.

 11
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

 Fig. 7. Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis.

 Fig. 8. Processing Eﬃciency of Diﬀerent Methods.

4.8. 𝑀 sensitivity analysis

 We designed experiments to choose an appropriate value of 𝑀 . In this paper, experiments are carried out on the CNN model to
test the inﬂuence of the 𝑀 value on F1-Score. The values of 𝑀 are 196, 784, 1024, 1600, 2304, and 4096 bytes, respectively, that is,
the generated image features are widths of 14, 28, 32, 40, 48, 64 square pictures. As shown in Fig. 7(c), diﬀerent 𝑀 values will lead
to diﬀerent classiﬁcation eﬀects of the CNN model, and the CNN eﬀect is the best when 𝑀 = 784. When the value of 𝑀 is too small,
the image features contain too little information. When the value of 𝑀 is too large, the image features contain too much noise.

4.9. Processing eﬃciency analysis

 Processing eﬃciency is a key factor to measure the value of a model in a real-world application. To prove that our approach
has high eﬃciency in the testing phase and can be deployed in a real network environment, we designed an experiment to compare
the average throughput of the proposed method with the existing ML-based methods, DL-based methods, and correlation-based
methods during both the training and testing phases under a single epoch. All methods use the best-performed hyper-parameters.
Firstly, it can be seen from Fig. 8 that although our approach may have a lower training speed compared to ML-based methods,
such as SVM, LR, DT, RF, Adaboost, it still achieves acceptable testing throughput while maintaining high classiﬁcation accuracy.
Secondly, although DL-based methods, such as CNN and TSCRNN, have shown remarkable performance, the proposed approach

 12
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

can achieve better processing eﬃciency, while DL-based methods are known for their high computational complexity and require
powerful hardware. Thirdly, existing correlation-based methods, such as DeepWalk and GCN, may suﬀer from low throughput in
training and testing phases since they are based on transductive models. The experimental results show that our approach utilizing
the inductive GraphSAGE model can be deployed in real networks for real-time tasks of encrypted malicious traﬃc detection.

5. Conclusion

 At present, there have been studies on botnet analysis using the graph method [39], which shows that the graph analysis method
is of great signiﬁcance to cyberspace security. In this work, ﬁrstly, the method constructs an attributed KNN graph by using multiview features of encrypted traﬃc, including vectorized features and image features. Speciﬁcally, in the attributed KNN graph, the
relationship between the nodes is constructed by the similarity of the image features of corresponding encrypted sessions, and the
attributes of the nodes are derived from the vectorized features of the encrypted sessions. Secondly, to make use of the correlation
of data samples in the testing phase, we propose to utilize GraphSAGE, a graph neural network composed of multiple graph layers,
to capture the similarity of encrypted traﬃc data samples and then get more abundant embeddings forms of encrypted traﬃc. After
learning the node embeddings, we feed it into a MLP classiﬁer to perform binary classiﬁcation on the encrypted session nodes. Since
in this scenario, the malicious judgment of the encrypted session is equivalent to the binary classiﬁcation of the encrypted session
node in the attribute KNN graph, we transform the encrypted malicious traﬃc detection problem into a graph node classiﬁcation
problem, and thus break through the diﬃculty of utilizing and mining of encrypted traﬃc correlation. Experiment results show that
our approach can eﬀectively integrate multi-view features and improve detection eﬃciency.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

 Yueping Hong: Data curation, Software, Writing – original draft. Qi Li: Conceptualization, Formal analysis. Meng Shen: Resources, Supervision.

Declaration of competing interest

 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.

Data availability

 Data will be made available on request.

Acknowledgement

 This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62172055, U20B2045, U1836103), the National
Key Research and Development Program (2019QY1404), the BUPT Project (2021XD-A09).

References

 [1] Google Transparency Report, HTTPS Encryption in Chrome [EB/OL] [2022-10-01], https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview?hl=En, 2022.
 [2] B. Anderson, S. Paul, D. McGrew, Deciphering malware’s use of TLS (without decryption), J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Tech. 14 (3) (2018) 195–211.
 [3] B. Anderson, D. McGrew, Identifying encrypted malware traﬃc with contextual ﬂow data, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
 and Security, 2016, pp. 35–46.
 [4] B. Anderson, D. McGrew, Machine learning for encrypted malware traﬃc classiﬁcation: accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity, in: Proceedings of the
 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
 [5] MITRE ATT&CK, MITRE ATT&CK Command and Control Report [EB/OL], https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1571/, 2022.
 [6] M. Shen, K. Ye, X. Liu, et al., Machine learning-powered encrypted network traﬃc analysis: a comprehensive survey, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. (2022).
 [7] X. Huang, Q. Song, F. Yang, et al., Large-scale heterogeneous feature embedding, Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 33 (01) (2019) 3878–3885.
 [8] X. Huang, J. Li, X. Hu, Accelerated attributed network embedding, in: Proceedings of the 2017 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, Society for
 Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2017, pp. 633–641.
 [9] Y. Ding, G. Zhu, D. Chen, et al., Adversarial sample attack and defense method for encrypted traﬃc data, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23 (10) (2022)
 18024–18039.
[10] Z. Fu, M. Liu, Y. Qin, et al., Encrypted malware traﬃc detection via graph-based network analysis, in: Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on
 Research in Attacks, Intrusions and Defenses, 2022, pp. 495–509.
[11] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional networks, in: ICLR 2017, 2017.
[12] W.L. Hamilton, R. Ying, J. Leskovec, Inductive representation learning on large graphs, 2017.
[13] G. Li, K. Ota, M. Dong, et al., DeSVig: decentralized Swift vigilance against adversarial attacks in industrial artiﬁcial intelligence systems, IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Inform. 16 (5) (2019) 3267–3277.
[14] G. Gs Creech, J. Hu, A semantic approach to host-based intrusion detection systems using contiguous and discontinuous system call patterns, IEEE Trans. Comput.
 63 (4) (2014) 807–819.
[15] H. Zhang, C. Papadopoulos, D. Massey, Detecting encrypted botnet traﬃc, in: 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFO-COM, Turin, 2013, pp. 3453–3458.
[16] Sourabh Saxena, Demystifying Malware Traﬃc, August 2016, pp. 1735–1780.
[17] G.S. Poh, D.M. Divakaran, H.W. Lim, et al., A survey of privacy-preserving techniques for encrypted traﬃc inspection over network middleboxes, arXiv preprint,
 arXiv:2101.04338, 2021.

 13
Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang et al. Information Sciences 644 (2023) 119229

[18] Z. Wang, K.W. Fok, V.L.L. Thing, Machine learning for encrypted malicious traﬃc detection: approaches, datasets and comparative study, Comput. Secur. 113
 (2022) 102542.
[19] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, et al., Classiﬁcation of encrypted traﬃc with second-order Markov chains and application attribute bigrams, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Secur. 12 (8) (2017) 1830–1843.
[20] R. Dai, C. Gao, B. Lang, et al., SSL malicious traﬃc detection based on multi-view features, in: Proceedings of the 2019 9th International Conference on
 Communication and Network Security, 2019, pp. 40–46.
[21] J. Liu, Y. Zeng, J. Shi, et al., MalDetect: a structure of encrypted malware traﬃc detection, Comput. Mater. Continua 2019 (60) (2019) 721–739.
[22] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, et al., Fine-grained webpage ﬁngerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traﬃc, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.
 16 (2020) 2046–2059.
[23] C. Dong, Z. Lu, Z. Cui, et al., MBTree: detecting encryption rats communication using malicious behavior tree, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021)
 3589–3603.
[24] Y. Sharon, D. Berend, Y. Liu, et al., Tantra: timing-based adversarial network traﬃc reshaping attack, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 17 (2022) 3225–3237.
[25] H. Li, K. Ota, Dong M. Learning, IoT in edge: deep learning for the Internet of things with edge computing, IEEE Netw. 32 (1) (2018) 96–101.
[26] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, et al., End-to-end encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE International
 Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), IEEE, 2017, pp. 43–48.
[27] T. Shapira, Y. Shavitt, FlowPic: a generic representation for encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation and applications identiﬁcation, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18 (2)
 (2021) 1218–1232.
[28] K. Lin, X. Xu, H. Gao, TSCRNN: a novel classiﬁcation scheme of encrypted traﬃc based on ﬂow spatiotemporal features for eﬃcient management of IIoT,
 Comput. Netw. 190 (2021) 107974.
[29] W. Bazuhair, Lee W. Detecting, Malign encrypted network traﬃc using perlin noise and convolutional neural network, in: 2020 10th Annual Computing and
 Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), 2020.
[30] Wang Pan, Chen Xuejiao, SAE-based encrypted traﬃc identiﬁcation method, Comput. Eng. 44 (11) (2018) 140.
[31] G. Shao, X. Chen, X. Zeng, et al., Deep learning hierarchical representation from heterogeneous ﬂow-level communication data, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.
 15 (2019) 1525–1540.
[32] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, et al., Accurate decentralized application identiﬁcation via encrypted traﬃc analysis using graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Secur. 16 (2021) 2367–2380.
[33] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, et al., BotMark: automated botnet detection with hybrid analysis of ﬂow-based and graph-based traﬃc behaviors, Inf. Sci. 511 (2020)
 284–296.
[34] T. Cui, G. Gou, G. Xiong, et al., SiamHAN: IPv6 address correlation attacks on TLS encrypted traﬃc via Siamese heterogeneous graph attention network, in:
 USENIX Security Symposium, 2021, pp. 4329–4346.
[35] T.D. Pham, T.L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, et al., Mappgraph: mobile-app classiﬁcation on encrypted network traﬃc using deep graph convolution neural networks,
 in: Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2021, pp. 1025–1038.
[36] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, et al., Optimizing feature selection for eﬃcient encrypted traﬃc classiﬁcation: a systematic approach, IEEE Netw. 34 (4) (2020) 20–27.
[37] https://www.zeek.org/.
[38] https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-ctu13.
[39] https://www.virustotal.com/gui/.
[40] https://mcfp.felk.cvut.cz/publicDatasets/.
[41] A.S. Shekhawat, F. Di Troia, M. Stamp, Feature analysis of encrypted malicious traﬃc, Expert Syst. Appl. 125 (2019) 130–141.
[42] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, et al., Characterization of encrypted and vpn traﬃc using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd International
 Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, pp. 407–414.
[43] K.S.A.N. Zincir-Heywood, How far can we push ﬂow analysis to identify encrypted anonymity network traﬃc?
[44] R. Alshammari, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, Can encrypted traﬃc be identiﬁed without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?, Comput. Netw. 55 (6)
 (2011) 1326–1350.

 14