10764 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

Heterogeneous Domain Adaptation for IoT Intrusion
Detection: A Geometric Graph Alignment Approach
 Jiashu Wu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Hao Dai , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Yang Wang , Member, IEEE, Kejiang Ye , Member, IEEE, and Chengzhong Xu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Data scarcity hinders the usability of data- the limited power and computational capability of IoT devices
dependent algorithms when tackling IoT intrusion detection hinder the applicability of powerful security mechanisms,
(IID). To address this, we utilize the data-rich network intru- together with relatively infrequent maintenance, making IoT
sion detection (NID) domain to facilitate more accurate intrusion
detection for IID domains. In this article, a geometric graph vulnerable to malicious intrusions. Therefore, to keep the IoT
alignment (GGA) approach is leveraged to mask the geometric infrastructure safe, an effective IoT intrusion detection (IID)
heterogeneities between domains for better intrusion knowledge system is vital. To advance the intrusion detection techniques,
transfer. Specifically, each intrusion domain is formulated as a several research directions become popular. Dietz et al. [3]
graph where vertices and edges represent intrusion categories and proposed to automatically scan IoT devices for predefined vulcategory-wise inter-relationships, respectively. The overall shape
is preserved via a confused discriminator incapable to identify nerability patterns, and isolated suspicious devices to block the
adjacency matrices between different intrusion domain graphs. A botnet spreading. McDermott et al. [4] tackled the problem
rotation avoidance mechanism and a center point matching mech- via deep recurrent neural network (RNN) and achieved satisanism are used to avoid graph misalignment due to rotation and fying detection performance. However, these efforts required
symmetry, respectively. Besides, category-wise semantic knowl- either a thorough intrusion pattern repository, or abundant
edge is transferred to act as vertex-level alignment. To exploit the
target data, a pseudo-label (PL) election mechanism that jointly labeled training data, which is expensive to collect and timeconsiders network prediction, geometric property, and neighbor- consuming to annotate, and is, especially, difficult for IoT due
hood information is used to produce fine-grained PL assignment. to factors such as data privacy concerns, the frequent emer-
Upon aligning the intrusion graphs geometrically from differ- gence of new IoT things, etc. Therefore, the data scarcity of
ent granularities, the transferred intrusion knowledge can boost IoT hinders the usability of these rules or the data-dependent
IID performance. Comprehensive experiments on several intrusion data sets demonstrate state-of-the-art performance of the methods.
GGA approach and validate the usefulness of GGA-constituting Considering that the Internet intrusion data is richer than IoT
components. domains, and they share several similar intrusion categories,
 Index Terms—Domain adaptation (DA), geometric graph align- several domain adaptation-based (DA) methods were proposed
ment (GGA), Internet of Things (IoT), intrusion detection, to treat the network intrusion (NI) as the source domain and
pseudo-label election. transfer rich intrusion knowledge to facilitate the data-scarce
 target IoT intrusion (II) domains. By achieving domaininvariant alignment, the transferred intrusion knowledge can
 I. I NTRODUCTION facilitate more accurate IID. For instance, Ning et al. [5]
 presented a Laddernet-based DA solution to improve the
 NTERNET of Things (IoT) devices become indispensable
I for various real-world applications and innovatively transform several fields such as healthcare [1], [2], etc. However,
 intrusion classification accuracy and secure the industrial IoT
 infrastructures. Hu et al. [6] studied a deep subdomain adaptation network with an attention mechanism and focused on
 distribution alignment between domains via local maximum
 Manuscript received 19 November 2022; revised 5 January 2023; accepted
23 January 2023. Date of publication 26 January 2023; date of current version mean discrepancy. Methods such as [7] and [8] proposed to
7 June 2023. This work was supported in part by the Third Xinjiang Scientific achieve intrusion domain alignment by aligning the graph
Expedition Program under Grant 2021xjkk1300; in part by the Science learning results. Efforts such as [9], [10], and [11] attempted
and Technology Development Fund of Macao SAR (FDCT) under Grant
1058No.0015/2019/AKP; and in part by the Chinese Academy of Sciences to explore unlabeled target domain via directly predicted,
President’s International Fellowship Initiative under Grant 2023VTA0001. threshold selected, or softly assigned pseudo-labels (PLs),
(Corresponding author: Yang Wang.) respectively, to facilitate better intrusion knowledge transfer.
 Jiashu Wu and Hao Dai are with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China, and Despite their success, they left some deficiencies that
also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, need to be addressed. Previous DA-based ID methods didn’t
China (e-mail: wujiashu21@mails.ucas.ac.cn; daihao19@mails.ucas.ac.cn). tackle the problem from a geometric graph perspective and
 Yang Wang and Kejiang Ye are with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: failed to explore unlabeled target domain via geometric and
yang.wang1@siat.ac.cn; kj.ye@siat.ac.cn). neighborhood-aware PLs. The ignorance of intrinsic geomet-
 Chengzhong Xu is with the State Key Laboratory of IoT for Smart City, ric properties in domain graphs and the under-explored target
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau, Macau, China
(e-mail: czxu@um.edu.mo). domain can result in coarse-grained alignment. Although some
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3239872 graph-based DA methods were proposed, they did not attempt
 2327-4662 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10765

 GGA can have each intrusion category and their interrelationships well aligned between domains. First, with the
 help of the PLE, the GGA performs a graph-level shapekeeping via a confused discriminator which is incapable to
 distinguish weighted adjacency matrices (WAMs) between
 intrusion domain graphs. Upon aligning the graph shapes, a
 center point matching mechanism and a rotation avoidance
 mechanism avoid graph misalignment caused by symmetry
Fig. 1. General motivation of the GGA approach. and graph rotation, respectively. Finally, the GGA will perform
 a vertex-level matching by preserving categorical correlation
 knowledge between domains, which equivalently aligns the
 graph vertex of each intrusion category between domains.
 Holistically, they form a graph alignment framework from general to specific level from a geometric perspective. The GGA
 can robustly transfer the enriched intrusion knowledge from
 the NI domain to facilitate more accurate intrusion detection
 in the II domain and, hence, secure IoT infrastructures. GGA’s
 motivation has been illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2.
 In summary, the contributions of this article are threefold.
 1) We propose to transfer enriched intrusion knowledge
 from the NI domain to facilitate more accurate intrusion
 detection for data-scarce IoT domains and formulate it
 as a semi-supervised HDA problem.
Fig. 2. Overview of the GGA mechanism.
 2) To our best knowledge, we are the pioneer to tackle this
 HDA problem from a pure GGA perspective with the help
 of the PLE mechanism. Rather than using isolated coarsegraph alignment from a pure geometric perspective, leaving the grained PL strategies, the PLE makes fine-grained PL
geometric properties under-explored. Despite some methods assignment by jointly considering geometric and neighcan partially convey the geometric properties through graph borhood information to filter confident but geometrically
embedding, however, the embedding learning is highly data- incorrect PLs and near-boundary ambiguous PLs. The
dependent which is challenging for IoT scenarios. Besides, GGA then aligns domain graphs geometrically through
although there were some traditional PL-based DA meth- four mechanisms, holistically forming a graph alignment
ods, their isolated PL assignment strategy failed to leverage framework from graph to vertex granularity.
the geometric and neighborhood information between labels, 3) We conduct comprehensive experiments of several tasks
which may produce error-prone PLs and mislead the intrusion on five widely used intrusion detection data sets to verknowledge transfer. ify the superior performance achieved by the GGA, and
 To address these limitations and achieve more fine-grained show the usefulness of its constituting components.
intrusion knowledge transfer, following the motivation illus- The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
trated in Figs. 1 and 2, we propose a geometric graph align- Section II presents related works by categories and demonment (GGA) approach that works under the semi-supervised strates the research opportunities of the GGA method.
heterogeneous DA (HDA) setting, i.e., the target is scarcely- Section III provides model preliminaries, graph formulations,
labeled and significant source-target heterogeneities exist, such and the GGA model architecture. The detailed GGA and
as having diverse feature spaces, following different distribu- pseudo-label election mechanism are explained in Section IV.
tions, etc. To positively exploit the unlabeled target domain, we Section V presents experimental setups and result analyzes.
utilize a PL election (PLE) mechanism. To prevent the error- The last section concludes this article. For better readability,
prone PL from misleading the model, the geometric property an acronym table, and a notation table have been presented in
is considered to eliminate confident but incorrect PLs based on the Appendix section.
their geometric relationship with each category. Besides, the
PLE consults the neighborhood label information when assigning PLs to avoid near-boundary ambiguous PLs, which cannot II. R ELATED W ORK
be fulfilled by traditional isolated PL assignment strategies. By IID3 Methods: The IID has drawn wide research attenjointly considering the network prediction, the geometric prop- tion to secure IoT infrastructures. The rule-based IID methods
erty, and the neighborhood information, the PLE can boost were initially popular. Dietz et al. [3] performed automatic
pseudo-label accuracy and, hence, lead to positive intrusion scanning of neighboring IoT devices for known vulnerabilknowledge transfer. ity patterns and temporarily isolated detected compromised
 The GGA then formulates each domain as a graph, where devices. Jun and Chi [12] proposed to filter security violations
vertices and edges represent intrusion categories and their via complex event processing, which required a sophistiinter-relationships. As illustrated in Fig. 2, enforcing a perfect cated rule repository. On the other hand, machine learning

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10766 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

techniques were also widely used for IID. Anthi et al. [13] instances and their neighboring labeled instances, compromispresented a three-layer intrusion detector that worked under ing accurate intrusion knowledge transfer. Some methods also
a supervised fashion for smart home settings. Shukla [14] required a manual threshold set based on prior experience and
tackled the problem via a hybrid two-stage mechanism that was not generalizable between tasks.
combined K-means clustering and decision trees. On the Tackling intrusion domain alignment from a graph perspecdeep learning perspective, models, such as feedforward neural tive is also feasible. For example, the WCGN method matched
network, deep autoencoder, and BiLSTM RNN, were utilized domains via graph learning [7], [8] to benefit the domain
to work on the IID problem by [4], [15], and [16], respec- alignment. Pilanci and Vural [23] proposed a graph base aligntively. However, these methods either needed a sophisticated ment method by transferring the graph spectrum information.
intrusion pattern repository, which requires substantial exper- However, although these embedding-related methods can partise to build and can hardly be complete and up-to-date or tially convey the geometric information of domains, learnrequired abundant amount of fully labeled data for training, ing a good embedding is highly data-dependent, hindering
which is labor-intensive to annotate. Hence, it naturally leads their applicability. Besides, none of these graph-based methto the DA-based methods which can comfortably work under ods solved the graph matching problem from a pure GGA
challenging data-scarce IID scenarios. perspective, which left a void to be filled.
 DA and Intrusion Detection: DA leverages source domain Our method tackles the HDA problem from a pure geometknowledge to facilitate better learning for data-scarce target ric graph perspective, which jointly considers several levels
domains, and, hence, is suitable to tackle the intrusion detec- of geometric property matching. The GGA method does not
tion for the data-scarce IoT domain. Vu et al. [17] utilized require a huge amount of data for graph embedding learning
two autoencoders on source and target data set and forced and enjoys a relatively low complexity. Besides, we utilize
the alignment of the bottleneck layers. Later, Ning [5] lever- a PLE mechanism which jointly accounts for the geometaged the Laddernet to tackle IID under a semi-supervised ric properties and the neighborhood information, so that the
setting. Hu et al. [6] presented a deep subdomain adaptation confident but wrong PL prediction that violates geometric
network with attention mechanism that performed intrusion properties and near-boundary ambiguous PLs can be avoided
knowledge transfer by minimizing local maximum mean dis- for positive transfer. Finally, we utilize the GGA method to
crepancy. However, these methods did not use PL assignments facilitate more accurate intrusion detection for the data-scarce
to exploit unlabeled target domain and failed to perform DA IoT domain.
via a geometric graph-based approach, hence, did not preserve
geometric properties during intrusion knowledge transfer. On
 III. M ODEL P RELIMINARY AND A RCHITECTURE
the other hand, Chen et al. [18] tackled the intrusion domain
alignment problem via transfer neural tree (TNT), a uni- A. Model Preliminary
fied framework that combined feature mapping, adaptation, The GGA method works under a semi-supervised HDA
and classification. A generalized joint distribution adaptation setting. It involves a source NI domain formulated as follows:
(G-JDA) approach was presented [9] to learn a pair of feature
projectors to eliminate the marginal and conditional distribu- DS = {XS , YN } = {(xSi , ySi )}, i ∈ [1, nS ]
tion divergence. Yao et al. [19] proposed the DDA method xSi ∈ RdS , ySi ∈ [1, K] (1)
that applied an adaptive classifier to reduce distribution divergence and enlarge interclass divergence. The TNT, G-JDA, where the source NI domain contains nS traffic records with
and DDA applied direct prediction as PLs for unlabeled tar- their corresponding intrusion label. Each record is represented
get instances and completely ignored the label neighborhood using dS features, and there are K categories. Similarly, the
information. Yao et al. [11] put forward the STN, a conditional target II domain are defined as follows:
distribution alignment strategy with the help of a soft-label
paradigm. Singh et al. [20] presented the STAR framework, DTL = {XTL , YTL } = {(xTLi , yTLi )}, i ∈ [1, nTL ]
  
which emphasized unlabeled target instances based on the dis- DTU = {XTU } = xTUj , j ∈ [1, nTU ]
tance with closest class prototypes during intrusion domain DT = DTL ∪ DTU , xTLi , xTUj ∈ RdT , yTLi ∈ [1, K]
alignment. Saito et al. [21] achieved intrusion knowledge
 nT = nTL + nTU , nTL  nTU . (2)
transfer by optimizing the minimax loss on the domain conditional entropy (MME). It utilized unlabeled target data Under the semi-supervised setting, the target domain is
based on a threshold-based strategy. The APE [22] method scarcely labeled, i.e., nTL  nTU . The source and target
chose to alleviate intradomain discrepancy via three proce- domain present heterogeneities, such as belonging to different
dures, namely, Attraction, Perturbation, and Exploration. From feature spaces, i.e., dS = dT .
a clustering-based perspective, Li et al. [10] proposed crossdomain adaptive clustering (CDAC) to tackle the DA problem.
In MME, APE, and CDAC, unlabeled target instances will B. Graph Formulation
be pseudo-labeled based on a threshold strategy. However, To perform the GGA, we formulate each intrusion domain
when assigning PLs, these method either failed to jointly as a graph, i.e., GX = <VX , EX >, X ∈ {S, T}. Both domains
consider geometric properties or assigned PLs in an isolated share K intrusion categories, therefore, each graph has K vermanner that ignored the relationships between pseudo-labeled tices, the vertex Vi is the centroid of the category i, denoted

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10767

Fig. 3. Architecture of the GGA method.

as follows: level. The motivation is to align the domain graphs in a finegrained manner, such that the shared classifier C yields the
 ni
 1  X best intrusion detection accuracy for unlabeled target domain.
 VXi = i
 xXj , i ∈ [1, K], X ∈ {S, T} (3)
 nX j=1
 IV. GGA A LGORITHM
where ni is the number of records under category i. Both In this section, we will first introduce the PLE mechagraphs are formulated as a complete graph, the weight of edge nism which facilitates better target participation during the
 j GGA process. Then, the GGA process and its constituting
E<VXi , VX > is set to be the Euclidean distance between verj
tex VXi and VX . The corresponding WAMs are denoted as MS components will be explained.
and MT .
 A. Pseudo-Label Election Mechanism
 Assigning PLs to unlabeled target data can excavate its
C. Model Architecture and Overview
 potentials during intrusion knowledge transfer. However, erro-
 The architecture of the GGA method has been shown in neous PL assignment may mislead the model toward negative
Fig. 3. Each intrusion domain has a feature projector that maps transfer. Traditional efforts mainly assigned PL to instances
features into a common feature subspace with dimension dC . in an isolated manner, without considering the relationship
The feature projector is defined as follows: between labels, and suffered from issues such as confident
  but geometrically-inconsistent PLs and near-support ambigu-
 ES (xi ), if xi ∈ XS
 f (xi ) = ous PLs. Therefore, we utilize the PLE mechanism to mitigate
 ET (xi ), if xi ∈ XT = XTL ∪ XTU these issues as much as possible. The PLE jointly considers the
 f (xi ) ∈ RdC . (4) voting of NN prediction, the geometric properties, and neighborhood information. A PL assignment will only be made for
The GGA method will then utilize the PLE mechanism to an instance if these three votes reach a consensus. When proassign fine-grained PLs to unlabeled target data and avoid ducing the geometric property-based PL, the category of the
error-prone PLs to mitigate negative transfer. To perform GGA most Cosine-similar labeled data centroid μiS+TL will be utibetween these heterogeneous domains, the WAM of the source lized as PLG for each unlabeled target instance and is defined
data, the labeled target data, and the combination of labeled as follows:
and pseudo-labeled target data will be generated to confuse the 
 (k)
discriminator D. Highly similar WAMs indicate well-aligned PLiG = argmax COS μS+TL , xTU i
 k
intrusion categories and the fine preservation of category-wise
 (k) 1 
interrelations and is equivalent with a perfect geometric graph μS+TL = (k) (k)
 xi (5)
shape keeping. By fusing three WAMs, the geometric shape nS + nTL (k) (k)
 xi ∈X ∪X S TL
of domain graphs are aligned, meanwhile, the labeled and
pseudo-labeled target data will be better fused together. After i , X (k)
 where PLiG denotes the geometric-based PL for the xTU S
keeping the shape, the domain graphs can still misalign due denotes source instances from category k. If the NN-prediction
to rotation and symmetry, which are mitigated by the rotation yields a confident PL prediction but is inconsistent with the
avoidance mechanism and the center point matching. Besides, geometric similarity property, then such confident but contracategorical correlations yielded by the shared classifier C will dictory PL will be rejected, as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). Besides,
be preserved between domains, which acts as a vertex-level the PLE will also consult the neighborhood information when
alignment mechanism. Holistically, the GGA approach aligns assigning PLs. If the K-nearest neighborhood around an unlathe domain graphs from general shape level to specific vertex beled target instance cannot reach a majority agreement or

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10768 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

 (a) (b) (c) (d)

Fig. 4. Illustration of the PLE. (a) Original feature. (b) Avoid geometrically inconsistent PL via geometric disagreement. (c) Near-boundary ambiguous PL
assignment avoidable via neighborhood disagreement. (d) PLE’s assignment.

Fig. 5. Illustration of the GGA method.

reach an agreement against the NN prediction or the geometric pseudo-labeled target data MTL+PL . These WAMs will then
vote, then such assignment will also be rejected. This is useful, be flattened and feed into the discriminator D, a single-layer
especially when deciding the PL for near-boundary unlabeled neural network that tries to distinguish the origin of the input
instances, as illustrated in Fig. 4(c). Since the neighborhood WAM. The source domain WAM MS is assigned with domain
can be harder to reach an agreement near the boundary due to label 1, while target domain WAMs are assigned with domain
ambiguity, the PLE can effectively get rid of near-boundary label 0. The shape keeping loss LSK is defined as follows:
PLs which are more likely to be erroneous. Overall, the PLE
will only assign confident PLs with probabilistic, geometric, LSK = log(D(MS ))
 1 
and neighborhood soundness, which can significantly boost + (1 − log(D(M))). (6)
the PL accuracy and, therefore, lead to positive intrusion 2
 M∈{MTL ,MTL+PL }
knowledge transfer.
 The source and target projector will try to minimize the LSK
 and let the discriminator D to be unable to distinguish the ori-
B. Geometric Graph Alignment gin of the input WAMs, while the discriminator will try to stay
 The GGA method has been illustrated in Fig. 5. It will per- unconfused. Upon this minimax game reaches an equilibrium,
form GGA from the general graph granularity to the specific both GS and GT will have their shape aligned as indicated in
vertex granularity, i.e., the shape keeping via confused dis- Fig. 5 (Mid), and the labeled and pseudo-labeled target data
criminator (purple step), rotation avoidance mechanism (gray will be better fused together.
step), center point matching against symmetry (pink step), and Rotation Avoidance Against Rotated Misalignment: As
the vertex-level alignment via semantic preservation (orange indicated in Fig. 5 (Mid), graph rotation can still cause
step). domain graph misalignment, even though the shape is aligned.
 Shape Keeping: First, the GGA with align the graph shape Therefore, to further align the domain graphs geometrically,
via a confused discriminator. We define the Same Shape Rule we define the Same Angle Rule as follows:
as follows. Definition 2 (Same Angle Rule): For graph GS and GT , the
 Definition 1 (Same Shape Rule): Both GS and GT have their Same Angle Rule holds if ∀i ∈ [1, K], 1 − COS(VSi , VTi ) = 0.
shape aligned with each other if and only if the WAMs MS The GGA method will keep the Same Angle Rule holding
and MT are the same. by minimizing the rotation loss, defined as follows:
 Specifically, with the help from the PLE, the GGA will 
 K
   
construct three WAMs: 1) the source WAM MS ; 2) the labeled LR = 1 − COS VSi , VTi . (7)
target WAM MTL ; and 3) a WAM based on both labeled and i=1

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10769

By minimizing LR , graph misalignment caused by rotation will where Lce denotes cross entropy loss. By minimizing the
be prevented since the categorize-wise vertex angle is enforced vertex-level alignment loss LV , it will enforce vertices in the
to be 0◦ . same category from different graphs to align with each other.
 Centre Point Matching Against Symmetric Misalignment: As Otherwise, the correlation semantic will fail to be preserved.
shown in the pink-boxed example in Fig. 5 (Mid), upon fixing GGA Theorem: The GGA forms the above mechanism into
the graph shape and enforcing the Same Angle Rule, symmetry a holistic framework and can align two domain graphs with
can still cause misalignment. Therefore, we further define the theoretical guarantee. We state the GGA Theorem as follows.
Same Centre Rule as follows: Theorem 1 (GGA Theorem): Given graph GS and GT , if the
 Definition 3 (Same Centre Rule): For graph GS and GT , Same Shape Rule, the Same Angle Rule, and the Same Centre
the Same Centre Rule holds if μS = μT , μX = Rule hold simultaneously, then GS and GT must exactly align
(1/nX ) ni=1X
 XX i , X ∈ {S, T}. with each other.
 We minimize the centre point matching loss as follows: The proof of the GGA Theorem is as follows.
 Proof: We prove the GGA Theorem by induction with
 LCP = ||μS − μT ||2 . (8) the help of contradiction.
Enforcing the Same Centre Rule brings threefold advantages: Case 1: Both GS and GT have two vertices. Given that the
First, the graph misalignment caused by symmetry can be Same Angle Rule holds, both graphs must be parallel with
prevented; Then, it boosts data participation during the intru- each other. Given that the Same Shape Rule holds, it enforces
sion knowledge transfer to fully excavate the potentials in all the only edge in both graphs to have equal length. Therefore,
data, irrespective of whether a PL is assigned or not; Finally, it is trivial to conclude that these two graphs are the same.
despite its computational simplicity, it can boost the intrusion Case k: Both GS and GT have k vertices. The aforemendetection performance as indicated by the experiments. tioned three rules hold and GS and GT are aligned. We add an
 Vertex-Level Alignment via Semantic Preservation: The additional vertex to GS and GT separately. Without breaking
above three steps focus on the overall graph level, in this step, any of the aforementioned three rules, the new graph GS and
we shift our focus to the vertex granularity. Each vertex in GT also align with each other.
the domain graph represents an intrusion category centroid, Proof Case k by Contradiction: Since under Case k, the preduring prediction, it presents a unique probabilistic category- requisite states that GS and GT align with each other, therefore,
wise correlation. Use object as an example, a laptop should we simply denote both of them as GX .
be highly similar with other laptops, somewhat similar with a Case k1: If GX is asymmetric regarding any line, then it is
TV screen, and very dissimilar with a bike, irrespective of its trivial that there is no possible strategy to add point differently
domain origin. By enforcing the corresponding vertices from to GX to get GX and GX without violating the Same Centre
both domain graphs to preserve the correlation semantic, it Rule.
in turn forces vertex-level alignment between domain graphs. Case k2: If GX is symmetric regarding a symmetric axis, to
Specifically, for source category k, its correlation semantic is stick to the Same Shape Rule and the Same Angle Rule, the
defined as follows: only possible strategy to add VSk+1 and VTk+1 is as follows: the
 line crossing VSk+1 and VTk+1 should also cross-origin (Same
 1  C(f (xi ))
 q(k) = (k) softmax (9) Angle Rule) and the center point of the symmetric axis (Same
 n (k)
 T Shape Rule). However, if we add VSk+1 and VTk+1 differently,
 S xi ∈XS
 then they must be symmetric regarding the graph symmetric
 (i)
where XS denotes category i source instances, C and f denote axis, which violates the Same Centre Rule for the graphs.
the shared classifier and the feature projector, respectively, T Given that the GGA theorem holds, the constituting comis a temperature hyperparameter that controls the correlation ponents of the GGA method can achieve a fine-grained GGA
semantic smoothness. Similarly, the correlation semantic of with theoretical guarantee and benefit intrusion knowledge
each labeled target instance is defined as follows: transfer.

 pi = softmax(C(f (xi ))), xi ∈ XTL . (10) C. Overall Optimization Objective
To perform the semantic preservation, we minimize the vertex- Finally, the source labels provide supervision during the
level alignment loss as follows: training process with supervision loss defined as follows:
   1 
 1 LSUP (XS , YS ) = Lce (c(f (xi )), yi ). (13)
 LVS = − q(yi ) log(pi ). (11) nS
 nTL (xi ,yi )∈(XS ,YS )
 (xi ,yi )∈(XTL ,YTL )
 Overall, the optimization objective of GGA is as follows:
Together with the supervision provided by the labeled target
instances, the final vertex-level alignment loss is defined as min max(LSUP + γ LSK + ηLR + λLCP + LV ) (14)
 C,ES ,ET D
follows:
 1−α  where γ , η, and λ are hyperparameters controlling the influ-
 LV = Lce (C(f (xi )), yi ) ence of loss components during optimization. During initial
 nTL
 (xi ,yi )∈(XTL ,YTL ) training stages, both domain graphs may suffer from imma-
 + αLVS (12) ture shape, therefore, the γ is set to a relatively low value

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10770 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

to emphasize other components such as vertex-wise semantic diversity has been improved. The data set contains four catealignment, etc. As the training progresses, the γ will grow gories, including normal traffic, DoS attacks, information theft
linearly to gradually emphasize the importance of shape keep- attacks, etc. Following [29], we utilize 10 000 data records.
ing. To form the optimization into an end-to-end procedure, we The original data set utilizes a 46-D feature space. We follow
follow [24] to apply the gradient reversal layer for the discrimi- the data set creator’s advice to use top 10 most informative
nator and optimize the model using the Adam gradient descent. features as the feature space. The data set is denoted as B.
Upon the equilibrium of the above minimax game is reached, II Data Set (UNSW-TONIOT): The UNSW-TONIOT data
the network training concludes, and the domain graphs can set [33] serves as one of the latest II data sets [34], released
be aligned in a fine-grained manner, which facilitates more in 2021. It reflects modern IoT standards, protocols, and is capaccurate intrusion detection for the target IoT domain. tured on modern testbed consists of seven types of IoT devices,
 such as smart fridge, modbus sensor, GPS tracker, etc. The
 data set covers seven types of intrusions, including scanning
 V. E XPERIMENT
 attacks, DoS attacks, etc. Heterogeneities present between IoT
A. Experimental Data Sets devices as the features captured by each type of IoT device
 During experiments, we utilize five representative and have their own feature dimension. Following [29], [35], we uticomprehensive intrusion detection data sets, which include lize around 10% of the data set, and select the weather meter
three NI data sets: 1) NSL-KDD; 2) UNSW-NB15; and and GPS tracker as the IoT devices used during experiments,
3) CICIDS2017, and two II data sets: 1) UNSW-BOTIOT and which are denoted as W and G, respectively.
2) UNSW-TONIOT. Comprehensiveness of Data Sets: The data sets we utilized
 NI Data Set: NSL-KDD The NSL-KDD data set [25] was are representative and comprehensive to verify the effectivereleased in 2009, which addressed issues of the prior data set ness of the proposed method. First, these data sets are widely
KDD CUP99 [26] such as having lots of redundant records. recognized and widely adopted by the research community
The NSL-KDD data set contains benign traffic with four types to testify intrusion detection effectiveness with thousands of
of intrusions, such as probing attack, Denial-of-Service (DoS) citations. Second, these data sets are developed and released
attack, etc. Following [13], we reasonably utilize 20% of the in recent years, some of them are release in 2021, therefore,
data set. Each traffic record in the data set is represented using they can reflect current intrusion trends and methods. Finally,
41 features. We follow Harb et al. [27] to use the top 31 most these data sets are captured on realistic testbeds with largeinformative features as the feature representation. The data set scale real IoT devices, and the sufficiency of the testbed is
is denoted as K. recognized by the research community. Hence, these data sets
 NI Data Set: UNSW-NB15: The UNSW-NB15 data set [28] are representative with guaranteed comprehensiveness.
was created by UNSW in 2015 using the IXIA PerfectStorm
tool, which aimed to address the data quality issue and out-ofdate incomprehensive network flow issue observed in previous B. Shared Intrusion
data sets. The data set contains ten traffic categories, including The NI data sets and the II data sets can have at most
normal traffic, DoS attacks, reconnaissance attacks, etc. We eight shared categories that can be transferred as intrusion
utilize 2700 traffic records, which follows the data set magni- knowledge, such as DoS attack, password attack, backdoor
tude in [29]. The data set is represented using 49 features, we attack, etc. These shared intrusion categories account for
perform preprocessing to remove four features having value 0 100%, 54.9%, 100%, 100%, and 98.3% the amount of records
for nearly all records. The data set is denoted as N. in NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CICIDS2017, UNSW-BOTIOT,
 NI Data Set: CICIDS2017: The CICIDS2017 data set [30] and UNSW-TONIOT data set, respectively. Therefore, transwas released in 2017, which served as one of the most up- ferring intrusion knowledge with wide coverage can effectively
to-date NI data sets with modern attack patterns. The data set detect most modern intrusions targeting the IoT domain.
has seven types of intrusions with benign traffic, represented
in 77-D features. We utilize the 20% portion of the data set
provided by the data set creator to perform the model training C. Implementation Details
and testing. During preprocessing, we perform data dedupli- We implement the GGA method using the PyTorch deep
cation and categorical-numerical entries conversion. Following learning framework. Following [11], [36], feature projectors
Stiawan et al. [31], we use features with top 40 information are two-layer neural networks using LeakyReLu [37] as their
gain as the feature space of the data set and denote the data activation function. Both the shared classifier and the disset as C. criminator are implemented as single-layer neural networks.
 II Data Set (UNSW-BOTIOT): The UNSW-BOTIOT data The hyperparameter setting is fixed during all experiments
set [32] was released in 2017 by UNSW, which presented as follows: α = 0.1, γmin = 0.01, γmax = 0.1, η = 0.01,
up-to-date modern attack scenarios captured based on a real- λ = 0.01, dC = 3, T = 5, and #neighbour = 4. Note
istic testbed environment. The testbed environment deployed that γ will increase linearly from γmin to γmax as the train-
IoT devices, such as weather station, smart fridges, etc., ing progresses. To emphasize the target data scarcity, we set
and utilized MQTT protocol, a lightweight IoT communica- nTL : nTU = 1 : 50 as the default ratio. We also conduct the
tion protocol commonly used in realistic IoT scenarios. The parameter sensitivity analyses to verify the stable and robust
data set quality has been carefully addressed, and the attack performance of the GGA method. Following [29], [38], we

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10771

 TABLE I
 I NTRUSION D ETECTION ACCURACY U NDER D EFAULT DATA S CARCITY R ATIO nTL : nTU = 1 : 50

use unlabeled target prediction accuracy as our major eval- pseudo-label strategy using geometric property as a refuation metric, and also use the category-weighted precision erence, however, the neighborhood information is still
(P), recall (R), F1-score (F), and Area under the ROC Curve ignored. Besides, STN utilizes a soft-label strategy, lack-
(A) [39], [40] to evaluate the GGA performance. Specifically, ing emphasize on confident predictions. The GGA is the
we define true positive TP(k) as the number of category k only method that jointly considers both the geometric
intrusions being corrected identified, similar for true nega- property and neighborhood information, while avoiding
tive TN(k) , false positive FP(k) , and false negative FN(k) . The hard-to-set threshold.
mathematical definitions of evaluation metrics are as follows: 2) From the domain alignment perspective, these baselines
 K  (k) + TN(k)
  apply diverse techniques, such as CDAC’s adversark=1 TP
 Accuracy = (15) ial adaptive clustering, MME’s alternated conditional
 nTU
 entropy minimization, STN’s joint distribution match-
 K (k)
 |XTU | TP(k) ing, etc. However, these methods fail to explicitly
 Precision = ·
 nTU TP(k) + FP(k) conduct domain alignment from a geometric graph
 k=1
 perspective. To our best knowledge, there lacks a sim-
  |X (k) |
 K
 ilar pure geometric-based graph baseline method, the
 = TU
 · Precision(k) (16)
 nTU WCGN is a comparable state-of-the-art graph method
 k=1
 (k)
 based on graph learning framework. However, since a
 K
 |XTU | TP(k)
 Recall = · proper graph learning requires both sufficient data and
 nTU TP(k) + FN(k) a high complexity, it is challenging under the datak=1
 scarce and computationally constrained IoT scenario.
  |X (k) |
 K
 = TU
 · Recall(k) (17) Conversely, the GGA performs knowledge transfer via a
 nTU GGA perspective. It fills the void of previous methods,
 k=1
 (k) avoids heavy data dependency, and has a relatively low
 K
 |XTU | 2 · Precision(k) · Recall(k)
 F1 = · . (18) complexity.
 k=1
 nTU Precision(k) + Recall(k) Therefore, these state-of-the-art baseline methods are representative and can be used to verify the superiority of the GGA
Besides, metrics A (AUC) represents the area under the ROC
 method from different perspectives.
curve, a curve plotting the TP rate and the FP rate.

D. State-of-the-Art Baselines E. Performance Evaluation
 We utilize nine state-of-the-art comparing methods, includ- Performance Analysis Under Default Data Scarcity Ratio:
ing TNT [18], MME [21], STN [11], APE [22], DDAS, We analyze the performance against state-of-the-art counter-
DDAC [19], WCGN [7], [8], CDAC [10], and STAR [20]. All parts under the default target data scarcity ratio. As indicated
of them are from top-tier conferences and journals, and eight in Table I, the GGA clearly outperforms all comparing methof them are proposed between 2019 and 2021. We summarize ods by at least 4.2%. The best-performed comparing method
their differences with GGA as follows. WCGN utilizes graph learning framework, however, it does not
 1) From the pseudo-labeling perspective, the DDAC, perform well under the data-scarce IoT scenario, its PL assign-
 DDAS, WCGN, and TNT utilize predicted hard pseudo ment strategy also lacks consideration of geometric properties
 label for target instances and ignore both the geo- and assigns PL in an isolated manner. Hence, it is natural to
 metric property and neighborhood information. On the observe a performance boost achieved by the GGA.
 other hand, MME, CDAC, and APE involve threshold- Performance Analysis Under Diverse Data Scarcity Ratios:
 based pseudo-label strategy. However, setting thresh- To verify the effectiveness and robustness of the GGA under
 olds properly requires expertise experience and has varied target data scarcities, we vary the data scarcity ratio
 compromised flexibility. Both APE and STAR apply nTL : nTU between 1 : 10 and 1 : 100. Following [5], [11], [36],

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10772 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

 TABLE II
 I NTRUSION D ETECTION ACCURACY U NDER VARIED nTL : nTU R ATIOS

 TABLE III
 I NTRUSION D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE U SING VARIOUS E VALUATION M ETRICS U NDER D EFAULT DATA S CARCITY

the 1 : 100 case is enough to represent an extreme datascarce setting. We randomly pick three tasks and present
their performance in Table II. As we can observe, the GGA
achieves the best intrusion detection performance among all
three tasks under all data scarcity settings. It yields a 4.36%
and 8.29% overall average performance increase compared
with the best and second best-performed methods WCGN
and STN. Moreover, under the extreme data scarcity case, the
performance boost achieved by GGA reaches 4.6% and 8.63%
compared with the best and second best-performed counterpart
WCGN and DDAC, and only presents a 0.87% drop compared
with the performance under the 1 : 50 case, which further verifies the superiority and robustness of the GGA when working
under diverse data scarcity conditions.
 Performance Analysis Using Diverse Evaluation Metrics:
To further verify the effectiveness of the GGA method using
evaluation metrics other than accuracy, we randomly select
two tasks and record the performance using another four evaluation metrics, and present the result in Table III. We observe
GGA achieves superior performance on all evaluation metrics. Specifically, the highest precision indicates that most of
the flagged malicious decisions made by GGA are correct.
The highest recall means the GGA can flag most amount of
intrusions among all malicious traffic. As a harmonic mean
of precision and recall, the highest F1-score indicates that the Fig. 6. PL accuracy under default data scarcity ratio between ablated
GGA can balance properly between flagging malicious actions experiments.
and avoiding triggering false alarms. Finally, the highest AUC
shows the GGA can effectively distinguish malicious intrusions from normal traffic. Together, these evaluation metrics Intrusion Detection Performance Summary: We verify the
verify the effectiveness of the GGA method and its real-world GGA has the best performance on all tasks when evaluated
usability in terms of false alarm avoidance. using all metrics. Therefore, it is sufficient to indicate that

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10773

Fig. 7. PL accuracy under default data scarcity ratio within a single
experiment that utilizes full PLE. Fig. 8. Within-experiment PL accuracy under varied data scarcity ratios.

the GGA method can accurately flag malicious traffic while prediction vote, geometric property vote, and neighborhood
not causing severe false alarms. The best F1-score and AUC vote, respectively. The height of each bar represents percentage
score performance also verify the GGA has the best ability to of unlabeled target data being pseudo-labeled, and red–green
distinguish benign traffic and different intrusions. Having such color and the value written on each bar indicates the accuracy
capability promotes the real-world usefulness of GGA when of PL assignment. As we can observe, using the full PLE
performing effective intrusion detection. yields advantages in threefold.
 1) The full PLE achieves the highest PL accuracy during all training stages. During the beginning stage, to
F. Pseudo-Label Accuracy Analysis avoid blindly generating a vast amount of false PLs and
 To justify the efficacy of the PLE mechanism, we perform mislead the alignment process, the full PLE can even
PL accuracy analysis in three ways: 1) analyze the PL accuracy temporarily generate no PLs, since generating PL blindly
between ablated experiments under default data scarcity ratio; can only deteriorate the alignment process.
2) analyze the PL accuracy of different PLE configurations in 2) The full PLE can reach a relatively high PL accuracy
a single full PLE setting under default data scarcity ratio; and around 86.6%–90% even at the intermediate training
3) perform 2) under varied data scarcity ratios to verify the stage, which guides the aligning process positively by
robustness of the PLE. fully exploiting the unlabeled target data.
 The results on two randomly selected tasks for case 1) has 3) The full PLE eventually achieves a PL accuracy around
been illustrated in Fig. 6. Note that N, G, and K represent NN 92.5%–96.2%, which indicates the superiority of PLE on

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10774 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDY G ROUP A: I NTRUSION D ETECTION ACCURACY OF GGA W ITH A BLATED GGA C OMPONENTS

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY G ROUP B: I NTRUSION D ETECTION ACCURACY OF GGA W ITH A BLATED PLE C OMPONENTS

 TABLE VI
 accurate PL assignment. Although the full PLE may not A BLATION S TUDY G ROUP C: I NTRUSION D ETECTION ACCURACY OF
 generate the highest amount of PLs, however, the accu- M ETHODS W ITH D IFFERENT G RAPH A LIGNMENT M ECHANISMS
 racy matters more than the amount, as indicated by the
 superior performance achieved by the full PLE during
 the ablation study.
 Besides the PL accuracy analysis performed between
ablated experiments, we also perform the PL accuracy analysis within a single full PLE experiment under three randomly
picked tasks. As indicated in Fig. 7, the within-experiment
performances also comply with the advantages summarized
above. The full PLE can stably achieve the highest PL assignment accuracy during all training stages. During each stage, where S + TL + PL stands for combining instances from the
ablating any PLE-constituting component will cause the PL source, labeled-target, and pseudo-labeled target domains.
accuracy to drop significantly. This result further verifies the As indicated in Tables IV–VI, the full GGA outperforms all
usability of all components considered in the PLE. its ablated counterparts by 3.4% on average, verifying positive
 To demonstrate the robustness of the PLE under varied contributions made by all constituting components toward a
data scarcities, the within-experiment PL accuracy is analyzed fine-grained GGA. In ablation group A, the rotation avoidance
under varied data scarcity ratios, as indicated in Fig. 8. Under mechanism is the best performance contributor with 4.9% of
a relatively low-data scarcity case, the PLE can achieve a performance boost, followed by the centre matching, shape-
99.06% PL accuracy during the final training stage. Even keeping mechanism and vertex-level semantic preservation. In
under the extreme data scarcity case, the PL accuracy only ablation group B, the results verify that all three voting compodrops by 4.27% compared with the 1 : 10 case, which nents are indispensable. The performance will drop by 3.3% on
demonstrates that under varied data scarcities, the PLE can average without any one of them. Finally, in ablation group C,
work robustly to generate accurate PL assignment and benefit a 2.8% performance reduction is observed by the Euclidean
positive intrusion knowledge transfer during the GGA process. distance-based pure vertex alignment procedure. It is natural to
 observe since there are huge heterogeneities between domains,
 therefore, pure vertex-level distance-based alignment may not
G. Ablation Study be strong enough to enforce a fine-grained graph alignment,
 We further investigate the efficacy of GGA’s constituting which results in degraded intrusion knowledge transfer. By
components. Ablation group A has the corresponding GGA jointly considering several granularities from shape keeping to
components in (14) being turned off. Ablation group B has vertex-level alignment, the GGA can facilitate a finer alignment
different PLE voters being ablated. Ablation group C compares and an enhanced intrusion detection performance.
GGA with the method that uses the direct vertex Euclidean
distance alignment as an alternative, which is defined as follows: H. Hypothesis Testing for Ablation Study
 
 K  To verify the statistical significance of the contributions
 2
 min VAi − VBi made by each constituting component, i.e., the performance
 i (A,B) boost is not observed randomly by chance, we perform signif-
 (A, B) ∈ {(S, TL + PL), (S, S + TL + PL) icance T-test on three randomly selected tasks. As illustrated
 (TL + PL, S + TL + PL)} (19) in Fig. 9, the gray shaded area denotes the significant threshold
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10775

 (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 9. Significance T-tests on three randomly selected tasks have been performed to verify the statistical soundness of the contributions from different
constituting components of the GGA. The gray shaded area denotes the significant threshold − log(0.05). Among each dimension, the wider the coverage is
the more significant the contribution is on that ablated component. (a) K→B. (b) N→G. (c) C→W.

Fig. 10. Parameter sensitivity analysis of the GGA method for hyperparameters α, γ , η, λ, and # neighbour under their corresponding reasonable range. As
shown in the legend, the solid and dashed horizontal lines indicate the best-comparing method and the best-performed GGA ablated counterpart under each
task, respectively.
 TABLE VII
− log(0.05). Among each dimension, the wider the coverage C OMPARISON ON T RAINING T IME P ER E POCH (S ECOND )
is, the more significant the contribution is on that ablated component. As we can see from Fig. 9, the colored area has wider
coverage than the gray shaded area among all dimensions,
which indicates that the contributions made by all constituting components have statistical soundness. Therefore, all
proposed components are indispensable for GGA to achieve a
 TABLE VIII
fine-grained intrusion knowledge transfer via graph alignment. C OMPARISON ON I NFERENCE T IME P ER I NSTANCE
 (M ICROSECOND = 10−6 S ECOND )
I. Parameter Sensitivity
 The parameter sensitivity of the GGA method has been
illustrated in Fig. 10. The GGA shows relatively stable
performance under these hyperparameter ranges without
showing severe fluctuations. Besides, the GGA outperforms the best-performed comparing method under nearly best-performed baseline counterparts. The results are presented
all hyperparameter ranges. Additionally, the GGA constantly in Tables VII and VIII. As we can observe, the GGA achieves
shows superior performance than its best-ablated counterpart. the best training and inference efficiency. Specifically, the
Therefore, we verify that the GGA method is robust on varied GGA trains 31 times and 6.67% faster than DDAC and
hyperparameter settings. WCGN, respectively. Besides, the GGA also achieves the
 Besides, during all experiments, only a fixed set of hyperpa- fastest inference speed, which outperforms the best-performed
rameters is used to tackle diverse data domains. The GGA can counterpart WCGN by 15.79%. Hence, it verifies the efficonstantly show satisfying performance without the need to ciency of the GGA, making it suitable to be used under
perform time-consuming hyperparameter resetting. Therefore, computationally-constrained IoT scenarios.
it further demonstrates the robustness of GGA on hyperparameters and its usefulness when tackling diverse intrusion VI. C ONCLUSION
data domains.
 In this article, we utilize the knowledge-rich NI domain
 to facilitate accurate intrusion detection for the data-scarce
J. Computational Efficiency IoT domain. We tackle this HDA problem through a GGA
 Finally, to verify the computational efficiency of the GGA approach. First, a PLE mechanism is employed to exploit
method, we measure both the training time per epoch and the unlabeled target instances, which jointly considers the
inference time per instance and make comparison between two network prediction, geometric property, and neighborhood
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
10776 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 10, NO. 12, 15 JUNE 2023

 TABLE IX
 ACRONYM TABLE caused by rotation and symmetry, respectively. Additionally,
 the vertex-level semantic is preserved to facilitate a more
 fine-grained graph alignment. By forming these mechanisms
 into a holistic whole, the GGA method can align intrusion
 graphs in a fine-grained manner, which benefits the intrusion
 knowledge transfer between domains. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of the
 GGA method. Insight analysis also verifies the usefulness of
 each constituting component of the GGA method.

 A PPENDIX
 Acronym Table: For better readability, we provide the following acronym table for reference. Note that all acronyms
 are defined in the main text as well as at the first time they
 TABLE X
 N OTATION TABLE are introduced.
 Notation Table: We provide a notation table for better
 readability.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] M. N. Bhuiyan, M. M. Rahman, M. M. Billah, and D. Saha, “Internet
 of Things (IoT): A review of its enabling technologies in healthcare
 applications, standards protocols, security, and market opportunities,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10474–10498, Jul. 2021.
 [2] J. Wu et al., “Joint semantic transfer network for IoT intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Nov. 1, 2022,
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3218339.
 [3] C. Dietz et al., “IoT-botnet detection and isolation by access routers,”
 in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Netw. Future (NOF), 2018, pp. 88–95.
 [4] C. D. McDermott, F. Majdani, and A. V. Petrovski, “Botnet detection
 in the Internet of Things using deep learning approaches,” in Proc. Int.
 Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1–8.
 [5] J. Ning et al., “Malware traffic classification using domain adaptation and ladder network for secure industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17058–17069, Sep. 2022.
 [6] X. Hu, C. Zhu, G. Cheng, R. Li, H. Wu, and J. Gong, “A deep subdomain
 adaptation network with attention mechanism for malware variant traffic
 identification at an IoT edge gateway,” IEEE Internet Things J., early
 access, Mar. 21, 2022, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2022.3160755.
 [7] Z. Wang, Y. Luo, Z. Huang, and M. Baktashmotlagh, “Prototypematching graph network for heterogeneous domain adaptation,” in Proc.
 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020, pp. 2104–2112.
 [8] L. Wang, C. Huang, W. Ma, X. Cao, and S. Vosoughi, “Graph embedding
 via diffusion-wavelets-based node feature distribution characterization,”
 in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manag., 2021, pp. 3478–3482.
 [9] Y.-T. Hsieh, S.-Y. Tao, Y.-H. H. Tsai, Y.-R. Yeh, and Y.-C. F. Wang,
 “Recognizing heterogeneous cross-domain data via generalized joint distribution adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME),
 2016, pp. 1–6.
 [10] J. Li, G. Li, Y. Shi, and Y. Yu, “Cross-domain adaptive clustering for
 semi-supervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 2505–2514.
 [11] Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, X. Li, and Y. Ye, “Heterogeneous domain adaptation
 via soft transfer network,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 2019, pp. 1578–1586.
 [12] C. Jun and C. Chi, “Design of complex event-processing IDS in Internet
 of Things,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Meas. Technol. Mechatronics Autom.,
 2014, pp. 226–229.
 [13] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Słowińska, G. Theodorakopoulos, and
 P. Burnap, “A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home
information to boost the PL assignment accuracy. The PLE IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9042–9053,
avoids geometrically diverged confident but wrong PLs and Oct. 2019.
near-boundary ambiguous PLs. Then, both intrusion domains [14] P. Shukla, “ML-IDS: A machine learning approach to detect wormhole
are formulated as graphs, with the GGA performed using four attacks in Internet of Things,” in Proc. Intell. Syst. Conf. (IntelliSys),
 2017, pp. 234–240.
mechanisms, from general graph granularity to vertex-level [15] M. Ge, X. Fu, N. Syed, Z. Baig, G. Teo, and A. Robles-Kelly, “Deep
alignment. Specifically, the graph shape is kept via a con- learning-based intrusion detection for IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 24th
fused discriminator that is incapable to distinguish the origin Pac. Rim Int. Symp. Depend. Comput. (PRDC), 2019, pp. 256–265.
 [16] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
of WAMs. Besides, the rotation avoidance mechanism and the attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
center point matching mechanism avoid graph misalignment no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
WU et al.: HETEROGENEOUS DOMAIN ADAPTATION FOR IoT INTRUSION DETECTION 10777

[17] L. Vu, Q. U. Nguyen, D. N. Nguyen, D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz, Jiashu Wu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 “Deep transfer learning for IoT attack detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, received the B.Sc. degree in computer science
 pp. 107335–107344, 2020. and financial mathematics and statistics from
[18] W.-Y. Chen, T.-M. H. Hsu, Y.-H. H. Tsai, Y.-C. F. Wang, and The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW,
 M.-S. Chen, “Transfer neural trees for heterogeneous domain adapta- Australia, in 2018, and the M.IT. degree in artifition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 399–414. cial intelligence from the University of Melbourne,
[19] Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, X. Li, and Y. Ye, “Discriminative distribution align- Parkville, VIC, Australia, in 2020. He is currently
 ment: A unified framework for heterogeneous domain adaptation,” pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Shenzhen Institute
 Pattern Recognit., vol. 101, May 2020, Art. no. 107165. of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
[20] A. Singh et al., “Improving semi-supervised domain adaptation using Sciences, Shenzhen, China, and the University of
 effective target selection and semantics,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 2709–2718. His research interests include machine learning and cloud computing.
[21] K. Saito, D. Kim, S. Sclaroff, T. Darrell, and K. Saenko, “Semisupervised domain adaptation via minimax entropy,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Hao Dai (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 8050–8058. received the B.S. and M.Sc. degrees in commu-
[22] T. Kim and C. Kim, “Attract, perturb, and explore: Learning a feature nication and electronic technology from Wuhan
 alignment network for semi-supervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. Eur. University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2015
 Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 591–607. and 2017, respectively. He is currently pursu-
[23] M. Pilanci and E. Vural, “Domain adaptation on graphs by learning ing the Ph.D. degree with Shenzhen Institute
 aligned graph bases,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 2, of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
 pp. 587–600, Feb. 2022. Sciences, Shenzhen, China, and the University of
[24] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation by back- Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
 propagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1180–1189. His research interests include mobile edge com-
[25] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed anal- puting, federated learning and deep reinforcement
 ysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell. learning.
 Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
[26] S. Hettich, “KDD cup 1999 data,” Data Set, Dept. Inf. Comput. Sci., Yang Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
 Univ. California, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 1999. degree in applied mathematics from the Ocean
[27] H. M. Harb, A. A. Zaghrot, M. A. Gomaa, and A. S. Desuky, “Selecting University of China, Qingdao, China, in 1989, the
 optimal subset of features for intrusion detection systems,” Adv. Comput. M.Sc. degree in computer science from Carlton
 Sci. Technol., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 179–192, 2011. University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2001, and
[28] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6. 2008.
[29] O. Alkadi, N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A deep He is currently with the Shenzhen Institutes
 blockchain framework-enabled collaborative intrusion detection for pro- of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of
 tecting IoT and cloud networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, Sciences, Beijing, China, as a Professor and as an
 pp. 9463–9472, Jun. 2021. Adjunct Professor with Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. His research
[30] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating interests include service and cloud computing, programming language implea new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” mentation, and software engineering.
 in Proc. ICISSP, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116. Dr. Wang was an Alberta Industry Research and Development Associate
[31] Kurniabudi, D. Stiawan, Darmawijoyo, M. Y. B. Idris, A. M. Bamhdi, from 2009 to 2011, and a Canadian Fulbright Scholar from 2014 to 2015.
 and R. Budiarto, “CICIDS-2017 dataset feature analysis with
 information gain for anomaly detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, Kejiang Ye (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and
 pp. 132911–132921, 2020. Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Zhejiang
[32] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards University, Hangzhou, China, in 2008 and 2013
 the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things respectively.
 for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Comput. He was also a joint Ph.D. student with
 Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019. The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW,
[33] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and Australia, from 2012 to 2013. After graduation, he
 F. T. H. den Hartog, “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher with Carnegie
 for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intru- Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, from 2014
 sion data sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, to 2015 and Wayne State University, Detroit, MI,
 Jan. 2022. USA, from 2015 to 2016. He is currently an
[34] G. Abdelmoumin, D. B. Rawat, and A. Rahman, “On the performance of Associate Professor with the Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,
 machine learning models for anomaly-based intelligent intrusion detec- Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China. His research interests focus
 tion systems for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, on the performance, energy, and reliability of cloud computing and network
 no. 6, pp. 4280–4290, Mar. 2022. systems.
[35] H. Qiu, T. Dong, T. Zhang, J. Lu, G. Memmi, and M. Qiu, “Adversarial
 attacks against network intrusion detection in IoT systems,” IEEE Chengzhong Xu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10327–10335, Jul. 2021. degree from The University of Hong Kong, Hong
[36] S. Li, B. Xie, J. Wu, Y. Zhao, C. H. Liu, and Z. Ding, “Simultaneous Kong, in 1993.
 semantic alignment network for heterogeneous domain adaptation,” in He is currently the Dean of the Faculty of
 Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020, pp. 3866–3874. Science and Technology with the University of
[37] A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, and A. Y. Ng, “Rectifier nonlinearities Macau, Macau, China, and the Director with
 improve neural network acoustic models,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 30, 2013, the Institute of Advanced Computing and Data
 p. 3. Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
[38] J. Li, Z. Zhao, R. Li, and H. Zhang, “AI-based two-stage intrusion detec- Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
 tion for software defined IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, China. He has published more than 200 papers
 no. 2, pp. 2093–2102, Apr. 2019. in journals and conferences. His research interest
[39] M. A. Ferrag, L. Maglaras, S. Moschoyiannis, and H. Janicke, “Deep includes parallel and distributed systems, service and cloud computing, and
 learning for cyber security intrusion detection: Approaches, datasets, software engineering.
 and comparative study,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 50, Feb. 2020, Dr. Xu serves on a number of journal editorial boards, includ-
 Art. no. 102419. ing IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTERS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
[40] S. Zavrak and M. İskefiyeli, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection from PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 network flow features using variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access, C LOUD C OMPUTING, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, and
 vol. 8, pp. 108346–108358, 2020. China Science Information Sciences.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: LNM Institute of Information Technology. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:37:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.