IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023 1267

 Improving Performance, Reliability, and
 Feasibility in Multimodal Multitask
 Traffic Classification with XAI
 Alfredo Nascita , Antonio Montieri , Member, IEEE, Giuseppe Aceto ,
 Domenico Ciuonzo , Senior Member, IEEE, Valerio Persico ,
 and Antonio Pescapé , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The promise of Deep Learning (DL) in solving hard performance, and the capability to adapt (without an expert
problems such as network Traffic Classification (TC) is being human in the loop) to the change of observed traffic, these
held back by the severe lack of transparency and explainabil- methods constitute a black-box whose behavior is extremely
ity of this kind of approaches. To cope with this strongly felt
issue, the field of eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has hard to explain, and therefore to improve, or secure against
been recently founded, and is providing effective techniques attacks: as such, they can not be trusted. As a result, all the
and approaches. Accordingly, in this work we investigate inter- main stakeholders agree there is a strong need to research
pretability via XAI-based techniques to understand and improve the explainability of Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions
the behavior of state-of-the-art multimodal and multitask DL applied to TC and more generally to networking, with the
traffic classifiers. Using a publicly available security-related
dataset (ISCX VPN- NON VPN), we explore and exploit XAI aim of improving performance, reliability, and feasibility of
techniques to characterize the considered classifiers providing such solutions.
global interpretations (rather than sample-based ones), and define Indeed, having explanations for AI systems is no longer just
a novel classifier, D ISTILLER -E VOLVED, optimized along three an attractive and desirable feature, but has become the fundaobjectives: performance, reliability, feasibility. The proposed mental basis of any AI design solution that users and network
methodology proves as highly appealing, allowing to much simplify the architecture to get faster training time and shorter operators can consider safe, reliable, and fair. In fact, in critical
classification time, as fewer packets must be collected. This is contexts such as network management, it is no longer sufficient
at the expenses of negligible (or even positive) impact on clas- to have accurate systems: network administrators and users
sification performance, while understanding and controlling the must trust the results and policies suggested by AI algorithms
interplay between inputs, model complexity, performance, and to decide whether to act and how.1 This is more pressing as
reliability.
 AI is being increasingly proposed to govern the complexity of
 Index Terms—Deep learning, encrypted traffic, explainable real-time network resources management and network secuartificial intelligence, multimodal learning, multitask learning, rity, whose landscape has been subject to continuous evolution,
traffic classification.
 last originated by the pandemic events.
 This need for transparency motivated the Defense Advanced
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to launch its program
 RAFFIC Classification (TC) is a key activity instrumen-
T tal to traffic management, resource planning, and security
enforcement in today’s networks, which are characterized by
 for eXplainable AI (XAI) already in 2017 [2], with the aim
 of shaping new learning processes that (a) produce betterexplainable models, (b) design effective explanation interfaces,
high heterogeneity and dynamicity of transmitted traffic. To and (c) understand the psychological requirements for effecmeet these challenging demands, recent research is strongly tive explanations. Notably, while these needs apply generally
focusing on Deep Learning (DL) methods for designing effec- to AI, they are specifically felt in the communications and
tive tools for accurate TC [1]. While promising unparalleled networking field, with several telecommunications companies
 investigating how to produce AI-based solutions that can be
 Manuscript received 30 April 2022; revised 3 November 2022 and
13 February 2023; accepted 15 February 2023. Date of publication the (safe) engine for their core business activities. For instance,
20 February 2023; date of current version 6 July 2023. This work is Telefonica has focused on “Responsible Use of AI” [3] to
partially supported by the Italian Research Program “PON Ricerca e address potential discrimination, lack of interpretability of the
Innovazione 2014–2020 (PON R&I) – Asse IV REACT-EU – Azione IV.4”,
the “Centro Nazionale HPC, Big Data e Quantum Computing – ICSC” and the results provided by the algorithms, and transparency of the
“RESTART” Project funded by MUR. The associate editor coordinating the personal data they use, and has published its AI Principles
review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Stakhanova. in 2018, covering fair AI, transparent and explainable AI,
(Corresponding author: Domenico Ciuonzo.)
 The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and human-centric AI, privacy and security by design. Besides,
Information Technologies, University of Naples Federico II, 80125 many other institutions and companies have defined rules
Naples, Italy (e-mail: alfredo.nascita@unina.it; antonio.montieri@unina.it;
giuseppe.aceto@unina.it; domenico.ciuonzo@unina.it; valerio.persico@
unina.it; pescape@unina.it). 1 We underline that when referring to “trust” in results/decisions, we do not
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3246794 imply network security aspects.
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1268 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

and principles to guide their research. In line with the EU • We propose and systematically evaluate a first variation
Commission guidelines for Trustworthy AI, Ericsson defined of the original realization based on the D ISTILLER
this concept [4] by focusing mainly on the explainability, framework—named D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS—and
safety, and verifiability of AI solutions. They also included compare its performance against state-of-the-art multraceability and accountability, always considering the human titask TC baselines [12], [13], [14], including our
being at the center of the whole process. The lack of explain- original multimodal multitask proposal [11] referred to
ability is, according to Huawei, the main reason for the as D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL herein. We investigate the
security vulnerabilities of AI systems. Indeed, unlike tradi- intrinsic working behavior of D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS
tional systems, this lack of explainability poses specific and applying state-of-the-art XAI tools (i.e., Deep SHAP [15]
serious security threats to DL-based applications that can be and Integrated Gradients [16]) to understand input imporexploited by adversarial machine learning methods such as tance associated with each modality, and within each
evasion, poisoning, and backdoor attacks [5]. Equally impor- single modality. In this context, a qualitative intertant, the relevance and timeliness of XAI adoption are also pretability comparison with D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL is
motivated by the rising adoption of encryption (e.g., TLS also put forward.
encapsulation) in modern Internet traffic [6], [7]. • We leverage the results of interpretability analysis to
 Therefore, in response to the needs arising from DL adop- improve our proposal and obtain a faster version of
tion for effective TC, the field of XAI is providing tools to it—named D ISTILLER -E ARLIER—with reduced training
link the outcome of the classification to the structure of the times and allowing earlier classification. This is obtained
DL model and the input, making the model explainable, in a by using a limited number of inputs and discarding irrelenumber of ways [8]. In addition to explainability, in this work vant ones for both modalities without losing performance.
we consider also reliability [9], measuring to which extent We also compare the aforementioned method with (a) a
the confidence associated with a given decision by a (possibly classic feature selection method that relies on estimating
opaque) DL algorithm can be deemed reliable—i.e., low (resp. mutual information, and we assess the results with (b) a
high) confidence in labeling a certain traffic object actually complete sensitivity analysis based on grid search.
leads to low (resp. high) accuracy in classifying it. This prop- • We evaluate the reliability of D ISTILLER -E ARLIER via
erty is crucial as it informs decisions with an impact on user a calibration analysis, in order to assess how reliable
experience and economic efficiency of network management. the confidence value reported with the prediction is. This
Finally, we also assess how XAI can be instrumentally used to analysis supports further improvements of the proposed
ensure the prototyping of feasible (viz. ready-to-be-deployed) architecture by leveraging the label smoothing technique
TC models [10]. Indeed, the understanding of the behavior of to improve the generalization capability of the model
the learned model enables focused performance enhancements, associated with each TC task, leading to D ISTILLER -
much more efficient than a less-informed search over the huge C ALIBRATED. Indeed, the adopted calibration techhyper-parameters space. As the adoption of DL is relatively nique reduces the excessive confidence associated with
new, even more so in the field of network traffic analysis, it is predictions and consequently reduces overfitting.
no wonder that XAI has not yet found mature application to • Aiming at improving the feasibility in terms of model
TC as well, despite its acute need: with this work we move an size (and related memory occupation), in order to make
important step in the direction of tackling this open challenge. the attained architecture deployable even on resource-
 In detail, the main contributions of this paper can be constrained devices, we investigate (i) pruning, (ii)
summarized as follows: quantization, and (iii) knowledge distillation techniques
 • Based on our recently proposed general framework to compress D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED and obtain our
 (D ISTILLER [11]), we design a novel architecture oper- final proposal, named D ISTILLER -E VOLVED. In this
 ating at biflow level which (i) effectively exploits the context, we assess in detail if (and, in positive case,
 heterogeneous nature of the different views of a traf- how) performance, interpretability, and reliability are
 fic object by distilling both intra- and inter-modalities affected by the consequent model simplification. Overall,
 dependence via multimodal learning and (ii) is able to D ISTILLER -E VOLVED enhances the previously-proposed
 solve multiple (related) TC tasks simultaneously via mul- D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL from different viewpoints: archititask learning. To support this improvement, we devise tecture and training procedure, input dimension, reliabila general methodology for interpreting and assessing ity (via calibration analysis), and feasibility (in terms of
 the reliability of multimodal multitask DL-based traf- model size).
 fic classifiers in practical experimental scenarios. The • The experimental campaign is conducted on ISCX VPNabove analysis includes different levels of granularity or NON VPN [17], a publicly-released human-generated
 viewpoints, including: (a) relative importance of differ- encrypted-traffic dataset, to foster reproducibility.
 ent input modalities for each task and down to specific The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
 parts of each modality; (b) how each task affects the surveys the current state-of-the-art on TC via multimodal mulothers’ behavior. Specifically, our study goes through titask DL and the recent application of XAI to networking
 a number of stages, each associated with a different and TC, positioning our contributions against related litrealization of the general D ISTILLER framework, as erature. Section III describes the considered XAI-based
 detailed hereinafter. multimodal multitask TC methodology; the experimental setup
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1269

considered and the experimental results discussed are reported (with the former two preprocessed via a two-level quanin Sections IV and V, respectively; Section VI ends the paper tization) [13], classification of VPN-encapsulated traffic at
with conclusions and future directions of research. different granularity [11], or joint classification of application, application category, user operation, operating system,
 II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK and browser [45]. Moreover, the multitask paradigm has been
 applied in the context of federated learning [12], transfer learn-
 In this section, we first review the current state-of-the-art
 ing [13], [14], and one-shot learning [13]. We underline that
on TC via multimodal multitask DL (Section II-A). Then,
 all the works proposing multitask architectures—with only
we discuss the current application of XAI methods to the
 one exception [34]—leverage such a learning paradigm in
networking field (Section II-B). Finally, we position our cona supervised manner, namely the solution of the considered
tribution against existing methods adopting XAI to DL-based
 tasks (regardless of the specific task dealt with) is taken into
TC (Section II-C).
 account when training the layers of the shared representation.
 We point the interested reader to our recent work [11] for a
A. Traffic Classification via Multimodal Multitask DL more in-depth analysis of the state-of-the-art concerning TC
 Several works perform encrypted TC by means of via multitask DL.
a variety of DL algorithms, including Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) [12], [13], different types of AutoEncoders
(AEs) [1], [33], [34], [35], [36], one- and two-dimensional B. XAI for Networking
Convolutional Neural Networks (1D- and 2D-CNNs) [1], [11], As AI techniques have been increasingly adopted to tackle
[14], [26], [29], [30], [32], [35], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], networking tasks in recent years, networking researchers are
[42], [43], variants of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) starting to explore XAI techniques to make AI models intersuch as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [1], [29], [34], pretable, trustworthy, and manageable [10]. Table I highlights
[39], [44], [45] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [11], [30], the main aspects of recent works facing such networking tasks
[38], [45], [46], possibly exploiting the composition capa- in the light of interpretability (e.g., anomaly detection [18],
bilities of hybrid DL architectures [1], [30], [44]. The way resource allocation [19], global and local network control [22],
input data are fed to such architectures is paramount for tak- and various networking-related prediction tasks [20], [21],
ing full advantage of the DL paradigm. Unfortunately, some [23], [24], [25]), with a specific focus on TC whose related
works [12], [13], [14], [41] counter-productively conduct a literature is clustered in the bottom half of the table. It is worth
preliminary ad-hoc feature extraction and do not exploit the noting that Tab. I does not report the other works dealing with
key advantage of DL of automatic extracting knowledge from multitask TC described in Section II-A because no XAI techraw traffic data without the need of human-expert intervention. nique is applied in them (with the sole exception of [11],
Conversely, other works [37], [40], [44], [45] feed DL models containing a calibration analysis of the proposed multitask TC
with input data containing traffic-trace metadata (e.g., times- classifier). Still, these works are later reported in Tab. III and
tamps or ad-hoc IDs) or biased fields (e.g., local IP addresses considered as baselines in the experimental phase.
or source/destination ports) which are likely to introduce AI techniques applied belong to both supervised and unsubias and misleadingly inflate TC performance. Differently, pervised Machine Learning (ML) and DL approaches, or
in the present work, we exploit unbiased raw input data they are reinforcement learning solutions. Consequently, the
providing different views on traffic (i.e., payload bytes and considered traffic object (i.e., the relevant elementary sampacket sequence information) to take advantage of its intrinsic ples of analysis) strongly depends on the specific networking
heterogeneity via multimodal approaches. task—with biflows dominating the studies performing TC—
 Indeed, even when using unbiased raw traffic data as input, while multimodal (MM) or multitask (MT) architectures are
most previous studies still partially capitalize the capabilities exploited only to face traffic prediction and classification.
of DL by leveraging myopic single-modal architectures, while Focusing on the specific XAI methodology adopted, we
only few works exploit the intrinsic heterogeneity of network can notice that the related works mostly apply interpretability
traffic data by means of multimodal proposals [11], [29], [30], techniques to provide post-hoc explanations [30] in vari-
[38], [39], [42], where the lower layers of the deep architecture ous forms. These include (i) different types of perturbation
are trained on heterogeneous subsets of input data with the aim analyses (e.g., occlusion analysis [26], [29] or universal
of learning intra- and inter-modality dependencies. perturbation attacks [31]), (ii) attribution based on Shapley
 On the other hand, a larger number of works propose values [23], [30], [39] (iii) Layer-wise relevance propagamultitask DL models which make use of a shared repre- tion [18], (iv) Interpretable local surrogates [20], [21], [23],
sentation to improve their learning ability. Specifically, they and (v) Integrated or smoothed gradients. Other approaches
train multiple tasks in parallel and exploit for each task the (e.g., saliency/feature maps, t-SNE) are based on visual repreinformation in the training signals of related ones. Multitask sentations [19], [27] that help to highlight the most important
approaches have been used to jointly tackle various prob- “features”—and ultimately the portion of input data—that led
lems associated with as many operators’ needs: (i) malware to the classification outcome (e.g., by inspecting the activation
detection/classification and TC [12], [40], [41], (ii) traffic clas- of intermediate neurons in hidden layers). Easier-to-interpret
sification and prediction [14], [34], (iii) different TC tasks, models than DL ones have been also exploited, namely persuch as classification of duration, flow rate, and application forming distillation toward (naturally interpretable) decision
1270 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 TABLE I
 R ELATED W ORKS IN THE N ETWORKING D OMAIN A PPLYING XAI M ETHODOLOGIES FOR D IFFERENT G OALS (I MPROVING M ODEL P ERFORMANCE ,
 T RUSTWORTHINESS , AND F EASIBILITY ). T HE S ECOND PART OF THE TABLE G ROUPS THE PAPERS TACKLING T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION .
 I N E ACH G ROUP, THE PAPERS A RE R EPORTED IN C HRONOLOGICAL O RDER . T HE M EANING OF
 ACRONYMS AND S YMBOLS I S S HOWN AT THE B OTTOM OF THE TABLE

 Sections

trees [22], [23], hypergraphs [22] or Markov models [24], [25]. used to improve (i) model performance (P): it provides means
These gray-box models despite being more simple and inter- to scrutinize the model for revealing bias/variances and dispretable than DL, usually show poorer performance and need cerning whether the decisions are derived from the intended
carefully hand-crafted features. Going further, solutions aim- portions of input data, thus allowing model performance
ing at explainability-by-design based on the detection of improvement as well as robustness and vulnerability assessclass prototypes and communication to the end-user are also ment (e.g., susceptibility to adversarial attacks); (ii) trustinvestigated [32]. worthiness (T): as humans are reluctant to trust decisions
 Finally, the reliability of DL outcomes is also investigated made by AI-based solutions without proper insights into their
to check whether such probabilistic outputs are calibrated, internal mechanisms, XAI techniques can expedite the validanamely to verify whether the confidence actually reflects the tion of functional coherence, constraints violation, and policy
reliability of the final decision. Techniques for both evaluating obligations, and can make decisions and recommendations
calibration and improving it—to make the DL models more more trustworthy; (iii) feasibility (F): it can assist model
reliable—are adopted in conjunction with TC tasks [11], [30]. refinement in order to allow these models to be accommodated
 According to our review, the considered body of litera- by resource-constrained network devices.
ture applies XAI methodologies to different extents, aiming at Hereinafter, we focus on XAI techniques applied to
improving the proposed solutions in one or more aspects (see interpret, refine, and improve solutions that tackle the problem
the three rightmost columns in Tab. I). Specifically, XAI is of network-traffic classification. Beliard et al. [27] propose
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1271

a platform to graphically visualize the inference process of overfitting. Also, by means of the reliable confidence score
a TC engine based on CNNs. Wang et al. [28] use Deep coupled with the classification outcome, actionable context is
SHAP [15] to explain a few representative outcomes obtained provided to the (human or automated) user.
through a 1D-CNN for mobile-app TC. Rezaei et al. [26] Concerning feasibility, our investigation on model comperform an occlusion analysis that allows to inspect how pression covers and compares a number of approaches (i.e.,
the CNN model proposed for the classification of mobile- knowledge distillation, pruning, and quantization) providing a
app traffic can classify SSL/TLS flows, revealing that certain more systematic study than previous works.
handshake fields can leak the information exploited in the TC Finally, similarly to Aceto et al. [11], we employ a
process. Sadeghzadeh et al. [31] tackle the robustness of DL- multimodal multitask DL architecture. In detail, we capibased TC models against adversarial samples, and demonstrate talize on the general D ISTILLER framework proposed in
that they are vulnerable to universal adversarial perturbation. the latter work and extend it by considering additional or
Fauvel et al. [32] propose an explainable-by-design CNN for (partially-)unexplored aspects to overcome different limita-
TC which also fulfills lightweight and efficiency purposes. tions of its very first realization leveraged in [11], here named
Akbari et al. [29] perform a feature engineering study that con- D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL. In doing so, through a process of
siders exclusively encrypted Web traffic in which they occlude sequential enhancements, each associated with a different realparts of the input that allow the DL model to learn a lazy and ization (see Section V for details on every novel realization),
unsophisticated logic. we come to the final definition of D ISTILLER -E VOLVED.
 Concerning reliability of TC results, in a recent work [11] Enhancements are here meant from different viewpoints,
we perform a calibration analysis for a proposed multimodal namely classification performance, reliability, and feasibility.
multitask DL architecture (but with no attempt in improv- Indeed, these aspects have been either improved w.r.t. [11]
ing it). Differently, in another work [30] we investigate (i.e., performance and reliability) or addressed for the first time
interpretability and reliability to improve the behavior of here (i.e., feasibility). Overall, to the best of our knowledge,
state-of-the-art multimodal DL traffic classifiers by applying the present paper provides the first attempt in interpretglobal-interpretation XAI techniques based on Deep SHAP and ing and enhancing this kind of multimodal multitask DL
methods to both assess and improve the reliability of classifiers. architectures with the support of XAI methodologies.

 III. M ULTIMODAL M ULTITASK D EEP L EARNING –BASED
C. Positioning of This Work
 E XPLAINABLE T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION
 In this work, we exploit XAI methodologies to enhance
 In this section, we describe our general methodology for
state-of-the-art multimodal multitask TC solutions along the
 interpreting and designing improved multimodal multitask DLthree previously mentioned dimensions: model performance,
 based traffic classifiers. Specifically, in Section III-A, we refresh
trustworthiness (via improved reliability), and feasibility. Such
 the general D ISTILLER framework recalling its peculiar charsolutions are clearly appealing because they can tackle several
 acteristics. Then, in Section III-B, we introduce the concept of
TC problems simultaneously (multitask) by inspecting the trafinterpretability in DL architectures and describe our approach
fic from complementary viewpoints (multimodal). Particularly,
 based on Deep SHAP and Integrated Gradients techniques. In
we leverage XAI methodologies to directly provide the expla-
 Section III-C, we motivate the role of reliability and introduce
nation (i.e., evaluate the importance) of raw traffic data and not
 metrics to assess—and techniques to improve—the calibration
of manually-extracted features, a task not only more challengof DL-based TC approaches. Finally, Section III-D describes
ing but also more useful for shedding light on the black-box
 model compression techniques capitalized in this work.
nature of complex DL-based traffic classifiers.
 Concerning interpretability techniques, differently than our
previous work [30] and most of the surveyed literature tack- A. Multimodal Multitask DL-Based Traffic Classification
ling TC—and similarly to Terra et al. [23]—we apply multiple Herein, we recall the D ISTILLER framework [11] we exploit
XAI approaches (Deep SHAP and Integrated Gradients) to for encrypted TC via multimodal multitask DL and the corcompare and cross-validate the outcomes of these techniques. responding training procedure adopted for each classifier
Furthermore, unlike Fauvel et al. [32]—which also tackle the based on it. Details of each instance are reported in later
problem of enhancing performance, trustworthiness, and fea- Section IV-B.
sibility in the context of TC—we do not subvert the nature of Generally speaking, multimodal DL is able to automatically
the original DL architecture for explainability purposes (along learn a hierarchical representation of traffic data by jointly
explainable-by-design principles) but rely on post-hoc analyses exploiting multiple “views” (viz. modalities) of the same traffic
that can be applied to any black-box ML/DL-based solution object, for instance: raw bytes of payload data and informative
previously proposed. protocol fields of packet sequences. Additionally, multitask
 Moreover, we exploit methods to assess (reliability dia- learning improves the ability to tackle a given network visgrams and related metrics [47]) and improve (focal loss [48] ibility task (e.g., classifying the mobile app generating each
and label smoothing [49]) the reliability of traffic classifiers. flow) by exploiting the information distilled from other related
The latter methods enhance the generalization capability of tasks (e.g., predicting the average packet length of each flow
classifiers through the reduction of excessive confidence asso- and detecting mice/elephant flows), particularly by learning
ciated with predictions and consequently the possibility of them in parallel via a shared representation. It allows a DL
1272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

model to reduce redundancy and computational overhead by i.e., by introducing the shared-representation and task-specific
leveraging a one-comprehensive model while providing better layers. Nevertheless, during fine-tuning, the “lowest” singlegeneralization and classification performance. modality layers (i.e., those aimed at intra-modality feature
 1) D ISTILLER Overview: Our goal is solving v = extraction) are frozen, namely their weights keep the value
1, . . . , V different related TC tasks, for example inferring the learned during the pre-training. Both the categorical crosstraffic-type and the particular application generating a traffic entropy functions concerning pre-training and fine-tuning are
object. Formally, given a traffic object (i.e., a subset of network minimized via standard first-order local optimizers.
packets sharing some common properties and constituting our
TC sample), the v th TC task (Tv ) consists in assigning a B. Interpreting Multimodal Multitask DL Traffic Classifiers
label among Lv classes (e.g., apps or services) within the set The starting point for interpreting complex DL architec-
{1, . . . , Lv }. When tackling multitask TC, each traffic object tures is to consider a simpler explanation model g(·), which is
is labeled with as many labels as the TC tasks to be solved. We designed to closely-approximate the original model f (·). In the
define the m th traffic object of the training set (encompassing present work, we focus on local explanation methods, which
M samples) as x(m), while the corresponding label of the v th explain the original model f (x) in the neighborhood of a particclassification task as v (m). Such a label may belong to one ular per-biflow instance x using the so-called simplified inputs
out of the Lv different classes, namely v (m) ∈ {1, . . . , Lv }. x  that map to the original ones through a mapping function
 To fully exploit the highly-structured information con- x = h x (x  ). Per-sample explanation outcomes based on local
tained in each sample x(m), we distill such information via methods are then aggregated to obtain global explanations, as
a multimodal DL architecture. A multimodal DL architecture illustrated at the end of this subsection.
leverages different data types (e.g., header fields or pay- The majority of interpretability techniques (e.g., LIME,
load bytes) to capitalize complementary views or modalities LEMNA, DeepLIFT) assumes a peculiar functional form for
of the same traffic object exploiting an advanced form of the explanation model g(·) leading to the definition of Additive
information fusion—named intermediate fusion—for capital- Feature Attribution (AFA). Formally, AFA methods are linear
izing the heterogeneity of network traffic data when solving functions of binary variables:
multiple (related) tasks in parallel.
 M
 
 2) D ISTILLER Architectural Definition: The generic  
 g z  = φ0 + 
 φm zm (1)
D ISTILLER architecture is made of P different modalities
 m=1
(each corresponding to a different input type). The first
part of such a framework consists of a certain number of where z  ∈ {0, 1}M , M denotes the number of simplified
input-specific single-modality layers, which extract the dis- inputs, and φm ∈ R. Hence, they provide an explanation
criminative features distilling the intra-modality dependencies model associating an “effect” φm to each input: the origiof the p th modality. On top of these layers, such features are nal model output f (x) can be approximated by summing the
fused via a merge layer, which is in charge of channeling effects of all input attributions.
the modality-specific features in a joint multimodal multitask In the present work, we leverage Deep SHAP [15] and
(shared) representation. The second part of the D ISTILLER Integrated Gradients, both detailed hereinafter.
framework is made of some shared-representation layers 1) Deep Shap: The first way to compute AFA solutions
followed by task-specific layers. The former layers extract is by means of the well-known Shapley values. The initial
the features distilling inter-modality dependencies; the latter concept of Shapley values originates from cooperative game
layers synthesize the task-oriented features (of the v th theory and specifies the contribution of player m to the payoff
task) from the shared ones. The D ISTILLER architecture is v (P) achieved by the whole coalition P [50]. To this aim,
terminated with one softmax layer for each TC task to be the method assesses the payoff of every subset of cooperating
solved. players S ⊂ P and evaluates the effect of removing or adding
 3) D ISTILLER Training Procedure: We train D ISTILLER the player m to S on the total payoff v (S) obtained by S if
via a two-stage procedure: a preliminary pre-training to distill the players cooperate. When leveraging this method for the
the features of each single-modality branch and a succes- interpretation of a DL-based model, the input data correspond
sive fine-tuning of the whole D ISTILLER architecture. In more to the players of the cooperative game, and the output of the
detail, when performing pre-training, each single-modality DL architecture f (x) to the payoff function.
branch is topped with V softmax “stubs”.2 In this case, a Since the exact computation of Shapley values grows expoweighted sum of the categorical cross-entropy of each TC task nentially with the input size M, we approximate them (in a
is minimized for promoting the capability of the p th modality lightweight form) via SHapley Additive exPlanation (SHAP)
to solve V different TC tasks alone. Since D ISTILLER solves by eliminating the need to re-train the models. Specifically,
multiple learning tasks in parallel, each weight represents the SHAP approximates these values via the conditional expectapreference level of the v th task in the multitask categorical tion [15] formally defined as:
   
cross-entropy to be minimized. For the fine-tuning, we remove f h x z  ≈ E{f (z )|z S } (2)
the softmax stubs and train the whole D ISTILLER architecture,
 where S denotes the set of non-zero indices within z  .
 2 In the next Section III-B, we will show how the auxiliary outputs of the We can further simplify the formulation in Eq. (2) by
stubs are exploited to perform per-modality interpretation analysis. assuming the statistical independence of the inputs and the
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1273

 
linearity of the model [15], formally: f (x ) = M m=1 wm xm + non-zero effect and (ii) implementation invariance–the effects
b. When both these hypotheses hold, the φm ’s are in closed- for two functionally-equivalent networks4 are always identical.
form and equal to φm (f , x ) = wm (xm − E{xm }). We exploit 3) From Local to Global Explanations: Hereinafter, Deep
the latter assumption to actually calculate the Shapley values. SHAP and IG methods are used to evaluate the (relative)
 In more detail, we leverage DeepLIFT [51] for the explicit importance of input data extracted from raw traffic (see
computation of the SHAP values. DeepLIFT is an AFA recur- Section IV for details) of a given traffic object when performsive explanation method for the decisions of DL architectures, ing a certain TC task.5 Therefore, to explain the predictive
which attributes to each input xm a value CΔxm Δo repre- behavior of DL-based traffic classifiers, the prediction model
senting the effect of that input being set to a reference value f (x) is chosen as the soft-output associated with the i th class
as opposed to its original value. Specifically, DeepLIFT cap- (regardless of the specific task considered), i.e., pi (x ). Hence,
italizes a linear composition rule for the calculation of the we interpret the Deep SHAP or IG φm as the importance value
CΔxm Δo ’s, which is based on the linearization of the non- of the m th input in forming the confidence pi associated with
linear components of a DNN, such as (soft)max, products, or labeling the traffic sample (whose overall input is x) with the
divisions. The reference value f (r) is a user-defined parame- i th class.
ter typically chosen to be an uninformative background value It is worth noticing that φm can be also negative.
for the m th input. When setting φ0 = f (r ) in Eq. (1) the Consequently, an importance value can be interpreted as
explanation model of DeepLIFT is compliant with the func- follows: positive (negative) values increase (decrease) the contional form of AFA methods and Shapley values represent fidence pi (x ) in the classification of the i th class w.r.t. its
the unique solution. Consequently, DeepLIFT can be used to average E{pi } or baseline pi (x  ) value for Deep SHAP or
obtain a compositional and fast approximation algorithm of IG, respectively. In more detail, for Deep SHAP, the sum of
Shapley values, named Deep SHAP [15]. We underline that the importance values equals the considered soft-output value
since Deep SHAP relies on an approximate computation of (pi (x )) minus the so-called base output. The latter represents
Shapley values, the local accuracy property f (x) = g(x) may the average of the same soft-output obtained in correspondence
be not satisfied with perfect equality.3 of the samples associated with the background set. Herein,
 2) Integrated Gradients (IG): The second interpretability for each traffic object, we focus on explaining the soft-output
technique we used in the present work is the Integrated associated with the predicted class p̂(x ), as this represents the
Gradients (IG). IG is based on the founding concept of input most relevant (and highest) output for a given TC task.
baseline. The underlying idea springs from the human incli- The additive form of employed methods enables the evaluanation to make attributions based on counterfactual intuition, tion of importance attributed to non-overlapping input subsets.
namely by implicitly comparing a certain effect (e.g., the deci- This investigation fits evaluating to which degree the different
sion of a classifier) against the absence of the effect. IG modalities of a multimodal DL traffic classifier contribute to
models such an “absence” using a single baseline input. In the interpretation of the decisions made (on a given TC task).
other words, we interpret the IG value φm as the importance Formally, we denote the input subsets associated
  with the P
value of the m th input in moving the confidence relative modalities as x 1 , . . . , x P , where x = P p=1 x p . Then, to
to the same class with the baseline as input (along the i th quantify the importance of the p th modality to multimodal
dimension for an input). Accordingly, IG is obtained by (a) TC effectiveness (we omit in what follows the index assoconsidering the straightline path from the baseline (x  ) to ciated with the v th task), we resort to a pooled importance
the input (x), (b) computing the gradients at all points along value φMp . The latter represents the importance value of the
the path and (c) cumulating them. Hence, given an input input subset x p (corresponding to the p th modality) in clasx = {x1 , . . . , xM } ∈ RM , the “effect” φm of each input sifying the traffic object associated with the overall input x
xm is given by: with the  ˆ The pooled importance value is obtained as
 label .
  1    φMp  m∈Mp φm , where Mp denotes the index set asso-
    ∂p i x  + α x − x 
φm (x ) = xm − xm × d α (3) ciated with the p th input subset within x, and its interpretation
 α=0 ∂xm
 with is analogous to that of the unpooled value φm .
According to the completeness axiom, all the effects add up On the other hand, to focus on a given modality and assess
to the difference between the output of the model relative to the related importance contribution of each individual input,
the i th class, pi (x ), at the input x and the baseline x  : we consider the stub output associated with the p th modality
 as our f (·) only depending on x p . In such a way, we can
 M
    exclusively focus on the behavior of the p th single-modality
 φm (x ) = p i (x ) − p i x  (4) branch, namely before the combined effect of intermediate
 m=1 fusion achieved by the shared-representation layers. This procedure isolates the interacting effect of other modalities on
Other axioms satisfied by this technique are: (i) sensitivity–
for every input and baseline that differ in one feature but have
 4 Two functionally-equivalent networks have the same output for all inputs,
different predictions, the differing feature should be given a
 despite different implementations.
 5 To simplify the notation, in the following, we avoid explicitly indicating
 3 In our previous work [30], we have experimentally proven that only a the v th task considered. Indeed, all the considerations are valid for all the
negligible discrepancy (always lower than 1%) exists. TC tasks constituting our multitask formulation.
1274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

the p th modality and permits per-modality interpretation. The p̂ v (x ) = maxi=1,...,Lv piv (x )) when solving the v th task. In
(isolated) importance values associated with the input subset detail, a confidence-calibrated multitask classifier is such that
x p (feeding the p th modality) are represented by the impor- for each sample, the confidence of a prediction p̂ v related to
 (p)
tance values φm , where m = 1, . . . , |Mp |. In the latter case, the v th task equals Pr{ˆv = v | pˆv }, where v is the actual
before proceeding to the calculation of the importance values, class and ˆv is the predicted one. On the other hand, a miscaliwe perform an additional fine-tuning of both single-modality brated classifier returns excessively optimistic (or pessimistic)
branches topped with the stubs—which follows the conven- confidence outputs associated with its decisions.
tional pre-training and fine-tuning phases performed to train To illustrate this property when varying p̂ v , we exploit the
the classifiers based on the D ISTILLER framework. This fur- reliability diagrams [47], which depict the accuracy as a functher step does not affect the performance of classifiers but it tion of the confidence (i.e., Pr{ˆv = v | p̂ v } vs. p̂ v ) for each
is required to update the stub weights to reflect on them the of the V different tasks. The so-obtained diagram is comchanges made to the rest of the DL architecture during the monly compared with the ideal Pr{ˆv = v | pˆv } = pˆv identity
(conventional) fine-tuning phase (see Section III-A). line: a perfectly-calibrated classifier has a reliability diagram
 Notably, a soft-output can assume a range of different val- corresponding to the identity function. Going into detail, a
ues. Accordingly, the absolute importance of the m th input reliability diagram is obtained by partitioning the predictions
may differ from sample to sample. Therefore, once we have into M equally-spaced bins (with width 1/M) and calculatobtained a local explanation for a single instance, our proposed ing the accuracy of each bin. Let Bm be the set of evaluated
global explanation approach relies on aggregating explana- samples such that the confidence associated with the predicted
tions over different samples x 1 , . . . , x N . The aggregation step class falls into the range Im  ( m−1 m
 M ; M ], the corresponding
is carried out on normalized importance values, obtained by bin-accuracy equals:
dividing each value by their overall sum, namely: 
 acc(Bm ) = |Bm |−1 1 ˆv (n) = v (n) (6)
 M
  n∈Bm
 φm  φm / φm . (5)
 m=1 where v (n) and ˆv (n)  arg maxi=1,...,Lv piv (n) are the
 true and predicted labels of the v th task for the n th sample,
Considering φm allows focusing on the relative importance of respectively. Confidence values range in the interval [1/Lv , 1],
each input (indeed, for each sample, the sum of the importance where Lv is the number of classes of the v th TC task. Hence,
values equals one). Additionally, as in [28], [30], we aggregate the starting point of the confidence interval is 1/Lv .
only on correctly-classified samples to focus on the correct We complement the reliability diagrams with the Expected
behavior of considered classifiers and to allow to interpret their Calibration Error (ECE), a concise metric measuring the
counter-intuitive (while right) decisions a posteriori. deviation from a perfect calibration. The ECE for the v th
 The above methodology for interpreting the behavior of task is defined as Ep̂ v {| Pr{ˆv = v | p̂ v } − p̂ v |} and
multimodal multitask DL traffic classifiers will be applied expresses the expected absolute deviation between confito the models based on D ISTILLER framework described dence and confidence-conditional accuracy. We approximately
in Section III-A. Specifically, to obtain the global explana- calculate it using the formula:
tions pertaining to different granularities, we will consider
 M
 
the following views of aggregation: (i) over the whole ISCX
VPN- NON VPN dataset and (ii) related to certain classes of ECE ≈ ( |Bm | / N ) |acc(Bm ) − conf(Bm )| (7)
 m=1
a given task (e.g., P2P, FTPS). Nevertheless, we underline
that the proposed interpretability approach is general and can which depends on the total number of tested samples N
be potentially applied to any multitask and/or multimodal and the confidence averaged  within the bin Bm , obtained
DL-based architecture exploited for TC. as conf(Bm ) = |Bm |−1 n∈Bm p̂ v (n). In the last term
 p̂ v (n)  maxi=1,...,Lv piv (n) denotes the predicted confi-
C. Calibration in Multitask Deep Learning dence of the v th task for the n th sample.
 In what follows, other than analyzing the calibration of each
 As discussed in Section II, it is of paramount importance
 TC task separately, we also investigate how the reliability of
to assess the reliability of (traffic) classifiers, which is one
 a task is affected by the other tasks. To do so, we generalize
of the considered pillars of XAI. Specifically, we evaluate
 the above concepts to the task-conditional reliability diagram
the reliability of a classifier in providing TC decisions with
 (Pr{ˆv = v | p̂ v , tsk} vs. p̂ v ) and task-conditional ECE
high confidence (or not), namely if they are calibrated (or
 (Ep̂ v | tsk {| Pr{ˆv = v | p̂ v , tsk} − p̂ v |}), where tsk denotes
not). Additionally, given the multitask nature of traffic clasthe generic task-conditional intersection of classification
sifiers considered, we assess how reliability on a given task
 events on the other tasks, defined as:
(i.e., on a specific network visibility problem) is affected by
correct/wrong decisions on other tasks.  = v
 tsk  ˆv  (8)
 Formally, given the generic input sample x fed to the mul- =
 v  =1,...,V ; v  =v
titask DL traffic classifier, we investigate the reliability of the
whole confidence vector (i.e., p v (x ) = p1v (x ), . . . , pLv v (x )) The above notation takes into account compactly all the comand of the confidence associated to the predicted class (i.e., binations of correct (=) and wrong (=) classification events
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1275

on all the tasks except v . Clearly, the task-conditional relia- should be reached, taking into account both soft and hard outbility diagram and ECE can be both approximated similarly comes. In detail, such loss functions are: (i) the cross-entropy
as the unconditional case. Task-conditional calibration anal- between one-hot encoded labels and student hard decisions and
ysis is useful in multitask DL traffic classifiers as it allows (ii) the cross-entropy7 between teacher and student soft outunderstanding if (and, in affirmative case how much) soft- puts. To effectively convey more and even better information
outputs may become over-optimistic (or over-pessimistic) due to the student, the soft outputs and hard decisions are obtained
to a correct/wrong decision on a related network visibility task. from the logits scaled by a factor T, called temperature. The
 To improve the calibration (and consequently the reliabil- data used to train the student model is the so-called transfer
ity) of a DL traffic classifier we resort to the label smoothing6 set: in this work, we make the common choice of using the
technique which is a type of loss regularization aiming at entire training set. Moreover, we train the student model for as
improving the generalization ability of DL models and reduc- many epochs as the teacher model since longer training should
ing an overly high prediction confidence [49]. More in detail, be beneficial for performance [55].
during the training phase, the label smoothing dictates that the Since both the teacher and student architectures are based
cross-entropy loss minimizes the prediction w.r.t. a smoothed on the D ISTILLER framework, we apply knowledge distillation
one-hot representation of the ground truth for the v th task to both pre-training and fine-tuning phases. Hence, to distill
v (n), computed as knowledge from the single-modality branches during their pre-
 α training, we consider the stub outputs of the teacher model to
 t v ls (n) = (1 − α) t v (n) + 1 (9)
 Lv Lv obtain its hard and soft outcomes.8
  T 2) Pruning: it involves purging connections between neuwhere t v (n)  t1v (n) · · · tLv v (n) is the one-hot rep- rons or some neurons altogether, that contribute less to
resentation of the label v (n). The smoothing parameter α the performance of the model. This procedure potentially
defines the amount of uncertainty enforced on the ground improves the inference time and energy efficiency of modtruth, with α → 0 collapsing to the usual non-smoothed els having sparse connection matrices: hence it is expected
cross-entropy-based training procedure. to work well with DL-based traffic classifiers. In this work,
 we exploit the gradual pruning approach [56], in which the
D. Deep Learning Model Compression sparsity increases from an initial value Si (usually zero) to a
 As mentioned earlier, another key objective of our analysis final value Sf , over a span of n pruning steps. In detail, this
is to assist model refinement to enable the deployment of DL method introduces a binary mask variable in each layer to be
architectures in resource-constrained environments such as on pruned, having the same size and shape of the layer weights,
network devices. This is also one of the main reasons underly- and specifying the weights that contribute to the forward exeing the design of a (single) multitask DL architecture to solve cution of the optimization procedure. The aim is to mask to
multiple related TC tasks [11]. Specifically, we aim at com- zero the smallest magnitude weights until a specified sparsity
pressing (multitask) DL models while limiting any potential level Sf is reached: zeroed weights do not get updated in the
loss in model “quality” (in terms of TC performance and cali- back-propagation step. In our analyses, pruning is applied to
bration on all the tasks). The techniques we have individually either (i) an already-trained model or (ii) to a model to be
considered for performing such model compression are prun- trained (i.e., within the training phase).
ing, quantization and knowledge distillation [52]. Moreover, 3) Quantization: it approximates a DL model that employs
we investigate the results obtained when applying quantiza- floating-point values with a model using lower precision datation to a pruned model. Compression techniques considered types for storing model weights and performing computation.
are briefly described in the following. As a result, the memory requirements and computing costs
 1) Knowledge Distillation: it has been initially proposed of the quantized model are drastically reduced by limitfor compressing the knowledge of an ensemble of models into ing the number of bits (viz. resolution) to represent each
a single one [53]. By extension, the same methodology can be trainable parameter. More specifically, we apply post-training
applied to train a smaller model (“the student”) to imitate the quantization [57] which is a desirable (and popular) compres-
(soft) predictions of a larger (and more accurate) pre-trained sion strategy not requiring re-training of the DL model (or
model (“the teacher”). access to the whole training set) and thus circumventing the
 The underlying idea is to exploit the soft outputs of the usual difficulties in performing such an activity (e.g., lack
teacher model to train the student for capitalizing on the high of computing-resource or data). The simplest form of postinformative value of soft outputs in combination with the com- training quantization statically approximates the weights of an
mon hard decisions. Indeed, to attain the best performance, a already-trained model, e.g., from 32-bit to 16-bit floating point
balance—expressed by a λ factor—between two loss functions numbers (or to 8-bit precision integers).
 6 We have also tried to employ the focal loss (in place of the cross-entropy
 7 Other functions (e.g., Kullback–Leibler divergence or focal loss [54]) can
loss) function which is commonly used to deal with class imbalance, but
that can be leveraged also to improve calibration by capitalizing its implicit be also used for computing the loss between student and teacher soft outputs,
regularization properties [30]. Unfortunately, using the focal loss (even in an however, these functions lead to worse results than the common cross-entropy
optimized fashion) we have attained a notable deterioration of performance, loss function.
which majorly impacts the hardest TC task. Moreover, the results (whose 8 We have also tested other scenarios performing distillation either only
details are omitted for brevity) suggest its weaker impact on calibration when during the pre-training or the sole fine-tuning, without substantial differences
compared with label smoothing. in performance.
1276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 This section describes the experimental setup considered
in this work. Specifically, in Section IV-A a brief description of the ISCX VPN- NON VPN dataset is provided. Then,
we introduce in Section IV-B the specific DL-based traffic
classifiers originating from the general D ISTILLER framework
and the multitask baselines used for comparative performance.
Finally, in Section IV-C, we report implementation details for
reproducibility.

A. Dataset Description
 For our experiments, we used the ISCX VPN- NON VPN
dataset [17] collected at the Canadian Institute for
Cybersecurity. It contains human-generated traffic related to
different traffic types and applications and collected through
sessions both regular and encapsulated over VPN. The dataset
is provided in raw (PCAP) format, and the ground-truth is
generated at trace-level: each PCAP trace corresponds to an
encapsulation technique (VPN or nonVPN), a traffic type
(6 classes), and a specific application (15 classes). For this
reason, it is possible to associate a three-view label (i.e., encap-
 Fig. 1. Number of per-class biflows for each ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset
sulation, traffic type, and application) to any traffic object and task. Hatches underline the number of nonVPN and VPN biflows for each
for each of them define three TC tasks to be tackled. As the class.
vast majority of papers tackling (multitask) TC works with
either unidirectional or bidirectional flows (viz. biflows), we mix of traffic types: Facebook (16% Chat, 84% VoIP),
segment the raw traffic collected in the ISCX VPN- NON VPN Hangouts (28% Chat, 72% VoIP), Skype (8.4% Chat,
dataset in biflows. A biflow is defined as the set of packets shar- 42.5% FileTransfer, 49.1% VoIP).
ing the same quintuple (Src_IP, Src_Port, Dst_IP, Finally, we also report (as a complementary viewpoint)
Dst_Port, L4 Protocol) where source and destination that the distribution of ISCX VPN- NON VPN in terms of
IP addresses and ports of the quintuple can be swapped [1]. protocols10 is as follows: 33.76% TLS, 37.79% UDP:DATA,
 Notably, analyzing the dataset, we have found that ≈ 65% of 15.23% HTTP, and the remaining 13.22% associated with
biflows extracted from ISCX VPN- NON VPN raw traffic data gQUIC, STUN, SSH, TCP:DATA, and other undetected prohave only one UDP packet with (Dst_IP, Dst_Port) tocols.11
equal to (255.255.255.255, 10505). After further
inspection, we have found that these packets are network B. Multitask Traffic Classifiers
broadcasts periodically sent by BlueStacks, an Android emula- Hereinafter, we describe the traffic classifiers we have investor for PCs.9 Moreover, we also noted some biflows pertaining tigated in this work, based on the general multimodal multitask
to certain protocols (e.g., SNMP, Dropbox LanSync Protocol, D ISTILLER framework introduced in Section III-A, along with
BOOTP) used in LANs for different purposes not strictly the other baselines considered for performance comparison.
related to the traffic types or applications constituting the Given the ISCX VPN- NON VPN dataset, we tackle a multidataset. Therefore, as opposed to the other works leveraging task TC problem with V = 3 TC tasks: (T1 ) encapsulation
ISCX VPN- NON VPN as is, we carried out careful pre- identification (L1 = 2 classes), (T2 ) traffic type recognition
processing cleaning operations to remove this noisy traffic and (L2 = 6 classes), and (T3 ) application classification (L3 = 15
thus obtain more meaningful results. classes).
 As a consequence, the final dataset contains ≈ 10.5k biflows As mentioned in Section IV-A, aiming at a consistent comwhose distribution among the different classes for each task parison with the state-of-the-art, all considered models operate
is shown in Fig. 1. In the same figure we also highlight with biflow traffic objects and use the same inputs. Specifically,
(with different hatches) the portion of VPN and nonVPN the latter are chosen among those proposed in the most related
traffic for each class. For the applications, in almost all (recent) literature based on a preliminary investigation (not
the cases (12 out of 15), the traffic type is unique: Aim shown for brevity): we consider the first Nb bytes of transportand ICQ (100% Chat), Email (100% Email), Spotify, layer payload arranged in byte-wise fashion (PAY input type)
Netflix, Vimeo, VoipBuster and YouTube (100%
Streaming), Torrent (100% P2P), FTPS, SFTP and 10 In detail, the Python wrappers PyShark (https://kiminewt.github.io/
SCP (100% File Transfer). However, there are also pyshark) and Scapy (https://scapy.net/) were employed.
 11 TCP:DATA and UDP:DATA indicate that the payload of the correspondapps for which the situation is different as they represent a
 ing TCP or UDP packets, respectively, can not be identified more exactly (e.g.,
 unavailable protocol dissector, non-standard ports used, missing beginning of
 9 https://www.bluestacks.com/ the communication).
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1277

 TABLE II
or informative unbiased fields extracted from the sequence of VARIANTS OF D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL I NVESTIGATED IN T HIS
the first Np packets (PSQ input type), namely (i) the number W ORK AND R ELATED E NHANCEMENTS
of bytes in the transport-layer payload (PL), (ii) the direction
(DIR) ∈ {0, 1}, (iii) the TCP windows size (TCP_WS) equal to
0 for UDP packets, and (iv) the time elapsed since the arrival
of the previous packet, i.e., the inter-arrival time (IAT). More
in detail, we set Nb = 784 bytes and Np = 32 packets—by
truncating longer samples and zero-padding shorter ones—and
normalize both input data within [0, 1].12
 We underline that we leverage neither biased inputs
(e.g., raw PCAP metadata encompassing timestamps or adhoc IDs and other biased fields as local IP addresses
or source/destination ports) which could wrongly inflate
performance leading to misleading outcomes [1], nor
 dense layer with Lv neurons and softmax activation). Except
manually-extracted features (e.g., statistics extracted on the
 for the last softmax, all the layers are equipped with Rectifier
sets of packet/payload lengths or inter-arrival times) to fully
 Linear Unit (ReLU) activations. To provide regularization and
exploit the benefits of DL, namely the possibility of working
 avoid overfitting, a 20% dropout is applied after each dense
directly with raw traffic significantly limiting human-expert
 layer (including the concatenation one) and after flattening the
intervention. It is worth noting that PAY input could be possi-
 2D representation of both the stack of convolutional/pooling
bly affected by the ratio of cleartext data (e.g., encryption
 layers and BiGRU.
based on TLS 1.2 vs. 1.3), while PSQ input by network-
 Starting with this traffic classifier, in our analyses, we follow
specific conditions, application-specific behaviors, and OSa process of sequential improvement of the basic D ISTILLER -
specific patterns. Nevertheless, in this regard, XAI allows us to
 O RIGINAL architecture via various optimizations. All the
trace back and evaluate the importance of each input (and even
 D ISTILLER-based variants, along with their improvements,
part of it) and how importance can mutate as a result of enviare introduced throughout Section V and are summarized
ronmental fluctuations. On the other hand, both PAY and PSQ
 in Tab. II. They are all trained via the two-phase proceinput types are suited for “early” TC—as opposed to classifidure involving the independent pre-training of single-modality
cation decisions that need to wait for the whole traffic object
 branches for 30 epochs each, and the successive fine-tuning
to be taken—and they refer to different levels of abstraction
 of the whole architecture for 40 epochs during which the
(biflow vs. packet) and standpoints (encryption-dependent vs.
 lowest two 1D convolutional (of PAY-modality) and BiGRU
encryption-independent).
 (of PSQ-modality) layers are frozen. Specifically, pre-training
 1) Distiller-Based Traffic Classifiers: All the classifiers
 and fine-tuning minimize the respective multitask categorical
described hereinafter are designed according to the D ISTILLER
 cross-entropy loss functions (set with a uniform allocation of
general framework and trained based on the two-phase prothe preference weights, that is each per-task weight equals
cedure illustrated in Section III-A. Our starting point is the
 1/3) via the standard ADAM optimizer (set with a batch size
D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL classifier we have firstly exploited
 of 50 samples). Finally, to further reduce the chance of overin [11]. D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL is made of P = 2 singlefitting, we apply the early-stopping technique by monitoring
modality branches: the PAY-modality branch is fed with the
 the variation of the training accuracy.13
PAY input, while the PSQ-modality branch with the PSQ one.
 2) Multitask Traffic Classification Baselines: In the fol-
The single-modality layers of the PAY-modality branch are two
 lowing, we provide some details on the baselines against
1D convolutional layers (with 16 and 32 filters, respectively,
 which we compare D ISTILLER-based classifiers. We report in
kernel size of 25, and unit stride), each followed by a 1D maxparentheses the input with which we feed each baseline.
pooling layer (with unit stride and spatial extent equal to 3)
 We have implemented a modified version—henceforth
and, finally, by one dense layer (with 128 neurons). The singlenamed 2D-CNN (PAY)—of the multitask (single-modal)
modality layers of the PSQ-modality branch are instead a
 architecture made of two 2D-CNN branches originally
bidirectional GRU (BiGRU with 64 units and return-sequences
 presented in [40]. In its original formulation, this baseline
behavior) and a dense layer (128 neurons). To capture the interis fed with biased input data (i.e., raw PCAP formatted as
modality dependencies, the abstract features extracted by such
 images) and characterized by an excessively ad-hoc structure.
branches are fused using a concatenation layer and fed to a
 We adapted it to our scenario by (i) feeding it with the unbishared-representation dense layer (with 128 neurons). The latased PAY input and (ii) considering a different task mapping
ter is then connected to V = 3 layers, each constituting one
task-specific dense layer (with 128 neurons), before performing the v th TC task via the corresponding softmax (i.e., a
 13 The most common approach monitors early-stopping by means of a validation set. Nevertheless, some classes in the training set (e.g., Aim, ICQ,
 SFTP) have a reduced number of samples due to the class-imbalance inher-
 12 To properly exploit the Integrated Gradients technique (see Section III-B), ent in the ISCX VPN- NON VPN dataset (cf. Section IV-A) but also typical
we need to distinguish actual from padded zeros. To this end, we add 1 to all of a real TC scenario. Therefore, using part of the training set for validation
bytes of the PAY input before normalization (by dividing each byte by 256) could impair the performance associated with these minority classes. For this
and zero-padding. Similarly, for the PSQ input, we constrain the quantile reason, we use early-stopping on training data by evaluating the “knee” of
transformer to map padding values to zeros. the training accuracy, and exiting when this condition is satisfied.
1278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

to the two CNN-based branches, namely one binary (T1 - All the experiments refer to the same hardware architecture:
Encapsulation) and two multi-class learning tasks (T2 - Traffic an OpenStack virtual machine with 16 vCPUs and 32 GB of
Type and T3 - Application). RAM, and Ubuntu 16.04 (64 bit) operating system, running
 We have also extended three state-of-the-art DL-based on a physical server with 2 × Intel Xeon E5-4610v2 CPUs @
single-task traffic classifiers to the multitask setup, namely the 8 × 2.30 GHz and 64 GB of RAM. For the evaluation of (per-
1D-CNN (PAY) architecture proposed in [37] and the LSTM epoch) training complexity of DL approaches, we computed
(PSQ) and HYBRID (PSQ) architectures proposed in [44]. the execution times via time.process_time() to con-
The former encompasses two 1D convolutional layers and a sider only the actual runtime on the CPUs (i.e., in a sequential
dense layer. The latter two are an LSTM and a hybrid cascade fashion).
of two 2D convolutional layers and an LSTM layer, respectively. We have extended these single-task architectures by V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
replacing the last softmax with three separate softmax layers,
 This section reports the experimental evaluation performed
one for each task.
 in this work. First, we introduce a new version of the classifier
 Finally, we compare D ISTILLER-based classifiers with
 (namely D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS) by introducing trainable
five native multitask DL architectures proposed for TC:
 embedding layers14 for both the modalities and a learning rate
two different (deep) MLP (PAY/PSQ) architectures adopted
 scheduler.15 We compare its performance against some of the
in [12], [13] and the 1D-CNN (PSQ) proposed in [14]. For
 state-of-the-art multitask traffic classifiers and analyze it in
the first two MLP baselines, we evaluate the performance with
 depth w.r.t. the three TC tasks (Section V-A).
PAY and PSQ input types, as in the reference works, they used
 Then, in Section V-B we analyze the importance of the
handcrafted PL/IAT stats as input. For the 1D-CNN (PSQ)
 traffic modalities used by the classifier, considering them both
baseline, we exploit the best-performing PSQ input type [11],
 together and separately. To this aim, we employ two wellas opposed to the original work in which the authors used a
 known techniques, namely Deep SHAP and IG. By leveraging
subset of PSQ (signed PL and IAT) as input.
 the median importance obtained with Deep SHAP for each
 To be consistent with D ISTILLER-based classifiers, all the
 modality input, we perform an analysis to choose the most
baselines are trained to minimize a multitask categorical
 appropriate input dimensions, discarding non-influential inputs
cross-entropy loss function set with a uniform allocation of
 that do not help in classifying the instances (Section V-C).
preference weights and using the ADAM optimizer and the
 In this way, we obtain another variant for the classifier, fed
early-stopping technique to prevent overfitting. The maximum
 with a subset of the original inputs, that is more suitable for
number of training epochs is set to 100, corresponding to
 early classification (named for the above reason D ISTILLER -
the number of epochs obtained summing up those of pre-
 E ARLIER).
training and fine-tuning stages of D ISTILLER-based classifiers.
 In Section V-D, we assess and improve the calibration of
Other training parameters are set in accordance with the
 this by using label smoothing during the training phase, thus
recommendation provided in the respective original studies.
 achieving D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED. We also analyze whether
 and how calibration changes when considering some combi-
C. Implementation Details nations of instances that have been correctly or incorrectly
 classified according to the three TC tasks.
 To allow reproducibility, we provide specific imple-
 Finally, in Section V-E, we compare different techniques
mentation details on the whole experimental workbench.
 (e.g., knowledge distillation, pruning and quantization) to
All the APIs refer to Python (3.7) programming
 define a lightweight architecture with similar performance
language. Specifically, we exploit the DL models proto the classifier optimized so far. With all these improvevided by Keras (https://keras.io) and TensorFlow 2
 ments in place, we define D ISTILLER -E VOLVED, which is
(https://www.tensorflow.org/), to implement, test, and calenhanced from different points of view: input size, calibration,
ibrate the traffic classifiers described above. For pruning,
 performance, and dimension.
we leverage the TensorFlow Model Optimization
 To conclude our study, in Section V-F we provide an
Toolkit, a suite of tools for optimizing ML and DL
 interpretability analysis of D ISTILLER -E VOLVED. Table II
models for deployment and execution. For quantization,
 summarizes the variants of D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL that we
we exploit the functionalities provided by TensorFlow
 obtain in our study, with the characterizing enhancements. We
Lite (https://www.tensorflow.org/lite) which enables
 compare the different versions of D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL in
to convert TensorFlow models for the deployment on
 Section V-G.
lightweight devices. Also, we use the shap library
 In all the following analyses, the performance evaluation
(https://github.com/slundberg/shap) to leverage its Deep
 is based on a stratified ten-fold cross-validation. Indeed, the
SHAP implementation and the open source Python library
 latter represents a solid assessment setup since it keeps the
Alibi (https://www.seldon.io/tech/products/alibi/) to
 sample ratio among classes for each fold: in this case, since
calculate the IG. Data pre- and post-processing operations have been performed mainly by means of numpy 14 Each input element is embedded into a vector of dimension e = 10.
(https://numpy.org/) and pandas (https://pandas.pydata.org/) To reduce the training complexity, in the PSQ-modality we embed only the
 number of bytes in transport-layer payload.
libraries. Finally, the graphical data representation has been 15 The newly introduced learning rate scheduler implements an adaptive
obtained using matplotlib (https://matplotlib.org/) and learning rate which is halved every five epochs during both the pre-training
seaborn (https://seaborn.pydata.org/) libraries. and the fine-tuning.
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1279

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS (H IGHLIGHTED IN O RANGE ) ACCURACY AND F-M EASURE W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT BASELINES .
 R ESULTS A RE IN THE F ORMAT avg. (± std.) O BTAINED OVER 10-F OLDS . R ANK I S BASED ON THE AVERAGE OF A LL
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS ON A LL THE TASKS . T HE L AST ROW S HOWS D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS G AIN [%]
 ON THE OVERALL -B EST-BASELINE : D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL (H IGHLIGHTED IN B LUE )

we are facing multiple TC tasks, the stratification is performed
herein on T3 , representing the hardest task. Hence, we report
both the mean and the standard deviation of each performance
measure as a result of the evaluation on the ten different folds.

A. Performance Comparison With State-of-the-Art Baselines
 In this section, we compare D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS
against the considered baseline architectures w.r.t. the three
TC tasks considered. Table III summarizes the results in terms
of (i) Accuracy (i.e., the fraction of correctly classified biflows
over their total number) and (ii) F-measure, (which takes into
account recall and precision in a more concise way). In detail,
as we consider multi-class traffic classifiers, we employ their
arithmetically-averaged (viz. macro) versions.
 Experimental results highlight that D ISTILLER -
E MBEDDINGS performs better than all the considered Fig. 2. Detailed performance of D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS. Error bars report
 average standard deviation of the joint probability of classification outcomes
baselines according to both the considered performance for V = 3 TC tasks: Encapsulation, Traffic Type, and Application (T1 , T2 ,
metrics. Indeed, it provides remarkable improvements w.r.t. and T3 , respectively). Each outcome can be either correct () or wrong (×),
the best-performing baseline that is D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL thus leading to 2V = 8 configurations.
in all the cases. More in detail, D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS
reports performance improvements of 1.32% and 1.57% for
task T1 , of 2.69% and 2.51% for task T2 and of 1.91% the 10 folds. Results show that for most of the instances
and 1.45% for task T3 in terms of Accuracy and F-measure, (≈70%) D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS succeeds in classifying
respectively. It is worth noting that the performance rank of correctly on all the tasks simultaneously, i.e., (,,), thus
the architectures witnesses that multimodal approaches (i.e., allowing full network visibility. Moreover, it is evident that
D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS and D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL) are the cases where the classifier is able to recognize the two
able to achieve better performance as they capitalize on two most difficult tasks (T2 –Traffic Type and T3 –Application)
different views of traffic data. Generally speaking, results while failing at the simplest one (T1 –Encapsulation), i.e.,
highlight that classifiers based on the PAY input outperform (×,,), are very infrequent. In addition, the probability of
those exploiting PSQ input. wrongly predicting all three tasks (×, ×, ×) is about twice
 To understand the performance of D ISTILLER - as high as the probability of identifying one of the two most
E MBEDDINGS in more detail, we also investigate the difficult tasks when the other two have not been correctly
relationship among classification results on different tasks. classified, namely (×, ×, ) or (×, , ×).
Hence, the bar plot in Fig. 2 reports the joint probability of
classification outcomes for the three tasks, with each outcome B. Interpretability Analysis
being either correct () or wrong (×). For each probability, This section presents the interpretability analysis for
we report the mean and standard deviation averaged over D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL and D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS to
1280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Fig. 3. Modality contributions of D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL and D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS with Deep SHAP (a, b) and IG (c, d) techniques. Normalized
 
importance φ th and 95th percentiles.
 Mp for both PAY-modality and PSQ-modality is reported for the three considered TC tasks. Whiskers show 5

highlight their differences in terms of performance explain- In summary, regardless of the specific interpretability
ability when investigated with Deep SHAP or IG. In detail, technique adopted, D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS results in a
in Section V-B1 we assess the contribution of each modality more balanced importance between the two input modalto compare their relative importance. Then, in Sections V-B2 ities w.r.t. D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL. This can be attributed to
and V-B3 we analyze in more detail PAY- and PSQ- the addition of embedding layers to the basic architecture of
modalities.16 D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL.
 1) Contribution of the Modalities to Correct TC Decisions: 2) Interpretability of PAY-Modality: In this section, we
In Fig. 3, we investigate the (relative) contribution that PAY focus on providing global explanations for the PAY-modality
and PSQ give to TC, focusing on D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL of D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL and D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS,
and D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS and using both Deep SHAP which rely on the first Nb = 784 transport-layer payload
(Figs. 3(a) and 3(b)) and IG (Figs. 3(c) and 3(d)). We con- bytes of each biflow. In the following, sample-wise posisider the pooled Deep SHAP values and the pooled IG φM for tive and negative Deep SHAP values are highlighted with
each modality and for each of the three TC tasks. The corre- red and blue colors, respectively. Also, for completeness, the
sponding distributions (shown via boxplots) are then obtained median importance value of each byte (over different samples)
by selecting the correctly classified test samples of the whole is reported as a solid black line. This allows for highlightdataset and they refer to PAY-modality (red) and PSQ-modality ing regions that are more consistently influential (if any) for
(green). Focusing on D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL and Deep SHAP predictions. We conducted this analysis for each of the three
(Fig. 3(a)), PAY-modality contributes with higher importance TC tasks.
values: the median value is higher than ≈ 65% for all the When considering the traffic pertaining to the two
considered TC tasks. The situation is very similar when con- classes of task T 1 (i.e., VPN and non-VPN), clear influsidering the outcome of the analysis with IG (Figs. 3(c)), but ential regions can be hardly highlighted, regardless of the
reporting lower values in absolute terms. classifier and the technique. This behavior results from the
 On the other hand, the results of the analysis are remarkably fact that a mix of traffic generated by different applications
different for D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS (Figs. 3(b) and 3(d)). is found at this level, with biflows exposing dramatically
Indeed, the differences among median values of pooled Deep different characteristics.
SHAP are less significant, with the two modalities contributing Moving to task T2 (Traffic Type), for some classes the
almost equally to the model predictions. Specifically, for the situation appears to be clearer. In Fig. 4, we compare the
task T1 with both the techniques, we can observe that the explanations obtained for the P2P traffic type as an explana-
PSQ-modality median value exceeds that of the other modality. tory example. We show the outcomes provided by Deep SHAP
 and IG for both models. Looking at Figs. 4(a) and 4(b), relat-
 16 Implementation Details for Interpretability Methods: the baseline for ing to the explanations obtained with Deep SHAP, the first
IG is set to all zero values for both modalities. Moreover, for D ISTILLER - 100 bytes of the biflows result to be essential. The same con-
O RIGINAL, we calculate IG w.r.t. the input layers. Conversely, for D ISTILLER - clusion can be drawn according to IG (Figs. 4(c) and 4(d)),
E MBEDDINGS, we calculate IG w.r.t. the embedding layer and then we sum although the importance reports more extreme values and the
the attribution of each input’s vector representation [58]. Specifically, when
we investigate its PSQ-modality, we refer to the layer concatenating the output explanation is less clear overall. We can notice that the median
of the embedding layer used for PL with the other fields (and then we isolate assumes exactly a zero value after 100 bytes (IG assigns
its representations). Similarly, when we investigate the PAY-modality of the zero importance to the bytes with the same value of the
same architecture, we refer to the output of the embedding layer. Conversely,
for Deep SHAP, not being based on a gradient definition, the effect is always baseline). Comparing the two models, a more precise explaevaluated w.r.t. the original inputs. nation is obtained for D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS (Figs. 4(b)
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1281

Fig. 4. Importance for the inputs (transport-layer payload bytes) of PAY-modality. Exemplifying service type (T2 ): P2P.

and 4(d)), probably due to the “focusing effect” brought by First, when considering T 1 also the interpretation of
the embedding layer. PSQ-modality is hard to understand, likely due to the mix
 By inspecting the content of these biflows, the bytes of traffic belonging to the related classes.
with higher importance values often correspond to strings Moving to T2 and T3 , often, the role of a field is not clearly
get_peers1 and info_hash20 which are typical of DHT stated (with sequences having both elements assuming posi-
Protocol used by BitTorrent. These packets start with the tive and negative importance). However, the two techniques
expression d1:ad2:id20 and have padding values bytes agree for most classes in identifying positive importance
in the final part. In the analyzed cases this padding receives for the PL field or the role (positive or negative) of specific
very low values differently from the initial ≈ 100 bytes. fields. IG often highlights as important a (limited) number of
Among Torrent biflows, there are also HTTP biflows (GET) packets that assume more extreme values in absolute terms
and for them, it is difficult to recognize consistently influential when compared with Deep SHAP.
regions. When referring to the explanations obtained for D ISTILLER -
 For the task T 2 , the importance peak is always found E MBEDDINGS with Deep SHAP, the PL field always assumes
in the first 100–200 bytes (even if it is less evident than in higher importance values for all the classes of both T 2
Fig. 4 in some cases). As a notable exception, for the Email and T 3 tasks. Although the other fields assume lower imporclass, there are a few groups of important bytes both in the tance values than PL, they are worthy of consideration as they
central and the last part of the considered portion of the biflow. assume positive values.
 The same phenomenon occurs for the classes associ- Figure 5 reports interesting evidences for FTPS. Looking at
ated with the task T 3 , with the exception of some apps Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), it is evident that moving from D ISTILLER -
(including Email, Hangouts, SCP, Vimeo and YouTube) O RIGINAL to D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS, the importance is
which have groups of bytes of non-negligible importance in much more concentrated on the PL field, which becomes the
addition to the initial ones. There are also other apps for most important field playing a fundamental role in the claswhich we cannot generalize and identify the most influen- sification of the biflows of this application. Indeed, while the
tial regions. For such apps, this observation does not imply various fields assume comparable values in Fig. 5(a), the PL
that the first 100–200 bytes are not important, but that areas field assumes much higher median values for the D ISTILLER -
with higher importance are more hardly identifiable. More E MBEDDINGS model (cf Fig. 5(b)). This result is justifiable
specifically, this occurs for some apps either having very if we consider that the modification made to D ISTILLER -
few correctly classified samples (such as ICQ and Aim) or O RIGINAL for the PSQ-modality consists in introducing an
whose traffic is composed of different traffic types (such embedding level just for this field. This confirms that the
as Skype, Facebook, and Hangouts). For instance, in change made to the architecture has increased the expressive
the latter case (e.g., Skype), the traffic mix corresponds to power of the PL.
8.4% Chat, 42.5% FileTransfer, and 49.1% VoIP (see Although less clear, the same phenomenon stems out from
Section IV-A). the analysis with IG (Figs. 5(c) and 5(d)). In fact, the impor-
 3) Interpretability of PSQ-Modality: Similarly to the tance of the DIR, IAT and TCP_WS fields is reduced in
previous section, here we use the above-mentioned inter- the transition from D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL to D ISTILLER -
pretability techniques and investigate the importance of the E MBEDDINGS and the very first elements of PL sequence
inputs associated with the PSQ-modality of D ISTILLER - assume higher median values.
O RIGINAL and D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS, thus discussing the In general terms, the initial elements of the sequences
branch fed with the 4 header fields extracted from the first show higher values than the others (even if there are cases
32 packets of each biflow. Hence, considering the importance where the trend is not always strictly decreasing).
associated with these fields, the figures in the following show From Fig. 5(b) we can notice that after the introduction of
(for some representative examples) the median importance val- embedding layers, the first packets have much higher imporues for each element of the 4 × 32 matrix used as input for tance than the following ones since the explanation provided
this modality. by Deep SHAP clearly shows a decreasing trend for the PL
1282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Fig. 5. Importance for fields and packets for FTPS app. Comparison of Deep SHAP and IG explanations for D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL and D ISTILLER -
E MBEDDINGS.

field. We can find this trend also for PL of the first packets in Note that concerning the PSQ-modality, our aim is to reduce
Fig. 5(d). Furthermore, in IG explanations we have different the number of packets rather than the number of fields considpackets with a zero median value. This phenomenon can be ered: while the PL field plays a crucial role in classification,
explained both by the fact that packets have decreasing impor- the importance of the other fields depends upon the specific
tance and by the IG characteristic of assigning a value of zero classes. Hence, considering them could still be beneficial for
importance to packets with a padding value. predictions. Moreover, reducing the number of packets (instead
 Notably, inspecting Fig. 5 both interpretability techniques of their fields) is beneficial to reduce both the network training
suggest that for the two architectures (above all for time and the time needed to gather the relevant input to the
D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL) the DIR field assumes negative DL architecture (i.e., allowing earlier TC).
importance values, potentially confusing the classifier. In con- In order to identify where the inputs are to be trimmed,
trast, the IAT field has positive values, although the median we propose the XAI-driven optimization procedure that
values are not very high. Generally speaking, there can be no follows. Since the importance of the considered inputs for
total agreement for the other fields different from PL. both modalities shows a decreasing trend, we identify as
 In conclusion, although the two techniques are based on more promising those inputs before the point of maximum
two different assumptions, they mostly agree in suggesting curvature of the median importance curve obtained for each
the most important groups of bytes or packets for predictions, modality. In more detail, a single importance curve for
albeit with some differences. Deep SHAP provides more stable PSQ-modality is obtained by summing the median imporand limited (less extreme) values that are easier to visual- tance of the fields considered for each packet. We interize and understand (and are in line with expectations, e.g., polate these curves (to mitigate their discontinuous trend)
about the impact of the adoption of embedding). In fact, IG and find the point of maximum curvature with the kneedle
explanations often result in a noisier and less clear importance algorithm [59].
representation. While IG has the advantage of clearly report- Figure 6 reports the outcome of applying the above XAIing input regions that are not influential to prediction (e.g., driven optimization procedure for the three tasks to both
padding) which are assigned a zero importance value by con- modalities. Specifically, the procedure highlights that the
struction, results show that Deep SHAP also clearly identifies initial ≈ 200 bytes and the first ≈ 10 packets are the most
these regions (assigning minimal importance values). For these influential for PAY-modality and PSQ-modality, respectively.
reasons, we will refer to the Deep SHAP technique for the To exploit this outcome, we can conservatively define a conconsiderations in the following sections. figuration that considers the first 256 bytes and the first 12
 packets of each biflow as input for D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS
 to obtain input dimensions commonly exploited in recent
C. Capitalizing on XAI to Choose Input Dimensionality literature [29], [30], [38].
 The analysis of the importance of each modality suggests In order to evaluate these results, we compare them with
that the initial bytes and packets of each biflow are the most the indications provided via the mutual information, which is a
important, despite some differences among traffic types and classic alternative method. Specifically, we measure the mutual
applications. Starting from the observations above, we can dependence between independent variables (the inputs of the
exploit this valuable information to improve the model by two modalities) w.r.t. the dependent variable (the actual label)
selecting a subset of the original inputs, disregarding the and assign a score accordingly. This method is used to obtain a
less influential ones. This analysis allows for optimizing the curve analogous to that obtained with the XAI-driven analysis,
architecture in a targeted way, avoiding the more onerous thus to compute the point of maximal curvature accordingly.
sensitivity analysis that, considering the multimodal nature The optimization based on mutual information (whose results
of D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS, requires the training of a DL are omitted for brevity) turns out to be even more consermodel for each combination of PAY and PSQ inputs. vative because recommends utilizing at least 300 bytes and
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1283

Fig. 6. Median Importance of D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS inputs for each TC task according to Deep SHAP. Figures (a–c) refer to PAY-modality, Figures (d–f)
to PSQ-modality. The colored line represents the interpolating polynomial (5th and 3rd degree, respectively) starting from the point of maximum median
importance. The dashed line shows the location of interpolating polynomial knee (point of maximum curvature).

Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis results for D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS: Figures (a-c) depict the F-measure for the three tasks versus (no. of bytes, no. packets).
The square with the solid line highlights the point identified with the XAI-driven method, whereas the one with the dotted line represents the configuration
found with the analysis based on mutual information. Similar results are observed with the accuracy (not shown, for brevity)

24 packets for all tasks, leading to a bigger architecture with mean RTPE of ≈ 50 seconds whereas the configuration suglonger training times. gested by the proposed XAI-driven approach requires ≈ 21
 Both methods are validated against the resource-consuming seconds, i.e., a 58% decrease. Notably, considering fewer bytes
sensitivity analysis which explores all the combinations of val- and packets also provides slight improvements for all three
ues within the range of interest (i.e., a grid search). For this tasks. In detail, concerning F-measure, we have improvements
analysis, we selected for the PAY-modality some values among of 0.39, 0.46, and 1.26 for the three TC tasks, respectively.
the most used in state-of-the-art classifiers (e.g., 128, 256, At the end of this analysis, we obtain an instance of
576). In addition, from 64 to 320 bytes, we increase by 64 D ISTILLER, which performs better and is more suitable
bytes the considered dimension both to take into account the for early classification since it requires fewer packets to
dimensions selected with mutual information and, above all, to provide the classification outcome. For this reason, we refer
understand if the performance reflects the importance profile to this new configuration as D ISTILLER -E ARLIER.
obtained through Deep SHAP. For the PSQ-modality, we start
with 4 packets and increase the size by 4 until 32 (the initial
number of packets). D. Calibration Analysis
 The heatmaps in Fig. 7 detail the performance (in terms of In this section, we investigate the reliability of the TC
F-measure) of the D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS classifier with models. Specifically, we focus on assessing and enhancthe different combinations for the input size. For task T1 , the ing the calibration of D ISTILLER -E ARLIER, as defined in
point identified by the XAI-driven procedure corresponds with Section III-C. The assessment is performed based on the calthe best performance. For task T2 , however, the configuration ibration analysis (reliability diagrams and ECE). On the other
suggested by the two methods provides similar performance, hand, the calibration enhancement is pursued by investigatcomparable with the ones obtained with more bytes and packets. ing the benefits provided by the adoption of label smoothing
For task T3 , the dimensions identified with our proposal provide during the training phase of our classifier.
higher performance than those identified with the other method. For the latter technique, we let the value of α (cf. Eq. (9))
Actually, the highest performance corresponds with 576 bytes vary in {0.0125, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1}. In the configuration
and 24 packets, but, considering that the gain in performance with α = 0, the usual cross-entropy is employed (viz. without
is not so high and the mean RTPE (Run Time Per-Epoch) is label smoothing). Figure 8 shows the calibration performance
much higher (≈ 37 seconds), the most convenient configuration obtained when using label smoothing in terms of ECE.
remains the one suggested by our proposed methods. Although a unimodal trend can be spotted for each task,
 Indeed, reducing the inputs leads to a significant reduc- the illustration highlights that it is not possible to select a
tion in terms of mean RTPE: D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS has a unique value for the parameter α such as to provide the best
1284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 task-conditional ECE of each task w.r.t. the four possible combinations of classification outcomes—namely, correct () or
 wrong (×) prediction—on the other two tasks. For completeness, the weighted average of the task-conditional ECEs for
 each case (the first bar of each group) is also reported. By
 looking at the results, for each task we can observe worse
 calibration outcomes (i.e., a higher conditional ECE) for the
 combinations involving at least one wrong decision on another
 task, and especially when considering the instances misclassified for both the other two tasks (corresponding to a “?” and
Fig. 8. Calibration sensitivity analysis of D ISTILLER -E ARLIER in terms of two “×”). Indeed, for tasks T2 and T3 , we have a similar
ECE. At the right of the dashed line, the best configuration is shown (i.e., trend, with the worst calibration observed in correspondence
with α = 0.025 for the task T1 and α = 0.05 for tasks T2 and T3 ). The
value of α providing the best calibration for each single task is highlighted of the instances erroneously classified by all the other tasks.
via a . Still, when there is only one task misclassification, T2 and T3
 seem to be highly affected each other. Conversely, for task T1
 TABLE IV
F-M EASURE E VALUATION OF D ISTILLER -E ARLIER V ERSUS THE (L ABEL ) we have a slightly different situation with calibration approxi-
 S MOOTHING PARAMETER α. T HE L AST ROW Q UANTIFIES THE mately the same when we consider instances misclassified on
 F-M EASURE [%] D IFFERENCE B ETWEEN D ISTILLER -E ARLIER both tasks T2 and T3 (? × ×) or only on task T2 (? × ).
 (α = 0) AND I TS B EST-C ALIBRATED V ERSION :
 D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED To further deepen such an analysis, we inspect the taskconditional reliability diagrams for task T2 , referring to
 (T1 , T3 ) = (, ), (T1 , T3 ) = (×, ) and (T1 , T3 ) =
 (, ×) in Fig. 9(b), 9(c), and 9(d) respectively. We omit the
 case (T1 , T3 ) = (×, ×) as this is less frequent (this generally applies to all the tasks considered) but also the case
 where it is more expected to have a calibration degradation.
 Overall, we can observe that we have an under-confident classifier when focusing on the instances correctly classified for
 both the other two tasks (Fig. 9(b)). Conversely, a particularly over-confident model is observed when the instances are
calibration for all the three TC tasks. Hence, in order to define misclassified only on task T3 (Fig. 9(c)). Finally, the shift to
a calibrated version of the architecture (namely, D ISTILLER - overconfidence is less apparent when misclassifications are on
C ALIBRATED) we set α to 0.025 for the binary task T1 , task T1 (Fig. 9(d)). This again confirms the higher coupling
whereas this parameter is chosen equal to 0.05 for the other effect between T2 − T3 , rather than T1 − T2 .
two tasks (T2 and T3 ). The calibration figures obtained with
this combination of values are shown at the right of the dashed
 E. Model Compression
line with a gray background.
 By comparing the reliability diagrams of D ISTILLER - This analysis aims at evaluating whether we can obtain a
E ARLIER and D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED (not directly shown lighter version of the architecture optimized so far using model
for brevity) to understand the differences in terms of calibra- compression techniques (namely, knowledge distillation, pruntion, we can spot that D ISTILLER -E ARLIER is over-confident ing, and quantization) with no significant loss in classification
in its predictions, especially for the (harder) tasks T2 and T3 . performance and calibration. We highlight that this aspect is
This phenomenon appears in a way lighter fashion when focus- particularly important for deployment in resource-constrained
ing on D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED which takes advantage of environments. To fairly quantify the benefits achieved with the
label smoothing. techniques investigated, we refer to the memory occupation of
 Conversely, in Tab. IV we focus on the classification the model.17
performance and report the assessment of the impact on F- To apply knowledge distillation, we consider D ISTILLER -
measure when employing label smoothing (with varying α). C ALIBRATED as the teacher model, and we define a
The last row shows the difference between D ISTILLER - lightweight version of it as the student model, by halving
E ARLIER (where label smoothing is not employed) and the number of filters in convolutional layers, the number of
D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED. Notably, both versions of the clas- units of dense and GRU layers, and the output dimension of
sifier achieve comparable results. Hence, leveraging label embedding layers.
smoothing during the training can improve the calibra- We evaluate different combinations for T and λ parameters
tion of the investigated multimodal multitask architecture, (cf. Section III-D). The configuration which returns the best
without significant losses in performance (we even have
small improvements in some cases). 17 To appreciate the differences, we consider the size of the compressed

 Finally, by focusing on D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED, in Fig. 9 file (gzip) used to save each model. We cannot use the number of parameters for comparison because it remains unchanged after compression (pruning
we report a task-conditional calibration analysis as described sets parameters to zero, while quantization uses different representations for
in Section III-C. To this end, in Fig. 9(a) we depict the parameters).
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1285

Fig. 9. Calibration analysis of D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED in terms of task-conditional ECE (as affected by other two tasks) for all three TC tasks (a).
Task-conditional Reliability Diagrams for D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED, referring to task T2 , are reported in (b-d). In detail, figure (b) depicts the diagram when
instances are correctly classified on both tasks T1 and T3 . Conversely, in figure (c) (resp. (d)) the diagram refers to instances correctly classified by T3
(resp. T1 ) but misclassified by T1 (resp. T3 ).

results is with T = 1 and λ = 0 (notably, in this configura- a configuration, the pruned model is ≈ 50% lighter than
tion the student model can rely only on the logits provided D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED, and exhibits performance compaby the teacher model and we use them as they are without rable with the starting model in terms of both F-measure and
scaling them up). However, knowledge distillation does not expected calibration error.
achieve satisfactory performance figures in the case investi- Finally, we have also evaluated quantization in two
gated: the performance of the student is not comparable to configurations, transforming the architecture weights from
that of the D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED (especially for task T3 , float32 to float16 and int8 representations, respecwhere a 3.73% loss is experienced). Likely, the cause of this tively. Notably, this compression technique has the remarkable
result can be found in the fact that (i) either distillation usu- advantage of being a post-training technique, i.e., does not
ally assumed to be initialized with a model trained on a larger require any additional training phase. Quantization leads up to
balanced dataset [60] or (ii) the student model suffers from a more than 70% occupation reduction (achieved when using
the halving of parameters and has irretrievably lost the ability int8 representation). In our experimental campaigns, we have
to distinguish certain classes (especially those with few sam- also explored the compression figures achievable when comples). In light of this last consideration, in future work, we bining quantization and pruning (i.e., applying quantization
plan to more accurately design the student model. to an already-pruned model). In this case, the reduction is even
 Concerning pruning, a number of parameters have to be more significant (more than 85%).
tuned, including: (i) the number of epochs to perform the Table V details the results of the experiments, reporting the
additional training phase required to identify the weights to memory occupancy (averaged over the 10 folds) achieved via
be pruned, (ii) the value of the final sparsity; (iii) whether each compression technique evaluated, together with classifiinitializing the model to prune with random weights or with cation performance in terms of F-measure as well as the related
the weights of the model optimized so far (D ISTILLER - calibration figures.
C ALIBRATED)—with the latter approach being recommended Quantization produces compressed models with higher
in the official documentation of the tfmot module. Hence reductions in size. In addition, as far as F-measure is
we performed an exhaustive experimental campaign18 (whose concerned, the performance of quantized models (whether
results are not shown, for brevity) aimed at identifying the we prune or not the model) is very close to the origsetup leading to a pruned model whose performance is as inal. Although these observations might suggest quantizamuch as possible similar to the one of the not pruned tion as the best choice, when also considering calibration
model. Results show that 20 epochs (6 epochs for each pre- the results in the Tab. V highlight that using quantization
training phase and 8 for the fine-tuning one) are enough to (either with or without pruning) produces highly decaliprune our already-trained model while keeping high classi- brated models. In more detail, reliability diagrams (not shown,
fication performance, while with final sparsity values higher for brevity) witness that applying quantization results in
than 0.6 classification performance starts decreasing. In such strongly under-calibrated classifiers for all three tasks, with
 the confidence being lower than the accuracy for every bin
 18 Number of epochs and final sparsity took values in {10, 20, 50, 100} (similar observations can be made when considering int8
and {0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}, respectively. representation).
1286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

 TABLE V
 OVERALL C OMPARISON OF C OMPRESSED M ODELS . S IZE R EFERS TO THE M EMORY N EEDED TO S TORE E ACH M ODEL .
 R ESULTS ARE R EPORTED IN T ERMS OF C LASSIFICATION (F-M EASURE ) AND C ALIBRATION (ECE) P ERFORMANCE ,
 AND A RE IN THE F ORMAT avg. (± std.) O BTAINED OVER 10-F OLDS

 F. D ISTILLER -E VOLVED Interpretability Analysis
 In this section, we focus on the interpretability of
 D ISTILLER -E VOLVED via Deep SHAP.
 Focusing on PAY-modality, we can say that the most crucial
 region is not always the same for the various classes, confirming the importance of considering a value for Nb no less than
 256 bytes. Indeed, when looking at task T2 , the most significant bytes are those in the range (50–150). On the other hand,
 for P2P (Fig. 11(a)), the first 100 bytes are those with the
 highest importance (same applies to D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL,
 as shown in Section V-B2), while for Email (Fig. 11(b)),
 the significant bytes are those up to position 200. For task
 T3 , the bytes around position 100 are almost always the most
Fig. 10. Comparison of Expected Calibration Error (ECE) against the size
of compressed models (only int8 quantization is shown). important, with the exception of isolated cases with few samples. In some cases, such as Facebook and Vimeo, the
 Figure 10 compares the ECE against the size for some of region of highest importance extends to bytes around posithe compressed models discussed above. The inspection is tion 175; for other classes (e.g., Email and SCP), one has to
limited to D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED and those models with an go even further to consider all bytes with the highest median
F-measure drop ≤ 1.5%. Moreover, only the int8 quantiza- importance.
tion is considered since it achieves a higher compression (with Regarding PSQ-modality, the PL field remains the most
similar calibration performance). Specifically, the three models important field, while the others highlight lower values (posicompared with D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED are those obtained tive in most of the cases). It may happen that they also assume
after the application of (i) pruning, (ii) quantization, or (iii) negative values, but in isolated cases and often for single
both techniques. It is evident that quantization allows a drastic values of the sequence. Accordingly, they may help in classifisize reduction but, unfortunately, it also results in a substan- cation even if they contribute less to the output. Figures 11(c)
tial increase in the ECE. As a result, both the architectures and 11(d) report the median importance for PSQ-modality for
where quantization is applied have similar representations and two exemplary classes (FTPS and Chat).
are positioned in the top-left part of the graph where the size Notably, Fig. 11(e) shows the median importance for either
is reduced, but the ECE becomes unacceptable. On the other modality and highlights how the PSQ-modality becomes the
hand, with pruning we obtain a model whose size is about most important for all three tasks after all the improvements.
≈ 50% less than the original model, keeping the calibration
performance almost unchanged. Indeed, its representation is G. Architecture Comparison
positioned in the same horizontal band identified by the cal- This section provides an overview of the performance
ibration error of D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED but in the central for all the architectures we have defined in our process of
part of the graph w.r.t. the model size axis. sequential enhancement leading from D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL
 Hence, in our sequential process, we select pruning as to D ISTILLER -E VOLVED (cf. Tab. II). The radar plot in
the best compression technique, thus defining D ISTILLER - Fig. 12 compares the five realizations based on D ISTILLER
E VOLVED as the result of applying pruning to D ISTILLER - framework along the three dimensions of interest, reporting
C ALIBRATED and resulting in the model optimized along the the related memory occupation as well as the calibration
three objectives. performance and the classification performance. Notably, the
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1287

 Fig. 12. Comparison of the different D ISTILLER versions obtained in
 the sequential optimization process. Axes report Size, Calibration (ECET 1 ,
 ECET 2 , and ECET 3 ), and Classification Performance (1 − FMT 1 ,
 1 − FMT 2 , and 1 − FMT 3 ). Note that classification performance is reported
 as the complement of F-measure to 1 so as to obtain smaller areas for better
 models.

 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
 In this paper, we exploited XAI as a Swiss Army Knife
 aiming for (i) interpreting, (ii) improving, and (iii) making feasible implementations of multimodal DL approaches that solve
 multiple (visibility) TC tasks via multitask learning, focusing
 on encrypted traffic. Pursuing these goals, we design, implement, and evaluate an evolved multimodal multitask DL traffic
 classifier, attained in multiple refinement steps driven by XAI,
Fig. 11. Interpretability of D ISTILLER -E VOLVED based on Deep SHAP. finally producing the D ISTILLER -E VOLVED model, passing
 through a number of stages, each associated with different
 realizations of the D ISTILLER framework.
latter is reported as its complement to 1 (1–F-measure) in order Our evaluation was performed on the public ISCX VPNto obtain a plot where smaller areas are associated with major NON VPN dataset of human-generated traffic labeled according
improvements. to three different TC tasks, namely encapsulation (VPN-
 First, we have obtained D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS, which encapsulated or not), traffic type (6 classes), and application
capitalizes embedding layers and adaptive learning rate and recognition (15 classes). We first showed that in all considered
achieves better classification performance than D ISTILLER - tasks our initial proposal (i.e., D ISTILLER -E MBEDDINGS)
O RIGINAL, but resulting in huge memory occupation. Then, outperforms several multitask DL-based traffic classifiers chowe have performed XAI-driven input optimization, thus defin- sen as baselines from the most relevant literature [12], [13],
ing D ISTILLER -E ARLIER, which reports better performance [14], [37], [40], [44], including the previous state-of-the-
(for all the dimensions of interest), in spite of being art version (i.e., D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL) sketched from the
able to provide classification verdicts after only 256 bytes same general multimodal multitask framework [11]. Moreover,
and 12 packets. To enhance the reliability of D ISTILLER - we exploited two interpretability methods (i.e., Deep SHAP
E ARLIER, we have leveraged label smoothing and obtained and Integrated Gradients) to provide a global explanation
D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED, which severely limits its calibra- of the underlying rationale for each considered modality,
tion error trading this improvement for limited loss in clas- fed with transport-layer payload or fields extracted from
sification performance. Finally, we focus on enhancing also packet-sequences, respectively. We quantified the contribumemory occupation by taking advantage of pruning. The tion of each modality in solving each task and underlined
resulting D ISTILLER -E VOLVED outperforms D ISTILLER - how the payload still keeps high importance—despite the sig-
O RIGINAL in all the aspects of interest while paying nificant amount of encrypted traffic—as well as the fields
limited classification degradation (≈ 1% F-measure) w.r.t. extracted from the very first packets. Overall, D ISTILLER -
the other variants, but remarkably improving calibra- E MBEDDINGS resulted in more balanced importance between
tion and memory occupation as it achieves the best the two input modalities w.r.t. D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL. Also,
performance figures for both. generalized evidence depends on the combination of input
1288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

type, task to be solved, and employed DL architecture. Driven [11] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
by interpretability outcomes, we designed a better perform- Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
ing and “earlier” version of our traffic classifier, namely [12] Y. Zhao, J. Chen, D. Wu, J. Teng, and S. Yu, “Multi-task network
D ISTILLER -E ARLIER. anomaly detection using federated learning,” in Proc. ACM 10th Int.
 Such an optimized proposal was then investigated in terms Symp. Inf. Commun. Technol. (SoICT), 2019, pp. 273–279.
 [13] H. Sun et al., “Common knowledge based and one-shot learning enabled
of reliability, namely how much we can trust its prediction multi-task traffic classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 39485–39495,
confidence, via calibration. Leveraging label smoothing we 2019.
designed the D ISTILLER -C ALIBRATED classifier that halves [14] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Multitask learning for network traffic classification,” in Proc. 29th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN),
the calibration error on all the three tasks w.r.t. D ISTILLER - 2020, pp. 1–9.
E ARLIER, obtaining a significant gain in reliability, without a [15] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
significant loss in performance. predictions,” in Proc. 30th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
 2017, pp. 4765–4774.
 Finally, we investigated three techniques to reduce the model
 [16] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Yan, “Axiomatic attribution for deep
size aiming at improving its feasibility: knowledge distillation, networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3319–3328.
pruning, and quantization. Pruning turned out to be the best com- [17] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
pression technique and led us to the definition of D ISTILLER - “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
E VOLVED which outperforms the D ISTILLER -O RIGINAL start- pp. 407–414.
ing point in terms of all aspects of interest: performance, [18] K. Amarasinghe, K. Kenney, and M. Manic, “Toward explainable deep
interpretability, reliability, and memory occupation. neural network based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf.
 Human Syst. Interaction (HSI), 2018, pp. 311–317.
 Future prospects of research will include (a) employing [19] Y. Zheng, Z. Liu, X. You, Y. Xu, and J. Jiang, “Demystifying deep
other datasets to assess the generalizability of the proposed learning in networking,” in Proc. 2nd ACM Asia–Pacific Workshop Netw.
approach by taking into account different network conditions, (APNet), 2018, pp. 1–7.
 [20] A. Dethise, M. Canini, and S. Kandula, “Cracking open the black box:
applications, and operating systems; (b) taking advantage of What observations can tell us about reinforcement learning agents,” in
XAI approaches toward the capitalization of unlabeled data Proc. ACM Workshop Netw. Meets AI ML (NetAI), 2019, pp. 29–36.
via semi-supervised multitask learning; (c) the use of reli- [21] A. Morichetta, P. Casas, and M. Mellia, “EXPLAIN-IT: Towards
ability and interpretability techniques for the analysis and explainable AI for unsupervised network traffic analysis,” in Proc. 3rd
 ACM CoNEXT Workshop Big DAta, Mach. Learn. Artif. Intell. Data
improved design of hierarchically-arranged DL-based traffic Commun. Netw/ (Big-DAMA), 2019, pp. 22–28.
classifiers; (d) a robustness assessment of multitask DL-based [22] Z. Meng, M. Wang, J. Bai, M. Xu, H. Mao, and H. Hu, “Interpreting
traffic classifiers to (possibly-multimodal) adversarial attacks; deep learning-based networking systems,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. ACM
 Special Interest Group Data Commun. Appl., Technol., Archit., Protocols
(e) investigating the effect of high classifier reliability on open- Comput. Commun. (SIGCOMM), 2020, pp. 154–171.
set TC (f) the design of (natively) self-explainable [32] and [23] A. Terra, R. Inam, S. Baskaran, P. Batista, I. Burdick, and E. Fersman,
lightweight DL traffic classifiers. “Explainability methods for identifying root-cause of SLA violation
 prediction in 5G network,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.
 (GLOBECOM), 2020, pp. 1–7.
 [24] G. Aceto, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 R EFERENCES A. Pescapé, “Characterization and prediction of mobile-app traffic using
 Markov modeling,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 1,
 [1] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted pp. 907–925, Mar. 2021.
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, [25] A. Montieri, G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., A. Pescapè, “Packet-level prediction of mobile-app traffic using
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019. multitask deep learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021,
 [2] D. Gunning and D. Aha, “DARPA’s explainable artificial intelligence Art. no. 108529.
 (XAI) program,” AI Mag., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 44–58, 2019. [26] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app iden-
 [3] Telefónica. “Telefonica’s approach to the responsible use of AI.” tification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362,
 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.telefonica.com/en/commitment/ 2019.
 how-we-work/business-principles/
 [27] C. Beliard, A. Finamore, and D. Rossi, “Opening the deep pandora
 [4] A. Mujumdar, K. Čyras, S. Singh, and A. Vulgarakis. “Trustworthy AI: box: Explainable traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Explainability, safety and verifiability.” Ericsson, Dec. 2020. [Online]. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 1292–1293.
 Available: https://www.ericsson.com/en/blog/2020/12/trustworthy-ai
 [28] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “Real network traffic collection and
 [5] “AI security white paper,” Huawei Technol., Shenzhen, China, White
 deep learning for mobile app identification,” Wireless Commun. Mobile
 Paper, Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.huawei.com/en/trust-
 Comput., vol. 2020, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 4707909.
 center/resources/ai-security-white-paper
 [6] A. Razaghpanah, A. A. Niaki, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, S. Sundaresan, [29] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
 J. Amann, and P. Gill, “Studying TLS usage in Android apps,” in Proc. increasingly encrypted Web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
 13th ACM Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol. (CoNEXT), 2017, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2021.
 pp. 350–362. [30] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 [7] D. Madariaga, L. Torrealba, J. Madariaga, J. Bermúdez, and J. Bustos- A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 Jiménez, “Analyzing the adoption of QUIC from a mobile development improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 perspective,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Evol. Perform. Interoperability Service. Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
 QUIC (EPIQ), 2020, pp. 35–41. [31] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traf-
 [8] W. Samek, G. Montavon, S. Lapuschkin, C. J. Anders, and K. R. Müller, fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 “Explaining deep neural networks and beyond: A review of methods and traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
 applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 3, pp. 247–278, Mar. 2021. pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 [9] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of [32] K. Fauvel, F. Chen, and D. Rossi, “A lightweight, efficient and
 modern neural networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), explainable-by-design convolutional neural network for Internet traffic
 2017, pp. 1321–1330. classification,” 2022, arXiv:2202.05535.
[10] T. Zhang, H. Qiu, M. Mellia, Y. Li, H. Li, and K. Xu, “Interpreting AI [33] D. Li, Y. Zhu, and W. Lin, “Traffic identification of mobile apps based on
 for networking: Where we are and where we are going,” IEEE Commun. variational autoencoder network,” in Proc. 13th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
 Mag., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 25–31, Feb. 2022. Intell. Security (CIS), 2017, pp. 287–291.
NASCITA et al.: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE, RELIABILITY, AND FEASIBILITY IN MULTIMODAL MULTITASK TC WITH XAI 1289

[34] A. Rago, G. Piro, G. Boggia, and P. Dini, “Multi-task learning at the [59] V. Satopaa, J. Albrecht, D. Irwin, and B. Raghavan, “Finding a ‘Kneedle’
 mobile edge: An effective way to combine traffic classification and in a haystack: Detecting knee points in system behavior,” in Proc. 31st
 prediction,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 9, pp. 10362–10374, IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. Workshops (ICDCSW), 2011,
 Sep. 2020. pp. 166–171.
[35] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep [60] E. Belouadah and A. Popescu, “IL2M: Class incremental learning with
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep dual memory,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), 2019,
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. pp. 583–592.
[36] G. Bovenzi, A. Foggia, S. Santella, A. Testa, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 “Data poisoning attacks against autoencoder-based anomaly detection Alfredo Nascita received the M.S. Laurea degree in
 models: A robustness analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., computer engineering from the University of Napoli
 2022, pp. 5427–5432. Federico II in March 2021, where he is currently
[37] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end pursuing the Ph.D. degree in information technology
 encrypted Traffic Classification with one-dimensional convolution neu- and electrical engineering with DIETI. His research
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI), interests include traffic classification, machine and
 2017, pp. 43–48. deep learning, and explainable artificial intelligence.
[38] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
 encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Elsevier
 Comput. Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
[39] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “Automatic mobile app identification from
 encrypted traffic with hybrid neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 pp. 182065–182077, 2020. Antonio Montieri (Member, IEEE) received the
[40] H. Huang, H. Deng, J. Chen, L. Han, and W. Wang, “Automatic multi- Ph.D. degree in information technology and electask learning system for abnormal network traffic detection,” Int. J. trical engineering from the University of Napoli
 Emerg. Technol. Learn., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 4–20, 2018. Federico II in April 2020, where he is an Assistant
[41] O. Barut, Y. Luo, T. Zhang, W. Li, and P. Li, “Multi-task hierarchi- Professor with DIETI. He has coauthored 39 papers
 cal learning based network traffic analytics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. in international journals and conference proceed-
 Commun. (ICC), 2021, pp. 1–6. ings. His work concerns network measurements,
[42] A. Nascita, F. Cerasuolo, D. D. Monda, J. T. A. Garcia, A. Montieri, (encrypted and mobile) traffic classification, traffic
 and A. Pescape, “Machine and deep learning approaches for IoT modeling and prediction, and monitoring of cloud
 attack classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops network performance.
 (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2022, pp. 1–6.
[43] G. Bovenzi, F. Cerasuolo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapé, “A comparison of machine and deep learning models for Giuseppe Aceto received the Ph.D. degree
 detection and classification of android malware traffic,” in Proc. IEEE in telecommunication engineering from the
 Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2022, pp. 1–6. University of Napoli Federico II, where he is an
[44] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, Assistant Professor. His research concerns network
 “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural performance, traffic analysis, and censorship, both
 networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050, in traditional networks and SDN, and ICTs applied
 2017. to health. He received the best paper award at IEEE
[45] W. Li, Z. D. Hugues, R. Valentin, and M. Liewig, “Multi-task attention ISCC 2010 and the 2018 Best Journal Paper Award
 network for digital context classification from Internet Traffic,” in Proc. by IEEE CSIM.
 7th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Technol. (ICMLT), 2022, pp. 1–12.
[46] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow
 sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
 Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), 2019, pp. 1171–1179. Domenico Ciuonzo (Senior Member, IEEE)
[47] A. Niculescu-Mizil and R. Caruana, “Predicting good probabilities with received the Ph.D. degree from the University
 supervised learning,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), of Campania L. Vanvitelli. He is a Tenure-Track
 2005, pp. 625–632. Professor with the University of Napoli Federico
[48] J. Mukhoti, V. Kulharia, A. Sanyal, S. Golodetz, P. H. Torr, and II. His research interests are data fusion, network
 P. K. Dokania, “Calibrating deep neural networks using focal loss,” in analytics, IoT, and AI. He is the recipient of two
 Proc. 34th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2020, p. 1282. Paper awards (IEEE ICCCS 2019 and Elsevier
[49] R. Müller, S. Kornblith, and G. Hinton, “When does label smoothing ComNet 2020), the 2019 IEEE AESS Exceptional
 help?” in Proc. 32th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2019, Service Award, the 2020 IEEE Sensors Council
 pp. 1–13. Early-Career Technical Achievement Award, and
[50] L. S. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” Contribut. Theory Games, the 2021 IEEE AESS Early-Career Award.
 vol. 2, no. 28, pp. 307–317, 1953.
[51] A. Shrikumar, P. Greenside, and A. Kundaje, “Learning important fea- Valerio Persico received the Ph.D. degree in
 tures through propagating activation differences,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. computer and automation engineering from the
 Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2017, pp. 3145–3153. University of Napoli Federico II in 2016, where he
[52] Y. Cheng, D. Wang, P. Zhou, and T. Zhang, “A survey of model is an Assistant Professor with DIETI. He has coaucompression and acceleration for deep neural networks,” 2017, thored more than 30 papers within international jourarXiv:1710.09282. nals and conference proceedings. His work concerns
[53] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural network measurements, cloud-network monitoring,
 network,” in Proc. NIPS Deep Learn. Represent. Learn. Workshop, 2015, and Internet path tracing and topology discovery.
 pp. 1–9.
[54] Y. Wu and M. Zhang, “Lightweight network traffic classification model
 based on knowledge distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Inf. Syst. Eng.
 (WISE), 2021, pp. 107–121. Antonio Pescapé (Senior Member, IEEE) is a
[55] L. Beyer, X. Zhai, A. Royer, L. Markeeva, R. Anil, and A. Kolesnikov, Full Professor of Computer Engineering with the
 “Knowledge distillation: A good teacher is patient and consistent,” 2021, University of Napoli Federico II. His work focuses
 arXiv:2106.05237. on measurement, monitoring, and analysis of the
[56] M. Zhu and S. Gupta, “To prune, or not to prune: Exploring the efficacy Internet. He has coauthored more than 200 conof pruning for model compression,” 2017, arXiv:1710.01878. ference and journal papers. He is the recipient of
[57] S. Migacz, “8-bit inference with TensorRT,” in Proc. GPU Technol. a number of research awards. Also, he has served
 Conf., vol. 2, 2017, p. 7.
 as an independent reviewer/evaluator of research
[58] M. Ancona, E. Ceolini, C. Öztireli, and M. Gross, “Towards better
 projects/project proposals co-funded by a number of
 understanding of gradient-based attribution methods for deep neural
 governments and agencies.
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–16.

 Open Access funding provided by ‘Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico II”’ within the CRUI CARE Agreement