Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

Including insider threats into risk management through Bayesian threat
graph networks
Nicola d’Ambrosio, Gaetano Perrone ∗ , Simon Pietro Romano
University of Napoli Federico II, Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Via Claudio 21, 80125 Napoli, Italy

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Cybersecurity incidents do represent a serious danger for companies. In fact, the number of cyber crimes is
Insider threats exponentially growing in a scenario where the global COVID-19 pandemic determined several conditions that
Risk assessment have negatively aﬀected companies’ cyber-security posture. The adoption of risk management processes can help
Risk management
 reduce security threats and mitigate both ﬁnancial and reputation losses. In computer systems, it is crucial to
Bayesian attack graphs
Attack graphs
 relate security risks to the system infrastructure. Bayesian attack graph models can help reach such a goal. The
Data security approach is very eﬀective as it allows to deﬁne the attack paths an attacker would perform against a speciﬁc
 network infrastructure. In this way, it is possible to construct a truthful representation of a company’s security
 risks that cannot be obtained with other approaches. Still, Bayesian risk management approaches are usually
 based on advanced threats. Namely, those threats relate to vulnerabilities that can only be exploited by a skilled
 attacker. Although several works enrich the expressiveness of the proposed Bayesian model, current proposals do
 not provide insights into how it is possible to estimate security control costs, asset values, and threat probabilities
 for other types of threats. Furthermore, they do not take insider threats into consideration. This work shows that
 a risk management framework based on Bayesian Attack Graphs can be adapted to include a variety of threats,
 including those related to the insiders. We ﬁrst extend an interesting work based on Bayesian Decision Networks
 to cover a broader range of threats. Then, we formalize several concepts, such as security control coverage and
 risk strategy, and show that our model can easily integrate insider threats when speciﬁc properties are deﬁned.
 Finally, in order to address insider threats, we enrich the model with security controls that diﬀer from the
 standard ones, such as technical IT training sessions and employee satisfaction surveys.

1. Introduction perform dynamic network risk assessments (Poolsappasit et al., 2012).
 These advancements have contributed to a more eﬃcient and applica-
 IT Risk management is a fundamental activity in enterprise com- ble risk assessment. Indeed, attack graphs make it possible to determine
panies. Several approaches are commonly used to prioritize risks and the risks associated with a particular asset. However, Bayesian attack
deﬁne proper defensive risk strategies. One of the challenges in im- graphs typically model cybersecurity threats based on exploiting either
plementing risk assessment processes is the realization of a risk man- known or (in the case of more advanced models) unknown vulneraagement strategy that addresses the real security risks of an IT sys- bilities through attacks performed by skilled technical intruders. One
tem. A well-founded approach to model network attacks is the attack reason is related to the fact that such models usually adopt known
graph analysis (Phillips and Swiler, 1998). Through attack graphs, it vulnerability databases to deﬁne vulnerabilities, e.g., the National Vulis possible to eﬀectively point out the exploits an attacker can per- nerability Database (NVD), as well as well-deﬁned metrics, such as the
form against a system with vulnerabilities. Exploits occur based on Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS), to estimate probabilities.
satisﬁed preconditions. A relevant evolution of the approach is the However, these approaches are not able to use quantitative metrics to
Bayesian attack graph model (Frigault and Wang, 2008), which aims estimate probabilities of other kinds of threats, such as business email
to integrate probabilistic models in order to estimate the likelihood compromise or unintentional threats. The very few models which emof such preconditions. Bayesian attack graph models were adapted to ploy methods to evaluate other types of threats and deﬁne advanced

* Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: nicola.dambrosio2@unina.it (N. d’Ambrosio), gaetano.perrone@unina.it (G. Perrone), spromano@unina.it (S.P. Romano).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103410
Received 8 February 2023; Received in revised form 22 June 2023; Accepted 24 July 2023
Available online 28 July 2023
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

security metrics, are typically based on heuristic approaches which underestimate important parameters. As an example, they do not take
worldwide cybersecurity incident trends into account when estimating
threats’ probabilities.
 In the above scenario, insider threats do represent a challenging
class of menace, due to the increasing risk they pose to enterprise organizations.
 The main contribution of this work is to show that it is possible to
include insider threats in Bayesian risk management frameworks. Risk
assessment is based on quantitative metrics for the deﬁnition of both
security control costs and asset values. The underlying attack graph
models allow for modeling the relationship between threat actors (internal and/or external) and assets. Threat probabilities are estimated
 Fig. 1. Example of an attack graph.
by analyzing the number of occurrences of global security incident
trends. We formulate an alternative model based on attack graphs that
we name “threat graph” and show that it is possible to integrate insider threats into threat graphs by analyzing their relationships with
assets and representing their enabling factors in terms of “initial threat
nodes”.
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides background information that is useful to better position our contribution. Section 3 analyzes several works that either investigate the
insider threat topic or leverage the techniques we used to develop our
framework, i.e., attack graphs and risk management processes. We will
observe that many works address the problem of detecting insider threat
activities, but few explore the application of risk management processes
to defend companies against internal attackers. Furthermore, we sum up
the model at the basis of our work, i.e., the Bayesian Risk Management
Framework (BRMF), and show both its strengths and limitations. We
then propose an enriched model that generalizes the vulnerability deﬁ-
nition to include diﬀerent types of threats. Section 4 delves deeper into
the insider threat concept and shows that the proposed enriched framework can easily include insider threats. Section 5 shows a practical
usage example of the proposed framework, while Section 6 summarizes
the results and paves the ground to new research directions in the insider threats risk management landscape.

2. Background and motivation
 Fig. 2. A simple example of a vulnerable network.
 In order to appreciate the details of our model, it is important to
have a few preliminary notions. In this section, we summarize the attack
graph concept and provide preliminary deﬁnitions that will help readers exploit or a postcondition caused by an exploit. Hence, exploit nodes dedig deeper into our model. ﬁne causal relationships between condition nodes. It is possible to put
 these relationships into a graphical representation, as shown in Fig. 1.
2.1. Attack graphs Exploit nodes are represented through rectangle nodes, while condition
 nodes are depicted with circle nodes. The relationships between condi-
 This section illustrates the fundamental concepts associated with tions and exploits are modeled with edges, and the ﬁnal representation
attack graphs. An excellent explanatory guide about attack graphs is is a directed bipartite graph.
provided by Zenitani (2023), attack graphs are fundamental models for Through attack graphs, it is possible to model network vulnerability
performing network security analysis. An attack graph allows for the rescenarios easily. Fig. 2 shows a simple vulnerable network environment.
alization of causal relations between malicious events that occur in an
 In the example, the attacker has access to a public web server that is
enterprise network. The ﬁrst graph-based system for network vulneravulnerable to two critical remote command execution (RCE) vulnerability analysis was proposed by Phillips and Swiler (1998), where they
 bilities, i.e., “CVE-2021-41773” (NVD, 2021a) and “CVE-2021-44228”
extended the fault-tree analysis (Kritzinger, 2017) in order to include
 (NVD, 2021b). If the ﬁnal attacker’s goal is to obtain sensitive data locyclic structures. First attack graph representations were based on state
 cated in the database, either of the two mentioned RCE vulnerabilities
enumeration graphs. In such representations, all vulnerabilities can be exmust be exploited.
ploited, and this information is modeled with a state that can be either
 In order to formalize the concept of attack graphs, several deﬁnitions
true or false. Therefore, if a network contains N computers and M vulcan be found in the literature. A widely accepted one is that provided
nerabilities, the number of possible states is 2𝑀𝑁 , which might cause
 by Wang et al. (2006).
scalability issues. To overcome the problem, several works (Ammann et
al., 2002; Jajodia et al., 2005) proposed an alternative approach called
the “exploit-dependency graph”. The representation is a bipartite di- Deﬁnition 1 (Attack graph - Wang et al., 2006). Given a set of exploits E,
rected graph composed of exploit nodes and condition nodes where each a set of security conditions C where 𝐸 ∩ 𝐶 = ∅, a require relation 𝑅𝑟 ⊆ 𝐶 ×
exploit node can only be connected to one or more condition nodes, 𝐸, and an imply relation 𝑅𝑖 ⊆ 𝐸 × 𝐶, an attack graph G is the connected,
and each condition node can only be connected to exploit nodes. Each directed graph G = (𝐸 ∪ 𝐶, 𝑅𝑟 ∪ 𝑅𝑖 ), where (𝐸 ∪ 𝐶) is the set of nodes
condition node denotes a fact that can be a precondition that enables an and (𝑅𝑟 ∪ 𝑅𝑖 ) is the set of edges.

 2
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Fig. 3. Attack graph of the proposed example.

 Zenitani (2023) includes another relevant concept in the deﬁnition, 2.1.1. Logical attack graph
i.e., the initial conditions. Despite their eﬀectiveness in modeling network attacks, attack
 graphs do not provide details about how to practically describe the
Deﬁnition 2 (Initial conditions - Zenitani, 2023). For each attack graph conditions and exploits. From the previous example, it is essential to
G, initial conditions refer to the subset 𝐶𝑖 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condi- observe that the exploits can be performed when all the pre-conditions
tion 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 satisfying ∄ 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 such that (𝑒, 𝑐) ∈ 𝑅𝑖 . are satisﬁed. At the same time, a post-condition (such as “web server
 compromised”) can occur if at least one of the exploits succeeds. Hence,
 exploits can be considered as AND combinations of their pre-conditions,
 In order to better ﬁt our model with attack graphs, we introduce two while post-conditions can be modeled as OR combinations of exploits.
further deﬁnitions: Fig. 4 illustrates the concept applied to the example through logical AND and OR ports. These considerations addressed researchers
Deﬁnition 3 (Goal conditions). For each attack graph G, goal conditions toward the propositional logic. Conditions and models can be reprerefer to the subset 𝐶𝑔 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condition 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 satisfying sented through a logic programming language, such as Datalog, i.e., the
∄ 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 such that (𝑐, 𝑒) ∈ 𝑅𝑟 . language proposed by Ceri et al. (1989). A Datalog program comprises
 a set of rules and facts. It accepts rules and facts and infers relationships
 Goal conditions represent the ﬁnal goals of the attacker. in order to decide whether the assertion is True or False. In our example,
 we aim to model the ﬁnal goal of the attacker, i.e., the exﬁltration of
 sensitive data from the database. To the purpose, Datalog rules can be
Deﬁnition 4 (Intermediate conditions). For each attack graph G, interme- used for exploits, while Datalog facts can be used to model conditions.
diate conditions refer to the subset 𝐶𝑚 ⊆ 𝐶 composed of every condition An example of rules that can model the proposed exploits is illus-
𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 such that 𝑐 ∉ (𝐶𝑔 ∪ 𝐶𝑖 ) trated in Listing 1.
 Such rules only represent the attack model, but the attack graph of
 The related attack graph containing the three deﬁned nodes is illus- the example is realized when we deﬁne a set of facts.
trated in Fig. 3. As it is possible to observe, the “web server compro- Facts model the initial preconditions of the attack graph and genmised” condition is implied by two diﬀerent exploits, and each exploit erate post-conditions through the Datalog rules. In order to automate
depends on other conditions. the realization of attack graphs, Ou et al. (2005) introduced MulVAL.

 3
 N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Fig. 4. Logical graph.

 This logic-based network security analyzer allows writing and analyz-
1 webserverCompromised(A, W) :- webserverReachable(A, W),
 ing attack graphs through Datalog. In logic attack graphs, there are two
2 webserverVulnerableToRCE(W, V).
3 types of nodes, i.e., fact nodes and derivation nodes. Fact nodes represent
4 readDatabaseCredentials(A, D) :- webserverCompromised(A, W), conditions that enable an attacker to perform an exploit and reach a
5 databaseCredentialsUsedByWebserver(W, D). goal. They can be primitive (i.e., facts that do not depend on derivation
6
 nodes) or derived (i.e., facts that are not primitive). Derivation nodes
7 sensitiveDataExfiltrated(D) :- readDatabaseCredentials(A, D).
 represent the exploits that allow an attacker to obtain post-conditions.
 Listing 1: Datalogic rules for the proposed example. Each derivation node has an “interaction rule” describing its dependencies. In particular, a derivation node depends on one or more fact nodes
 that satisfy the rule’s preconditions. Although several MulVAL extensions have been developed, the fundamental concepts are still practical
1 webserverReachable(Attacker, Webserver). and adopted.
2 databaseCredentialsUsedByWebserver(Webserver, Database).
3 webserverVulnerableToRCE(Webserver, CVE-2021-41773).
4 webserverVulnerableToRCE(Webserver, CVE-2021-44228) 2.1.2. Attack template
 When modeling attack graphs, a decisive choice regards the deﬁ-
 Listing 2: Datalogic facts for the proposed example. nition of an attack template, i.e., the rule set that contains the list of

 4
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

security conditions and their relationships. The default MulVAL attack actor is a malicious person or organization that does not necessarily
templates are mainly based on exploits against known vulnerabilities ob- have any technical skills.
tained from scanning and vulnerability assessment tools. Several works From the threat graph, it is possible to derive the Bayesian Threat
aim to extend the base MulVAL attack templates. A comprehensive tax- Graph (BTG) in the same way as the Bayesian attack graph (see Seconomy for attack graph generation and usage in network security is tion 2.1.3).
provided by Kaynar (2016). BTG, which stands for Bayesian Threat Graph, is a Bayesian model
 derived from the related threat graph. BTG is formally equivalent to
2.1.3. Bayesian attack graphs the Bayesian Attack Graph, meaning that the formulae described in Sec-
 In the previous section, we observed that security conditions could tion 2.1.3 can be applied in the same way.
be modeled as facts that can be either true or false. However, this is a There is indeed a subtle yet signiﬁcant semantic diﬀerence between
strong assumption. Researchers have hence explored novel approaches an Attack Graph and a Threat Graph, which basically reﬂects the difto introduce stochastic variables in attack graphs. ference between a threat and an attack. A threat can be either inten-
 Combining the Bayesian network probabilistic method with attack tional or unintentional, whereas an attack is intentional by deﬁnition.
graphs makes it possible to obtain a Bayesian attack graph (Frigault and As such, a threat is a circumstance that has potential to cause loss or
Wang, 2008). For each exploit node, it is possible to model a conditional damage, while an attack is an explicit attempt at causing damage. The
probability table (CPT) based on AND and OR relationships. In particu- introduction of Threat Graphs allows us to explicitly catch the above
lar, in order to compute CPTs eﬃciently, loopy propagation algorithms semantic diﬀerence, by incorporating additional security risks, such as
can be adopted. For attack graphs, the Noisy OR/AND (Pearl, 1988) those resulting from human errors or negligence. This generalization is
approach is commonly used. If 𝑝𝑎𝑖 is the set of probabilities related especially important when including insiders in the graph model.
to the preconditions that must be satisﬁed to make a node 𝑋𝑖 true, it Furthermore, we aim to develop a graph model that explicitly incoris possible to deﬁne noisy-AND and noisy-OR relationships as follows porates the previously mentioned concepts of goal threat, vector threat,
(Munoz-Gonzalez et al., 2019): and initial threat preconditions. By extending the attack graph, we can
 { apply these concepts, represent insiders, and create the model as pre-
 0, ∃𝑋𝑗 ∈ 𝐩𝐚𝑖 |𝑋𝑗 = 𝐹
𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦-𝐴𝑁𝐷 ∶ 𝑝(𝑋𝑖 |𝐩𝐚𝑖 ) = ∏ (1) sented in Section 4.
 𝑗∶𝑋𝑗 𝑝𝑣𝑗 , 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒. In the proposed model, the number of goal threats is given by the
 {
 0, ∀𝑋𝑗 ∈ 𝐩𝐚𝑖 |𝑋𝑗 = 𝐹 number of analyzed assets. Namely, if 𝑁𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 is the number of assets in
𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦-𝑂𝑅 ∶ 𝑝(𝑋𝑖 |𝐩𝐚𝑖 ) = ∏ (2) the system and 𝑁𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙 is the number of goal threat types, the number of
 1 − 𝑗∶𝑋𝑗 (1 − 𝑝𝑣𝑗 ), 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
 goal threats is given by the following Equation:
 Each AND gate in Fig. 4 can be converted into noisy-AND equations,
while the noisy-OR equation models the probability of each OR gate. Us- 𝑁𝐺𝑇 = 𝑁𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 × 𝑁𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙 (3)
ing these equations makes it possible to obtain a Bayesian Attack Graph
 Vector threats can also be categorized according to the required techni-
(BAG).
 cal level:

2.2. Threat graph - revisiting the attack graph deﬁnition
 • Non technical threats: they do not need technical skills. They basically occur when a system publicly exposes sensitive data.
 In this section, we introduce new deﬁnitions that will support the
 • Technical threats: they require IT skills but no hacking skills. For
description of the model proposed in Section 4. A threat to a sysexample, an anonymous ftp login exposes sensitive data.
tem is either a malicious or unintentional action that harms the system.
 • Advanced threats: they refer to threats that require hacking skills,
Threats can be categorized by classifying worldwide security incidents.
 such as vulnerability exploitation capabilities.
We divide them in two sets:
 This categorization needs to be highlighted as it helps deﬁne the threat
 • Goal Threats, i.e., threats that cause a ﬁnal impact. In Section 5, we
 graph edges between pairs of nodes. In fact, non-technical threats may
 consider two primary goal threats, namely, data exﬁltration and
 be performed by a variety of threat actors, whereas other threats canransomware.
 not be performed by employees (even disgruntled ones) having neither
 • Vector Threats, i.e., threats that can be sequentially exploited to
 technical nor hacking skills. An important consideration is related to
 enable preconditions for a goal threat.
 the probability and impact of a threat. We deﬁne the concept of “measurable threat”:
We also introduce Initial Threat Preconditions, i.e., conditions that
enable the initial vector threat of the sequence that led to a goal threat.
 According to the deﬁnitions in Section 2.1, it is possible to describe Deﬁnition 6 (Measurable threat). A measurable threat is a threat to
vector threats, goal threats and initial threat preconditions in terms of which it is possible to assign a ﬁnancial loss and a cyber incident frecondition nodes and hence formulate the following threat graph deﬁni- quency.
tion:
 2.2.1. Security controls
Deﬁnition 5 (Threat graph). A threat graph 𝑇 𝐺 is an attack graph G In our model, security controls reduce the probability that a threat
where: occurs. We introduce the concept of “addressed threats”.

 • intermediate nodes represent vector threats, i.e., a single step in Deﬁnition 7 (Security control). A security control is a tuple SC=(Cost,
 the sequence of threats (i.e., the “threat path”) exploited by a threat AddressedThreats), where Cost represents the implementation cost of SC
 actor in order to reach a goal threat; and AddressedThreats is a list of addressed vector threats. After applying
 • goal nodes represent goal threats, i.e., the ﬁnal steps of a threat security controls, the probability of vector threats is reduced. Consepath followed by a threat actor; quently, goal threats probabilities are also reduced.
 • initial nodes represent the initial threat preconditions.
 In our model, security controls reduce the probability of addressed
 In the previous deﬁnition, we explicitly refer to “threat actor” to threats. In particular, some security controls harden the system by reunderline the diﬀerence from a skilled attacker. In particular, a threat ducing the probability of exploiting a vulnerability. In contrast, others

 5
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

aim to increase the eﬀectiveness of intrusion detection systems that eral factors cause cyber losses. Palsson et al. (2020) apply a random
should induce attackers to be discouraged by the possibility of being forest algorithm to create a relationship between cyber incident factors
discovered. Indeed, this is a strong assumption that requires further and several ﬁnancial cost classes, summarizing a relationship between
work, as the “deterrence level” depends on various factors, such as the threat types and ﬁnancial losses. We leverage this relationship to estiattacker’s motivation (Chan and Yao, 2005). We are nonetheless herein mate the global costs in our use case. Anyway, the estimation should
assuming that such an assumption holds true. also consider the number of breached records. Jacob (2014) observed
 We can deﬁne the security control “coverage” in the following way: that there is a logarithmic relationship between the security incident
 losses and breached records. A recent study by the Cyentia Institute
Deﬁnition 8 (Security control coverage). Let 𝕋 a set of measurable (Cyentia, 2020) conﬁrms this relationship. The study relates the numthreats used to evaluate risk, and 𝑆𝐶 a security control. 𝔸𝕋 ⊆ 𝕋 is the ber of compromised records to the ﬁnancial losses of cyber incidents
set of threats addressed by the security control. The probability of a that occurred in 2020. These considerations can be used to include lothreat 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ∈ 𝔸𝕋 is reduced by 𝑟𝑖 when the security control is applied. cal impact factors that depend on the company information within the
The security control coverage reduction is deﬁned by the tuple: model. By applying a regression model to the Cyentia studies, it is possible to obtain the following formula:
𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝐶𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 = [𝑟0 , ..., 𝑟𝑛 ] (4)
 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 𝑒10.36+0.55⋅𝑙𝑛(𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 ) (8)
where 𝑛 is the number of addressed threats.
 Equation (8) relates the number of records stored in an asset to the
 Finding how much a security control reduces the probability of ad- ﬁnancial losses for a company caused by cyber incidents involving the
dressed threats is challenging. The probability can be estimated through asset. In our model, each asset can be aﬀected by one or more threat
either qualitative or quantitative approaches. Quantitative approaches goals. Each asset contains 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑠𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 sensitive data, and we assume
are preferred, as these estimations allow objective results to be less that a threat completely breaches it. Through this assumption, we can
susceptible to cognitive biases. In order to assess the security con- give an impact score for each asset in the model.
trol impact against the addressed threats it is crucial to adopt Speciﬁc,
Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-bound criteria, i.e., we 3. Related works
have to deﬁne SMART metrics (Doran, 2008).
 After security controls are applied, a new Bayesian Threat Graph is Several works inspired our framework. Khosravi and Bafghi (2020)
generated, and, depending on the addressed threats, the probability of present a network security risk management framework based on
goal threats is reduced accordingly. Bayesian Decision Networks that allows the selection of the best security
 We can deﬁne a risk strategy as a combination of security controls. controls’ combination under budget constraints. The model is focused
 on software vulnerabilities exploitable by attackers having hacking
 skills. In our work, we will extend it to cover more generic threats
Deﬁnition 9 (Risk strategy). Let 𝑆𝐶 the set of possible security controls
 and, in particular, insider threats. Our model also includes additional
and 𝑁𝑠𝑐 the number of security controls. Each security control can be
 security controls to deal with insider threats and proposes a diﬀerent ineither applied or not. A risk strategy is the implementation of a subset
 terpretation of several concepts like, for example, the way the security
of security controls. The number of risk strategies is given by Equation
 controls address threats. Namely, in our model, unlike BRMF, security
(5)
 controls reduce threat probabilities rather than decreasing their impact
𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 = 2𝑁𝑠𝑐 (5) (see Section 2.2.1). We will give more details in the next section. Erola
 et al. (2022) allowed us to gain relevant insights into several aspects.
 For example, considering the CIS (Center for Internet Security) critical
 Each security control has a cost. The implementation cost of a risk
 security controls and the security impact in terms of data loss. Although
strategy depends on the implemented security controls:
 we utilized the logarithmic relationship between security incident losses
 and breached records, the approach proposed by Erola et al. might in-
Deﬁnition 10 (Risk strategy cost). Let 𝑆𝐶 the set of security controls
 deed be integrated to also assess impact loss.
that a company is going to implement in the system. The risk strategy
 Psychological, social, and biological information (Levy, 2010) works
cost is given by:
 led us to integrate employee satisfaction processes, technical training,
 𝑛
 ∑ and stress monitoring as security controls in our ﬁnal framework in-
𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑐𝑖 (6) cluding insider threats (Saito et al., 2021; Roll et al., 2019; Wong et al.,
 𝑖=0
 2019).
where 𝑛 is the number of implemented security controls, and 𝑐𝑖 is the The current insider threat research is mainly focused on discovercost of security control 𝑠𝑐𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝐶. ing malicious behaviors in systems (Al-Mhiqani et al., 2020). Many
 works evaluate the detection performance by leveraging the insider
2.2.2. Threat impact threat dataset provided by the Computer Emergency Response Team
 The impact of a threat can be computed in the same way as done in (CERT) division (Lindauer, 2020). The dataset has both monitoring and
the work from Erola et al. (2022). In particular, it can be obtained by behavioral features. In particular, OCEAN personality traits (Rothmann
considering the ﬁnancial losses caused by a threat at a speciﬁc instant and Coetzer, 2003) are used to characterize the employees. Tuor et
in time. al. (2017) develop an unsupervised deep learning model to detect insider threats, while Yuan et al. (2018) design an alternative deep neural
Deﬁnition 11 (Threat impact). Let 𝑡 be a goal threat of a Bayesian network and show that it increases the performance detection metrics
Threat Graph and 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑡 the ﬁnancial loss associated with the compared to other approaches. Finally, Zhang et al. (2021) demonstrate
threat obtained by analyzing the related cyber incidents. We can deﬁne that ensemble learning and self-supervised techniques increase the dethe threat impact variable as follows: tection of malicious activities.
 Several works aim to propose insider threat models by adopting for-
𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑡 = 𝐹 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑙𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑡 (7) mal methods (Wing, 1990). An outstanding contribution is represented
 by the “CERT Guide to Insider Threats” (Cappelli et al., 2012). Other
 Equation (7) can be computed by considering the current statistics two relevant formal languages (Magklaras et al., 2006; Kammuller and
of cyber incident costs for a speciﬁc threat. This is not easy, as sev- Probst, 2017) are mentioned in a systematic survey about insider threats

 6
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

from Xiong and Lagerström (2019). To the best of our knowlewdge, no Roy Sarkar (2010) does not propose a model, yet provides a comunifying theory currently exists to model insider threats. As to threat prehensive set of technical, behavioral, and organizational measures to
categorization, we could not ﬁnd in the literature a well-founded set predict the likelihood of insider threats. Axelrad et al. (2013) propose
of insider threats. Though, we were able to get relevant information an interesting approach that encloses several insider features, such as
from statistical sources. In particular, the Vocabulary for Event Record- dynamic environmental stressors and static personality, into Bayesian
ing and Incident Sharing (VERIS) (The veris framework, 2022) oﬀers a networks. Although the approach focuses on detection rather than secuset of metrics designed to provide a common language for describing rity risk assessment, it provides a point of reﬂection about the usefulness
security incidents in a structured and repeatable manner. Through this of Bayesian networks to model insider threat behavior. However, the audatabase, it was possible to deﬁne the most relevant threats, by also thors do not consider relationships between insiders and assets.
including the insider ones. Another relevant data breach source from Other works model the insider threat through game theoretic models
which to infer further insider threat scenarios was provided by Verizon’s such as that proposed by Joshi et al. (2021). In their work, adversarial
Data Breach Investigation Report (DBIR) (Verizon, 2021). Through data risk analysis (ARA) addresses the insider threat problem. It is an inanalysis, we were actually able to extract various threats (see Table 6). teresting work as it proposes an attack-defense approach to select the
Nurse et al. (2014) propose an interesting framework to character- best defensive action that eﬀectively counters insider threats. Furtherize insider attacks and pose countermeasures. In his disruptive paper more, since it models both the attacker’s and the defender’s behavior,
(Greitzer, 2019), Greitzer shows that emerging government guidelines it oﬀers a richer expressiveness than our model. However, it does not
specify only minimum standards for insider threat monitoring, analysis, consider the importance of assets in the utility function that deﬁnes the
and mitigation programs, so authors oﬀer insights to ﬁll the gap. attacker’s behavior. Also, it does not provide detailed information about
 Our work widens the research scope to include insider threats in risk estimating security control costs.
management processes. In fact, even if risk management frameworks In our opinion, one of the most relevant works about including inare extensively adopted to prevent security risks in companies, their ap- sider threats in risk management is provided by Greitzer et al. (2021).
plication to address insider threats is relatively unexplored. Logan and The work proposes a knowledge elicitation model to support the de-
Clarkson (2020) show that the insider is a signiﬁcant risk for companies velopment of insider threat risk models. Although the proposed model
and try to make available a qualitative approach to deﬁne insider-based neither focuses on deﬁning a risk strategy, nor illustrates the approaches
risk assessment. Anyway, it is an early work that does not provide many for estimating costs, it is a fundamental piece of work that can be leverdetails about how to integrate insider threats into risk management pro- aged to deﬁne insider threat preconditions. Table 1 summarizes the
cesses. Stone (2021) oﬀers systematic reviews that conﬁrm the beneﬁts mentioned works and their properties.
of using the risk-management process to combat insider threats. In our Indeed, each of these models oﬀers relevant insights that can be of
model, we deﬁne a threat graph that is conceptually based on attack inspiration to enrich our work. We will provide some pointers in the
graphs. Attack graph models are extensively adopted to model the be- concluding section of the paper.
havior of attackers in order to prevent attacks from being successful.
Lallie et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive overview that oﬀers a the- 3.2. Attack graphs and risk analysis
oretical foundation of attack graphs and shows there is no standard
method for representing them. We think that the main cause behind Attack graphs eﬀectively underline the relationship between attacks
such a lack of standardization is the quest for ﬂexibility of such models. and nodes in a network system, but it is challenging to deﬁne which se-
Still, it is also their strength, as it is possible to deﬁne diﬀerent attack curity measures should be applied to address such attacks. On the other
“view” levels and, most importantly, to have a clear vision of the at- hand, well-founded risk assessment methodologies allow for deﬁning
tacker’s behavior. In fact, attack graphs show the sequential steps of an risk strategy eﬀectively but are usually adopted without considering the
attacker who breaks into a system and relate the potential threats to the real system environment. Hence they cannot be leveraged by network
aﬀected assets. It is an essential feature in risk management, as the im- administrators to mitigate security risks. A pioneering Bayesian attack
pact level depends on the asset’s importance. To underline the beneﬁts graph framework was proposed by Poolsappasit et al. (2012) to formalof the visual attack graph representation, Lallie et al. (2018) conﬁrm ize a dynamic network risk assessment model. Several works propose
that such models can increase the cyber-attack perception. In this work, Bayesian approaches to assess network security risks. However, they
in order to improve the understanding of the model, we represent high- mainly focus on network security technical threats and estimate threat
level threats through attack graphs. By using such an approach, it would probabilities using vulnerability scoring systems designed to capture
also be possible to model low-level threats. Current works based on at- technical characteristics of software, hardware, and ﬁrmware vulnertack graphs are focused on the application to cyber-physical systems abilities, such as the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).
and Internet of Things (Ghazo et al., 2020). Table 2 compares our work with similar approaches. As it is possible
 to observe, current Bayesian risk management models mainly aim to
3.1. Insider threat analysis mitigate technical threats. Insider threats and non-technical threats are
 typically not taken into account.
 Several works propose approaches to detect insider threats and select the most eﬀective defensive strategies to minimize risks. Mathew et 3.3. Base risk management framework (BRMF)
al. (2008) deﬁne a theoretical model called Capabilities Attack Graphs
(CAG) to detect the most probable attack paths on the basis of the cost A work that explicitly implements Bayesian attack graphs to perform
related to the security controls and vulnerability score. Our threat graph risk assessment is authored by Khosravi and Bafghi (2020). The paper
is similar to their work, as it is basically asset-centric. However, the au- in question can help identify the limitations of existing approaches.
thors do not include asset values in their cost estimation. Furthermore, For simplicity, we will call the authors’ work Base Risk Managetheir model is based on CERT vulnerabilities and seems to rely only on ment Framework (BRMF). BRMF leverages the visual representation
what we have herein deﬁned as hacking threats. of attack graphs, and therefore allows to share attack scenarios with
 Bishop et al. (2010) propose a descriptive research work that gives non-technical teams easily. Its strength resides in the fact that it is selfinteresting insights into the integration of insider threats in risk man- explanatory. As the attack graph model is widely adopted, BRMF can
agement, such as the importance of access resources and psychological be applied in many contexts. The attack graph model perfectly ﬁts an
indicators. However, their model includes neither external attackers nor attacker who tries to exploit remote vulnerabilities in order to break inasset values when evaluating security risks. Therefore, no quantitative side a system, compromise internal servers through lateral movement,
metrics are deﬁned to evaluate security risk strategies. and eventually exﬁltrate sensitive data from the corrupted targets.

 7
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

Table 1
Comparison between related insider threat analysis works. Legend: Eternal Attackers: if the model includes external attackers; Technical Threats: if the model
includes technical threats; Non-technical threats: if the model includes non-technical threats; Asset value: if the model includes asset values; SMART metrics: if the
model deﬁnes SMART metrics; Security controls: if the model deﬁnes security control costs; Insiders and assets relationships: if the model analyzes relationships
among insiders and assets.

 Mathew et al. (2008) Bishop et al. (2010) Axelrad et al. (2013) Joshi et al. (2021) Greitzer et al. (2021) Our work

 External Attackers Y N N N Y Y
 Technical threats Y N N Y Y Y
 Non-technical threats Y Y Y Y Y Y
 Asset value N N N N N Y
 SMART metrics N N N N N Y
 Security controls N Y N Y N Y
 Insiders and assets relationships Y Y N Y N Y

Table 2
Comparison between related risk analysis works based on attack graphs. Legend: Probability metric: Used Probability Metric; Asset impact: if asset impact is included
in the risk analysis; Non-technical threats: if the attack template includes non-technical threats; Insider threats: if the attack template includes insider threats.

 Work Attack graph template Probability metric Asset impact Non-technical threats Insider threats

 Munoz-Gonzalez et al. (2019) Technical attacks, based on CVE. Do not include CVSS score N N N
 0-days or global security incidents

 Behbehani et al. (2022) Web attacks. Manually creates CVSS scores to CVSS score N N N
 evaluate probabilities

 Sawilla and Ou (2008) Network attacks, extracts metrics and vulnerabilities CVSS score N N N
 from public known databases such as NVD

 Khosravi and Bafghi (2020) Based on technical attacks, but introduces CVSS Score Y N N
 interesting approaches to deﬁne a risk management
 strategy based on Bayesian attack graphs

 Deng et al. (2023) Based on technical attacks, but introduces a new SIR model Y N N
 metric to evaluate asset importance (Ross, 1916)

 Our work Based on “threats”, composed of technical, Global security Y Y Y
 non-technical and insider threats. Use global security incident trends
 incidents to estimate threat probabilities

 The model allows to link attack scenarios to the network topology, using attack models based on known software vulnerabilities, it is not
by enabling security teams to easily and rapidly understand what should possible to model other types of threats, such as:
be protected and hardened. The model can become too complex if large
network scenarios are considered, which might negatively impact its • 0-day attacks: if CVSS scores are used to evaluate risks, it is not
visual representation power. For this reason, it is crucial to choose a possible to model attacks that exploit unknown vulnerabilities;
proper abstraction level for the attacks adopted in the model, as we did • Weak or default credentials issues: attackers might compromise a tarin our work. get server by using default credentials. This is related to negligent
 system administrators who erroneously do not harden passwords;
 • Social engineering attacks: the attacker might, e.g., send a phishing
3.3.1. BRMF limitations
 e-mail to break into the system.
 As the attack graph approach is very ﬂexible, we chose to start from
the BRMF model (which only focuses on the exploitation of vulnerabil-
 This limitation is much more impactful when considering non-technical
ities) and enrich it in order to cover other threats while also widening
 insider threats. In fact, even if an insider threat might exploit vulthe scope of several related concepts. In fact, despite its advantages,
 nerabilities, this is a rare condition. Munshi et al. (2012) underline
BRMF has a few intrinsic limitations, like, for example, the fact that
 the discrepancy between the academic literature and empirical data in
it is only focused on vulnerabilities. Several works adopted an attacker
 focusing on insider’s technical skills. Although several models demonrisk assessment procedure making use of the base metrics (i.e., Conﬁdenstrated that technical skills might increase the probability of an insider
tiality Impact, Integrity Impact and Availability Impact) by using existing
 threat, empirical data show that non-technical threats are the primary
vulnerability databases (e.g., the one proposed by the National Vulnercause of incidents.1 Malicious insiders usually leverage privileged acability Database – NVD, 2022). Unfortunately, this approach is weak
 cess to hosts, computers, and systems. A relevant consideration is that
for several reasons. In fact, the probability of an attack that exploits
 they can also exploit the physical access to the systems, so it is essential
vulnerabilities on a target does not just depend on the severity of such
 to model physical assets.
vulnerabilities but also on additional factors. For example, critical vul-
 Since BRMF only considers vulnerabilities, the proposed security
nerabilities might aﬀect a target representing a rarely used asset inside controls fall in the category of network security solutions, such as apthe company. For this reason, even if severity is critical in such a case, plying patches, disabling services and/or adding a network Intrusion
potential attackers will likely not exploit such a ﬂaw, as they will focus on investigating the most relevant widely deployed vulnerabilities
they have discovered. Hence, a parameter such as the cybersecurity in- 1 According to Verizon’s DBIR, 74% of breaches in 2023 involved the hucidents trend is in this case a better probability indicator, as it reﬂects man element (https://www.verizon.com/business/resources/reports/dbir/, acthe most widely deployed cyber attacks against companies. Also, when cessed: 17-06-2023).

 8
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

Detection System (IDS). Through network-related security controls, it • threats are not related to skilled attackers that exploit software vulis not possible to include further threats. For this reason, we consider nerabilities, but are rather deﬁned through known datasets such as
the CIS (Center for Internet Security) Critical Security Controls (SANS, Advisen (2019);
2008, 2021) provided by the SANS institute2 in the same way as pro- • real incidents are used to model threat probabilities and evaluate
posed in Erola et al. (2022). As stated by the authors, SANS has a their impact;
lack of non-technical controls. They introduce organizational culture, • assets are not just servers but also include people, software, abstract
information-security programs, etc., but do not consider human factors. concepts, etc.
An employee might be inﬂuenced by several factors, such as disgruntlement or overworking. Even if several studies, e.g., Kweon et al. (2019), We use a similar approach to extend the risk framework by including
have been carried out to explore the importance of security awareness other types of threats, as well as by redeﬁning the risk strategy in terms
courses to reduce the risk of social engineering attacks, none of them, of risk and security controls implementation cost.
to the best of our knowledge, integrates employee satisfaction programs
in the risk management process. Many works conﬁrm the relationship 4.2. Risk and security risk strategy
between job satisfaction and performance. A crucial research study by
Vincent et al. (1960) explores the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that For each goal threat, we can deﬁne an asset risk given by the product
inﬂuence job motivation. Job dissatisfaction and overworking can in- between threat probability and threat impact. The total risk is given by
crease human error and lead to malicious behaviors, thus introducing Equation (9):
security risks. For this reason, it is important to conduct surveys that 𝑁𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 𝑁𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡
 ∑ ∑
estimate the employees’ job satisfaction level as well as their burnout 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 = 𝑃 (𝑇𝑖 ) × 𝐼(𝐴𝑗 ) (9)
level (Kappala, 2015). In Section 4.7 we show how it is possible to ex- 𝑖=0 𝑗=0

tend CIS Critical Security Controls in order to include insider threats. Each asset (𝐴𝑗 ) can be aﬀected by 𝑁𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 goal threats, and each goal
 One more weakness of BRMF derives from the approach used to threat 𝑇𝑖 has a 𝑃 (𝑇𝑖 ) probability, obtained after the inference of
relate security controls to security risks. Namely, in BRMF, security con- the Bayesian Threat Graph generated by the implementation of Algotrols reduce the damaging impact. Still, it is unclear how is it possible rithm 1.
to estimate how much a security control reduces the impact of an attack. The accurate evaluation of the risk reduction by applying security 4.3. An algorithm to estimate the best risk strategy
controls is an open research question. Still, it is important to underline
that security controls reduce threat probability rather than threat im- The aforementioned deﬁnitions allow us to deﬁne an algorithm to
pact. Based on these considerations, we can simplify the approach by evaluate the best security controls selection under budget constraints
inferring the reduced threat probabilities of a Bayesian Graph when a (Algorithm 1).
subset of the available security controls is applied. In our approach, we
compute the risk by multiplying the threat probability by the threat Algorithm 1 Bayesian reduced threat algorithm.
impact. To summarize, we design a model that: Require: 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ : the threat graph.
 Require: 𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 : the number of risk strategies
 1: 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠 ← 𝐸𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦𝑆𝑒𝑡()
 • extends the attack concept by including other threat scenarios, e.g.,
 2: for 𝑖 < 𝑁𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑒𝑠 do
 weak credentials, sensitive data exposure, social engineering at- 3: 𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠(𝑖)
 tacks, etc.; 4: 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑦𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡)
 • deﬁnes an alternative approach to evaluate the best security con- 5: 𝑏𝑡𝑔 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝐵𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ(𝑠𝑢𝑏𝑠𝑒𝑡, 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ)
 6: 𝑀𝑎𝑘𝑒𝐼𝑛𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝑏𝑡𝑔)
 trols combination through the risk analysis obtained by generating
 7: 𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 = 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠(𝑏𝑡𝑔)
 Bayesian graphs having reduced Conditional Probability Tables 8: for all 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠 do
 (CPTs); 9: 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐴𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡𝐹 𝑟𝑜𝑚𝐺𝑜𝑎𝑙(𝑔)
 • evaluates threat probabilities based on cyber incident trends , as well 10: 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 ← 𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑡.𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠()
 11: 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏 ← 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝑃 𝑟𝑜𝑏(𝑔)
 as threat impact based asset values;
 12: 𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠.𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘(𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠, 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏))
 • includes insider threats in the model by adding speciﬁc security con- 13: end for
 trols capable of addressing them. 14: 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 ← 𝑆𝑢𝑚(𝑇 ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘𝑠)
 15: 𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑖, 𝑇 𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘)
 16: 𝑖←𝑖+1
4. Towards an enriched risk management framework for insider
 17: end for
threats

 The deﬁned algorithm allows selecting the risk strategy that max-
 In this section, we propose a risk management framework that gen- imizes risk reduction. As explained in Section 2.2.1, it is possible to
eralizes both threat and security metrics used in the BRMF attack graph select the strategy depending on either risk reduction or budget conby also including insider threats. straints. For each risk strategy, a Bayesian Threat Graph is generated
 (Line 6). The implemented security controls reduce the threat probabilities vector, thus also reducing risk. For each goal threat, the risk
4.1. Beyond BRMF limits
 associated with the related assets is estimated by using Equation (8)
 (Line 11).
 A relevant recent work (Erola et al., 2022) inspired us to devise a In the previous section, we have observed that a threat has several
generalized BRMF model. In their study, Erola et al. (2022) design a preconditions that inﬂuence its probability. In the same way as BRMF,
system to evaluate Cyber Value-at-Risk in networked architectures. The we do not formalize the relationship between the preconditions and the
approach is interesting under several perspectives: probability. The analysis of these relationships would be too complex
 and depends on the speciﬁc threat as well as the context in which the
 model is applied. As in almost all of the cited related works, we assume
 2 Oﬃcially the Escal Institute of Advanced Technologies. SANS stands for that the implementation of a security control is a boolean condition
SysAdmin, Audit, Network, and Security. that can either protect a system or not. Another important assumption

 9
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 4.5. Unintentional insiders

 An unintentional insider might expose sensitive data, disable a security control and/or send sensitive data to the wrong recipients. These
 events introduce threats into the system. Hence, they can be modeled
 as preconditions that depend on unintentional human errors that cause
 security ﬂaws.

 Insider Threat Consideration 3 (Unintentional insider threats). An employee could make unintentional mistakes that generate security ﬂaws
 exploitable by an attacker, i.e., initial threat preconditions.

 Fig. 6 shows that a human error on tasks aﬀecting security generates an initial threat precondition (i.e., a “security ﬂaw”). Unintentional
 mistakes can be inﬂuenced by several factors. The impact of factors on
 human errors can be computed using known approaches with some variations. Firstly, “unawareness” should be considered as a potential factor,
 which could be mitigated thanks to security training courses. Secondly,
 when considering the impact of human error on security, it is important
 to account for the number of security tasks over the total tasks assigned
 to the employee. The human error model gives an indication of the general error that an employee might commit during the execution of an IT
 task. If 𝑁𝑆𝐸𝐶 is the number of tasks that aﬀect security and 𝑁𝑇 𝑂𝑇 is the
 total number of tasks assigned to the employee, the probability that an
 employee’s human error aﬀects security (i.e., the threat precondition)
 Fig. 5. Hacked insider.
 is given by:
 𝑁𝑆𝐸𝐶
is that security controls are immune from vulnerabilities, while they 𝑃 (𝑆𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐹 𝑙𝑎𝑤) = 𝑃 (𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟) ⋅ (10)
 𝑁𝑇 𝑂𝑇
might potentially introduce further threats into the system. For example,
the IT administrator might set default credentials, and/or a monitoring Several authors explored models for human error estimation. Reason
system might itself present vulnerabilities. In our model, insiders can (2000) analyzes human error through both a person and a system apbe often represented as non-technical attackers with system privileges proach and explores the risks of mishaps in clinical practice. Yazdanhigher than external attackers. For the sake of completeness, we remark parast et al. (2018) propose an optimization-based resource allocation
that an even worse situation is the one in which the insider also has algorithm that includes human error factors. Human error is also investitechnical skills. In such a case, the insiderness (i.e., the fact that higher gated through biological models. Holroyd and Coles (2002) investigated
privileges do exist) property translates into the most impactful conse- the neural basis of human errors, and recent studies have devised prequences on the security of an organization. diction models by using biological information. Though, in Section 5
 Namely, we model an insider threat as an attacker that satisﬁes the we do not leverage any advanced human error probability model, but
“insiderness” property. rather consider the precondition as a boolean variable. As part of our
 future work, we will focus on applying such error models in order to
 evaluate their eﬀectiveness in quantifying security risks introduced by
Insider Threat Consideration 1 (Insiderness property). The insiderness
 human errors.
property is a threat precondition that enables an attacker to access the
system with higher privileges than external actors.
 4.6. Malicious insiders

 As an insider threat is a company employee, they introduce non- Malicious insiders are internal attackers who introduce vector
technical threats into the system. They might exﬁltrate data without threats that depend on their system privileges. The “malicious intention”
exploiting vulnerabilities, while also bypassing monitoring systems and is the main precondition for this threat. Such a precondition depends
hence reducing the eﬀectiveness of the implemented security controls. on several factors, like behavioral, personal, social, and psychological
 ones.
4.4. Hacked insiders
 Insider Threat Consideration 4 (Malicious insider). A malicious insider
 Hacked insiders are easily represented in our model by introducing is an attacker that satisﬁes the insiderness property.
the “hacked” threat precondition. An attacker that hacks an employee
changes the BTG state, enabling new threats inside the system. Fig. 7 shows the relationship between the insiderness property,
 namely, an insider threat precondition, and several triggering factors.
 The insiderness property can be ascribed to several factors, such
Insider Threat Consideration 2 (Hacked user). A hacked user is an
 as personal problems, disgruntlement, OCEAN personal traits (see Secinitial threat precondition for an attacker that has been able to hack an
 tion 3), etc. Unfortunately, no study carefully analyzes this relationship.
employee of the target organization by defeating the security controls
 Current works are ineﬀective in discovering the triggering factors that
applied to the employee’s system.
 inﬂuence the behavior of an employee. Martinez-Moyano et al. (2008)
 proposed an interesting dynamic model that we are going to explore
 Fig. 5 shows an example of an external attacker that compromises an in order to integrate such a relationship into our framework. The ininternal user, thus enabling a “hacked user” initial threat precondition. siderness level might be obtained by conducting employee satisfaction
Such a precondition allows the attacker to obtain higher privileges in surveys (Popovic et al., 2015). It is essential to underline that external
the system, hence enabling privileged threat paths. attackers also have a personality, might have personal problems, and,

 10
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Fig. 6. Human error and initial threat condition.

 Fig. 7. Insiderness triggering factors.

depending on the person’s relationship with the organization, might Fig. 8 summarizes the aforementioned considerations. Insiderness,
also be disgruntled (e.g., a disgruntled customer). However, we do not security ﬂaws, and hacked users can be modeled as threat preconinclude these factors in the model as we assume that external entities, ditions. In this way, it is possible to integrate insider threats into a
i.e., attackers with partial or no access to the system, already have ma- uniﬁed model, i.e., the threat graph. In the use case scenario prolicious intentions. We were interested in modeling which factors turn posed in Section 5, we will treat insider threat preconditions as boolean
an employee into a malicious employee, as those users have higher variables. As a future improvement, we will try to reﬁne such an asprivileges in the system. For this reason, we deﬁne the “insiderness” sumption by leveraging the recent work conducted by Greitzer et al.
property and relate it to the previously illustrated triggering factors. In- (2021).
siders have speciﬁc features. For sure, more attack paths are available to
them thanks to their facilitated access to the network. It would anyhow
 4.7. Security controls for insider threats
be interesting to extend this concept to the wider category of supplychain attacks (Warren and Hutchinson, 2000). It would anyhow be
interesting to extend this concept to the wider category of supply-chain As anticipated in Section 3.3.1, CIS Critical Security Controls do not
attacks (Reason, 2000). In Section 6 we will explore this topic in more include non-technical controls. Therefore, we extend them in order to
detail. model security controls for insider threats.

 11
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Table 4
 Reduction percentage per security control for addressed threats.

 SC Name % Reduction
 𝑁3_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃3
 CIS_03 Data Protection (𝑁3_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁3 +𝐹 𝑃3 )
 𝑁𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖𝑔𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
 CIS_04 Secure Conﬁguration of Enterprise Assets and Software 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
 (𝑁5_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃5 )
 CIS_05 Account Management (𝑁5_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁5 +𝐹 𝑃5 )
 (𝑁6_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃6 )
 CIS_06 Access Control Management (𝑁6_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁6 +𝐹 𝑃6 )
 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
 CIS_07 Continuous Vulnerability Management 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
 (𝑁9_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃9 )
 CIS_09 Email and Web Browser Protections (𝑁9_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁9 +𝐹 𝑃9 )
 (𝑁10_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃10 )
 CIS_10 Malware Defenses (𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁10 +𝐹 𝑃10 )
 (𝑁13_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 −𝐹 𝑃13 )
 CIS_13 Network Monitoring and Defense (𝑁𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 +𝐹 𝑁13 +𝐹 𝑃13 )
 𝑁𝑐𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑑_𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
 CIS_14 Security Awareness and Skill Training 𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
 CIS_16 Application Software Security 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
 𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠
 OTH_04 Technical training for unskilled IT personnel and 𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠
 software developers
 Fig. 8. Insider threats and threat graph.

Table 3 • 𝐹 𝑃𝑖_𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑠 : false positives, i.e., the number of alerts erroneously trig-
Security controls for the proposed use case. gered by CIS_i;
 • 𝐹 𝑁𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 : false negatives, i.e., the number of security incidents
 CIS Security Name
 Control
 not detected by CIS_i;
 • 𝑇 𝑃𝑖_𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠 : true positives, i.e., the number of security incidents
 CIS_01 Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets
 detected by CIS_i;
 CIS_02 Inventory and Control of Software Assets
 CIS_03 Data Protection • 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the total number of services in a system;
 CIS_04 Secure Conﬁguration of Enterprise Assets and Software • 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 : the total number of applications in a system;
 CIS_05 Account Management • 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the number of vulnerable services in a system;
 CIS_06 Access Control Management
 • 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 : the number of vulnerable applications in a sys-
 CIS_07 Continuous Vulnerability Management
 CIS_08 Audit Log Management
 tem;
 CIS_09 Email and Web Browser Protections • 𝑁𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓 𝑖𝑔𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 : the number of misconﬁgured services in a sys-
 CIS_10 Malware Defenses tem;
 CIS_11 Data Recovery • 𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠 : the number of employees who have fallen victim of
 CIS_12 Network Infrastructure Management
 a test phishing campaign;
 CIS_13 Network Monitoring and Defense
 CIS_14 Security Awareness and Skill Training • 𝑁𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑜𝑦𝑒𝑒𝑠 : the total number of employees.
 CIS_16 Application Software Security
 CIS_17 Incident Response Management These metrics might be obtained by analyzing historical security in-
 OTH_01 Employee rewards cidents and performing security audits on the company. For example,
 OTH_02 Employee engagement survey for the reduction of employees’
 disgruntlement level
 vulnerability assessment activities help determine both 𝑁𝑣𝑢𝑙𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠
 OTH_03 Implementation of a process for reducing employees’ turnover and 𝑁𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑠𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑠 , while controlled phishing sessions might be conducted
 OTH_04 Technical training for unskilled IT personnel and software to compute 𝑁𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑣𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑠 . For each security control, we deﬁne a fordevelopers mula that represents the reduction percentage of the addressed threat.
 Table 4 shows the security controls and reduction formulae for addressed threats. We exclude CIS_01, CIS_02, CIS_15, and CIS_18
Insider Threat Consideration 5 (Security controls for insider threats).
 from the list since such controls are related to asset inventory and Pen-
The security controls should include organizational processes for adetration Testing activities. As it is impossible to evaluate the threats
dressing employees’ disgruntlement and overworking conditions.
 without knowing assets, data, and security ﬂaws, we consider them
 as “precondition controls” that are mandatory in order to implement
 In order to address insider threats, we include four additional se- a security risk management process. With regard to OTH_01, OTH_02
curity controls (OTH_01 through OTH_04) besides those provided by and OTH_03, they are missing in Table 4 since it is challenging to de-
SANS (CIS_01 through CIS_17). Table 3 lists the security controls ﬁne a quantitative metric to evaluate their eﬀectiveness. We aim to
considered for the proposed use case. further explore such a problem in future works. The reduction percent-
 Each CIS_i represents one of the Critical Security Controls pro- age reported for these indicators in the third column of Table 9 when
vided by SANS, while every OTH_i is a security control that we have discussing the proposed use case is a heuristic currently based on our
included to address insider threats. As already stated in Section 2.2.1, it practical experience.
is crucial to deﬁne SMART metrics to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the
implemented security controls. In order to achieve such an evaluation, 4.8. Enriched Bayesian risk management framework
Viegas and Kuyucu (2022) suggest a list of Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs). These KPIs can be used to estimate the security control eﬀective- Fig. 9 shows the enriched model. To summarize, the main diﬀerness against the addressed threats. It is possible to map each security ences from the BRMF are the following:
control onto these metrics and deﬁne formulae that combine them to
assess the threat probability reduction. Namely, we deﬁne the follow- • Host vulnerabilities are replaced by a threat model that embodies
ing relevant SMART metrics: both internal and external threats;
 • CVSS Base and Environmental Metrics are replaced with goal threat
 • 𝑁𝑖_𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 : the number of incidents detected by CIS_i; ﬁnancial losses (i.e., the costs associated with cyber incidents) and

 12
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Fig. 9. Enriched Bayesian Risk Management Framework.

 data company information, namely the estimated value of the com- the process used to ﬁnd both threats and probabilities. Table 5 summapany data; rizes the required parameters to use the model.
 • Employee information such as employee satisfaction or overworking are considered relevant factors to estimate threat probabilities 5.1.1. Cyber incidents extraction by year
 and generate the BTG; We downloaded the VERIS framework in CSV format (Veris csv
 • The security control selection criteria algorithm is changed, by re- database, 2008). The ﬁle contains 9135 rows, where each row repreplacing Bayesian Decision Networks with Bayesian Threat Graphs sents a security incident and is composed of 2550 columns, namely the
 having cumulative threat probabilities reduced through the imple- security incident metrics. We ﬁltered out the incidents notiﬁed in 2020,
 mentation of diﬀerent risk strategies. i.e., the entries with the “plus.timeline.notiﬁcation.year” equal to 2020.
 With this approach, we ended up with 272 incident entries.
5. Use case and performance considerations
 5.1.2. Threat identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation
 In this section, we show a practical example of how it is possible to For each security incident, we analyzed the most interesting metrics
use the enriched Bayesian Risk Management framework to manage risk and created the threat model illustrated in Table 6.
inside a company. We describe a process to model threats and calculate Threats might be caused by either an internal actor or an external
the parameters required by our model. Then, we describe an application one. We identiﬁed 19 external threats and 9 internal threats. Internal
of the model through a simple use case scenario. Finally, we give an threats can either be caused by a human error (see, e.g., TID_06), or
insight into the performance issues of the proposed framework. by intentional action (see, e.g., TID_04). Some threats could be considered both internal and external, such as TID_05, TID_09 and TID_11.
 Though, we consider them as external only, as all these internal cases
5.1. Process to identify threats and parameters are included in the generic internal threat TID_04. We distinguish between TID_11 (web vulnerabilities) and TID_05 (service vulnerabilities)
 To identify the threats and model parameters, we decided to use because TID_11 is related to the exploitation of web application vulthe VERIS framework (The veris framework, 2022). The Vocabulary for nerabilities, which is a well-conﬁned domain including speciﬁc threats,
Event Recording and Incident Sharing (VERIS) collects several metrics attacks, and countermeasures (Auricchio et al., 2022). Web server vulthat allow to describe cyber incidents in a structured and repeatable nerabilities are indeed included in TID_05. In Section 2.2, we group
manner. The metrics provide useful insights about the occurred cyber- threats into vector and goal threats. By analyzing the VERIS dataset, we
incidents. Some metrics describe the used vectors. For example, the observed two primary goal threats:
“threat variety” metric provides information about the deployed malware, while the “pattern” ﬁeld describes the techniques used to perform • Data exﬁltration (TID_17), caused by several vector threats, such as
the attack. Another important metric reports whether the cyber incident vulnerabilities that disclose data or even administrators that errowas caused by an internal actor or an external one. Hereafter we explain neously expose a sensitive data storage.

 13
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

Table 5
Model parameters for the proposed use case.

 Model parameter Description Used criteria

 Threat model A set of threats that includes internal actors Analyze the VERIS framework metrics of the cyber incidents for a particular year to
 deﬁne threats

 Global threat probability The probability that a threat in the model will occur Divide the number of security incidents caused by the threat by the total number of
 occurred incidents

 Financial Impact The ﬁnancial damage induced by the threat Examine the ﬁnancial losses caused by the threats in the year

 Security Controls The defensive mechanisms that reduce threat impact Use CIS critical security controls for external threats. Include further special controls
 to address insider threats

 Security Controls Costs The costs of implementing the security controls Estimate the average costs for buying security products and hiring cybersecurity
 personnel.

Table 6 Table 8
Identiﬁed Threats. Threat probabilities for vector threats.

 Threat ID Threat Actor Threat ID Threat # of incidents Prob.

 TID_01 Sensitive data storage erroneously exposed Internal (error) TID_01 Sensitive data storage erroneously exposed 67 0.2463
 TID_02 Ransomware deployment External TID_03 Skimming device installation 3 0.0110
 TID_03 Skimming device installation External TID_04 Employee abuses privileged access 20 0.0735
 TID_04 Employee abuses privileged access Internal TID_05 Service Vulnerability 19 0.0698
 TID_05 Service Vulnerability External TID_06 Sensitive information erroneously disclosed 7 0.0257
 TID_06 Sensitive information erroneously disclosed by e-mail Internal (error) by e-mail
 TID_07 Employee account breach External TID_07 Employee account breach 34 0.1250
 TID_08 Spear phishing External TID_08 Spear phishing 7 0.0257
 TID_09 Production data in weak test applications External TID_09 Production data in weak test applications 1 0.0036
 TID_10 Stolen sensitive asset External TID_10 Stolen sensitive asset 13 0.0477
 TID_11 Web vulnerability External TID_11 Web vulnerability 64 0.2352
 TID_12 Resource saturation through traﬃc External TID_12 Resource saturation through traﬃc 1 0.0036
 TID_13 Attacker discovers weak passwords External TID_13 Attacker discovers weak passwords 4 0.0147
 TID_14 Legacy environment exploitation External TID_14 Legacy environment exploitation 2 0.0073
 TID_15 Credential stuﬃng External TID_15 Credential stuﬃng 10 0.0368
 TID_16 Fraud-based identity stealing External TID_16 Fraud-based identity stealing 1 0.0037
 TID_17 Data exﬁltration from a company asset External TID_18 Hacking Mobile Application 2 0.0073
 TID_18 Hacking Mobile Application External TID_19 Password easily guessable by internal users 1 0.0037
 TID_19 Password easily guessable by internal users Internal TID_20 Sensitive data on USB pen 1 0.0037
 TID_20 Sensitive data on USB pen Internal TID_21 Data loss or destruction due to IT error 2 0.0073
 TID_21 Data loss or destruction due to IT error Internal TID_22 Social engineering attack to spoof identity 1 0.0037
 TID_22 Social engineering attack to spoof identity External TID_23 Erroneous disclosure through social media 5 0.0184
 TID_23 Erroneous disclosure through social media Internal TID_24 Business e-mail compromise attack 2 0.0073
 TID_24 Business e-mail compromise attack External TID_25 External partner breach and access to 3 0.0110
 TID_25 External partner breach and access to customer data Internal customer data
 TID_26 Scamming External TID_26 Scamming 1 0.0037
 TID_27 E-mail attachment containing a virus External TID_27 E-mail attachment containing a virus 1 0.0037

Table 7 5.1.4. Security controls
Threat probabilities for goal threats. As stated in Section 4.7, we consider the SANS Critical Security
 Threat ID Threat # of incidents Prob. Controls to address threats. In order to take into account human error,
 overworking, and disgruntlement factors, we integrate the above men-
 TID_17 Data exﬁltration from a company asset 59 0.2169
 TID_02 Ransomware deployment 213 0.7830 tioned controls with four non-technical additional ones. Some security
 controls address speciﬁc threats, while others cover all of them, thus
 reducing both the security incident and operational costs required to ei-
 • Ransomware (TID_02), i.e., cyber-attacks that encrypt systems and ther restore the infrastructure or increase the intruder detection level.
 exﬁltrate sensitive data by blocking the company unless a ransom To obtain the reduction percentage for each security control, we assign
 is paid. values to the involved SMART metrics by following the approach de-
 ﬁned in Section 2.2.1. Table 9 lists the proposed security controls, the
The remaining 25 threats are considered vector threats, i.e., threats that addressed threats, and the threat reduction percentage obtained in this
allow triggering goal threats. way.
 A realistic security cost estimation is challenging. Indeed, we were
 not able to estimate the threat reduction for CIS_08 and CIS_17. Cur-
5.1.3. Threat probability and impact rent studies are focused on ﬁnding the security incident costs. Though,
 To evaluate the threat probabilities, we divide the number of cyber they do not clarify how is it possible to evaluate the real Return On Inincidents caused by the threat by the total number of cyber incidents. vestment (ROI) deriving from the application of security controls that
Tables 7 and 8 show the global probabilities for goal and vector threats, address threats. In this use case, we use average costs retrieved from
respectively. several enterprise sources to evaluate hardware, software, and security
 As stated in Section 2, threat impact is computed based on Equa- controls’ implementation costs (Data, 2021). Such costs should also intion (8). Each goal threat impacts a single asset. We consider the num- clude employee satisfaction survey processes (Bjarnar, 2021), security
ber of impacted records to estimate the damage induced by the threat. training courses (TrustNet, 2022) and security personnel salaries (Cours-

 14
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 Fig. 10. Use case scenario.

Table 9 Table 10
Security controls for the proposed use case. Costs associated with Devices and Processes.

 CIS Security Control Addressed Threats Reduction Device / Process Cost Periodicity

 CIS_03 TID_06, TID_09, TID_10 0.9 Firewall 5000 Installation and subscription
 CIS_04 TID_05 0.6 Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) 12 Monthly Cost per device
 CIS_05 TID_07 0.7 E-mail protection 4 Monthly Cost per user
 CIS_06 TID_04 0.75 Security training costs 2000 Annual cost per 50 employees
 CIS_07 TID_11, TID_05 0.4 Employee satisfaction survey 6000 Annual cost per 50 employees
 CIS_08 All N.A. Technical training for unskilled IT 2000 Annual cost per 50 employees
 CIS_09 TID_11 0.9 personnel and software developers
 CIS_10 TID_02 0.72 Device Management 9 Monthly Cost per device
 CIS_11 All 1 Identity and Access Management (IAM) 4 Monthly Cost per user
 CIS_12 TID_11, TID_05 0.95 Web Application Firewall (WAF) 4000 Installation and subscription
 CIS_13 All 0.95
 CIS_14 TID_08, TID_10, TID_15, TID_23, TID_08, TID_11 0.3
 CIS_16 TID_11 0.7 5.2. Use case scenario
 CIS_17 All N.A.
 OTH_01 TID_04 0.2
 OTH_02 TID_04 0.2 Fig. 10 leverages a use case scenario to show the eﬀectiveness of the
 OTH_03 TID_01 0.2 enriched BRMF model. It is important to underline that we focus on a
 OTH_04 TID_01, TID_11 0.4 simple scenario not taking into account all possible situations and thus
 showing a few limitations. Though, as we will better discuss hereafter,
 through the application of speciﬁc optimization strategies it is possiera, 2022). This is a strong simpliﬁcation as these costs are unreliable
 ble to signiﬁcantly reduce the level of complexity of a real-world use
and depend on several conditions, such as the region, the country, the
 case by properly grouping employees, assets and vulnerabilities into seadopted software, etc. Further studies are required to formalize a for- mantically homogeneous clusters. In Section 6 we will point out these
mula that allows computing security costs in a proper way. Table 10 limitations and propose approaches for increasing the eﬀectiveness of
lists the estimated costs of implementing security controls. the model.

 15
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

 The network is composed of a DMZ (“Demilitarized Zone”) and an Table 11
internal network. The DMZ contains a company website, a data stor- Best ﬁrst ﬁve risk reduction strategies.
age (namely, an elasticsearch server), and a DNS server, while a File # Implemented security controls Cost Risk reduction
Server is deployed in the internal network. In this example, we con-
 195 CIS_10, CIS_12, OTH_03, OTH_04 114, 000 29.33
sider three users with diﬀerent privileges and personal characteristics. 227 CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_14, OTH_03, OTH_04 115, 000 29.48
Daniel is an “aware” employee, i.e., he is less subject to phishing at- 211 CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_16, OTH_03, OTH_04 118, 000 29.34
tacks, but he is also disgruntled for several reasons. Charlie is a satisﬁed 4291 CIS_04, CIS_10, CIS_12, OTH_03, OTH_04 118, 500 29.33
employee, but he is “unaware”, i.e., he has no knowledge about the se- 243 CIS_10, CIS_12, CIS_14, CIS_16, OTH_03, OTH_04 119, 000 29.49
curity risks of using a weak password or opening a suspicious email. We
state that Charlie has the “unawareness” property. Anna is the company’s system administrator, and manages the entire infrastructure. She
is skilled and aware of phishing problems, but she has to deal with an
overload of work, so she is subject to the “human error” property. There
are also two attackers. The technical attacker can exploit vulnerabilities,
but he/she has only access to the DMZ, while the non-technical attacker
has physical access to Daniel’s workstation, so he/she can install a skimming device or steal the computer. In this scenario, we consider a subset
of the threats reported in Table 6. The steps needed to implement the
process are listed below:

 1. generate a threat graph by connecting technical, non-technical, and
 advanced threats with involved entities on the basis of their skills;
 2. apply threat probabilities that will be used to generate the initial
 Bayesian Threat Graph (i.e., the one in which threats are not mitigated through the application of security controls);
 3. apply all the security control combinations and generate the related Bayesian Threat Graphs (i.e., the ones in which threats are
 mitigated through the application of speciﬁc combinations of secu-
 Fig. 11. Bayesian Risk Management Framework: Cost vs risk reduction analysis.
 rity controls);
 4. obtain the goal threat probabilities and compute both the risk and
 the related cost is 285, 500. Though, it is also possible to establish alterthe risk strategy implementation cost in order to properly select the
 native criteria for reducing risk. For example, based on the maximum
 most suitable risk strategy.
 risk reduction achieved by implementing all security controls, we could
 select the risk strategy that reduces risk by at least 29% while minimiz-
 We adapt MulVAL (Ou et al., 2005) to model the rules deﬁned above
 ing cost. We can ﬁlter out strategies that do not meet the risk reduction
and generate a threat graph. MulVAL utilizes two ﬁles: the former, i.e.,
 requirement and rank the remaining combinations in ascending order
“rules.P”, which deﬁnes the rules that model threats (namely, rule_inof cost. In the proposed use case, there are 657 combinations of secuteractions), as well as their preconditions, modeled as primitives. The
 rity controls that reduce risk by at least 29%. Table 11 shows the top
latter, i.e., “input.P”, describes the conditions applied to our scenario.
 ﬁve combinations in ascending order of cost.
MulVAL focuses on technical vulnerabilities. Though, it contains a Pro-
 As it can be observed from the table, these combinations have an
log environment that allows deﬁning custom rules. We deﬁne rules that
 excellent risk reduction and allow for a cost reduction of about 60%
include insider threat preconditions, such as “insiderness” and “human
errors”. For example, a human error is a precondition for TID_02 (i.e., compared to the implementation of the comprehensive risk strategy.
sensitive information erroneously disclosed by email). The threat graph Results indicate that the exclusive implementation of non-technical seand security controls illustrated in Table 9 are used as input for Algo- curity controls (e.g., customer satisfaction surveys) or technical controls
rithm 1. For clarity purposes, we model high-level threats and do not (e.g., Malware Defenses) is not the best risk strategy to adopt. In fact,
consider the internal resources, such as ﬁle storage paths or NFS server the combination of both kinds of security controls gives the best results
folders. We just focus on host permissions. We assume that ‘exec’ permis- in terms of performance.
sion includes read and write ones. An important consideration concerns It is also possible to make graphic considerations which help strike
probabilities. Namely, the Bayesian Threat Graph converts primitives a balance between risk reduction percentage and related cost. Fig. 11
into probabilities. With BRMF, authors use the “vulExists” primitive to relates the normalized cost to the risk reduction percentage. Each point
assign probabilities to the Bayesian Attack Graph. Since we need to represents a subset of the implemented security controls. It is possible
link vulnerabilities to threats, we add primitives that model the vec- to observe that security controls can be grouped into ﬁve clusters based
tor threats. In this way, we can identify vector threats in the Bayesian on a clearly identiﬁable range of risk reduction percentage. Depending
Threat Graph. We implemented the use case example and pushed the on the selected range of risk reduction percentage, it is possible to sesource code to Github (Gx1, NdA994, Ns-unina/insiderthreats, 2022). lect the risk strategy implementation with the lowest cost in the group.
We used MulVAL to create the threat graph, and the PyAgrum library For the largest percentage of risk reduction (i.e., ∼30%) the minimum
(Ducamp and Gonzales, 2020) to generate the Bayesian Threat Graph. normalized cost is 0.4, or, likewise, the total cost is reduced by 60%,
Several classes and methods have been implemented to model the risk, as observed in the previous analysis. In contrast, the range that mincalculate the CPTs recursively, and implement Algorithm 1. After ex- imizes cost is the one that reduces the security risk by less than 5%.
ecuting the algorithm, the cost for implementing security controls is Therefore, when selecting the security risk strategy, it is crucial to ﬁnd
computed, together with the residual risk for each implementation of a compromise between risk reduction and implementation cost.
the security strategy. When all the values are computed, the most appropriate risk strategy can be selected based on various criteria. The 5.3. Security practitioner considerations
strategy that maximizes security risk reduction is, of course, the one
that implements all security controls. In our case study, the risk reduc- Cybersecurity risk management models aim to provide an accurate
tion deriving from implementing all security controls is 29.65%, and representation of a company, but they are susceptible to errors. One of

 16
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

the main challenges lies in the uncertainty surrounding various factors, human error rates. Examples of such methodologies include the Techparticularly those related to insiders. Consequently, our model may not nique for Human Error-Rate Prediction (THERP), Cognitive Reliability
fully capture the actual security risks faced by the company. and Error Analysis Method (CREAM), Technique for Human Error As-
 In this section, we provide guidance for security experts who wish to sessment (THEA), Cause Based Decision Tree (CBDT), and others (Liu
implement our model within their organizations. This guidance oﬀers et al., 2021). Security experts can assess employees’ tasks and detervaluable insights into eﬀectively incorporating our model into existing mine if they involve security risks, and then implement the appropriate
risk management processes. methodologies for speciﬁc personnel.
 Insiderness is a particularly challenging parameter, and it will be
5.3.1. Security controls costs and ﬁnancial losses thoroughly explored in future works. In particular, one relevant recent
 In order to implement the model, it is essential to estimate the study by Greitzer et al. (2021) will be used as a basis for further recosts associated with security controls and the ﬁnancial losses resultsearch. As a practical approach, anonymous surveys can be conducted
ing from a cyber attack. The costs of security controls can generally be
 to analyze employees’ satisfaction and estimate the psychological facdetermined with relative certainty, as they involve hardware, software,
 tors that inﬂuence insider threats. Surveys can be administered to each
services, and the expenses related to security teams, solution deploydepartment within the company, and the insiderness properties can be
ment, and maintenance.
 grouped based on employees belonging to the same department, allow-
 On the other hand, estimating ﬁnancial losses is often challenging
 ing for the estimation of the risk of malicious behaviors. However, the
and prone to inaccuracies. In Section 2.2.2, we propose an approach to
estimate the ﬁnancial loss per asset, drawing upon established formulae relationship between an insider’s malicious behavior and attack triggers
from existing literature. However, it is important to note that these for- (as a function of psychological, social and behavioral factors) remains a
mulae may not fully capture the actual ﬁnancial losses experienced by subject of ongoing study.
the company. Certain costs can be estimated more accurately, such as
the direct costs associated with system recovery, legal expenses, and the
 5.3.4. Security controls
economic impact resulting from service disruptions. Simulations, such
 The parameter of security controls’ threat probability reduction
as backup recovery tests, can help estimate the cost of system recovery. However, there are other costs that are diﬃcult to predict, such as poses challenges in terms of precise deﬁnition. While several studies
the reputational damage leading to decreased sales and customer dis- have attempted to deﬁne formulae, it is diﬃcult to precisely quantify
satisfaction following a data breach. Companies often employ business the eﬀectiveness of security controls.
teams to develop forecasting models to monitor customer satisfaction One approach to address this challenge is to conduct a security asand implement marketing strategies. These strategies may involve dis- sessment with enabled security controls. For example, the eﬀectiveness
tributing customer questionnaires to gather feedback and enhance the of a security training course can be evaluated by comparing the results
quality of services. Cybersecurity experts can collaborate with these of a phishing test conducted before and after the training. The diﬀerence
business teams to develop forecasting models that attempt to estimate in the number of compromised employees can indicate the eﬀectiveness
the ﬁnancial losses that would arise if a data breach aﬀects customers’ of the training course. Similarly, for antivirus and security monitoring
data. Gathering customers’ feedback regarding the impacts of a data solutions, simulated ransomware attacks and penetration tests can be
breach can be particularly valuable in forecasting ﬁnancial losses. conducted both with and without the controls enabled. The reduction
 In summary, it is crucial for security experts to work closely with in the occurrence of related threats can provide a percentage estimation
business teams to enhance the accuracy of threat impact assessments of the controls’ eﬀectiveness.
and estimate ﬁnancial losses more eﬀectively. It is important to note that these solutions may require signiﬁcant
 costs and time investments, and careful consideration should be given
5.3.2. Threats to selecting the most appropriate methods based on the speciﬁc context
 Estimating threat probabilities is a common challenge in cybersecu- and needs of the organization.
rity risk management processes. To address this, cybersecurity experts
often employ multiple-choice surveys to assess the likelihood and/or
impact of threats. These surveys are distributed among various groups 5.3.5. Cyclical feedback loop process to improve accuracy
within the company and provide either qualitative assessments (e.g., After a security breach, it is crucial for companies to undergo a
high, medium, low probability) or quantitative values (e.g., 10%, 25%) “learned experience” step where security experts thoroughly investigate
that can be used for risk assessment. the errors that led to the incident, analyze the eﬀectiveness of security
 In the previous section, we suggested using the VERIS database to controls, and take steps to enhance the overall cybersecurity posture
estimate threat probabilities. However, it is important to note that the of the organization. This event provides an opportunity to review and
information available in public data sources may not accurately reﬂect
 reﬁne all the parameters of the proposed framework.
the speciﬁc situation of the company. Therefore, it is crucial for secu-
 Following a breach, the company can gather valuable information
rity experts to integrate public data with surveys conducted within the
 regarding inaccurate parameters such as indirect costs, human errors,
company to obtain estimations that are contextualized and tailored to
 and insiderness. This information can be used to adjust and ﬁne-tune the
the organization’s speciﬁc circumstances. By combining external data
 parameters, resulting in more accurate risk values. The eﬀectiveness of
sources with internal surveys, a more accurate assessment of threat
 security controls and their reduction parameters can also be reevaluated
probabilities can be achieved.
 and optimized. Additionally, the costs associated with implementing
5.3.3. Insiders threats security controls can be assessed and made more eﬃcient.
 The estimation of insider threats’ parameters, such as human er- It is important to acknowledge that despite the suggestions provided
ror and insiderness probability, poses signiﬁcant challenges. Further in this section, there may still be limitations and inaccuracies, particuresearch is needed to establish the link between human errors, insider- larly when it comes to insider parameters. However, by continuously
ness, and security risks. In Section 6, we outline several future research learning from security incidents and reﬁning the framework, organizadirections in this regard. tions can make progress in reducing the impact of inaccurate factors.
 However, security practitioners can begin adopting the framework In Section 6, we present future research ideas that aim to further
through practical approaches. For addressing human errors, an eﬀec- improve the framework and address the challenges related to parameter
tive approach is to implement established methodologies for predicting accuracy.

 17
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

5.4. Considerations about time and space complexity for these nodes, which can hence be removed from the network. Anyway, this approach might in some cases prove to be over simplistic and
 The proposed framework requires the inference computation on thus aﬀect the realism of the model.
Bayesian Belief Network, that is known to be an NP-hard problem
(Dagum and Luby, 1993). In this section, we show that it is possible Optimization Criterion 2. Consider category classes instead of single
to overcome the problem by adopting several criteria. Though, it is im- elements.
portant to underline that the primary goal of this work is to describe the
model. Hence, we will not herein discuss performance issues in detail. In the proposed models the network complexity depends on the num-
A scaling solution that implements the suggested optimization criteria ber of employees, assets and vulnerabilities. Instead of considering the
will be proposed in future works. total number of employees and assets, we might leverage the concept of
 ‘categories’. For employees, it would be possible to use company busi-
5.4.1. Attack graph generation performance ness areas, such as Human Resources (HR), Marketing, Research and
 To generate the attack graph we adapted MulVAL for the creation of Development (R&D). As to assets, it would be possible to categorize
the threat graph. Although MulVAL is extensively used in the research them by considering their importance in terms of key features like, e.g.,
ﬁeld (Tayouri et al., 2022), it is subject to several performance limita- the number of sensitive records associated with them.
tions. The proposed optimization criterion should be applied by minimiz-
 Wang et al. (2019) underline that MulVAL cannot be used in large ing the diﬀerence between the posterior probability of the categorized
scale network environments. In our model the presence of a large num- model and that of the original one. In future works we will explore
ber of employees and/or assets exponentially increases the graph gen- clustering techniques to deﬁne the optimal number of categories that
eration time. A few optimization strategies can be leveraged in order to minimize such an error.
face this issue, as discussed below.
 Several authors create algorithms that can be used to eﬃciently gen- 5.4.3. Security controls and performance
erate an attack graph (Ou et al., 2006; Chokshi et al., 2012; Albanese et Algorithm 1 iterates over an exponential number of security conal., 2012). In these works, authors propose algorithms that have poly- trol combinations, therefore it is computationally expensive. However,
nomial complexity both in time and space. Though, such approaches each risk strategy performance computation of a single iteration is inshould be thoroughly validated through solid experimental campaigns dependent from the others. Therefore, it is possible to apply parallel
aimed at assessing their scalability in real-world complex scenarios. computing techniques (Shukur et al., 2020) to increase performance.
 Previous works are focused on the automatic generation of attack Another approach could be to store pre-computed risk strategy tables
graphs from data sources, without considering potential performance for speciﬁc threat models. Finally, one might think of applying machine
issues. To the best of our knowledge, there is no study that explores learning techniques to infer the relationships between threat graphs, sesuch a challenging problem. In future works we intend to tackle this curity controls and risk strategy. This is a fundamental issue for future
issue by investigating scalable approaches to the generation of attack research that needs to be further investigated.
graphs. To the purpose, state-of-the-art solutions will be both evaluated
and integrated in our framework.
 5.4.4. Future evolutions of the model
 According to the previous observations, future works will investigate
5.4.2. Bayesian complexity state-of-the-art solutions and explore new techniques to:
 To address the mentioned NP-hard problem, several authors propose
model variations that eﬀectively improve performance. Amongst the • reduce time and space complexity for threat graph computation;
most promising proposals we ﬁnd approximate inference algorithms, • reduce time and space complexity of the inference algorithms;
such as Loopy Belief Propagation (Murphy et al., 2013) or sampling • explore the application of optimization criteria to reduce the
inference (which uses sampling to compute the posterior probability). treewidth of the threat graph;
More recent works propose innovative approaches to address mem- • analyze parallel computing approaches to decrease the exponential
ory and time issues. Byun et al. (2019) propose a new matrix-based complexity of Algorithm 1.
data structure for discrete Bayesian Networks that improves memory
usage. Jongsawat and Premchaiswadi (2013) show that it is possible We plan to realize a framework able to overcome MulVAL’s limits
to compute an exact inference by leveraging the MapReduce program- in terms of time and space complexity. We also intend to explore the
ming model to run parts of the original network in parallel. Michiels integration of state-of-the-art inference algorithms on Bayesian Belief
et al. (2021) oﬀer a public framework for learning Bayesian Networks Networks to reduce the complexity associated with inference computathat can scale to tens of thousands of nodes while providing fast and tion. Finally, we will investigate if it is possible to adopt the proposed
friendly user experience. These approaches can be integrated into our optimization criteria by minimizing the diﬀerence with respect to the
framework to model realistic use-cases with large networks. The exist- posterior probabilities of the original model.
ing exact Bayesian network inference algorithms share the property of
run time exponentiality in the size of the largest clique of the trian-
 6. Conclusions
gulated moral graph, which is also called the induced width (i.e., the
treewidth) of the graph (Corneil and Rotics, 2005). For this reason, it is
 In this paper, we have presented a Risk Management framework
crucial to ﬁnd out criteria that reduce the treewidth of the network. We
 based on Bayesian Networks to evaluate the risk associated with both
propose two criteria to reduce the network complexity.
 internal and external threats. We have extended the work from Khosravi and Bafghi (2020) in order to include several types of threats not
Optimization Criterion 1. Use boolean assumptions to reduce model caused by security ﬂaws. We have provided deﬁnitions that formalcomplexity. ize the risk management process and demonstrated how it is possible
 to model an insider threat as a special type of attacker that can per-
 In the use case we proposed above, several properties can be rep- form non-technical attacks, too. To deﬁne a risk strategy, we have used
resented as boolean conditions. This is, e.g., the case of both “human several types of security controls based on SANS CIS Critical Security
error” and “insiderness”. These assumptions reduce the network com- Controls. We have underlined the importance of alternative defensive
plexity. Indeed, we do not have to compute the posterior probability approaches, such as technical training sessions to reduce human error

 18
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

and employee satisfaction surveys to decrease employees’ disgruntle- However, current datasets do not provide enough information to dement. Finally, we have deﬁned a performance indicator to select a ﬁne these relationships properly. All this to say that the role of insider
risk strategy, i.e., a subset of implemented security controls that max- threats in risk management is still an unexplored ﬁeld. We do hope that
imizes the security beneﬁts while also minimizing the probability of this work will oﬀer useful insights to colleagues interested in investigatgoal threats. We have provided a use case scenario that shows an ap- ing such a challenging research ﬁeld.
plication example of the framework by using the VERIS set of metrics
as a basis for the deﬁnition of the proposed threat model. Although the CRediT authorship contribution statement
use case described in Section 5 is a simplistic representation of an IT
system, it shows several aspects of our model. Future works will enrich Nicola d’Ambrosio: Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Valthe threat model and automate the generation of probabilities from the idation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Gaetano Perrone:
VERIS framework. Estimating threat probabilities by just relying on the Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation,
security incidents contained within the VERIS framework can indeed Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Sibring to unreliable results. Hence, we envision to include other datasets mon Pietro Romano: Methodology, Project administration, Superviin our framework, like, e.g., the one proposed by Abbiati et al. (2021), sion, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
which integrates several datasets in order to provide statistically significant observations. Further works will extend the threat model and the Declaration of competing interest
list of security controls, by exploring alternative classiﬁcation schemes.
As repeatedly underlined herein before, the use of attack graphs oﬀers a The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
number of beneﬁts. However, as MulVAL is based on ﬁrst-order logic, it interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
has a few intrinsic limitations for modeling complex scenarios. In fact, the work reported in this paper.
for such scenarios, the number of required rules grows exponentially.
For this reason, we will investigate alternative approaches to model the Data availability
attacker’s behavior. For example, second-order and higher-order logic
(Väänänen, 2021) might reduce the model’s complexity through the Data are public available and I share the code and results through
utilization of either universal or existential quantiﬁers to model both the GitHub platform.
threats and assets. In Section 4.6, we have deﬁned the malicious insider and underlined that malicious insider attack paths could involve Funding
wider categories, such as supply-chain attacks. With the supply-chain,
we can spot situations in which increased privileges do exist. Let’s ﬁgure This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agenout, as an example, an external consultant who has access to a sys- cies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
tem on a customer’s premises. It is in theory possible to generalise the
currently adopted concept of “insiderness” by deﬁning a generic “dis- References
gruntlement” property that enables critical threats against a system in
case the disgruntled entity (either an internal or an external one) also Abbiati, G., Ranise, S., Schizzerotto, A., Siena, A., 2021. Merging datasets of CyberSecurity
holds increased privileges allowing them to carry out a successful attack. incidents for fun and insight. Front. Big Data 3. https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2020.
 521132.
This is for sure among the concepts we will further explore in our fu-
 Advisen, 2019. https://www.advisenltd.com/data/cyber-loss-data/. (Accessed 28 April
ture work. The threat impact evaluation deﬁned in Equation (6) could 2021).
also be subject to relevant improvements. In fact, we have used the Al-Mhiqani, M.N., Ahmad, R., Abidin, Z.Z., Yassin, W., Hassan, A., Abdulkareem, K.H.,
logarithmic relationship between the number of records stored into an Ali, N.S., Yunos, Z., 2020. A review of insider threat detection: classiﬁcation, machine
asset and the security incident losses. This relationship might be over- learning techniques, datasets, open challenges, and recommendations. Appl. Sci. 10
 (15), 5208. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10155208.
simplistic, as it does not consider several factors, like, e.g., the fact that
 Albanese, M., Jajodia, S., Noel, S., 2012. Time-eﬃcient and cost-eﬀective network harddiﬀerent assets might contain records having diﬀerent sensitivity and, ening using attack graphs. In: IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
consequently, diﬀerent values. We are aware that this work is a prelimi- Systems and Networks (DSN 2012), pp. 1–12.
nary step toward a complete Risk Management framework that includes Ammann, P., Wijesekera, D., Kaushik, S., 2002. Scalable, graph-based network vulnerability analysis. In: Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communiinsider threats. Further studies will need to be undertaken to reﬁne
 cations Security, CCS ’02. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
the model. In Section 5.3, we have provided suggestions for security pp. 217–224.
practitioners aiming at integrating our framework into their companies. Auricchio, N., Cappuccio, A., Caturano, F., Perrone, G., Romano, S.P., 2022. An automated
Although companies could beneﬁt from the framework, the prioritized approach to web oﬀensive security. Comput. Commun. 195, 248–261. https://doi.
risk strategies could not be optimal, as many factors required to run org/10.1016/j.comcom.2022.08.018.
 Axelrad, E.T., Sticha, P.J., Brdiczka, O., Shen, J., 2013. A Bayesian network model for
the algorithm may be inherently inaccurate. In order to address the ispredicting insider threats. In: 2013 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, pp. 82–89.
sue, companies should monitor the frameworks’ risk strategy outputs Behbehani, D., Rajarajan, M., Komninos, N., Al–Begain, K., 2022. Detecting open bankand ﬁne-tune them according to their business needs. The framework ing api security threats using Bayesian attack graphs. In: 2022 14th International
could also beneﬁt from well-known methodologies developed to man- Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN),
 pp. 789–796.
age the input uncertainty, such as sensitivity analysis (Saltelli, 2002). In
 Bishop, M., Engle, S., Frincke, D.A., Gates, C., Greitzer, F.L., Peisert, S., Whalen, S., 2010.
future works, we will assess the framework through sensitivity analysis A risk management approach to the “insider threat”. In: Insider Threats in Cyber
and Monte Carlo simulation and evaluate the impact of variables’ un- Security. Springer US, pp. 115–137.
certainty. We also intend to implement the framework in companies in Bjarnar, 2021. The cost of outsourcing an employee survey. https://www.driveresearch.
order to obtain eﬀective feedback from security risk management teams com/market-research-company-blog/the-cost-of-outsourcing-an-employee-survey/,
 online; 10-Apr-2022.
and thus improve the overall method.
 Byun, J.-E., Zwirglmaier, K., Straub, D., Song, J., 2019. Matrix-based Bayesian network for
 The work lets several questions open. We ask ourselves whether is eﬃcient memory storage and ﬂexible inference. Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 185, 533–545.
it possible to model the relationship between OCEAN’s personal, social, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2019.01.007.
behavioral traits and the insiderness property. Recent works provide Cappelli, D.M., Moore, A.P., Trzeciak, R.F., 2012. The CERT Guide to Insider Threats: How
comprehensive insider threats ontologies (Costa et al., 2016; Greitzer to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Information Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage,
 Fraud). Addison-Wesley.
et al., 2018) that could be included in our model in order to enrich its Ceri, S., Gottlob, G., Tanca, L., 1989. What you always wanted to know about datalog
expressiveness. Similarly, we wonder whether is it possible to ﬁnd a re- (and never dared to ask). IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 1 (1), 146–166. https://
liable connection between human error probability and security tasks. doi.org/10.1109/69.43410.

 19
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

Chan, S.H., Yao, L.J., 2005. An empirical investigation of hacking behavior. Rev. Bus. Inf. Lallie, H.S., Debattista, K., Bal, J., 2020. A review of attack graph and attack tree visual
 Syst. (RBIS) 9 (4), 41–58. https://doi.org/10.19030/rbis.v9i4.4443. syntax in cyber security. Comput. Sci. Rev. 35, 100219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Chokshi, I., Ghosh, N., Ghosh, S.K., 2012. Eﬃcient generation of exploit dependency cosrev.2019.100219.
 graph by customized attack modeling technique. In: 2012 18th International Con- Levy, A., 2010. Information in biology: a ﬁctionalist account. Noûs 45 (4), 640–657.
 ference on Advanced Computing and Communications (ADCOM), pp. 39–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0068.2010.00792.x.
Corneil, D.G., Rotics, U., 2005. On the relationship between clique-width and treewidth. Lindauer, B., 2020. Insider threat test dataset. https://doi.org/10.1184/R1/12841247.V1.
 SIAM J. Comput. 34 (4), 825–847. https://doi.org/10.1137/s0097539701385351. Liu, P., Zhang, R., Yin, Z., Li, Z., 2021. Human Errors and Human Reliability.
Costa, D., Albrethsen, M., Collins, M., Perl, S., Silowash, G., Spooner, D., 2016. An insider John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, pp. 514–572. Ch. 20. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
 threat indicator ontology. Tech. Rep. CMU/SEI-2016-TR-007, Software Engineering com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9781119636113.ch20. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
 Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/ abs/10.1002/9781119636113.ch20.
 library/asset-view.cfm?AssetID=454613. Logan, P.Y., Clarkson, A.C., 2020. Enhancing information security: a qualitative risk anal-
Coursera, 2022. Cybersecurity analyst salary guide: how much can you make? https:// ysis method for overcoming the insider threat. In: Modern Organizations Through
 www.coursera.org/articles/cybersecurity-analyst-salary, online; 10-Apr-2022. Information Technology.
Cyentia, 2020. Information risk insights study. Tech. rep. Cyentia Institute. Magklaras, G., Furnell, S., Brooke, P., 2006. Towards an insider threat prediction spec-
Dagum, P., Luby, M., 1993. Approximating probabilistic inference in Bayesian belief iﬁcation language. Inf. Manag. Comput. Secur. 14 (4), 361–381. https://doi.org/10.
 networks is NP-hard. Artif. Intell. 60 (1), 141–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/0004- 1108/09685220610690826.
 3702(93)90036-b. Martinez-Moyano, I.J., Rich, E., Conrad, S., Andersen, D.F., Stewart, T.R., 2008. A behav-
Data, P., 2021. How much does cyber security cost? Common cyber security expenses & ioral theory of insider-threat risks: a system dynamics approach. ACM Trans. Model.
 fees. https://www.provendatarecovery.com/blog/cyber-security-cost-expenses-fees/, Comput. Simul. 18 (2). https://doi.org/10.1145/1346325.1346328.
 online; 10-Apr-2022. Mathew, S., Upadhyaya, S., Ha, D., Ngo, H.Q., 2008. Insider abuse comprehension
Deng, S., Zhang, J., Wu, D., He, Y., Xie, X., Wu, X., 2023. A quantitative risk assessment through capability acquisition graphs. In: 2008 11th International Conference on Inmodel for distribution cyber-physical system under cyberattack. IEEE Trans. Ind. In- formation Fusion, pp. 1–8.
 form. 19 (3), 2899–2908. https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2022.3169456. Michiels, M., Larrañaga, P., Bielza, C., 2021. Bayesuites: an open web frame-
Doran, G.T., 2008. There’s a s.m.a.r.t. way to write managements’s goals and work for massive Bayesian networks focused on neuroscience. Neurocomputobjectives. https://community.mis.temple.edu/mis0855002fall2015/ﬁles/2015/10/ ing 428, 166–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.11.066. https://www.
 S.M.A.R.T-Way-Management-Review.pdf, online; 25-Apr-2022. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231220318609.
Ducamp, G., Gonzales, C., 2020. Wuillemin, agrum/pyagrum: a toolbox to build mod- Munoz-Gonzalez, L., Sgandurra, D., Barrere, M., Lupu, E.C., 2019. Exact inference techels and algorithms for probabilistic graphical models in python. In: Jaeger, M., niques for the analysis of Bayesian attack graphs. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 Nielsen, T.D. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Probabilis- Comput. 16 (2), 231–244. https://doi.org/10.1109/tdsc.2016.2627033.
 tic Graphical Models. In: Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, vol. 138, Munshi, A., Dell, P., Armstrong, H., 2012. Insider threat behavior factors: a comparison
 pp. 609–612. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v138/ducamp20a.html. of theory with reported incidents. In: 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on
Erola, A., Agraﬁotis, I., Nurse, J.R., Axon, L., Goldsmith, M., Creese, S., 2022. A system to System Sciences, pp. 2402–2411.
 calculate cyber value-at-risk. Comput. Secur. 113, 102545. https://doi.org/10.1016/
 Murphy, K., Weiss, Y., Jordan, M.I., 2013. Loopy belief propagation for approximate
 j.cose.2021.102545.
 inference: an empirical study. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1301.6725. https://
Frigault, M., Wang, L., 2008. Measuring network security using Bayesian network-based
 arxiv.org/abs/1301.6725, 2013.
 attack graphs. In: 2008 32nd Annual IEEE International Computer Software and Ap-
 National vulnerability database, 2022. https://nvd.nist.gov/. (Accessed 9 March 2022).
 plications Conference, pp. 698–703.
 Nurse, J.R.C., Buckley, O., Legg, P.A., Goldsmith, M., Creese, S., Wright, G.R.T., Whitty,
Ghazo, A.T.A., Ibrahim, M., Ren, H., Kumar, R., 2020. A2g2v: automatic attack graph
 M., 2014. Understanding insider threat: a framework for characterising attacks. In:
 generation and visualization and its applications to computer and SCADA networks.
 2014 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE, pp. 214–228.
 IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 50 (10), 3488–3498. https://doi.org/10.1109/
 NVD, 2021a. Cve-2021-41773. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVEtsmc.2019.2915940.
 2021-41773, online; 17-Apr-2023.
Greitzer, F., Purl, J., Leong, Y.M., Becker, D.S., 2018. Soﬁt: sociotechnical and organiza-
 NVD, 2021b. Cve-2021-44228. https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVEtional factors for insider threat. In: 2018 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW),
 2021-44228, online; 17-Apr-2023.
 pp. 197–206.
 Ou, X., Govindavajhala, S., Appel, A.W., 2005. MulVAL: a logic-based network secu-
Greitzer, F.L., 2019. Insider threats. In: Proceedings of the Northwest Cybersecurity Symrity analyzer. In: 14th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 05), SSYM’05.
 posium. ACM, pp. 1–8.
 USENIX Association, p. 8.
Greitzer, F.L., Purl, J., Sticha, P.J., Martin, C.Y., Lee, J.D., 2021. Use of expert judgments
 Ou, X., Boyer, W.F., McQueen, M.A., 2006. A scalable approach to attack graph generto inform Bayesian models of insider threat risk. J. Wirel. Mob. Netw. Ubiquitous
 ation. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM Conference on Computer and Communica-
 Comput. Dependable Appl. 12 (2), 3–47. https://doi.org/10.22667/JOWUA.2021.06.
 tions Security, CCS ’06. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
 30.003.
 pp. 336–345.
Gx1, NdA994, Ns-unina/insiderthreats, 2022. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.
 Palsson, K., Gudmundsson, S., Shetty, S., 2020. Analysis of the impact of cyber events
 6471205. https://zenodo.org/record/6471205.
Holroyd, C.B., Coles, M.G.H., 2002. The neural basis of human error processing: rein- for cyber insurance. Geneva Pap. Risk Insur., Issues Pract. 45 (4), 564–579. https://
 forcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related negativity. Psychol. Rev. 109 doi.org/10.1057/s41288-020-00171-w.
 (4), 679–709. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.109.4.679. Pearl, J., 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible In-
Jacob, 2014. Analyzing ponemon cost of data breach. https://datadrivensecurity.info/ ference. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
 blog/posts/2014/Dec/ponemon/, online; 10-Apr-2022. Phillips, C., Swiler, L.P., 1998. A graph-based system for network-vulnerability analysis.
Jajodia, S., Noel, S., O’Berry, B., 2005. Topological analysis of network attack vulnerabil- In: Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop on New Security Paradigms, NSPW ’98. Assoity. Springer US, Boston, MA, pp. 247–266. ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 71–79.
Jongsawat, N., Premchaiswadi, W., 2013. Solving the NP-hard computational problem in Poolsappasit, N., Dewri, R., Ray, I., 2012. Dynamic security risk management using
 Bayesian networks using apache hadoop MapReduce. In: 2013 Eleventh International Bayesian attack graphs. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 9 (1), 61–74.
 Conference on ICT and Knowledge Engineering. IEEE, pp. 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/tdsc.2011.34.
Joshi, C., Aliaga, J.R., Insua, D.R., 2021. Insider threat modeling: an adversarial risk Popovic, B., Radojka, M., Paunović, T., 2015. Employee satisfaction survey in function of
 analysis approach. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16, 1131–1142. https://doi.org/ business improvement. Manag. - J. Theory Pract. Manag. 20, 31–40. https://doi.org/
 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3118886. 10.7595/management.fon.2015.0021.
Kammuller, F., Probst, C.W., 2017. Modeling and veriﬁcation of insider threats using Reason, J., 2000. Human error: models and management. BMJ 320 (7237), 768–770.
 logical analysis. IEEE Syst. J. 11 (2), 534–545. https://doi.org/10.1109/jsyst.2015. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.320.7237.768.
 2453215. Roll, L.C., Ling Siu, O., Li, S.Y., Witte, H.D., 2019. Human error: the impact of job inse-
Kappala, M., 2015. Employee Satisfaction Survey. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing. curity on attention-related cognitive errors and error detection. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Kaynar, K., 2016. A taxonomy for attack graph generation and usage in network security. Public Health 16 (13), 2427. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16132427.
 J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 29, 27–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2016.02.001. Ross, R., 1916. An application of the theory of probabilities to the study of a pri-
Khosravi-Farmad, M., Ghaemi-Bafghi, A., 2020. Bayesian decision network-based security ori pathometry.—part i. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A, Contain. Pap. Math. Phys.
 risk management framework. J. Netw. Syst. Manag. 28 (4), 1794–1819. https://doi. Character 92 (638), 204–230. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1916.0007. https://
 org/10.1007/s10922-020-09558-5. royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspa.1916.0007.
Kritzinger, D., 2017. Fault tree analysis. In: Aircraft System Safety. Elsevier, pp. 59–99. Rothmann, S., Coetzer, E.P., 2003. The big ﬁve personality dimensions and job perfor-
Kweon, E., Lee, H., Chai, S., Yoo, K., 2019. The utility of information security training and mance. SA J. Ind. Psychol. 29 (1). https://doi.org/10.4102/sajip.v29i1.88.
 education on cybersecurity incidents: an empirical evidence. Inf. Syst. Front. https:// Saito, Y., Anuardi, M.N.A.M., Matsubara, R., Sugaya, M., 2021. Preliminary analysis of
 doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019-09977-z. human error prediction model by using biological information. In: Engineering Psy-
Lallie, H.S., Debattista, K., Bal, J., 2018. An empirical evaluation of the eﬀectiveness of chology and Cognitive Ergonomics. Springer International Publishing, pp. 324–335.
 attack graphs and fault trees in cyber-attack perception. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Saltelli, A., 2002. Sensitivity analysis for importance assessment. Risk Anal. 22 (3),
 Secur. 13 (5), 1110–1122. https://doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2017.2771238. 579–590. https://doi.org/10.1111/0272-4332.00040.

 20
N. d’Ambrosio, G. Perrone and S.P. Romano Computers & Security 133 (2023) 103410

SANS, 2008. About sans institute. https://www.sans.org/about/?msc=main-nav, online; Xiong, W., Lagerström, R., 2019. Threat modeling – a systematic literature review. Com-
 15-Apr-2023. put. Secur. 84, 53–69.
SANS, 2021. The cis critical security controls, version 8. https://www.cisecurity.org/ Yazdanparast, R., Hamid, M., Azadeh, M.A., Keramati, A., 2018. An intelligent algorithm
 controls/v8, online; 07-Apr-2022. for optimization of resource allocation problem by considering human error in an
Sarkar, K.R., 2010. Assessing insider threats to information security using technical, emergency department. Int. J. Ind. Syst. Eng. 11, 287–309.
 behavioural and organisational measures. Inf. Secur. Tech. Rep. 15 (3), 112–133. Yuan, F., Cao, Y., Shang, Y., Liu, Y., Tan, J., Fang, B., 2018. Insider threat detection with
 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2010.11.002. deep neural network. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer International
Sawilla, R.E., Ou, X., 2008. Identifying critical attack assets in dependency attack graphs. Publishing, pp. 43–54.
 In: Computer Security - ESORICS 2008. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 18–34. Zenitani, K., 2023. Attack graph analysis: an explanatory guide. Comput. Secur. 126,
Shukur, H., Zeebaree, S.R.M., Ahmed, A.J., Zebari, R.R., Ahmed, O., Tahir, B.S.A., Sadeeq, 103081. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.103081.
 M.A.M., 2020. A state of art survey for concurrent computation and clustering of par- Zhang, C., Wang, S., Zhan, D., Yu, T., Wang, T., Yin, M., 2021. Detecting insider threat
 allel computing for distributed systems. J. Appl. Sci. Technol. Trends 1 (4), 148–154. from behavioral logs based on ensemble and self-supervised learning. Secur. Commun.
 https://doi.org/10.38094/jastt1466. Netw. 2021, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/4148441.
Stone, A.G., 2021. The role risk-management plays in reducing insider threat’s in the
 federal government. Inf. Secur. J.: Glob. Perspect., 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1080/
 19393555.2021.1998735. Gaetano Perrone is currently CTO at SECurity Solutions for
Tayouri, D., Baum, N., Shabtai, A., Puzis, R., 2022. A survey of mulval extensions Innovation (SECSI), a company based in Naples focused on reand their attack scenarios coverage. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2208.05750. searching innovative solutions in the network security domain.
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05750, 2022. Passionate in any area related to network security, cloud computing, and software development, he completed a Ph.D. degree in
The veris framework, 2022. https://veriscommunity.net/. (Accessed 9 April 2022).
 computer engineering and systems from the University of Naples
TrustNet, 2022. Security awareness training cost. https://www.trustnetinc.com/securityin 2022. He continues conducting research in fuzzing, knowledge
 awareness-training/, online; 10-Apr-2022. graph, and reinforcement learning domains to automate, formal-
Tuor, A., Kaplan, S., Hutchinson, B., Nichols, N., Robinson, S., 2017. Deep learning for un- ize and increase the eﬀectiveness of security testing approaches.
 supervised insider threat detection in structured cybersecurity data streams. https://
 doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1710.00811.
 Simon Pietro Romano (Member, IEEE) is currently a Pro-
Väänänen, J., 2021. Second-order and higher-order logic. In: Zalta, E.N. (Ed.), The Stanfessor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Inforford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2021 edition. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanmation Technology, University of Napoli Federico II. He teaches
 ford University.
 computer networks, computer architectures, network security,
Veris csv database, 2008. https://github.com/vz-risk/VCDB/blob/master/data/csv/vcdb. and telematics applications. He is also the Co- Founder of Meetecsv.zip, online; 9-Apr-2022. cho, a startup and university spin-oﬀ dealing with scalable video
Verizon, 2021. 2021 data breach investigations report, online; 01-Jan-2022. streaming and WebRTC-based uniﬁed collaboration, as well as
Viegas, V., Kuyucu, O., 2022. Security metrics. In: IT Security Controls. Apress, of SECurity Solutions for Innovation (SECSI) that focuses on
 pp. 221–244. network security. He actively participates in Internet Engineer-
Vincent, M.J., Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., Snyderman, B.B., 1960. The motivation to work. ing Task Force (IETF) standardization activities, mainly in the
 Am. Sociol. Rev. 25 (2), 288. https://doi.org/10.2307/2092643. applications and real time (ART) area. (Based on document published on 10 November
Wang, C., Li, K., Tian, Y., He, X., 2019. Network risk assessment based on improved Mul- 2020.)
 VAL framework and HMM. In: Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences,
 Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering. Springer International Pub- Nicola d’Ambrosio is currently an Ph.D. student at the Delishing, pp. 298–307. partment of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology,
Wang, L., Noel, S., Jajodia, S., 2006. Minimum-cost network hardening using attack University of Napoli Federico II. He worked as free-lance infrasgraphs. Comput. Commun. 29 (18), 3812–3824. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom. tructural penetration testing with SecSI, a startup and university
 2006.06.018. spin-oﬀ that focuses on network security. He was also a tutor for
Warren, M., Hutchinson, W., 2000. Cyber attacks against supply chain management sys- Cyber HackAdemy, a professional cybersecurity course.
 tems: a short note. Int J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 30 (7/8), 710–716. https://
 doi.org/10.1108/09600030010346521.
Wing, J., 1990. A speciﬁer’s introduction to formal methods. Computer 23 (9), 8–22.
 https://doi.org/10.1109/2.58215.
Wong, K., Chan, A.H.S., Ngan, S.C., 2019. The eﬀect of long working hours and overtime on occupational health: a meta-analysis of evidence from 1998 to 2018. Int. J.
 Environ. Res. Public Health 16 (12), 2102. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16122102.

 21