IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023 791

 Machine Learning-Powered Encrypted Network
 Traffic Analysis: A Comprehensive Survey
 Meng Shen , Member, IEEE, Ke Ye, Xingtong Liu, Liehuang Zhu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Jiawen Kang , Member, IEEE, Shui Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Qi Li , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Ke Xu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Traffic analysis is the process of monitoring network I. I NTRODUCTION
activities, discovering specific patterns, and gleaning valuable
 ITH the rapid increase of Internet traffic, the secuinformation from network traffic. It can be applied in various
fields such as network assert probing and anomaly detection.
With the advent of network traffic encryption, however, traffic
 W rity of network connections becomes significantly
 crucial, as a large amount of user sensitive information
analysis becomes an arduous task. Due to the invisibility of packet is transmitted on the Internet, such as bank accounts and
payload, traditional traffic analysis methods relying on captur- payment records. To ensure security and privacy, data encryping valuable information from plaintext payload are likely to lose
efficacy. Machine learning has been emerging as a powerful tool tion technologies, e.g., Secure Socket Layer/Transport Layer
to extract informative features without getting access to payload, Security (SSL/TLS) [1], have been widely used to protect
and thus is widely employed in encrypted traffic analysis. In this network connections. According to the Google Transparency
paper, we present a comprehensive survey on recent achievements Report [2], more than 95% of services provided by Google
in machine learning-powered encrypted traffic analysis. To begin
with, we review the literature in this area and summarize the
 have applied encryption protocols to protect their connecanalysis goals that serve as the basis for literature classification. tions, so that the resulting data packets are transmitted in a
Then, we abstract the workflow of encrypted traffic analysis with more secure way and can only be decrypted by legitimate
machine learning tools, including traffic collection, traffic repre- receivers.
sentation, traffic analysis method, and performance evaluation. The ever-growing encrypted traffic, however, brings new
For the surveyed studies, the requirements of classification granularity and information timeliness may vary a lot for different challenges to network traffic analysis, which is a useful tool for
analysis goals. Hence, in terms of the goal of traffic analysis, we administrators in network management and network anomaly
present a comprehensive review on existing studies according to detection. Traditional traffic analysis methods usually rely
four categories: network asset identification, network characteri- on valuable information from plaintext payload [11]. They
zation, privacy leakage detection, and anomaly detection. Finally,
 are likely to lose efficacy for encrypted traffic, as payload
we discuss the challenges and directions for future research on
encrypted traffic analysis. information is no longer available. For instance, many attackers take advantage of encryption protocols to hide malicious
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic analysis, traffic classification,
machine learning, deep learning, anomaly detection. contents and evade anomaly detection. It becomes more difficult for network administrators to find suspicious patterns
 in encrypted traffic. As another example, internet service
 Manuscript received 20 January 2022; revised 23 May 2022 and 28 July
2022; accepted 16 September 2022. Date of publication 20 September 2022;
 providers (ISPs) usually measure delivery quality (e.g., video
date of current version 24 February 2023. This work was supported in part resolution, stall frequency) of video streams by analyzing conby the National Key Research and Development Program of China under tents in HTTP request header [12], [13] and then take actions
Grant 2020YFB1006101; in part by NSFC Projects under Grant 62222201,
Grant 62102099, Grant 62132011, Grant 61972039, and Grant 61932016; accordingly. However, end-to-end encryption adopted by conin part by the Beijing Nova Program under Grant Z201100006820006; in tent providers sets a new barrier for ISPs to measure video
part by the China National Funds for Distinguished Young Scientists under delivery quality.
Grant 61825204; and in part by the Beijing Outstanding Young Scientist
Program under Grant BJJWZYJH01201910003011. (Corresponding author: From the perspective of end users, traffic encryption also
Meng Shen.) poses new threats to user privacy. In general, traffic encryption
 Meng Shen, Xingtong Liu, and Liehuang Zhu are with the protocols (e.g., TLS) can protect Internet users from eaves-
School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of
Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: shenmeng@bit.edu.cn; droppers that attempt to decipher or modify the content in their
liuxingtong@bit.edu.cn; liehuangz@bit.edu.cn). network connections. However, the privacy of end users is still
 Ke Ye is with the School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of
Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail: yeke@bit.edu.cn).
 threatened by advanced side-channel attacks. For instance, an
 Jiawen Kang is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of eavesdropper can record their encrypted traffic and learn sensi-
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: kavinkang@gdut.edu.cn). tive information, such as the websites a user is visiting and the
 Shui Yu is with the School of Computer Science, University of Technology
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia (e-mail: shui.yu@uts.edu.au).
 actions taken by a user in mobile applications [14], [15], [16].
 Qi Li is with the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua Encrypted traffic analysis provides us with a useful tool to get
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: qli01@tsinghua.edu.cn). more insights into the information leakage from network con-
 Ke Xu is with the Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: xuke@tsinghua.edu.cn). nections, and then defenses can be designed and implemented
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/COMST.2022.3208196 accordingly.
 1553-877X 
 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
792 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE I
 T HE D IFFERENCES B ETWEEN OTHER E XISTING W ORKS AND O UR S URVEY

 vision [18], [19], Internet of Things (IoT) [20], economics
 and econometrics [21]. For instance, Bkassiny et al. [17] discuss the role of various machine learning models in cognitive
 radios, which is defined as radio devices that can adapt to
 the environment automatically. Wang et al. [18] provide an
 overview of generative adversarial networks applied in computer vision, including high-quality image generation, diverse
 image generation and stabilizing training. Different from these
 surveys, this survey focuses on the applications of machine
 learning in encrypted traffic analysis.
 There are several surveys on traffic analysis, which are
 summarized in Table I. Buczak and Guven [3] conduct
Fig. 1. Number of investigated papers on encrypted traffic analysis sorted a survey of machine learning and data mining methods
by published year. applied for intrusion detection. Jing et al. [4] focus on the
 Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) and Worm attack detection. Fernandes et al. [5] and Kwon et al. [6] investigate
 To deal with these new challenges caused by traffic encryp- traffic analysis methods for network anomaly detection. These
tion, machine learning techniques have been employed to surveys are not comprehensive enough, as they only conextract useful information from encrypted traffic, with no cern about malicious behavior detection, where most studies
need for access to packet payloads. The machine learning- focus on unencrypted network traffic. Due to the invisibilpowered encrypted traffic analysis leverages statistical features ity of packet payload, methods for unencrypted traffic relying
or behavioral features of encrypted traffic, which are less on plaintext payload signatures are likely to lose efficacy for
affected when encryption protocols are adopted. These meth- encrypted traffic.
ods show great capabilities in dealing with extremely large Several recent surveys pay attention to traffic analysis
amounts of data, which is suitable for building classification methods applicable in the encrypted scenario [7], [8], [9],
models without being specifically programmed. Moreover, as [10]. Among these studies, Conti et al. [9] review the
the branch of machine learning, deep learning obviates the pro- applications of traffic analysis targeting mobile devices, and
cess of manual feature extraction, which makes it a desirable Pacheco et al. [10] review the application of machine learning
approach for encrypted traffic analysis, especially in dealing in traffic analysis, including both unencrypted and encrypted
with the constantly varying traffic patterns. traffic. Numerous recent studies in this field show two research
 There are a fruitful number of studies on encrypted traffic trends: 1) encrypted traffic analysis can find its applications in
analysis during the past decade. We investigated 108 papers a wider range of scenarios in both fixed and mobile networks,
that were published between 2007 and 2021, as depicted in from network asset recognition to network anomaly detection,
Fig. 1. Among the literature investigated, machine learning and 2) deep learning techniques are increasingly employed to
techniques play an important role in encrypted traffic analysis. demonstrate their superiority over traditional machine learning
Therefore, it is quite necessary to conduct a comprehensive models in encrypted traffic analysis. Therefore, compared with
survey that summarizes the recent achievements in machine the existing surveys, we cover an extensive range of applilearning-powered encrypted traffic analysis and sheds a new cations of encrypted traffic analysis based on the advanced
light on future research directions. machine learning techniques.

A. Differences From Existing Surveys
 With the rapid development of machine learning algorithms, B. Contributions
there are many surveys on applications of machine learning in The popularity of encrypted communication makes a survey
various scenarios, including cognitive radios [17], computer dedicated to encrypted traffic analysis necessary. Compared
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 793

Fig. 2. System model of encrypted traffic analysis.

with surveys that have been published on network traffic clas- Next, Section IX elaborates on the challenges and future
sification, we systematically introduce the encryption protocols research directions of encrypted traffic analysis. We still foland pay more attention to the complete workflow of encrypted low the steps in the general framework of encrypted traffic
traffic analysis. Moreover, we focus on machine learning tech- analysis and state the research challenges and opportunities
niques that are widely employed for a variety of analysis in traffic dataset construction, traffic representation, analysis
goals. The main contributions of this survey are summarized model building, and proposed countermeasures.
as follows: Finally, Section X concludes this survey. We summarize
 1) We abstract the workflow of encrypted traffic analy- the achievements made by state-of-the-art on encrypted trafsis from a great amount of concrete traffic analysis fic analysis to highlight the valuable information that can be
 approaches, which presents an overview that helps excavated in traffic encryption scenarios. We also point out
 readers grasp the general process on traffic analysis, potential research directions that require further investigations.
 including traffic collection, traffic representation, traffic
 analysis method design, and performance evaluation. II. OVERVIEW OF E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC A NALYSIS
 2) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to survey In this section, we first introduce a general system model of
 existing studies that employ machine learning techniques encrypted traffic analysis, and then propose a criterion, accordin encrypted traffic analysis. We present a systematic ing to which we can classify existing papers using a layered
 classification of the state-of-the-art methods according structure. The list of common abbreviations and explanations
 to analysis goals, including network asset identification, are summarized in Table II.
 network characterization, privacy leakage detection and
 anomaly detection. This type of organization allows us
 A. System Model
 to exhibit the variety of classification granularity and
 information timeliness among different analysis goals. The system model of encrypted traffic analysis is shown in
 3) We provide further insights into the defects of exist- Fig. 2. Encrypted traffic generated by different kinds of end
 ing studies, and discuss in detail the future research devices, e.g., computers, IoT devices, and mobile phones, is
 challenges and directions on encrypted traffic analy- sent to remote servers, which may pass through the gateway,
 sis, which provides readers with possible directions for firewall, local ISP networks and the Internet. Traffic monitors
 developing innovative solutions. can collect traffic at different points along this path and then
 conduct traffic analysis according to their goals. For example,
 a network administrator may monitor whether the network is
C. Survey Organization under attack by analyzing the traffic passing by the firewall;
 We commence with an overview on the application sce- an attacker can refer from an end user’s traffic which website
narios of encrypted traffic analysis in Section II-B, which or application the user is visiting. Moreover, ISPs can measure
depicts a whole picture according to their analysis goals. In network service quality perceived by end users based on the
Section III-C, we introduce the background of machine learn- traffic traversing their networks.
ing techniques that are commonly used in encrypted traffic
analysis. Then, we present a description of the general frame- B. Taxonomy of Encrypted Traffic Analysis
work of encrypted traffic analysis in Section IV, which serves Considering that a fruitful of papers have been published
as a guideline to review and compare the studies with specific during the last decade, it is challenging to classify these papers
analysis goals. according to appropriate criteria. Structuring the literature in a
 Sections V-VIII introduce recent studies on encrypted traf- comprehensive and clear way is non-trivial, as we would end
fic analysis according to the 4 types of analysis goals. In up with completely different categories according to various
each section, we attempt to extract the information of each classification criteria.
literature following the stages of the general framework in The requirements of classification granularity and
Section IV. By this way, we can observe that the similarities information timeliness may vary between different analand differences thoroughly among the existing studies. ysis goals for the surveyed studies. For instance, network

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
794 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE II
 C OMMON A BBREVIATIONS AND E XPLANATIONS U SED IN T HIS PAPER

Fig. 3. Classification of existing studies on encrypted traffic analysis according to their analysis goals.

attack detection is generally regarded as a binary classifi- malicious attackers can accurately grasp the vulnerabilcation problem (i.e., whether the traffic is malicious) while ities of devices by identifying which version it is. As
website fingerprinting is regarded as a multi-class problem different types of network devices and OS versions may
(i.e., which website the user is visiting). Compared with lead to various characteristics in communication traffic,
website fingerprinting, QoE metric measurement has a higher we can perform network asset identification based on
requirement for real-time performance, since an ISP needs traffic analysis even if the traffic is encrypted. Coupled
to adjust the quality of content transmission according to with the above two aspects, we shall introduce a varithe actual situation. Accordingly, encrypted traffic analysis ety of analysis methods as well as traffic representation
methods highly depend on the analysis goals, including traffic methods.
feature extraction and machine learning model selection. The • Network characterization is to have an understanding of
researchers attempt to optimize their analysis methods to meet service delivery quality and related protocols by anathe requirements of a specific application scenario. Thus, we lyzing the corresponding traffic. Video streaming traffic
group the existing studies by the analysis goals, as illustrated shows a trend of rapid growth, where the demands for
in the hierarchical structure in Fig. 3. At the top level, high bandwidth and low latency increase accordingly.
we identify four macro-goals that correspond to different The control of transmission quality by service providers
application domains, including network asset identification, is inseparable from the perception of user experience.
network characterization, privacy leakage detection, and However, with the adoption of encrypted protocols, such
anomaly detection. At the lower level, several micro-goals are as SSL/TLS and QUIC, video streaming services produce
summarized within each application domain, corresponding an increasing amount of encrypted traffic, leaving limited
to the specific targets. features for network characterization. To solve this issue,
 • Network asset identification targets identifying physical a lot of studies focus on measuring and characterizing
 network equipment and the operating system (OS). On the video-based service delivery quality from encrypted
 the one hand, with an increasing number of network traffic, e.g., the QoE perceived by end users. These chardevices connected to the Internet, it becomes more dif- acteristics can help network providers to figure out the
 ficult for network administrators to fully understand the long-term or short-term quality of their network service
 network assets under their control. On the other hand, and optimize their routing strategies.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 795

 • Privacy leakage detection focuses on the analysis of unlabeled data is less expensive [33]. Reinforcement learning
 information that may be leaked by encrypted traffic. is trained to decide actions yield the most rewards by the trial
 Although the encryption protocols are proposed to pro- and error, which is based on the interactions with environments
 tect the content of traffic packet, there are still differences and past experiences of learning [34].
 in the traffic of different websites or applications, which Taking supervised learning as an example, we introduce
 provides a possible way for privacy leakage, such as what a general model of machine learning. Supervised learning
 website or application a victim is visiting, as well as the uses a training dataset to train a model, which is leveraged
 in-app actions during the visits (e.g., sending an email in for the prediction of the test dataset. For a training dataset
 Gmail [22]). This difference may be reflected in features D = {(xi , yi )}, i = 1, 2, . . . , N , where xi ∈ X denotes an
 such as packet length, peak packet numbers, etc. With this input sample (e.g., an extracted feature vector), and yi ∈ Y
 target, we review three categories of privacy leakage, i.e., denotes an output sample (e.g., a specific label for classi-
 Website Fingerprinting (WF), Application Fingerprinting fication problems). In the training phase, a decision model
 (AF), and user action identification. Ŷ = f (X ) is obtained, which maps the inputs to outputs.
 • Attack detection mainly aims to detect diverse malware Through the training algorithm, the decision model tries to
 and network anomaly. Recently, we have witnessed a minimize the differences between the predicted value yˆi and
 rapid growth of malware targeting PCs, mobile phones the real value y based on a loss function L(yi , f (xi )). The
 and IoT devices, such as WannaCry and Petya. There model that minimizes the loss function is taken as the final
 are also an increasing number of network attacks on decision model f ∗ (X ). In the testing phase, for each sample in
 various platforms, such as enterprise networks, campus the test dataset, the model gives the corresponding prediction
 networks, IoT networks and blockchain networks [23], value.
 [24], [25]. The adoption of encryption techniques makes Inspired by the existing surveys [35], [36], we also consider
 payload-based anomaly detection methods ineffective, as model complexity as another criterion to categorize machine
 the traditional detection methods commonly scan packet learning methods. According to this criterion, machine learncontents to figure out malicious patterns based on the sig- ing can be roughly divided into two categories, namely tradinature library. However, the traffic generated by abnormal tional machine learning methods and deep learning methods.
 behaviors is still different from that of legitimate behav- The main difference of them is that most deep learning methiors, making it possible to distinguish abnormal traffic ods leverage cascades of neural network layers, which contain
 from benign traffic even in an encrypted scenario. nonlinear processing units for feature extraction [37]. In contrast, traditional machine learning methods without nonlinear
 III. BACKGROUND OF M ACHINE L EARNING processing units usually require more feature engineering [38].
 For traffic analysis, feature extraction is a crucial part. To
 As this survey mainly focuses on the application of machine
 improve the accuracy of traffic classification, many studies
learning in encrypted traffic analysis, in this section, we briefly
 focus on how to extract effective semantic information from
introduce the background of machine learning and review
 byte stream to fed into traditional machine learning models.
several commonly-used algorithms.
 However, with the advent of deep learning, feature engi-
 Machine learning aims to build models that can improve
 neering is no longer the only concern. The combination of
the future performance of a target through learning from the
 raw information and neural network models becomes another
past experiences [26], [27], [28], [29], [30]. It is a highly
 way to achieve high accuracy. We observed that feature engiinterdisciplinary field based on other fields such as statisneering combined with traditional machine learning, and raw
tics and optimization theory [31], which serves multiple tasks
 information combined with deep learning are the two common
in different scenarios, e.g., medical industry [32], IoT [20]
 types of approaches for traffic analysis. The former focuses
and financial industry [21]. Machine learning also plays an
 more on the extraction of effective features, while the latter
important role in encrypted traffic classification, which can be
 focuses more on the construction of models with strong feademonstrated by the fact that almost 85% of the studies investure extraction capability. Due to this reason, we will mainly
tigated employ machine learning methods for various analysis
 introduce machine learning according to this criterion.
goals.

A. Categories of Machine Learning Methods B. Traditional Machine Learning Methods
 From the aspect of whether labels are required, machine Typical examples of traditional machine learning methlearning can be classified as supervised learning, unsupervised ods include Naïve Bayes, Markov Model, k-Nearest Neighbor
learning, semi-supervised learning and reinforcement learning. (k-NN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Decision Tree
As for supervised learning, the input data has a pre-determined (DT), Random Forest (RF), and clustering, which are briefly
label, e.g., the type of traffic. The model is trained to achieve described as follows.
a higher level of classification accuracy. For unsupervised • Naïve Bayes [39] method is a classification method based
learning, there is no label for training dataset, the model is on Bayes’ theorem and condition independence. It is
designed by deducing existing patterns of samples [26]. Semi- called naïve because it assumes that the features are
supervised learning is used for the dateset with both labeled independent of each other. It can make probabilistic inferand unlabeled samples, typically most of them are unlabeled as ences for classification and decision-making problems.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
796 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

Fig. 4. A general workflow of encrypted traffic analysis.

 • Markov Model [40] is a stochastic model, which gives We mainly introduce three typical deep learning methods that
 the probabilities of random state changing. It composes are widely employed in encrypted traffic analysis.
 of state, state transition probability, and the initial proba- • Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [46] is a kind of
 bility distribution. The first-order Markov model assumes neural network with convolution operation added, which
 that the current state depends only on the last state and can weaken local features and enhance generalization.
 is irrelevant to the earlier states. The special thing about CNN is that this method has the
 • k-NN [41] is a commonly used supervised learning convolutional layer, which uses the convolution operation
 method. Given the target sample, it finds out the nearest k to filter the input features. Normally, the convolutional
 samples, and predicts the information according to these layer and the pooling layer appear alternately. After the
 neighborhoods. The distant calculation methods include combination of several sets of convolutional and pooling
 Euclidean distance, Manhattan distance, etc. layers, a fully connected layer will be added at the end.
 • SVM [42] is a flexible supervised algorithm for both clas- • Graph Neural Network (GNN) [47] is a deep learning
 sification and regression. In order to solve the complex method that processes the data represented in the graph
 classification problems, SVM uses a kernel function to domain [47]. As an effective graph analysis method, GNN
 map the features of low dimensional space to the higher is widely used in social network and physics system
 one. Common kernel functions include linear kernel, analysis, which leverage graphs as the denotation of the
 polynomial kernel, Gaussian kernel and Sigmoid kernel. relationships underlying data.
 • DT [43] is composed of directed edges and nodes which • Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [48] is a special kind
 include the root node, internal nodes and leaf nodes. The of Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) used to process
 path from the root node to each leaf node corresponds to sequences, which has achieved excellent performances
 a decision sequence. The commonly used algorithms for in the field of natural language processing. LSTM has
 DT are ID3, C4.5 and CART. the ability to selectively remember the previous output
 • RF [44]is a collection of traditional DTs. Given the short- results and superimpose them on different positions of
 coming that DT is easy to overfit, RF adopts the voting the current cell to achieve the purpose of data analysis.
 mechanism based on multiple DTs for improvement. To
 be specific, each tree in RF is trained by a sub dataset
 IV. A G ENERAL F RAMEWORK OF E NCRYPTED
 sampled from the original dataset and then the final result
 T RAFFIC A NALYSIS
 is obtained through the voting of all DTs.
 • k-Means [45] is a commonly used clustering algorithm. In this section, we summarize the general framework of
 It assigns each object to the nearest cluster based on the encrypted traffic analysis. We present the framework overview
 distances from cluster centers, and then recalculates the and then elaborate on each component in the section.
 centers. This process is repeated until convergence and The overview of the general framework of encrypted traffic
 finally all objects are divided into k clusters. analysis is illustrated in Fig. 4, where four components are
 evolved, namely traffic collection, traffic representation, traffic
C. Deep Learning Methods analysis method, and performance evaluation.
 Traditional machine learning technologies are essentially
shallow learning, which has some limitations in terms of accu- A. Traffic Encryption Mechanisms
racy for classification tasks. In particular, their generalization We summarize the encryption protocols and anonymity
abilities are restricted when dealing with complex problems. mechanisms currently used for secure communication before
Hence, deep learning is introduced to address these limitations. introducing each individual component in Fig. 4. Without

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 797

 components including handshake protocol, alert protocol and record protocol. Handshake protocol is mainly
 used for encryption algorithm negotiation, key generation
 and identity authentication. Alert protocol is exploited
 for warning message notification once one of the parties
 discovers the exception. Record protocol is responsible for data translation between communication parties.
 The data is divided into multiple shorter fragments and
 each fragment is compressed separately. Thereafter, the
 compressed fragment will be added with a message
 authentication code which is used to ensure the integrity
 and perform data authentication. Finally, the compressed
 fragment with the message authentication code will be
Fig. 5. Mechanisms in the network model. encrypted together with a symmetric password.
 • SSH [52]. SSH is a security protocol based on the
 application layer, which is designed to provide security
traffic encryption, sensitive information transmitted in clear- for the connection and interaction between the client
text would be effortlessly sniffed by malicious eavesdroppers and remote host, preventing information leakage durwho have access to network interfaces. Moreover, cleartext ing remote access. SSH establishes an encrypted channel
communication provides convenience for intentional attack- between the communicating parties to ensure the confiers inserting false information, which makes communication dentiality of the transmitted information and uses a key
unreliable. Therefore, traffic encryption mechanisms have been exchange algorithm to ensure the security of the key
implemented for communication security guarantees. itself. It mainly consists of three parts including the trans-
 The interaction process of an encryption protocol usu- port layer protocol (SSH-TRANS), user authentication
ally includes two parts: a secure connection establishment protocol (SSH-USERAUTH) and the connection protocol
phase and an encrypted data transmission phase. The secure (SSH-CONNECT).
connection establishment phase mainly includes handshake, • HTTPS [53]. HTTPS is the extension of HTTP by wrapauthentication and encryption algorithm negotiation, which is ping it inside the SSL/TLS protocol, which is used for
the preparation for encrypted data transmission. The encrypted safety communication over the network. Compared with
data transmission phase ensures safe transmission with the use HTTP, HTTPS can be utilized for encrypted transmisof the encryption algorithm negotiated in the previous phase. sion, identity authentication and data integrity protection.
 Next, we introduce mainly used encryption protocols includ- For this reason, HTTPS plays an important role in
ing Internet Protocol Security (IPSec) on the network layer, online activities such as shopping, payment and website
SSL/TLS and Quick UDP Internet Connections (QUIC) browsing.
between the transport layer and application layer, Secure Shell • QUIC [54]. QUIC is a new generation of low-latency
(SSH) and HTTP over Secure Socket Layer (HTTPS) on the network transport layer protocol based on user datagram
application layer as well as anonymity mechanisms such as protocol (UDP), which is similar to TLS implemented
The Onion Router (Tor) in detail. The encryption protocols on TCP. HTTP and several extended protocols are based
and anonymity mechanisms are organized according to their on TCP protocol. However, the TCP protocol requires
positions in the network structure as Fig. 5. three times of handshakes before establishing a connec-
 • IPSec [49].IPSec is a set of network transmission pro- tion. The purpose of QUIC is to reduce network latency
 tocols for network layer communication security, which while ensuring reliability. QUIC needs to complete the
 is utilized for the authentication of communication par- confirmation of packet transmission by itself because
 ties as well as the confidentiality and integrity of the it is built on UDP which is unreliable. Besides, QUIC
 data [50]. IPSec mainly includes Security Association realizes multiplexing without head-of-line blocking and
 (SA), Internet Key Exchange (IKE), Authentication can be used for applications or services with real-time
 header (AH) and Encapsulated Security Payload (ESP). requirements.
 • SSL/TLS [1]. SSL locates between a reliable connection- • Tor [55]. Tor is an open-source and free anonymous
 oriented network layer protocol and an application layer communication software. It is widely used because it
 protocol. It creates an encryption channel between the can provide low-latency and low-overhead anonymous
 communication parties to ensure the confidentiality of access services. Due to the similarity between the struccommunication, preventing malicious attackers acquir- ture of the Tor network and onion, it is called the
 ing and modifying any information, which may contain onion routing. Tor can help users deal with some malisensitive data. TLS is a standard proposed by Internet cious attacks effectively. As the Tor client starts, it will
 Engineering Task Force (IETF) in 1999 as the succes- first run an onion agent locally and then get in touch
 sor of SSL, providing transport layer security directly on with the directory server which stores global relay node
 top of the TCP protocol [7]. The recent version of TLS information. After the onion agent obtains the relay node
 is TLS 1.3 [51] defined in 2018. TLS consists of three information, it will select three nodes according to the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
798 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 routing algorithm to form an anonymous communica- TCPdump is based on the command line, users can
 tion link. The onion agent will shake hands with each set parameters to meet different requirements, such as
 node using the Diffie-Hellman (DH) handshake protocol limiting the number of captured packages.
 to negotiate a session key. Only when the link is con- • Wireshark [62]. It is a traffic collection tool that runs on
 firmed to be established, users’ access information begins Windows, which is known as the user interface version
 to be delivered. In this process, each node cannot dis- of tshark [63]. Similar to TCPdump, it enables user specover the source and destination of the information. Tor cific requirements on packet capture. It can display traffic
 randomly selects forwarding nodes and keeps updating. information more visually through the user interface, such
 At the same time, it encrypts the packet contents with the as displaying different protocol information in different
 negotiated keys to ensure confidentiality. colors. Compared with TCPdump, Wireshark shows a
 • Nested encryption [56]. National Security Agency (NSA) better user experience but consumes more power and
 delivers the multi-site connectivity capability package to memory [61].
 meet the demands of data transmission across networks • Netflow [64]. It is a network monitoring technique
 with different security levels. It needs two independent proposed by Cisco, which can be deployed on routers
 encryption tunnels (i.e., inner encryption component and and gateways. Unlike the above three tools, Netflow
 outer encryption component), which can use either IPSec provides a flow-level view of network traffic, recording
 or Media Access Control Security (MACsec). According the information on each flow, rather than providing the
 to the times of encryption, the network is classified into packet-level information as Wireshark and TCPdump do.
 the red network that consists of unencrypted data, the In NetFlow, a flow is uniquely defined by the five tuples,
 gray network that consists of data that has been encrypted namely the source IP address or port, the destination IP
 once, and the black network that consists of data that has address or port, and the transport protocol. For enterprise
 been encrypted twice. When a packet is sent to the black users, a flow-level display of traffic can be more useful,
 network, it is encrypted by the two encryption compo- manageable and readable than the packet-level display.
 nents in turn. Similarly, at the destination, the received • Hardware Probe [65]. It is a network tool that can cappacket is unencrypted twice. ture and analyze network packets at the physical layer.
 Encryption technologies are used to protect user privacy and The hardware probe can provide more timely information,
communication security emerges endlessly. Although these including physical layer data, without consuming network
encryption protocols or anonymity mechanisms protect the resources. While compared with software-based tools,
security of communication to a certain extent, it is still pos- the strategy based on hardware is expensive and
sible for the attacker to obtain some sensitive information by inflexible.
analyzing the encrypted traffic.

 C. Traffic Representations
B. Traffic Collection The representation of traffic is essential for traffic analysis.
 Traffic data collection is an important step in the field For different application scenarios, the traffic representations
of encrypted traffic analysis, as a data set is the foundation may be diverse. A superior traffic representation can improve
of experiments. Therefore, data collection often acts as the the effectiveness and reduce the overhead.
starting point of encrypted traffic analysis. 1) Representation Level: We introduce two mainly used
 As shown in Fig. 2, traffic can be captured at various nodes traffic representation levels according to classification granin a network, such as switches, routers, and gateways. In ularity including flow-level and session-level.
recent years, several network simulation techniques, such as • Flow-Level. The flow is a collection of data packets
NS3 [57], have been proposed to simulate network traffic. with the specific common attributes. Generally, common
Software-Defined Network (SDN) [58], [59], which has a spe- attributes refer to the source or destination IP, source or
cial network structure, can also facilitate traffic data collection. destination port and protocol [66]. Moreover, in [67], a
In this section, we are dedicated to introducing typical traffic group of packets with specific common attributes colcollection tools that are commonly used for traffic capture. lected in a pre-defined time interval are regarded as
 • Libpcap [60]. It is a well-known network packet capture the basic unit of analysis, which is also considered as
 library based on C/C++, which sits at the data link layer flow-level representation in this survey. From the flowand can display TCP/IP and other packets transmitted level representation, multiple statistical features such as
 over the network. Libpcap defines pcap as the storage an average packet count, maximum packet length, or
 form of captured packets, which is widely used in traffic minimum interval time can be extracted.
 capture tools. Many other traffic capture tools, such as • Session-Level. The session is a collection of packets gen-
 Tcpdump and Wireshark, are based on this library. erated during the complete interaction between the client
 • TCPdump [61]. It is a packet analysis tool that runs on and server, e.g., packets generated by a complete website
 Linux systems, which is based on Libpcap. TCPdump visit process from session-level traffic [68]. The packets
 offers the ability to capture network packets and record in a session may have different attributes such as destithose packets in pcap files. It also enables users to nation IP, therefore, a session may contain several flows.
 filter network packets using regular expressions. Since Especially, there is no limitation on the size of the flow,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 799

 e.g., a flow may contain only one packet. However, a 1) Machine Learning Method: As shown in Table III, we
 session must include a completely interactive process, so can divide these methods into two categories, namely tradiit includes at least two packets related to the establish- tional machine learning and deep learning. In encrypted traffic
 ment of the interactive process. Meanwhile, the statistical analysis, the major difference between the two categories is
 features extracted from flow-level representation are also that the former requires manually-crafted features as input,
 suitable for session-level representation as the essence of which needs complex feature engineering processes, while the
 a session is still a collection of packets. In addition, other latter enables end-to-end traffic classification. The process of
 features such as the count of flows or the average duration feature extraction requires much prior knowledge about the
 of flows can be extracted as session-level features. task, e.g., the most contributing features for distinguishing
 2) The Forms of Representations: The traffic representa- target traffic from background traffic.
tion corresponds to the input of classifiers. To be specific, Traditional machine learning technologies are essentially
multiple features such as packet-based features and statistical shallow learning, which has some limitations in the accurafeatures can be used as the input of traditional machine learn- cies for classification tasks. In particular, their generalization
ing classifiers. Besides, raw representations of traffic such as abilities are restricted when dealing with complex problems. In
sequences [68] or graphs [69] may be used as the input of deep contrast, deep learning methods are introduced to address these
learning models. Different forms of traffic representations for limitations. Benefitting from the feature learning ability of
encrypted traffic analysis are introduced as follows. deep learning, it enables raw traffic representation as input. For
 • Packet-Based Features: The basic packet-based features example, several studies represent traffic with sequences, e.g.,
 are the information of packet header captured directly. packet direction sequences [68], and use a CNN as the clas-
 Generally, the five-tuple of IP packets, including source sifier. Also, the CNN can be combined with a triplet network
 and destination IP addresses, source and destination ports as the feature extractor [140]. Moreover, network traffic can
 and protocol types, are the most commonly leveraged also be represented by a graph structure, which digs out the
 packet-based features. Moreover, the Time-To-Live of the hidden information [69], and is combined with GNNs for traf-
 IP header, the initial window size of the TCP header fic classification. In addition, as there are correlations between
 can also be extracted as features. These are the simplest the packets at the current moment and those in the previous
 features obtained directly from the packet. period of time, LSTMs can be used to capture timing features
 • Statistical Features: Statistical features are defined as of packet sequences [147].
 features extracted from a group of packets through The rapid development of machine learning, especially deep
 abstraction or computation. The statistic values include learning, provides a large number of analytical methods for
 expectations, deviations, average, minimum, maximum, encrypted traffic analysis. Unsupervised learning has even
 medians, accumulation, etc. Combining these statistics the ability to identify unknown targets, which provides more
 with traffic attributes, such as packet size, inter-arrival possibilities for abnormal traffic detection.
 time, packet count, results in a large number of statis- 2) Knowledge-Based Method: It is used for traffic analysis
 tical features, e.g., average of cumulative packet sizes, based on prior knowledge. The knowledge-based method is
 quartile of inter-arrival time and burst packet count. generally composed of two parts, i.e., the knowledge base and
 • Raw Traffic Representation: In addition to selecting the inference engine. The knowledge base is used to store
 network traffic features manually, researchers can also use facts, such as specific patterns and logical assertions. The
 frameworks or models like deep learning algorithms to inference engine is used to analyze the problem and match
 extract features automatically. Artificial feature extraction the content in the knowledge base. In encrypted traffic analyis based on experience, however, the raw representation sis, several studies extract features of traffic and match them
 transfers the offload of feature selection to the mod- using similarity analysis [71] or pre-established rules [72]
 els. Several studies encode traffic into sequences [68], to achieve the purpose of classification. However, the accugraphs [69] or images [70] for classification. For exam- racy of knowledge-based detection greatly depends on the
 ple, the traffic can be abstracted into graphs. The structure completeness of the knowledge base. Therefore, knowledgeof the graph can be regarded as a set of interconnected based methods are not widely used in traffic analysis. With
 nodes, each of which is treated as a packet. This is sim- the types of network devices, applications and attack methods
 ilar to the graph definition in data structure and can be increasing, the knowledge base needs to be updated dynamiaugmented with directions, weights, etc. cally. Hence, most studies tend to leverage machine learning
 methods for encrypted traffic analysis.

D. Encrypted Traffic Analysis Methods
 With the traffic representation obtained in Section IV-C, E. Performance Evaluation Metrics
traffic analysis methods are applied according to different In order to verify the effectiveness of encrypted traffic
task requirements. The investigated encrypted traffic analysis analysis methods, several effective validation methods and
methods are summarized in Table III. As a necessary sup- evaluation metrics are proposed.
plementary, apart from machine learning methods, we also The validation method is used to confirm that the anaintroduce knowledge-based methods, which are selected in lytical method is suitable for its intended use. In machine
certain scenarios. learning, there are two commonly used datasets, training set

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
800 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE III
 S UMMARY OF E XISTING T RAFFIC A NALYSIS M ETHODS

and test set, which are utilized for model building and model as the training set. In the end, each subsetblock of data is
validating. used for training and testing, which maximizes the use of the
 Different partition methods are used for dividing the two dataset and the final validation result does not depend on the
datasets. Common partition methods are k-fold cross valida- random choice of the training set.
tion, hold-out, and bootstrapping. Among them, the k-fold At the same time, according to the coverage of the traincross validation is the most frequently used validation method. ing set to the test set, we can divide the validation method
In practice, 10-fold (i.e., k = 10) cross validation it is com- into closed-world validation and open-world validation. In a
monly used to evaluate to divide the data into 10 blocks closed-world, we assume that the training set contains all
in encrypted traffic analysis methods validation [84], [151], classes of samples in the test set, which means there is no
[152], which means k = 10. We first 10-fold cross valida- unknown sample in the test set. However, the open-world cortion divides a complete dataset into an average of 10 mutually responds to a more realistic scenario, in which the test set
exclusive subsets. Then, one of the subsets is used as the test contains samples belonging to unknown classes. In the field
set in turns, and the union of the remaining 9 subsets is used of encrypted traffic analysis, unknown samples can represent

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 801

 TABLE IV
 C ONFUSION M ATRIX OF C LASSIFICATION R ESULT • Area Under ROC Curve (AUC) is the area under the ROC
 curve. If the ROC curves of the two comparison models
 cross, we can choose AUC as the evaluation metric.
 • Precision-Recall Curve (P-R Curve) is constituted by
 Prec and Recall, with Prec as the vertical axis and Recall
 as the horizontal axis. When it comes to the imbalance
 dataset, P-R Curve is used to evaluate the performance
 of the model as an alternative to ROC Curve [68].
 In addition, customized metrics are introduced into
 encrypted traffic analysis to evaluate the amount of leaked
 information [100]. Mutual information, which measures the
 mutual dependence between two variables, can be used as the
new network devices [119], OS types [153], malware [152], feature engineering process for WF. The mutual information
network attacks [134], etc. Compared with the closed-world is defined as Formula 1:
validation, the open-world validation generally has higher
requirements for classification models. I (F ; W ) = H (W ) − H (W |F ) (1)
 After the selection of validation methods, multiple evalua- where F denotes the fingerprints of traffic, W denotes the webtion metrics are proposed. According to the different require- site information, I(F; W) means the amount of information can
ments of the classification on the accuracy, time and general- be attained from F about W, H (·) is the entropy.
ization, we can divide the evaluation metrics into effectiveness, 2) Time Overhead: Several encrypted traffic application
time overhead and robustness. scenarios have time requirements for methods, such as network
 1) Effectiveness: For both binary classification and multi- attack detection and network device identification. For these
classification tasks, two metrics, accuracy and error rate, scenarios, time overhead is another issue affecting the pracare commonly used. Accuracy is defined as the ratio of ticability of the model. In the encrypted traffic analysis field,
the number of samples labeled correctly over the total time overhead evaluation metrics mainly include training time,
number of samples, while Error rate is defined as the validation time and time complexity.
percentage of samples classified incorrectly in the total • Training and validation time. They are important indicasamples. tors commonly used for experimentally evaluating time
 In particular, for binary classification, we can obtain a con- overheads. Training time refers to the time required to
fusion matrix, as shown in Table IV. The confusion matrix train a traffic analysis model with a given set of training
includes four elements: true positive (TP), false positive (FP), samples, while validation time refers to the time used
true negative (TN), and false negative (FN). Among them, TP to analyze the test set using the pre-trained model. To
stands for positive samples predicted to be positive by the make a fair comparison among different analysis methmodel, FP stands for negative samples predicted to be posi- ods, the evaluation on training and validation time should
tive by the model, FN stands for positive samples predicted to be conducted on the same dataset [154], [155], [156].
be negative by the model, and TN stands for negative samples • Time complexity. It provides a theoretical estimate of
predicted to be negative by the model. Based on these four ele- time overhead to run a certain traffic analysis method.
ments, the commonly-used evaluation metrics for effectiveness Different from training and validation time, time comcan be calculated. plexity focuses on computational complexity, rather than
 • TPR (Recall) is the ratio between the number of posi- concrete analysis time spent on specific datasets.
 tive samples correctly classified and the number of actual 3) Generalization: As the traffic in the network changes
 positive samples, ranging between 0 and 1. dynamically over time, the previously constructed model may
 • FPR is the ratio between the number of negative samples not be suitable after the traffic features change. It requires
 incorrectly classified and the number of actual negative that the constructed model is capable of generalization, which
 samples, ranging between 0 and 1. means that the classifier is supposed to be robust to the data
 • Precision (Prec) is the ratio between the number of mismatch problem. It may occur due to the staleness of trainpositive samples correctly classified and the number of ing data or structure difference between training and test set.
 samples classified as positive, ranging between 0 and 1. Here, we introduce a metric to evaluate the generalization
Moreover, some metrics that consider two of the above metrics which is defined as the number of samples needed for retraincomprehensively are proposed. ing the previously trained model [140]. For example, in the
 • F1 considers both Prec and Recall, which is represented field of website fingerprinting, it is impossible for an attacker
 as the harmonic mean of Prec and Recall. to use all website traffic for model training. If the training set
 • Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is con- comes from website a, while the attacker is expected to monstituted by TPR and FPR, with TPR as the vertical axis itor website b, there are different structures between training
 and FPR as the horizontal axis. When we compare the and test sets. Due to this issue, the previously trained model is
 performance of two models, if the ROC curve of the first no longer applicable to the current test set. Therefore, we are
 model can completely ‘cover’ the second one’s, we can supposed to use new samples which have the same structures
 consider the performance of the first one is better. as the test set to retrain the model. If the model retrained by

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
802 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE V
 A C ONCLUSION FOR S TUDIES R ELATED TO N ETWORK A SSET I DENTIFICATION

only a few samples performs well, it is considered to have type is also clearly shown in the HTTP packet header (e.g.,
strong generalization and transferability. the user-agent field). All the information used above has
 been masked in encrypted traffic. Therefore, in the traffic encrypted scenario, it is non-trivial to identify network
 V. N ETWORK A SSET I DENTIFICATION
 assets accurately without getting access to packet content. In
 Network assets refer to valuable resources in computer this section, we will introduce the applications of encrypted
networks, which vary from physical network equipment (e.g., traffic analysis in network asset identification from device
servers, routers, switches, firewalls, and printers) to software fingerprinting to OS identification, which are summarized in
assets such as operating system (OS). Currently, there are Table V.
several search engines (e.g., Shodan [160], FOFA [161] and
Zoomeye [162]) that provide information retrieval services of
worldwide network assets connected to the Internet. A. Device Fingerprinting
 Traffic analysis methods are largely used in network asset With the aim of network security, when a device gets conprobing process. On one hand, network administrators can nected to a network, the network administrator is supposed to
keep themselves updated with the online status of their authenticate this device and allocate it basic communication
network assets, and can also find assets with potential secu- permissions according to the device type. Due to the numerous
rity risks in time. On the other hand, malicious attackers can quantity and frequent alternation of network devices, authenalso accurately grasp vulnerabilities of devices (e.g., probing tication manually is unpractical, which makes it necessary to
devices with stale protections) and carry out targeted attacks. identify the device type automatically. However, the abnormal
 Traffic encryption has a significant impact on network asset behaviors of several untrusted devices challenge the identificaidentification, as traditional analysis methods on unencrypted tion. For example, malicious devices may respond to queries
traffic depend on inspecting certain fields in packet pay- with fake identities [157], or deviate from their expected
load. For instance, the device type can be toilless attained behaviors, e.g., a temperature sensor tries to read information
from the non-encrypted traffic (e.g., the names and ver- from a network camera. These problems motivate researchers
sion numbers of standard libraries used by devices can be to find effective and robust fingerprints that can be used to
extracted at the HTTP packet header [163]), and the OS identify device type accurately.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 803

 Traditional Machine Learning Methods: Machine learning The methods described above have a common limitation
methods are widely used in device probing, performing well in that they cannot extract features until the completion of traffic
terms of device classification. Numerous studies compare the transmission and thereby are not suitable for early identifieffectiveness and overhead of different algorithms for device cation. In practice, however, network administrators wish to
fingerprinting, such as SVM, random forest and decision tree. know device types as soon as the devices join the network. To
Most of the studies investigated focus on IoT devices, as the meet the needs of real-time device identification, several studamount and types of IoT devices keep on increasing. Hence, ies propose more time efficient methods, e.g., obtaining traffic
we will mainly introduce the application of machine learning representations using the first n packets in a connection.
methods in IoT device identification. IoT sentinel [117] extracts 23 features (e.g., IP options) from
 The growing smart home IoT market introduces new chal- the protocol header from packets generated in the device setup
lenges for network management. Although IoT devices bring process to meet the demands. For each newly joined device,
us convenience, they become potential targets for adversaries, the features of the first 12 packets are recorded by gateway to
such as smart watches, network cameras and even sweep- form device fingerprints. Based on the fingerprints provided by
ing robots. Notably, attacks involving IoT devices account for the gateway, the remote server identifies the type using RF and
more than 25% of attack events in enterprises by 2020 [164]. returns an isolation level, which is leveraged for restricting the
Most IoT devices generate less traffic and are lower diversity, communication behavior of the device. The extracted features
which makes it difficult for traffic-based identification [117]. are all related to specific fields in packet header, without taking
 To construct effective device fingerprints using transitional into consideration the behavior features of devices.
machine learning models, traffic representation is of great Deep Learning Methods: We notice that transitional
importance. Several studies try to make use of protocol machine learning methods have two significant defects: 1)
header information, such as the link layer, network layer and they all rely on artificial feature selection, which requires prior
application layer, for traffic representation. domain knowledge, and 2) they are tightly bounded with a spe-
 Maiti et al. [102] make an observation that link layer fea- cific task and cannot be easily transferred to different tasks.
tures can be used for traffic representation. A set of consecutive To overcome these limitations, deep learning techniques have
link layer frames are combined together as a block, which is been employed in recent studies [119], [158], [159].
the basic unit for fingerprint construction. Traffic features can Radhakrishnan et al. [159] propose a mobile device classibe extracted from blocks, including temporal properties, pay- fication method, which employs packet inter-arrival time as
load sizes and header information, and then fed to a random traffic representation and build a classifier using Artificial
forest classifier. While feature extraction requires a block size Neural Networks (ANNs). They test 14 devices in an isoof 30K frames, which may take up to days of traffic collec- lated testbed and 23 devices (e.g., iPads, iPhones) in campus
tion for a standby IoT device. It indicates that only link layer network. As is known that packet timing is largely affected by
features are insufficient for efficient device fingerprinting. network fluctuation, such as packet loss and network jitters,
 To improve the efficiency on feature extraction, statisti- these methods are difficult to maintain high-level performance
cal features are explored in the following studies [93], [116]. in terms of accuracy. Similar to the previous work, packet
Sivanathan et al. [116] propose a method to distinguish IoT inter-arrival time is also exploited by Aneja et al. [158].
traffic from non-IoT traffic and then identify specific IoT To achieve better performance, they reshape the sequences
device types. Firstly, the number of different Internet servers of packet inter-arrival into a two-dimensional image, which
contacted and unique DNS requests can be used to distin- is used to train a CNN classifier. Thus, the device recogniguish whether it is an IoT device. Further, they observe that tion problem has turned into an image classification problem.
12 features (e.g., DNS interval, sleep time) are effective for However, they only consider two devices in their experiments,
distinguishing one IoT device from another. The extracted fea- which is far less than the amount of devices in practice.
tures are fed into a RF classifier, which has the viability of Moreover, there is an unsolved issue of model retraining, i.e.,
identifying IoT devices. However, this method splits the traffic the single multi-class classifier requires full model retraining
by fixed-length windows, i.e., regard traffic in a fixed period when new types join, which requires further investigation.
of time as a sample, which may lead to the traffic generated by Knowledge-Based Methods: These methods can be leveran activity to be split up, thus hindering classification results. aged in routing device probing. Different Access Point (AP)
 Msadek et al. [154] overcomes the shortcoming of manual types have specific internal architectures, which affects the
parameter selection in earlier studies [116], by adding sliding speed of packet processing. Hence, the packet inter-arrival time
windows for traffic splitting automatically. The basic idea is is a distinguishing feature for routing devices. Gao et al. [71]
that, instead of shifting by a specific length, it moves traffic extract distinct patterns of traffic by applying wavelet transwith the next unrelated activity, which ensures the relevant form to the sequence of packet inter-arrival time. The wavelet
traffic in the same window. To construct device fingerprints, analysis is used to reveal discriminative attributes of wireless
they combine the basic features based on dominant protocol devices. Through measuring similarities of the current pattern
analysis (e.g., types of protocols, port intervals) with derived and the patterns in database, they can determine which type
features based on statistical distributions (e.g., maximum and of AP the traffic belongs to. This method is restricted in real
minimum packet sizes). The feature fusion process can obtain applications, because it largely relies on prior knowledge of
more discriminative information for device fingerprints. specific architectures.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
804 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

B. Operating System Identification the classification of minor OS versions is not solved by the
 Operating System (OS) identification can find its applica- proposed method.
tions in various scenarios. It enables network administrators
to obtain the information of end devices connected to the C. Summary and Lessons Learned
network and ensure timely OS upgrades. From the perspec- In this section, we review existing studies that focus on
tive of malicious attackers, OS identification is leveraged as a encrypted traffic analysis applied in network asset identificapowerful tool to learn vulnerabilities of the target system or tion, including device fingerprinting and OS identification. Due
tailor attacks on a certain stale OS. Therefore, the study on to the differences in protocols used between devices, the packet
accurate and rapid OS identification is of great significance to header information (e.g., TCP/IP fingerprints) is one of the
network security. mostly used features extracted from traffic, as these features
 Machine Learning Methods: In recent years, a large num- can be attained even if the traffic is encrypted. In addition, the
ber of machine learning methods have been proposed for OS statistical features (e.g., mean packet size) are widely used
recognition. Multiple protocol header features are extracted, to represent the uniqueness of traffic generated from different
such as the Time-to-Live of the IP header, the initial win- devices, achieving effective identification performances.
dow size and max segment size of the TCP header [120], Our investigation depicts several remaining challenges in
as TCP/IP header can still be attained even if the traffic is network asset identification. First, network devices, especially
encrypted. For example, p0f [165], a passive OS fingerprint- IoT devices, are well known for the huge scale deployment.
ing tool, relies on configuration differences of various network Thus, continuous traffic collection and processing are required,
stack implementations reflecting in the packet header. which lead to significant improvement for both feature extrac-
 Al-Shehari and Shahzad [109] extend p0f feature set by tion methods and classification frameworks. Second, the huge
adding the features extracted from the header of FIN packets scale is reflected in not only the generated traffic volume, but
(FIN packets are TCP packets required to close connections). also the multiple asset types. In practical applications, there
They utilize the C4.5 algorithm to identify the OS that does not are types of devices that the model has not known before,
have an exact match in the p0f signature database. However, which requires the methods to be able to handle more comonly the older versions of OS are considered in feature selec- plex cases in the open-world scene. Finally, traffic source is
tion, which leads to the newer OS can not be classified at the a crucial part of the effectiveness evaluation. However, due to
version level. the lack of valid public dataset, most of current studies resort
 To classify the OS more accurately based on encrypted traf- to the traffic generated in the lab environment. Therefore, a
fic, several statistical features are applied, such as mean and large-scale and real-world dataset is essential for network asset
extreme value. In addition to TCP/IP and TLS header fea- identification.
tures, Fan et al. [151] extract several flow statistics features
(e.g., mean packet throughput). They use light gradient boosting machine algorithm to identify the host OS information. VI. N ETWORK C HARACTERIZATION
This method can identify not only types but also OS versions. As numerous network services keep on emerging, the
Muehlstein et al. [103] propose a method to identify the OS, improvement on user experience and service quality becomes
browser, and application. They leverage both base features crucial to service providers. In this paper, we refer to network
which are used in most traffic classification methods (e.g., characterization as the process of traffic monitoring and analpacket inter-arrival time) and new features which are based on ysis to learn network characteristics that are closely related to
a comprehensive network traffic analysis (e.g., bursty behav- service quality. More specifically, we focus on two aspects of
iors). About 50 features are exploited in this work including network characteristics, namely QoE metric measurement and
both header features and statistical features. The feature selec- protocol recognition.
tion is crucial, which affects the accuracy of the model directly. The rapid growth of video streaming traffic asserts signifi-
However, the statistical features are sensitive to OS upgrade, cant pressure on mobile network operators [166]. QoE metric
even a small magnitude of changes may reduce the effective- measurement aims to extract critical QoE indicators (e.g.,
ness of the model, which makes robust feature extraction an video bitrate, resolution, and stalling) from network traffic,
important research direction. which can provide network operators with more insights into
 Knowledge-Based Methods: These methods mainly leverage the video delivery quality perceived by end users. Network
fingerprint libraries and pre-defined rules to identify the OS protocol recognition is also of great importance to network
types [72]. However, this method will fail if there are multiple operators, as it can provide a deep understanding of all kinds
OS types corresponding to one key. To find more effective of protocols in the traffic traversing their networks.
fingerprints, Ruffing et al. [73] present a method that extracts While traffic encryption benefits user privacy protection, it
features of traffic in the frequency domain. To filter out the has a negative impact on monitoring network characteristics.
frequency component that is not helpful for OS identification, In unencrypted traffic, QoE measurement and protocol recogthe genetic algorithm is applied to decide which one should nition are usually based on high performance DPI engines
be kept. By calculating the correlation between the features of that carefully inspects packet contents. For instance, the string
the target traffic and the samples in fingerprint libraries, they related to specific requests can be extracted from the HTTP
can identify which type of OS the traffic belongs to. While header to indicate the delay aroused at the beginning of video

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 805

 TABLE VI
 A C ONCLUSION FOR S TUDIES R ELATED TO Q O E M ETRICS M EASUREMENT

 Traditional Machine Learning Methods: These methods utilize observable network features (e.g., packet length and packet
 time) and machine learning classifiers to predict QoE. Several
 studies choose different features and use multiple statistical
 models for accurate QoE metric measurement through analyzing encrypted traffic. The parameters and their weights
 of models are momentous for accurate prediction. Therefore,
 distinct weights are assigned to factors usually according to
 their contributions to the overall QoE to obtain an objective statistical model [168], [169]. The proliferation of smart
 vehicular terminals imposes serious challenges to vehicular
 networks [171]. Oche et al. [168] observe that the key factors
Fig. 6. QoE Metric Measurement Model. impacting the QoE in a vehicular environment are frame rate,
 bit rate, packet loss, throughput and delay, which may lead to
 blocking, blurriness or blackouts of videos. They propose a
 QoE estimation function based on the multivariate statistical
sessions [12]. However, this information is hidden by the
 approach and ordinal regression analysis. The overall QoE is
encryption of packet contents. Moreover, several private proestimated as a weighted sum of the QoE influencing factors.
tocols mask their identities through encryption for evading
 Due to the convenience of predicting the overall QoE accordcensorship [167], increasing the difficulty of protocol recogniing to the evaluation function, it is suitable for real-time QoE
tion. In this section, we review and summarize existing studies
 prediction. However, the function requires regular parameter
on encrypted traffic analysis with the goals of QoE metric
 updates to meet the dynamic changes of services.
measurement and protocol recognition.
 In addition to using the overall QoE aforementioned, several studies employ specific indicators (e.g., stall occurrence,
 resolution, and bitrate) to describe different levels of QoE.
A. QoE Metric Measurement Dimopoulos et al. [121] propose a predictive model for mea-
 With the exponential increase in multimedia services, QoE suring QoE degradation levels caused by three key factors,
measurement is increasingly crucial to the optimization or i.e., stalling, video resolution and quality variations. To obtain
development of corresponding services [170]. To measure QoE these factors from encrypted traffic, they extract 10 features
reliably and accurately, several researchers develop objective from chunk size and packet inter-arrival time (e.g., the perquality prediction models through traffic collection and anal- centiles of chunk size), which are fed into RF for QoE
ysis. The factors which influence quality (e.g., stalling event, prediction. While the approach extracts features after obtaining
resolution and bitrate) or overall QoE which takes all factors the traffic of an entire video session, which makes it unsuitable
aforementioned into account are measurement metrics con- for real-time measurement.
cerned by the current QoE-related studies. We list several Traffic collection is a crucial part of the classification
metrics and show the model of QoE metric measurement in process. Data diversity is important for creating robust and
Fig. 6. Selection of metrics describing QoE, collection and effective models. Specifically, in order to collect more realistic
prediction of traffic, especially real-time monitoring, are three data, a variety of network conditions are supposed to be taken
key points in QoE metric measurement. The current studies of into consideration. To this end, Orsolic et al. [124] collect the
QoE metric measurement are summarized in Table VI. YouTube video traffic under 39 different bandwidth scenarios

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
806 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE VII
 A C ONCLUSION FOR S TUDIES R ELATED TO P ROTOCOL R ECOGNITION

to estimate the QoE of end users when watching videos. The differentiated Quality of Service (QoS) or carry out malware
bandwidth envelopes range from 0.3 to 7 Mbps to cover a large and intrusion detection. Traditionally, protocols are identified
number of different scenarios, which differ in QoE metrics, by ports which are assigned for the majority of standard protoe.g., stalling number. To be specific, they extract 17 statistical cols (e.g., HTTP, FTP and TELNET) by the Internet Assigned
features corresponding to packet length, packet time, packet Numbers Authority (IANA). While port-based identification
count and throughput as the input of 5 machine learning mod- methods are less effective, as many applications allow users to
els, e.g., RF and Naïve Bayes. However, it is not clear whether customize the ports for communication [173]. Therefore, sevthe approach can obtain a superior performance when trans- eral approaches have been proposed to deal with this problem,
ferred to other platforms, as the features are extracted for which are summarised in Table VII.
YouTube traffic. Traditional Machine Learning Methods: These methods
 Similar to the aforementioned issues, the traffic generated have been widely used in protocol recognition, which is useby software running on different platforms or network envi- ful for network management and resource allocation. The
ronments may be various in the terms of element loading extracted features, e.g., mean packet size, packet inter-arrival
orders or packet sizes. In order to conduct a more complete time, standard deviation in packet lengths and absolute deviastudy of video streaming, Pan et al. [123] collect their data tion of packet sizes, rely on information that can be obtained
from different networks, e.g., WiFi and 4G, or different areas, from packet headers or the entire flow/session. For instance,
e.g., Hong Kong and Shanghai for evaluating the quality of Rao et al. [172] propose a method for Tor anonymous trafvideo. Among them, the bitrate is regarded as the key factor fic identification based on cluster algorithm. Observing that
influencing user experience. Thus the main goal is to acquire the duration time between onion proxy and entry node of Tor
bitrate information. To be specific, multiple machine learning network is usually fixed and long, the flow duration time is
algorithms such as RF are used as classifiers in the method. extracted as features. Moreover, the large number of fixed-
However, in addition to quantifiable factors, more user subjec- length packets in the process of communication in Tor network
tive feelings should be considered to the scope of evaluation is considered as another typical feature. Combined with the
models, for instance, although high resolution is provided, it above features, they utilize the gravitational clustering algois not user-friendly if stalling occurs due to the poor network rithm as a classifier to realize the Tor traffic identification.
condition. However, the approach results in poor performance in clas-
 Deep Learning Methods: Traditional machine learning sifying Tor and Http traffic, as the former is usually hidden
methods require the input of interpretable features, while deep behind the latter, which leads to similarity between them.
learning can utilize raw traffic data to avoid hand-crafted fea- Deep Learning Methods: In addition to traditional machine
ture selection. Shen et al. [137] design a CNN-based model for learning methods, these methods are widely utilized to idenmeasuring fine-grained video QoE metrics, including startup tify security protocols. Lopez-Martin et al. [138] present a
delay, rebuffering, and video resolution. To achieve the goal of new technique based on a combination of CNN and RNN that
inferring QoE metrics in a real-time manner, only the Round- can be applied on IoT traffic to recognize the used services.
Trip Time (RTT) of upstream packets are used as a crucial In terms of feature extraction, they only consider the first 20
feature. Real-world datasets collected from two large-scale packets that are exchanged in a flow lifetime. 6 features are
content providers (i.e., YouTube and Bilibili) are utilized to extracted from each packet header, i.e., source port, destidemonstrate the effectiveness of the approach. While it will nation port, packet direction, bytes in payload, inter-arrival
be invalid in video streaming based on UDP protocol, as there time and window size. They observe that compared with pure
are no RTT features in UDP traffic. RNN model, RNN combined with a previous CNN model can
 achieve higher accuracy, as the location invariant patterns from
 the reshaped traffic can be extracted by CNNs.
B. Protocol Recognition Knowledge-Based Methods: These methods are used to
 Protocol recognition is an important foundation for network identify protocols based on specific rules. The DPI method
service providers and network administrators to provide appears to obtain more accuracy in protocol recognition, which
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 807

is used to check the contents of the entire packet involving
packet header and payload, and then match some pre-defined
special strings to determine the specific application. For example, L7-filter [174], Libprotoident [175] and nDPI [76] are
built based on DPI, where nDPI has the ability to process
encryption protocols. It applies a decoder for SSL that extracts
the host name, which can be leveraged for specific application
identification.
 Fig. 7. Threat Model of Website Fingerprinting.
C. Summary and Lessons Learned
 In this section, we review existing studies that focus on
 It is worth mentioning that, from the aspect of defense,
encrypted traffic analysis applied in QoE metric measureit helps administrators discover if there is a risk of privacy
ment and protocol identification from the perspective of user
 leakage, so they can protect user data by adding artificial
experience. As shown in Table VI, 4 types of key factors
 noise [176]. However, from the aspect of the attack, the
affecting QoE are concluded, i.e., stalling, resolution, switch
 machine learning techniques for leakage detection might be reand bitrate. To measureg these factors, several statistical feapurposed as an adversarial tool to launch privacy attacks, e.g.,
tures are extracted from encrypted traffic, where the packet
 re-identification attacks, inference and linkage attacks [177],
timing is the most commonly used feature, as it can reflect
 [178], [179], [180], which puts users at risk of privacy
the speed of data transmission directly.
 breaches even when only browsing on the Internet.
 However, there are also several challenges related to
network characterization. Firstly, as the requirements for
real-time resource allocation and optimization mechanisms A. Website Fingerprinting
increase, such as the emergence of live broadcast applications, The popularity of the Internet has aroused people’s attenonline deployment and updates of QoE prediction models are tion to potential privacy threats associated with Web browsing.
demanded. Secondly, the majority of aforementioned studies Although encryption mechanisms like SSL/TLS or HTTPS
choose a subset of protocols in order to examine the effec- establish encrypted tunnels to preserve communication contiveness of approaches, which leads to potential scalability tents, they are still endangered by website fingerprinting (WF)
and adaptability issues. Moreover, since efficient data col- attacks, which leverage specific features of encrypted traffic,
lection is significant, we suggest automating the process of e.g., packet sizes, time and directions, to identify a website or
data collection and processing, which enables the running of webpage. Through the features, inadequate information about
more massive measurement assignments and thus increases the user identities, behaviors and preferences may be leaked.
robustness of prediction models. The threat model of WF is shown in Fig. 7. First, the
 attacker utilizes sniffing tools such as Wireshark to monitor
 encrypted traffic generated by the victim. Then, the obtained
 VII. P RIVACY L EAKAGE D ETECTION traffic is segmented into flows or sessions, from which multiple
 With the development of the Internet, large amounts of features are extracted. After that, the attacker leverages clasdata are created and disseminated, which may contain per- sification techniques, e.g., machine learning algorithms, to
sonal private information. The user activities can be inferred identify from which website the traffic is generated. In this
from non-encrypted traffic effortlessly. Take Web browsing way, the Web browsing information of the victim is leaked.
for example, the website being visited can be confirmed Traditional Machine Learning Methods: The traditional
through the HTTP packet header (e.g., host). While with machine learning classifiers, such as k-NN [98], SVM [104]
the widespread encryption protocol, the packets are usu- and RF [126], are widely used in website fingerprinting. The
ally encrypted by TLS, making the HTTP header invisible. effectiveness of different methods is usually evaluated in two
However, attackers can still obtain sensitive information from scenarios, namely closed-world and open-world scenarios. In
the encrypted traffic. In other words, despite the existence of the closed-world assumption, users are assumed to access a
encryption technologies, there is still a risk of privacy leakage small number of known websites, which simplifies the attack
through the channel of encrypted traffic analysis. process. However, in practice, users can visit a larger amount
 In this section, we will introduce three aspects of privacy of websites, thus it is unrealistic for the attacker to collect samleakage detection, which are website fingerprinting, applica- ples of all possible websites. The open-world assumption is
tion fingerprinting, and user action identification, respectively. more realistic, where only a fixed set of websites are assumed
Website fingerprinting is a kind of traffic analysis that attempts to be monitored by the attacker.
to learn about which website or webpage users are browsing. The popularity of Tor with anonymity urges researchers
Similarly, application fingerprinting can be used to identify to propose novel WF attacks. Though Tor claims to prowhich application users are using. User action identification vide anonymous browsing services for users through encrypfocuses on inferring the behaviors of users, e.g., sending an tion, it cannot conceal the behavioral information of trafemail on smartphones. A summary of approaches pertaining fic, e.g., packet directions and packet inter-arrival time.
to privacy leakage detection are presented in Table VIII. Al-Naami et al. [96] propose a WF attack by extracting

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
808 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE VIII
 A C ONCLUSION FOR S TUDIES R ELATED TO W EBSITE AND A PPLICATION F INGERPRINTING AND U SER ACTION I DENTIFICATION

features related to data dependencies occurring over sequen- in WF. Wang et al. [95] improve the effectiveness of the former
tial transmissions of packets, e.g., bursts, packet sizes and in the open-world scenario by using k-NN. The fingerprints are
timestamp. To mitigate the impact of drifts between the cur- constructed based on the features including bursts, packet sizes
rent data and previously training data, the model needs to and packet ordering. However, it needs manually analysis to
be re-trained periodically according to whether the accu- extract features that may contain significant information, to
racy drops below a certain threshold. Hence, there is an overcome this shortcoming, Panchenko et al. [105] propose a
open issue of model fine tuning to overcome the data drift WF attack named CUMUL based on cumulated packet sizes
problem. and an SVM classifier. They leverage the cumulated sum of
 A superior representation of traffic plays a momentous role packet sizes as the traffic representation, from which a fixed
in WF. Wang and Goldberg [106] propose a data collection number of features are derived. Specifically, they extract the
scheme that uses the more fundamental Tor cells, which are features by sampling the piece-wise linear interpolant of the
data in units of 512 bytes, instead of TCP/IP packets as the cumulated packet size sequence at n equidistant points. The
meta-data. Since then, Tor cell has been certified and utilized feature sets proposed in [105] and [95] have proven to perform

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 809

well on website fingerprinting while they are less effective on After that, robust WF methods have been proposed to mainwebpage classification. tain their performance on defended traffic. Sirinam et al. [68]
 Webpage fingerprinting is a fine-grained variation of WF, propose a method named DeepFingerprinting based on CNNs.
where the attackers attempt to identify specific webpages To be specific, the traffic is represented as sequences of packet
belonging to the same website. The analysis of webpages directions (e.g., 1 for incoming packets and −1 for outgoing
is meaningful for privacy leakage detection due to the rea- packets), which is used for automatic feature extraction by the
son that the fine-grained analysis may reveal more sensitive CNN classifier. Even though the traffic statistical features are
information. For instance, the attacker can acquire information partly obscured by dummy packets, the remaining sequence
about which type of videos the victim prefers. However, the features can still be learned by the CNN model. Gong and
SSL/TLS traffic parameters of different webpages on the same Wang [185] observe that the front of traffic leaks the largest
websites are basically the same, making the classification amount of information. They propose a WF defense method,
methods based on SSL/TLS fingerprints less effective. named Front, to add dummy packets to the front of traffic
 To achieve fine-grained WF, Shen et al. [98] focus on according to Rayleigh distribution. The experiments show that
the classification of webpages from the same website. The it can reduce the effectiveness of DF [68].
cumulative length of a packet sequence is selected as the fea- To further improve the transferability of WF methods
ture, which distinguishes between webpages. Only features in different scenarios, the authors in [68] propose Triplet
extracted from the first 100 packets of a webpage loading Fingerprinting [140], which is built on a machine learning
trace are input into the k-NN classifier, balancing the accu- technique named N-shot learning that requires a few training
racy and time complexity. As the cumulative packet length in samples to identify a given class. While they do not address
bidirectional interaction between clients and servers describes the problem of multi-tab Web browsing [186], i.e., the users
the differences in the content transmitted on webpages, it is visit multiple websites continuously, where the traces of the
effective for fine-grained webpage fingerprinting. The authors websites may overlap. It remains an open issue of multi-trace
in [111] extend the study in [98] by utilizing more distin- splitting and classification.
guishing features and enlarging the experimental dataset. The In addition for WF attacks, deep learning, e.g., the genregular patterns of the first few packets in the interaction erative adversarial net (GAN), also has applications in the
process are leveraged to identify the webpages. They grasp privacy protection [177] to prevent attackers from inferring
distinctive features of webpages related to packet length in sensitive information from user browsing traffic. For example,
the uplink-dominant stage, including block features, sequence as deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examfeatures and statistical features. Both high accuracy and low ples, Nasr et al. [187] leverage adversarial perturbation to
time overhead are achieved using the extracted features. disturb the original traffic patterns. They design an adversar-
 The selected features play an important role in WF, hence, ial network and a dummy packet inserting approach to create
there are several studies focusing on how to choose the dis- adversarial perturbations on live traffic, which is effective for
tinctive features. For instance, Li et al. [100] select 3043 againsting Var-CNN [188] and DF [68].
features used in the state-of-the-art WF attacks and empirically Recently, the one-page setting, a standard for evaluating
confirm that Tor leaks information about client connections. WF defenses, is proposed by Wang [189]. The author argues
The mutual information is exploited to measure the amount that the evaluation of WF defense should not be set in a sceof information that can be obtained through encrypted traf- nario where there are a large number of websites in the open
fic, which illustrates that anonymous networks are still faced world, which strongly favors the defender. He proposes that
with eavesdropping. The above work quantifies the extent of WF defense should be evaluated with only one monitored webinformation leakage, which brings inspiration in the aspect of site and one non-monitored website. The experiment results
feature selection. show that under one-page setting, Decoy [104], Front [185]
 Deep Learning Methods: Compared with traditional and Tamaraw [190] failed to defend against WF.
machine learning, deep learning requires more complex cal- Knowledge-Based Methods: These methods are utilized in
culations and larger consumption, e.g., storage resources and WF because of their convenience and efficiency. Specifically,
time costs. As the input of the deep learning model, the sam- calculating the similarities between samples to be classified
ples classified need to be expressed in a regular form, e.g., a and samples of known categories is one of the commonly used
sequence of fixed lengths. Generally, deep learning methods methods. Lu et al. [77] consider information about packet sizes
weaken the interpretability of features, as feature extraction is and propose an approach to analyze the similarity between findone automatically by the model. gerprints using Levenshtein distance, which is effective for WF
 To protect the communication from encrypted traffic analy- in the case of encryption and proxy channels. Considering that
sis, there are two defense strategies against WF attacks, which the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) downloading packare WTF-PAD [183] and Walkie-Talkie [184], respectively. ets contain less information, only the size of the last packet
WTF-PAD is a defense method using adaptive padding that transferring the remaining data in each data chunk is extracted
can increase padding when channel utilization is low. Walkie- as the fingerprint. The proposed method can guarantee the
talkie makes the network connection work in a half duplex effectiveness of defending strategies such as traffic morphing
mode as well as adds dummy packets and delays to mask the and padding. While the extracted features depend heavily on
features of communications. packet size information, which is not available for Tor network.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
810 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

B. Application Fingerprinting
 With the profusion of mobile applications, the resulting
network traffic increases dramatically. The existing studies
usually regard the process of identifying applications through
traffic analysis as application fingerprinting (AF). On the one
hand, AF helps network administrators identify the applications that are visited by users in their networks, which
can be used for network management. For example, through
encrypted traffic analysis, the administrator can block access
to forbidden applications for security control. On the other
hand, AF leaks the users privacy such as their commonly used
applications. For example, the usage of sensitive applications
such as job-hunting and health testing applications may cause
privacy exposure. In addition, grasping the information on sensitive applications visited by potential victims, attackers may
provide them with false information and commit fraud such
as phishing attacks.
 Due to the widely used encryption mechanisms, tradi- Fig. 8. Traffic Interaction Graph [69].
tional methods such as payload-based classification are no
longer feasible. Multiple machine learning methods (e.g.,
RF [127]), deep learning methods (e.g., CNN [141]) and statistical methods (e.g., Markov model [16]) have been proposed applications. However, it is not clear how scalable and robust
for AF. their approach is since they consider only five applications.
 Traditional Machine Learning Methods: Behavioral features Moreover, the application fingerprints may be influenced by
such as sizes, lengths and directions are used in these meth- different devices, versions or time, which corresponds to the
ods, as alternatives to packet contents, which is invisible in robustness and the stability of analysis methods. To investiencrypted traffic. Wang et al. [127] leverage the frame inter- gate how to identify apps or how app fingerprints change,
arrival time, size and direction during bursts, which contain Taylor et al. [128] utilize a total of 54 statistical features to
several frames aggregated densely within a period of time, construct burst vectors, e.g., the variance, skew and kurtosis
as traffic features to categorize iOS and Android applica- of packet sizes, and train the ambiguity detection classitions. Shen et al. [181] combine certificate packet length with fier which involves a reinforcement learning strategy. They
second-order Markov Chain to identify applications. However, evaluate the robustness of their approach across various app
there are several occasions where the probability computed versions, devices or changing time, the last of which is the
with the fingerprint of correct application is lower than that least influential factor.
of the wrong application, as certificate packet lengths of the Deep Learning Methods: Deep learning automatically
two applications are subject to the same cluster. To solve the extracts and selects features, reducing the cost of manual
issue, they extend the leveraged information to two types, i.e., feature extraction greatly. For example, decentralized applithe first application data length, and the certificate packet size cations (DApps) are increasingly developed and deployed on
in [16]. However, there are conditions that produce SSL/TLS blockchain platforms [69], [191]. However, DApps deployed
flows without the certificate packets. To solve the problem, on the same platforms may share similar encryption settings,
Liu et al. [90] leverage both message type sequences and which reduces the discrimination of the generated traffic. To
packet length sequences as features, as there are overlaps identify DApp accurately, Shen et al. [69] propose GraphDApp
in message type sequences between different applications. to extract traffic interaction graph using the method shown in
However, this method needs to load the entire flow before Fig. 8 and utilize GNN for identifying decentralized appliperforming feature generation, weakening their capabilities for cations that users visit. The traffic interaction graph reserves
timely classification. several dimensional features like packet length, direction and
 Capturing the traffic of specific targets contrapuntally so on. Furthermore, their method is verified in classification
has been the most commonly-employed strategy in prac- of traditional applications and is applicable. While it needs to
tice. Nevertheless, it is not simple to distinguish and fil- be updated regularly as the applications change.
ter background traffic completely. Moreover, the mixture of
target traffic and background traffic may weaken the effectiveness of the classification model. To solve the issue, C. User Action Identification
Mongkolluksamee et al. [107] filter short-lived flows accord- Apart from websites and applications, identifying fineing to flow duration constraint to remove background traffic. grained user actions from encrypted traffic is essential for
Specifically, they construct graphlet consisting of five-tuple network management. Various service providers research user
information and then utilize 59-dimension features extracted behaviors or request types in order to manage services and
from graphlet and packet size distribution to classify monitored improve QoS better. In addition, several studies analyze the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 811

specific traffic of applications, e.g., voice call, to detect the Deep Learning Methods: These methods are useful for
leakage of user privacy. identifying video contents or user actions. Li et al. [147]
 Traditional Machine Learning Methods: These methods are develop RNNs requiring less computational power and time
widely used in user action identification. Despite the use of than state-of-the-art classifiers to identify YouTube videos. It
SSL/TLS, the traffic analysis approach is still an effective tool does not require complete TCP/IP flow information, which
that an eavesdropper can leverage to undermine the privacy of makes it suitable for online video identification. Nevertheless,
mobile users. Conti et al. [130] propose a user action iden- the authors consider only 10 videos so it is unclear whether
tification method based on clustering and RF. Packet header the method is effective in unveiling more videos.
information (e.g., ports), packet sizes and packet directions To detect the existence of wireless cameras and infer user
are considered as features. The method takes advantage of the presence status, Ji et al. [148] utilize packet lengths and LSTM
most distinctive flows belonging to a particular user action for to identify whether there is a wireless camera in the target area.
classification. However, there are only 3 applications and a Furthermore, the count or size of video and audio frames of
subset of actions related to those applications are analyzed. wireless camera may change with motions and voices of users,
Thereafter, Saltaformaggio et al. [22] expand the application resulting in different bitrate. As such, they infer user presence
data set and propose a method to detect 35 types of behaviors by detecting the bitrate changes caused by human motions.
in iOS and Android applications, such as reading news. Instead However, slight movements of users may not change the state
of extracting the fingerprints of an activity directly, they cut of camera, resulting in failure recognition, which makes the
the traffic into segments, which represent the traffic’s behav- method less effective.
iors in a time window. Whether the traffic contains specific Knowledge-Based Methods: Various communication applibehaviors is considered as the fingerprints to classify activi- cations are arising to provide convenience to users. However,
ties. While the method is vulnerable to imitation attacks, i.e., an encrypted VoIP conversation does not prevent attackers
replaying traffic that belongs to other applications to confuse from eavesdropping completely. Knowledge-based methods
the classifier. can be leveraged to discover the sensitive information, e.g.,
 Watching videos online by multiple users will generate a language used [79], which leaks users privacy in the commularge amount of traffic, which may leak users privacy such as nication process. Burschka et al. [78] focus on recognizing
religious faith and sexual orientation. Encrypted traffic analysis the specific sentence during the conversation using Skype,
is applied to video identification to prove the information leak- which is a widely used VoIP application. The packet sizes are
age from video streaming. The packet size features extracted used as features to achieve isolated phoneme classification.
for other purposes, such as audio content analysis, are not Through manually separating sentences, the dynamic time
reliable for video classification, as the payload size in video warping (DTW) algorithm is used to calculate whether each
streaming is often set to be the maximum size. Ran et al. [108] sentence is the specific sentence previously set. However, due
propose a method to classify the video titles on YouTube from to the variety of sentences in natural language, it is impossible
encrypted traffic. They observe that the total number of bits at to build a DTW model for each sentence.
a peak, which is defined as a section of traffic where there is
silence before and after, is an informative feature. Therefore,
they construct a feature vector containing the bits of every D. Summary and Lessons Learned
peak in a video stream and make classification based on the In this section, we review three types of encrypted trafsimilarity between a given sample and the known classes. fic analysis related to privacy leakage detection, i.e., website
Specifically, during the experiments, the noise traffic, e.g., fingerprinting, application fingerprinting, and user action idennon-YouTube packets and TCP re-transmission packets are fil- tification. Discriminative feature extraction and appropriate
tered out at the state of preprocessing. While in a real network classifier selection are two key points in privacy leakage detecenvironment, the re-transmission event may change the feature tion, affecting the effectiveness of models significantly. Packet
distribution and even hinder accurate classification. length and packet direction are two widely used features in dis-
 The widespread use of smart IoT devices gives rise to ram- closing traffic private information. From coarse-grained WF to
pant concerns on user privacy. Smart devices such as Amazon fine-grained action analysis, more discriminative traffic rep-
Echo, which can interact with users via voice commands, may resentations, e.g., burst features, and more complex network
leak sensitive information such as contents spoken from traf- structures, e.g., GNN, are used to dig out leaks.
fic transmitting between the cloud service and itself. Jackson Based on the limitations of existing approaches, several
and Camp [129] focus on the information leaked by smart issues should be further investigated. First, the variety of
speakers such as Amazon Echo. They collect the encrypted dataset should be taken into consideration. For instance,
traffic sent from the cloud service to the Echo device, which the traffic used for WF is supposed to be collected from
associates with the response to the user request. Several sta- multiple Web browsers (e.g., Firefox, Chrome and Internet
tistical features extracted from TCP packets, such as the Explorer) and multiple platforms (e.g., Windows, Linux and
histogram of packet inter-arrival time, are exploited to identify iOS), which can be leveraged to validate the generality of
the type of user requests, e.g., requests for weather and direc- models. Second, in response to these privacy attacks, practitions. It demonstrates the information leakage of user request cal defenses have been proposed by adding dummy packets
type in smart speakers, but its generalizability across different or delays into the traffic to mask the original features. Those
networks, users, and devices still needs further investigation. countermeasures hinder the effectiveness of privacy attacks,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
812 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE IX
 A C ONCLUSION FOR S TUDIES R ELATED TO A NOMALY D ETECTION

which requires exploring traffic features surviving under these traffic analysis in malware detection and network anomaly
defenses. detection.

 VIII. ATTACK D ETECTION A. Malware Detection
 With the rapid evolution of the Internet, the complexity Malware is software designed to damage devices or
of network topology and the scale of devices has increased networks. After being implanted in the target device, the malaccordingly, which brings an outbreak trend of anomalous ware will run executable code or scripts to damage it. For
behaviors. The increasing popularity of mobile phones and example, malware like WannaCry and Petya disrupted busi-
IoT devices attracts malware developers who earn profit from ness operations by exposing vulnerabilities in software, which
the malicious applications implanted into victims’ devices. leads to immense financial loss. The rampant malware makes
Moreover, there are numerous network attacks on various it necessary for intelligent intrusion detection systems.
platforms, e.g., campus networks, enterprise networks, IoT Traffic analysis methods are largely used in malware detecnetworks and blockchain networks. Given the significant tion, which attempts to leverage unique features reflected in
growth of anomalous behaviors, there is a pressing need for traffic to detect the behavior of the target software during
timely and effective anomaly detection. execution. While the encryption leveraged in malware com-
 The traditional anomaly detection methods commonly scan munication hinders payload-based feature extraction, which
packet contents to find malicious patterns based on the motivates researchers to find effective fingerprints that can be
pre-determined signatures, e.g., the unique part of the mal- used for encryption traffic.
ware which is unlikely found in any benign traffic [195]. Traditional Machine Learning Methods: Machine learning
However, due to traffic encryption, payload-based anomaly has become the most commonly used intelligent data analysis
detection methods are less effective. Thus, novel traffic rep- technology. A large amount of studies apply machine learnresentations and anomaly detection methods suitable for ing techniques to malware detection. We divide these studies
encryption traffic need to be proposed. As described in into the application of machine learning methods in mobile
Table IX, we mainly focus on the applications of encrypted malware detection and IoT malware detection.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 813

 With the development of wireless communication technol- malware traffic. The results show that if there is similar malogy [180], [196], smartphones have become indispensable, ware in the training set, the detection of unknown malware is
which are closely related to sensitive information exchange. effective. However, it has low identification rates when there is
However, the software installed on mobile phones may bring no similar malware available in the trained model. Therefore,
potential dangers to users. Smartphones store a large amount it is an open issue of unknown malware detection.
of private information, thereby, they are the main targets of In addition to mobile phones, smart home IoT devices are
cyber-attacks [197], which makes it urgent to build an efficient also vulnerable to malware. With the popularity of smart home
malware detection system to protect privacy. platforms supporting third-party application development, peo-
 Lashkari et al. [192] propose an Android malware detec- ple pay more and more attention to the security and privacy
tion model to protect mobile device users from malicious loopholes of smart home IoT devices. Intrinsic design flaws
applications. They leverage 3 feature selection algorithms, i.e., of Samsung-owned SmartThings that lead to significant over
information gain [198], cfs subset evaluation [199], and SVM, privilege in SmartApps are discovered [200], which promotes
to select the common features from the feature set. Finally, the the development of IoT malware detection.
selected features, e.g., maximum and minimum packet length, Malware that controls IoT devices may behave inconsisare extracted from traffic and then are fed into 5 classifiers, tently with its declared working patterns. Gu et al. [132]
e.g., k-NN and DT. They compare the precision, recall, accu- propose an IoT malware detection method by analyzing the
racy and false positive of the 5 classifiers and observe that the sequence of traffic packets to discover whether the state of the
DT model performs well in two tasks, i.e., distinguishing mal- IoT device is consistent with the state declared by the software.
ware from benign applications and classifying malware into They extract IoT context using natural language processing
general malware and adware (software that generates revenue (NLP) to represent the actions the user expected and generby generating advertisements automatically). To improve the ate wireless context inferred from the wireless communication
performance of a single machine learning model, ensemble traffic to describe the actual actions. By comparing the differlearning is used in malware detection. Rahmat et al. [155] ences of the contexts, malware can be identified. However,
apply bagging and boosting algorithms to create ensemble the detection process is time consuming due to the process of
models. They divide the dataset into smaller subsets and each NLP analysis, which limits its ability to detect malware in a
of the subsets is then provided to train a base learner. The out- real-time manner.
puts obtained by these learners are voted to obtain the final Moreover, the fabricated ad request is another malicious
result. They compare 5 ensemble learners (e.g., AdaBoost, traffic, which leads to losses for advertisers. “Click farm” is
XGBoost) as well as 4 single learners (e.g., Naïve Bayes, one of the most common ways to fabricate the visits (e.g.,
SVM) and observe that the XGBoost model achieves the the number of times an app has been downloaded), which
highest accuracy. leverages multiple mobile devices to simulate normal user
 The above methods require a large number of resources for operations. To discover these bot devices, Sun et al. [201]
feature calculation and classifier training. However, mobile propose a mobile ad fraud detection method based on invalid
phones have limited computing power and storage, which traffic analysis. Firstly, they develop a classifier to distinguish
necessitates a lighter detection method to improve user expe- bot devices from the normal user by leveraging 11 features,
rience. Offloading the calculations from mobile to remote e.g., the entropy of ad slot IDs. Secondly, devices are clusservers can be used to solve the challenge. Following this idea, tered based on app usage patterns. Finally, the devices in a
Wang et al. [114] utilize a mirror technology to transfer traffic cluster are related by majority voting of all devices in the
to the server, which is used for traffic filtering, analyzing and same cluster.
detecting. To detect malware, they train a DT model with 6 Deep Learning Methods: As the diversity and variability of
statistical features including uploading or downloading bytes, traffic features, Malware detection is considered as a complex
uploading or downloading packet number and average byte problem, which is difficult to be solved by traditional machine
of uploading or downloading packets. However, this method learning methods. Therefore, deep learning methods are introperforms poorly in unknown types of malware detection, as it duced to solve two problems, i.e., automatic feature extraction
relies on existing features, which may not appear in unknown and effective feature learning.
malware. Compared with traditional machine learning methods which
 Given the various types of malware, there is a pressing require a lot of prior knowledge to select input features, deep
demand to propose methods to detect the malware family that learning methods can automatically extract them from raw
is not included in the training set, which requires extracting the traffic. Feng et al. [143] propose a two-layer deep learning
features that are prevalent in malware traffic. Garg et al. [113] model for Android malware detection. The traffic analysis is
extract representative malware features, e.g., time properties based on a cascaded model of CNN and AutoEncoder, which
and packet numbers, then feed them into machine learning takes the 2-D images as input. Thus the malware detection
classifiers. They compare 5 classifiers including DT, logistic problem is translated to image classification problem. This
regression, k-NN, Bayes as well as RF, and observe that the method achieves high accuracy in binary classification (2-
k-NN and RF achieve the highest and stablest accuracy. To label) and category classification (4-label), while it will lead
examine the ability of unknown malware detection, the leave- to low accuracy for malicious family classification, as the
one-out method is used, i.e., a type of malware is left out images are similar between malicious families in the same
as the test set and the model is trained with the rest of the category.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
814 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 algorithm. Through detecting deviations from the built models,
 they can judge whether a DDoS attack has occurred. Similarly,
 Zolotukhin et al. [193] build a normal user behavior model
 using DBSCAN algorithm with 9 features, e.g., inter-arrival
 time, extracted from traffic. If the target traffic deviates from
 the normal model by greater than the threshold, it is judged as
 a DoS attack traffic. The main difference between the above
 methods is that the former builds several normal user behav-
Fig. 9. Three types of network anomaly detection methods based on machine ior models, which considers multiple types of user behaviors,
learning. while the latter builds only one, which regards all outliers as
 abnormal values.
 Anomaly-based methods are usually realized by clustering
 As the structure of deep neural network makes it has a algorithms, which have the advantages of updating the built
stronger ability to fit complex functions, it is more suitable models online. Moreover, This type of method augments the
to learn traffic features comprehensively. For example, traf- ability to detect unknown anomalies. However, if the attacker
fic is composed of sequential packets and adjacent packets are can mimic the behavior of a normal human user, traffic related
usually closely related to each other, which makes LSTM suit- to the attack may be clustered into the normal class.
able for the traffic analysis, as its ability of handling sequential The modeling process of the anomaly-based method rarely
input and dealing with long-term dependencies. Following this considers anomalous traffic, but it may contain key discrimiidea, Prasse et al. [149] propose a client malware detection native information. Due to this reason, several studies consider
method based on the LSTM network. Compared with RF the problem of network anomaly detection as a classification
classifier, the method they proposed performs better. problem [115]. They combine normal and abnormal traffic
 to train a classifier to determine whether the target object is
 network anomaly traffic.
B. Network Anomaly Detection In order to build the detection system suited to SDN,
 As the Internet has become the primary universal commu- Ajaeiya et al. [156] propose a method which leverages the
nication infrastructure, it is also subject to a variety and an built-in statistics collected by the OpenFlow switch at 1-second
increasing number of attacks. Network attacks such as Denial interval to detect network attacks. The statistics are aggregated
of Service (DoS), User to Root (U2R), Remote to Local (R2L) to 9 features, e.g., standard deviation of packets and standard
and Probing Attack increase rapidly, which pushes cyberspace deviation of bytes, which are used to build a classifier using
security becoming an important topic. Traffic analysis meth- bagged trees. The system runs over the control plan and is
ods are widely used to build intrusion detection systems, while therefore transparent to users, which is an advantage of SDN.
encryption technology block accesses to the contents of data In general, the special structure of SDN introduces the abilpackets, which brings challenges to attack detection. Therefor, ity of traffic collection, which brings convenience for network
the Internet needs more effective protection measures suitable attack detection system construction.
for encrypted traffic. As summarized in Table IX, in this sec- In blockchain networks, special types of network attack
tion, we mainly introduce the encrypted traffic analysis used detection can be regarded as a binary classification
in network anomaly detection. problem [202]. As an emerging infrastructure, blockchain has
 Traditional Machine Learning Methods: Machine learning been applied in many fields such as healthcare, IoT, energy
methods are largely used in the network anomaly detection. As and manufacturing [203]. However, it still has many security
shown in Fig. 9 , we can further divide the network anomaly problems, which threaten network security. Eclipse attack is an
detection based on machine learning methods into anomaly- attack that may cause serious consequences to the blockchain
based detection, classification-based detection and hybrid network, which isolates the victimized blockchain node from
detection according to the prior knowledge. For anomaly- the normal network by occupying the routing table of it. To
based detection, only normal traffic is leveraged in model detect the eclipse attack in Ethereum, Xu et al. [133] leverage
building, which is usually constructed with unsupervised encrypted traffic analysis to detect whether the target node is
learning methods. For classification-based detection, both nor- being attacked. They utilize information entropy, packet size,
mal and abnormal traffic are leveraged to build a classifier packet frequency and connection time to describe the eclipse
with supervised learning methods. For hybrid detection, it attack features and use RF as the classifier.
is the combination of anomaly-based and classification-based However, the classification-based detection method has an
methods. inherent limitation that it is difficult to deal with unknown
 Anomaly-based detection methods construct models of nor- types of attacks, as the classification process is based on feamal user behaviors leveraging features extracted from them. tures extracted from existing malicious behaviors, which may
On the basis of the models, behaviors that deviate from the be changed as the malware evolves.
normal patterns are classified as abnormal. To further improve the ability of network anomaly detec-
 Qin et al. [136] leverage the entropy of destination tion, Hybrid detection methods which combine anomaly-based
addresses, destination ports, source addresses, packet sizes and detection and classification-based detection are proposed.
flow durations to model normal users’ patterns using k-means Generally, the hybrid detection method is shown as a two-step

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 815

method. The first step is classification-based detection and abnormal user behaviors, e.g., DDoS attack generates more
the second step is anomaly-based detection. Samples clas- illegal connections compared with normal actions, from which
sified as "normal" in step 1 will be input into the model the anomaly can be detected. As for unknown types, the clusin step 2 for abnormal or outlier detection. IoTArgos [134] tering algorithm is introduced to solve the problem, where
combines supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms to the traffic deviating from the normal cluster is classified as
discover suspicious behaviors. They make the observation that abnormal. However, its performance largely relies on the effecthe 11 features, e.g., remote ports and packets per 5 min, tiveness of the extracted features, which makes it difficult to
are effective for network detection. To be specific, supervised detect malicious behaviors that mimic normal users.
machine learning algorithm is used for filtering a subset of We summarize that high overhead, self-adaptive and zeroattack traffic, while unsupervised machine learning algorithm day attack discoveries are three main dilemmas of anomaly
is exploited for discovering samples misclassified as ’normal’ detection based on encrypted traffic analysis. Firstly, for
at the previous step. the purpose of protecting resources, malicious behaviors are
 Compared with the anomaly-based detection and expected to be detected as soon as possible, which requires
classification-based detection, the hybrid detection method timely feature extraction approaches and efficient classificaachieves both high classification accuracy of known attacks tion models. Secondly, due to the dynamics and diversity
and detection capability of unknown attacks. of malware and network anomaly, the detection models are
 Deep Learning Methods: Due to the strong feature extrac- expected to update the strategies (e.g., extracted features and
tion ability, it is applied in network anomaly detection. decision thresholds) as illegitimate traffic changes mask in a
 On the one hand, deep learning methods are able to short while. Moreover, new malware and network anomaly
extract features from raw traffic. Zeng et al. [150] propose are surging. Detection systems that are appropriate for zeroan end-to-end intrusion detection framework based on deep day attack discovering, e.g., anomaly-based methods, are more
learning. Three deep learning models including CNN, LSTM suitable for the realistic network environments in terms of
and SAE are used for anomaly detection. Compared with unknown malicious behavior detecting.
traditional machine learning methods, the deep learning algorithm requires less manual intervention, which provides greater
automation. IX. C HALLENGES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
 On the other hand, the multi-layer neural network has the Although researchers have made substantial achievements
ability to combine shallow features to form higher-level fea- in developing encrypted traffic analysis methods, there remain
tures that are more complex and abstract, which is suitable significant challenges around dataset construction, traffic repto discover the covert attack behavior. Following this idea, resentation, analysis model building, and potential counter-
Zolotukhin et al. [67] combine both clustering algorithm and measures. At the same time, unprecedented study opportunities
SAE algorithm to build a DDoS attack detection model. For are also provided to develop innovative approaches to tackle
each time interval, 8 types of features, e.g., percentage of these challenges.
packets with different TCP flags, are extracted as the input
of clustering and SAE model. A normal user behavior model
is built using clustering algorithm, which divides the behav- A. Traffic Dataset Construction
ior deviated from it as DoS attack. SAE is used to detect the Network traffic dataset is a crucial component for traffic
attack that is able to mimic the browsing behavior of a regu- analysis, as high-quality datasets can play an important role
lar human user, which cannot be discovered by the clustering in training, e.g., helping to train accurate and robust classifiers
algorithm. for supervised learning, and in validation, e.g., helping to eval-
 Knowledge-Based Methods: Generally, these methods uate the performance of traffic analysis methods, no matter
depend on artificial rules to determine whether it is network whatever technique is used. The requirements in constructing
attack traffic. The rules are usually based on ports, protocol high-quality encrypted traffic datasets are two-fold.
headers and artificial features. David and Thomas [82] cal- First, datasets should provide a good amount of variety to
culate the fast entropy of flow count for each connection as cover diverse scenarios in reality. For instance, in supervised
the fingerprint, which needs only packet header information. learning, to construct accurate website fingerprinting classi-
They build a rule with an adaptive threshold for DDoS attack fiers, an ideal dataset for training should consist of instances
detection. However, the proposed detection method relies on generated by visiting numerous websites through diverse Web
flow count, which makes it less effective for classifying flash browsers (e.g., Chrome, Firefox, IE, Safari) on various types
crowds (massive legitimate packets arrive in a short time) [4] of devices (e.g., laptops, PCs, smartphones, and pads) that
and DDoS attacks. are equipped with all major OS types (e.g., Windows, Linux,
 iOS, Android) and get access to the Internet via different approaches (e.g., fixed network, 3G/4G/5G, and WiFi).
C. Summary and Lessons Learned Without adequate training data, even the classifier with the
 In this section, we introduce existing studies that focus best performance would be rendered useless. Second, to quanon encrypted traffic analysis applied in anomaly detection, titatively measure the effectiveness of a certain traffic analysis
including malware detection and network anomaly detec- method, such as checking the correctness of the results from
tion. The traffic patterns are distinctive between normal and machine learning classifiers, we should be able to obtain

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
816 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 TABLE X
 S UMMARY OF C HALLENGES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS time-consuming and costly in terms of human efforts, crowdsourcing emerges as a promising approach to reduce the
 complexity, where multiple users or volunteers are involved to
 complete the same data collection and labeling tasks together.
 There are several issues to be further addressed, such as
 operational standards to measure data quality, incentives to
 attract more participants, and privacy protection strategies to
 secure participants sensitive information. Additional efforts
 can also be put on benchmark datasets in different research
 domains, which can greatly facilitate a fair and comprehensive
 comparison of different approaches.

 B. Traffic Representation
 Traffic representation can be of great importance to
 extract multi-dimensional information from encrypted traffic.
 Informative representations can extract the most distinctive
 features, which helps improve the accuracy of both supervised
 and unsupervised machine learning models. Existing studies
 have proposed several representations at different levels of
 granularity. For flow-level representation, statistic features [66]
 are usually fed into traditional machine learning classifiers, while the sequence of directional packets, image-based
 abstraction [150], graph-based abstraction [69], frequency
 domain [204] are proposed to work with deep learning classifiers. For session-level representation, the sequences of packet
 direction or timing [68] are used. Recently, raw bitmap representation [205] combined with automated machine learning
 is proposed to reduce reliance upon feature selection, hence it
 is suitable for multiple traffic analysis tasks.
 It is still a challenging task to propose an appropriate representation of encrypted traffic. To achieve this goal, several
factual data as ascertainable through direct observation, which issues should be carefully considered and addressed.
is known as the ground truth. Effectiveness: To facilitate the classification or clustering
 It is quite challenging to obtain datasets with sufficient of different classes of encrypted traffic, an effective represendiversity and undisputed ground truth. We refer to a straight- tation should be discriminative enough to make each class
forward way that is commonly used in the literature as easily separated from one another. More specifically, a powsnowball method. The basic idea of this method is to sim- erful representation should make a traffic instance similar to
ulate a vasty of user actions, such as simulating Web visiting those in the same class while distinctive from those in a differbehaviors of real users, and then collect the resulting traffic ent class. Existing representations usually abstract encrypted
traces. It usually starts with a small set of user actions, and traffic from one or multiple aspects, such as packet order,
then enlarges the set to cover a variety of combinations of soft- timing, direction and frequency [73]. Except for abstractware, hardware, and environmental variations. It can obtain ing these superficial features, future studies can dig into the
data samples with accurate ground truth, but requires signifi- interaction process between a pair of communication comcant manual efforts. An alternative way is referred to as gold ponents (e.g., client-server interactions) and attach the traffic
panning method, which collects traffic from network devices with more semantic knowledge of the application-layer data in
in real-world environments, e.g., recording traffic traversing transmission. This can provide us with more insights into the
through the egress router of a campus network, as real-world fundamental reasons that lead to traffic differences among diftraffic has sufficient diversity. Since the target traffic traces ferent classes. In addition, appropriate evaluation metrics are
are usually mixed with a much larger amount of background needed to quantitatively measure the effectiveness of different
traces, time-consuming efforts are needed to filter out untar- representations.
geted traces, like the gold panning process that separates gold Robustness: Traffic representation should have the ability to
from other materials. A major obstacle to this approach is the resist change of encrypted traffic without significantly adapting
lack of ground truth for most encrypted traffic traces. its initial construction. Potential changes can take many forms,
 To break through the dilemma between accuracy and such as protocol upgrading, content updates, and network
diversity, auto-labeling tools are highly desirable to automat- condition changes. Statistical representations are usually senically collect accurate and adequate data samples for a given sitive to these changes, as a small magnitude of changes
analysis purpose. Since ensuring sufficient diversity can be would render the original representations inefficient. This can

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 817

be demonstrated by the quantitative measure of information RTT, packet loss rate, and inter-packet gap). With these indileakage of different statistical features, where the features cators, the operators can launch certain optimization strategies
contribute mostly to website fingerprinting vary greatly when on network devices so as to improve QoE perceived by end
the traffic is perturbed. In contrast, the stream representations users. Statistical representations owe the advantage of interare more robust to such changes, as they construct traffic pretability, because the features can be used to reason the
abstractions from the original packet streams and thereby are prediction of classifiers. While stream representations are not
not severely affected by potential changes. The current forms interpretable enough as the features are automatically extracted
of stream representation (e.g., sequence, graph, and image) and learned as in a black-box scenario. Recent advances in
usually borrow ideas from other research domains, such as interpretable machine learning can be employed to improve
speech signal processing, natural language processing, and the interpretability of encrypted traffic analysis methods.
computer vision. More powerful and robust representations are
expected to be proposed to reflect the inherent characteristics
of encrypted network traffic. C. Analysis Model Building
 Time Efficiency: It is desirable to construct traffic represen- Traffic encryption uncovers payload segments of packets,
tation in a time-efficient manner so as to accelerate the model which reduce the information that can be exploited for analytraining process or make decisions rapidly for on-the-fly traf- sis significantly. Thus, most existing work resorts to machine
fic instances. Time efficiency can be explained in two aspects. learning techniques to build analysis models. As mentioned
The first one, which is commonly employed in the literature, is above, the traffic analysis problem is usually treated as a
time consumption on construing representation for a batch of supervised or unsupervised classification problem, where the
encrypted traffic instances. Statistical representations usually classifiers can be roughly grouped into two categories.
require complex computation of multi-dimensional features, In the first category, the classifiers usually leverage tradisuch as entropy and frequency spectrum. Stream representa- tional machine learning models (e.g., k-NN, SVM, RF, and
tions vary a lot in terms of time consumption, depending on DT), which are carefully trained with empirically crafted feathe specific form of a representation. For instance, sequence- tures. The classifiers in the second category employ deep
based and graph-based representations are quite easy to obtain learning models (e.g., CNN, MLP, and LSTM) that can autofrom the original encrypted traffic, whereas image-based rep- matically learn effective features from raw input data and
resentation can result in a dramatic increase of time overhead thus avoid the complicated feature engineering process. An
for reforming packet sequence information into the image-like emerging trend appears to combine deep learning models and
structure. The second aspect is usually ignored in existing traditional machine learning techniques together, e.g., effective
studies, which can be roughly interpreted as the number of features are first extracted using deep learning models and then
packets required for representation construction. Since pack- used to train traditional machine learning classifiers.
ets are arrived at a monitoring point in sequence, the smaller In order to improve the performance of a classifier, several
the number of packets used, the less the time spent on repre- challenging issues should be well addressed.
sentation construction. Several statistical features are able to Effectiveness: The fundamental goal of a classifier is to
be extracted by the end of the session, which cost a lot of achieve high effectiveness, which can be measured by a series
time [118]. Therefore, the number of packets used is crucial of metrics, such as accuracy, precision, recall, etc. Most existfor online training or testing. Statistical representations require ing work focuses on evaluating the effectiveness of a classifier
complete flows or packet sequences, thus resulting in poor time in the closed-world setting [98], where the traffic is assumed to
efficiency, while typical stream representations (e.g., sequence- be generated from a limited number of targeted sources (e.g.,
or graph-based ones) can be obtained with a flexible number of websites). A classifier with high accuracy in the closed-world
packets. Improving time efficiency of representation construc- scenario, however, loses efficacy in the more realistic opention is an interesting topic. The challenge is carefully balance world scenario, as the encrypted traffic can be generated from
the trade-offs between effectiveness and time efficiency, i.e., a much larger number of untargeted sources than the targeted
achieving discriminative representation using as few features ones. In other words, the targeted traffic may take only a small
and packets as possible. fraction of the total amount of traffic in the open-world setting,
 Interpretability: As the machine learning methods, espe- and the classifier should also be able to distinguish between
cially deep learning techniques, have been widely used for the targeted and untargeted traffic.
encrypted traffic analysis, interpretability becomes a challeng- In order to evade traffic analysis tools, several defenses have
ing issue, which means the degree to which a human can been proposed to reduce the information leaked out from the
understand the cause of a decision. The need for interpretabil- encrypted traffic. Defenses negatively affect the effectiveness
ity arises from an eagerness to know why a machine learning of classifiers, as less discriminative features can be extracted
method ends with such predictions. In other words, getting cor- from defended traffic. Existing studies have confirmed that the
rect predictions only partially solves the problem. For instance, accuracy of classifiers drops significantly on defended trafin a QoE metric estimation task, besides accurate predication fic. An interesting problem is to investigate how to maintain
of a well-trained machine learning method, network operators the effectiveness of classifiers in distinguishing between the
are also eager to know the major reasons that result in poor targeted and untargeted traffic when all the traffic is protected.
QoE metrics (e.g., low video resolution on user side), which Generalizability: A robust classifier should remain effeccan be interpreted from typical network quality indicators (e.g., tive under different networks and environmental conditions.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
818 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

Many existing studies assume that the pre-trained classifiers The current advances in transfer learning provide promisare applied in scenarios having similar or even the same con- ing opportunities to improve the transferability of classifiers,
ditions as in the training process. This assumption gives the which can also ameliorate the generalization issues.
classifier an unrealistic advantage for making predictions, as
the conditions for testing would be different from those for
training. We summarize the differences as following: D. Countermeasures
 • Networking heterogeneity. Network encrypted traffic can In order to protect against traffic analysis methods, many
 be generated from users or devices with heterogeneous countermeasures have been proposed over the years. Existing
 network conditions, including fixed network and wireless solutions mainly focus on two aspects: 1) protecting usernetwork (e.g., WiFi and 3G/4/G/5G). The locations where side information leakage against fingerprinting attacks, and 2)
 network traffic is collected can also be different, e.g., at obfuscating malicious traffic to evade anomaly traffic detecthe locations near to end users (e.g., the access point), tors. Next, we briefly describe the achievements of current
 both upstream and downstream traffic can be collected, solutions and discuss the challenges.
 whereas at the locations far away from end users (e.g., Website Fingerprinting Defenses: To defend against passive
 the backbone routers) only unidirectional traffic can be WF attacks, several methods have been proposed to make the
 collected due to routing asymmetry in the real world. targeted traffic traces less discriminative. To achieve this goal,
 • Parameter variations. Network encrypted traffic can be they typically employ two approaches: inserting dummy packgenerated with different hardware and software parame- ets, and/or deferring the sending of certain packets. Gong and
 ters. The range of hardware covers PCs, laptops, smart- Wang [185] classify existing defenses into three types: traffic
 phones, IoT devices, wearable devices, network servers obfuscation, confusion, and regularization. For ease of underand devices, while the range of software parameters cov- standing, we can roughly summarize the basic ideas behind
 ers OS types, browser brands and versions, protocol these defenses into two categories.
 versions (e.g., TLS and Tor-browser-bundle). The first category aims at making traffic traces as similar
 • Temporal drift. The sources for generating encrypted traf- as possible, by inserting dummy packets or enlarging interfic would change over time, e.g., the layout and content packet delays. The defended traffic traces from a targeted site
 of a webpage can vary frequently, or the upgrade of become indistinguishable from those from another one (e.g.,
 data transmission protocols such as Dynamic Adaptive Walkie-talkie [184] or Decoy [104]) or multiple sites (e.g.,
 Streaming over HTTP (DASH), making the accuracy of Supersequence). This idea is analogue to the k-anonymity
 a well-trained classifier decay after a certain period. strategy in protecting sensitive location information. The
 Transferability: In order to reduce the complexity and second category aims to make traffic traces as stochasresource consumption on frequently re-training a classifier, it tic as possible, by inserting dummy packets following a
is highly desirable that the classifier can be flexibly transferred certain distribution (e.g., a fixed rate distribution in WTFto different datasets and tasks. Currently, most supervised PAD [183], or the Rayleigh distribution in Front [185]).
classifiers are trained with a fixed number of labels, where With the adoption of such defenses, the resulting traffic
the classifiers attempt to learn the optimal mapping from traces from the same site become apparently different, making
labelled samples (traffic traces or features) to their correspond- the attackers difficult to extract consistent and discriminative
ing labels. Then, in the prediction phase, the classifier outputs features.
the probability vector for a given unlabeled sample. In prac- Anomaly Detection Escape: To evade anomaly traffic detectice, more flexibility is needed to design an out-of-the-box tion, several methods have been proposed to mislead the
classifier. classifiers by traffic obfuscation. The basic idea behind these
 • Dataset transferability. The label set in the training dataset methods is to disguise malicious traffic as normal traffic, by
 would change dynamically. For instance, the adversary changing the features of malicious traffic. Such as intermediate
 conducting website fingerprinting attacks may wish to DDoS attack, bots generate random browser-like requests to
 enlarge or shrink the set of targeted websites by adding or make the attack behavior can not be distinguished from the
 removing the corresponding labels. Another example can regular human traffic [67].
 be found in the estimation of video resolutions, where a Next, we discuss the challenges to design efficient and
 coarse-grained label set (e.g., high, medium, and low res- effective countermeasures.
 olutions) is replaced by a fine-grained label set consisting The effectiveness and overhead should be taken into conof specific resolutions (e.g., 144P, 360P, 480P, 720P, and sideration when designing countermeasures. The effectiveness
 1080P). is usually measured as the accuracy of a specific classifier
 • Task transferability. Most classifiers are trained for a spe- on traffic traces when the countermeasures are applied. Since
 cific task, which results in poor transferability among the goal of changing traffic features is usually achieved by
 tasks. For instance, when the classifiers for application adding dummy packets or deferring packet delivery, the overrecognition are directly applied for user action recog- head is commonly measured by the bandwidth overhead and
 nition, the accuracy would drop significantly, as the time overhead, where the former denotes the fraction of bandfeatures of different tasks vary a lot. As a result, the width increase compared with the original traffic traces, while
 shift of traffic analysis goals inevitably leads to classifier the latter denotes the fraction of time extension for completing
 re-training. the packet transmission.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 819

 There usually exists a conflict between these two factors. dynamic changes, which provides connivance for device man-
For instance, to reduce the overhead introduced by potential agement. Then, we review the studies on privacy leakage
countermeasures, dummy packets should be added as little detection including WF, AF and fine-grained user action
as possible, and at the same time, packets should maintain identification. By detecting sensitive information leaked from
their original delivery timetables. This, however, would have website browsing and application using, malicious eavesdroplimited impacts on changing the original traffic features, result- pers may commit criminal activities such as financial fraud.
ing in a poor defense effect on classifiers. Thus, to design Next, the network characterization section focuses on QoE
appropriate countermeasures for traffic analysis models, a bet- metric measurement and protocol recognition, which helps serter balance should be achieved between effectiveness and vice providers to grasp the network environment and adjust
overhead. service strategies timely. As for the anomaly detection sec-
 The recent advances in GANs can be helpful to improve the tion, we introduce two types of malicious behaviors, which
effectiveness of defenses. GANs have proved to be effective are malware and network attacks, respectively. Novel repin many fields such as face recognition and acoustical signal resentations and detection methods for encrypted traffic are
processing. By crafting adversarial examples, the perturbed introduced. Finally, we discuss challenges and future direcsamples can successfully cheat a deep learning classifier. It is tions, which provide new ideas for developing innovative
not straightforward to apply GAN techniques in the domain approaches.
of encrypted traffic analysis, due to the following barriers: In conclusion, encrypted traffic analysis plays an essential
 • Unforeseeable traffic traces. The traffic traces are gener- role in the field of network security protection and personated in a real-time manner, the defender can hardly learn alized service guarantee. However, the analysis is a mixed
 the whole traces in advance. To address this problem, blessing which breaks the security of the network and probes
 historical traces can be used to learn a relatively con- user privacy to a certain extent. Hence, there are also several
 stant pattern as a basic prediction of unforeseeable traces. studies contributing to countermeasures against encrypted traf-
 Since many factors have influences on traces, the gap fic analysis. Due to this reason, determining how to properly
 between real and predicted traces can always exist and use encrypted traffic analysis is a problem worthy of considerwould negatively impact the effectiveness of defenses. ation. To conclude, with the rapid development of the network
 • Limited manipulation methods. Unlike the diversified and related technologies, encrypted traffic analysis will be a
 ways to craft adversarial images, the methods to manip- vibrant field and continue to flourish.
 ulate traffic traces are limited to adding dummy packets
 or deferring packet delivery. In other words, the defender
 R EFERENCES
 cannot delete or speed up packets in the original traffic traces, which narrows the space to craft effective [1] E. Rescorla, SSL and TLS: Designing and Building Secure Systems,
 vol. 1. Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2001.
 adversarial traffic traces. [2] “Transparencyreport.” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
 • Limited prior knowledge of classifiers. Most classifiers transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview
 conduct traffic analysis in a passive manner, where the [3] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and
 machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
 victim knows little prior knowledge of these classifiers. Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2nd Quart.,
 As a result, the defenses are blinded to the features that 2016.
 can be employed by potential attacks. In such a scenario, [4] X. Jing, Z. Yan, and W. Pedrycz, “Security data collection and data analytics in the Internet: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21,
 the specific classifiers can be treated as a black-box and no. 1, pp. 586–618, 1st Quart., 2018.
 the defenses are expected to have good defense effects [5] G. Fernandes, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, L. F. Carvalho, J. F. Al-Muhtadi,
 no matter which classifier is used. and M. L. Proença, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly
 detection,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 447–489, 2019.
 [6] D. Kwon, H. Kim, J. Kim, S. C. Suh, I. Kim, and K. J. Kim, “A survey
 of deep learning-based network anomaly detection,” Cluster Comput.,
 vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 949–961, 2019.
 X. C ONCLUSION [7] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
 for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Int. J. Netw. Manag.,
 This paper surveys significant studies in the field of vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–374, 2015.
multi-target and multi-method encrypted traffic analysis. [8] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81,
Before starting the introduction of the specific studies, we May 2019.
review the network encryption technologies and introduce [9] M. Conti, Q. Q. Li, A. Maragno, and R. Spolaor, “The dark side
the goals of encrypted traffic analysis. In particular, we (-channel) of mobile devices: A survey on network traffic analysis,”
summarize the workflow including traffic collection, traf- IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2658–2713, 4th
 Quart., 2018.
fic representation, traffic analysis method, and performance [10] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar,
evaluation. “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network traf-
 In terms of classification goals, we review four applica- fic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2018.
tion scenarios including network asset identification, network [11] A. Bremler-Barr, Y. Harchol, D. Hay, and Y. Koral, “Deep packet
characterization, privacy leakage detection and anomaly detec- inspection as a service,” in Proc. 10th ACM Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw.
tion. Network asset identification section focuses studies Exp. Technol., 2014, pp. 271–282.
 [12] G. Dimopoulos, P. Barlet-Ros, and J. Sanjuas-Cuxart, “Analysis of
of device fingerprinting and OS identification. By prob- youtube user experience from passive measurements,” in Proc. 9th Int.
ing network assets, administrators can keep abreast of the Conf. Netw. Service Manag. (CNSM), 2013, pp. 260–267.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
820 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 [13] R. Schatz, T. Hoßfeld, and P. Casas, “Passive YouTube QoE monitoring [36] T. Kotsiopoulos, P. Sarigiannidis, D. Ioannidis, and D. Tzovaras,
 for ISPs,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Innov. Mobile Internet Services “Machine learning and deep learning in smart manufacturing: The
 Comput., 2012, pp. 358–364. smart grid paradigm,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, May 2021,
 [14] M. Shen, J. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Liu, and L. Zhu, “Machine learning Art. no. 100341.
 classification on traffic of secondary encryption,” in Proc. IEEE Global [37] P. P. Shinde and S. Shah, “A review of machine learning and deep
 Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6. learning applications,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
 [15] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and N. Guizani, “Optimizing Control Autom. (ICCUBEA), 2018, pp. 1–6.
 feature selection for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A system- [38] Y. Xin et al., “Machine learning and deep learning methods for
 atic approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 20–27, Jul./Aug. 2020. cybersecurity,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 35365–35381, 2018.
 [16] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted [39] I. Rish et al., “An empirical study of the Naive Bayes classifier,” in
 traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute Proc. IJCAI Workshop Empirical Methods Artif. Intell., vol. 3, 2001,
 bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 41–46.
 pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017. [40] J. G. Kemeny and J. L. Snell, Markov Chains with Stationary
 [17] M. Bkassiny, Y. Li, and S. K. Jayaweera, “A survey on machine- Transition Probabilities, vol. 6. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
 learning techniques in cognitive radios,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., 1976.
 vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1136–1159, 3rd Quart., 2012. [41] T. Cover and P. Hart, “Nearest neighbor pattern classification,” IEEE
 [18] Z. Wang, Q. She, and T. E. Ward, “Generative adversarial networks Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 1, pp. 21–27, Jan. 1967.
 in computer vision: A survey and taxonomy,” ACM Comput. Surveys, [42] W. S. Noble, “What is a support vector machine?” Nat. Biotechnol.,
 vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021. vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1565–1567, 2006.
 [19] Q. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Li, S. Jin, and F. Li, “The application of deep learning [43] S. R. Safavian and D. Landgrebe, “A survey of decision tree classifier
 in computer vision,” in Proc. IEEE Chin. Autom. Congr. (CAC), 2017, methodology,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 21, no. 3,
 pp. 6522–6527. pp. 660–674, May/Jun. 1991.
 [20] L. Cui, S. Yang, F. Chen, Z. Ming, N. Lu, and J. Qin, “A survey on [44] G. Biau and E. Scornet, “A random forest guided tour,” Test, vol. 25,
 application of machine learning for Internet of Things,” Int. J. Mach. no. 2, pp. 197–227, 2016.
 Learn. Cybern., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1399–1417, 2018. [45] R. Xu and D. Wunsch, “Survey of clustering algorithms,” IEEE Trans.
 [21] S. Athey and G. W. Imbens, “Machine learning methods that Neural Netw., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 645–678, May 2005.
 economists should know about,’ Annu. Rev. Econ., vol. 11, no. 1, [46] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learnpp. 685–725, 2019. ing applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
 [22] B. Saltaformaggio et al., “Eavesdropping on fine-grained user activities pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
 within smartphone apps over encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. 10th [47] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
 USENIX Workshop Offensive Technol. (WOOT), Austin, TX, USA, “The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20,
 Aug. 2016, pp. 69–78. no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2009.
 [23] W. Zhang, D. Yang, Y. Xu, X. Huang, J. Zhang, and M. Gidlund, [48] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 “DeepHealth: A self-attention based method for instant intelligent Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 predictive maintenance in Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans.
 [49] S. Frankel, Demystifying the IPsec Puzzle. London, U.K.: Artech
 Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5461–5473, Aug. 2021.
 House, 2001.
 [24] J. Zhang, H. Du, Q. Sun, B. Ai, and D. W. K. Ng, “Physical layer
 [50] S. Frankel, K. Kent, R. Lewkowski, A. D. Orebaugh, R. W. Ritchey,
 security enhancement with reconfigurable intelligent surface-aided
 and S. R. Sharma, Guide to ipSEC VPNs, document NIST SP 800-77,
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3480–3495,
 NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2005.
 2021.
 [51] The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.3, Eric Res.,
 [25] M. Shen, H. Lu, F. Wang, H. Liu, and L. Zhu, “Secure and effi-
 Palo Alto, CA, USA, 2018.
 cient blockchain-assisted authentication for edge-integrated Internetof-Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., early access, Jul. 27, 2022, [52] T. Ylonen et al., “The secure shell (SSH) protocol architecture,” IETF,
 doi: 10.1109/TVT.2022.3194008. RFC 4251, 2006.
 [26] K. Das and R. N. Behera, “A survey on machine learning: Concept, [53] M. S. Bhiogade, “Secure socket layer,” in Proc. Comput. Sci. Inf.
 algorithms and applications,” Int. J. Innov. Res. Comput. Commun. Technol. Educ. Conf., 2002, pp. 85–90.
 Eng., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1301–1309, 2017. [54] A. Langley et al., “The quick transport protocol: Design and Internet-
 [27] Y. Qu et al., “Empowering edge intelligence by air-ground inte- scale deployment,” in Proc. Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data
 grated federated learning,” IEEE Netw., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 34–41, Commun., 2017, pp. 183–196.
 Sep./Oct. 2021. [55] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “ToR: The second-
 [28] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, R. Deng, P. Wang, and generation onion router,” Naval Res. Lab., Washington, DC, USA, Rep.
 L.-C. Wang, “Deep reinforcement learning for mobile 5G and beyond: TR-2004, 2004.
 Fundamentals, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., [56] “Multi-Site Connectivity Capability Package V1.1.” Accessed:
 vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 44–52, Jun. 2019. May 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nsa.gov/Resources/
 [29] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato, Commercial-Solutions-for-Classified-Program/Capability-Packages/
 “Federated learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods, and [57] R. S. Panwar and K. M. Sivalingam, “Implementation of wrap around
 future directions,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118, 2020. mechanism for system level simulation of LTE cellular networks in
 [30] M. Xu et al., “Multi-agent federated reinforcement learning NS3,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Symp. World Wireless Mobile Multimedia
 for secure incentive mechanism in intelligent cyber-physical Netw. (WoWMoM), 2017, pp. 1–9.
 systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, May 18, 2021, [58] J. H. Cox et al., “Advancing software-defined networks: A survey,”
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2021.3081626. IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 25487–25526, 2017.
 [31] J. Qiu, Q. Wu, G. Ding, Y. Xu, and S. Feng, “A survey of machine [59] L. Cui, F. R. Yu, and Q. Yan, “When big data meets software-defined
 learning for big data processing,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., networking: SDN for big data and big data for SDN,” IEEE Netw.,
 vol. 2016, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2016. vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 58–65, Feb. 2016.
 [32] M. N. Wernick, Y. Yang, J. G. Brankov, G. Yourganov, and [60] M. P. Karpowicz and P. Arabas, “Preliminary results on the Linux
 S. C. Strother, “Machine learning in medical imaging,” IEEE Signal libpcap model identification,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Methods
 Process. Mag., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 25–38, Mar./Apr. 2017. Models Autom. Robot. (MMAR), 2015, pp. 1056–1061.
 [33] P. Ongsulee, “Artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learn- [61] P. Goyal and A. Goyal, “Comparative study of two most popular packet
 ing,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf. ICT Knowl. Eng. (ICT&KE), 2017, sniffing tools-Tcpdump and wireshark,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Int. Conf.
 pp. 1–6. Comput. Intell. Commun. Netw. (CICN), 2017, pp. 77–81.
 [34] J. Alzubi, A. Nayyar, and A. Kumar, “Machine learning from the- [62] L. Chappell, Wireshark Network Analysis. PODBOOKS, Reading,
 ory to algorithms: An overview,” J. Phys. Conf., vol. 1142, Jan. 2018, U.K., 2012.
 Art. no. 012012. [63] B. Merino, Instant Traffic Analysis With Tshark How-To. London, U.K.:
 [35] M. A. Al-Garadi, A. Mohamed, A. K. Al-Ali, X. Du, I. Ali, and Packt, 2013.
 M. Guizani, “A survey of machine and deep learning methods for [64] R. Hofstede et al., “Flow monitoring explained: From packet capture
 Internet of Things (IoT) security,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., to data analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1646–1685, 3rd Quart., 2020. Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037–2064, 4th Quart., 2014.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 821

[65] N. Bonelli, A. DiPietro, S. Giordano, G. Procissi, and F. Vitucci, [89] A. Arora and S. K. Peddoju, “Minimizing network traffic features for
 “Towards smarter probes: In-network traffic capturing and processing,” Android mobile malware detection,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Distrib.
 in Trustworthy Internet. Milan, Italy: Springer, 2011, pp. 289–301. Comput. Netw., 2017, pp. 1–10.
[66] H. Kawai, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, and I. Oka, “Identification of commu- [90] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 nication devices from analysis of traffic patterns,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov proba-
 Int. Conf. Netw. Service Manag. (CNSM), 2017, pp. 1–5. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Qual. Service
[67] M. Zolotukhin, T. Hämäläinen, T. Kokkonen, and J. Siltanen, (IWQoS), 2018, pp. 1–10.
 “Increasing Web service availability by detecting application-layer [91] C. V. Wright, L. Ballard, S. E. Coull, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson,
 DDoS attacks in encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. “Spot me if you can: Uncovering spoken phrases in encrypted VoIP
 Telecommun. (ICT), 2016, pp. 1–6. conversations,” in Proc. SP, 2008, pp. 35–49.
[68] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprint- [92] A. Shahraki, M. Abbasi, A. Taherkordi, and A. D. Jurcut, “A comparing: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” ative study on online machine learning techniques for network traffic
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2018, streams analysis,” Comput. Netw., vol. 207, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108836.
 pp. 1928–1943. [93] A. Acar et al., “Peek-a-boo: I see your smart home activities, even
[69] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- encrypted!” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Security Privacy Wireless Mobile
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using Netw., 2020, pp. 207–218.
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, [94] Y. N. Dong, J. J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and claspp. 2367–2380, 2021. sification of Internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,”
[70] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for Comput. Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, Jan. 2017.
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE [95] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg,
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. “Effective attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,”
[71] K. Gao, C. Corbett, and R. Beyah, “A passive approach to wireless in Proc. USENIX Assoc., 2014, pp. 143–157.
 device fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. [96] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi-
 Netw. (DSN), 2010, pp. 383–392. directional dependence,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Security Appl., 2016,
[72] M. Husák, M. Čermák, T. Jirsík, and P. Čeleda, “HTTPs traffic anal- pp. 177–188.
 ysis and client identification using passive SSL/TLS fingerprinting,” [97] X. Gong, N. Kiyavash, and N. Borisov, “Fingerprinting websites using
 EURASIP J. Inf. Security, vol. 2016, no. 1, p. 6, 2016. remote traffic analysis,” in Proc. 17th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun.
[73] N. Ruffing, Y. Zhu, R. Libertini, Y. Guan, and R. Bettati, “Smartphone Security, 2010, pp. 684–686.
 reconnaissance: Operating system identification,” in Proc. 13th IEEE [98] M. Shen, Y. Liu, S. Chen, L. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Webpage finger-
 Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2016, pp. 1086–1091. printing using only packet length information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
[74] J. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Yu, and K. Shen, “Walls have ears: Traffic-based Commun. (ICC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
 side-channel attack in video streaming,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM [99] R. Overdorf, M. Juarez, G. Acar, R. Greenstadt, and C. Diaz, “How
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 1538–1546. unique is your. Onion? An analysis of the fingerprintability of ToR
[75] G. Cheng and S. Wang, “Traffic classification based on port connection onion services,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
 pattern,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Service Syst. (CSSS), Security, 2017, pp. 2021–2036.
 2011, pp. 914–917.
 [100] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
[76] L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano, “NDPI: Openwebsite fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
 source high-speed deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Wireless
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2018, pp. 1977–1992.
 Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), 2014, pp. 617–622.
 [101] T. Wang, “High precision open-world website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
[77] L. Lu, E.-C. Chang, and M. C. Chan, “Website fingerprinting and iden-
 IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2020, pp. 152–167.
 tification using ordered feature sequences,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res.
 [102] R. R. Maiti, S. Siby, R. Sridharan, and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Link-layer
 Comput. Security, 2010, pp. 199–214.
 device type classification on encrypted wireless traffic with cots radios,”
[78] S. Burschka, K. Mclaughlin, and S. Sezer, “Analysis of information
 in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. Comput. Security, 2017, pp. 247–264.
 leakage from encrypted Skype conversations,” Int. J. Inf. Security,
 vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 313–325, 2010. [103] J. Muehlstein et al., “Analyzing https encrypted traffic to identify user’s
[79] C. V. Wright, L. Ballard, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson, “Language operating system, browser and application,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Annu.
 identification of encrypted voip traffic: Alejandra Y Roberto or Alice Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
 and Bob?” in Proc. USENIX Security Symp., vol. 3, 2007, pp. 43–54. [104] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fin-
[80] A. Arora, S. Garg, and S. K. Peddoju, “Malware detection using gerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc.
 network traffic analysis in Android based mobile devices,” in Proc. 8th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, pp. 103–114.
 Int. Conf. Next Gener. Mobile Apps Services Technol., 2014, pp. 66–71. [105] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
[81] W. Zhang, Y. Meng, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and H. Zhu, NDSS, 2016, pp. 1–7.
 “HoMonit: Monitoring smart home apps from encrypted traffic,” [106] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on ToR,” in
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2018, Proc. 12th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2013, pp. 201–212.
 pp. 1074–1088. [107] S. Mongkolluksamee, V. Visoottiviseth, and K. Fukuda, “Combining
[82] J. David and C. Thomas, “DDoS attack detection using fast entropy communication patterns & traffic patterns to enhance mobile trafapproach on flow-based network traffic,” Procedia Comput. Sci., fic identification performance,” J. Inf. Process., vol. 24, no. 2,
 vol. 50, pp. 30–36, 2015. pp. 247–254, 2016.
[83] L. Yu, T. Liu, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Q. Liu, and J. Tan, “WDMTI: Wireless [108] D. Ran, A. Dvir, O. Pele, and O. Hadar, “I know what you saw last
 device manufacturer and type identification using hierarchical Dirichlet minute—Encrypted HTTP adaptive video streaming title classification,”
 process,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf. Mobile Ad Hoc Sensor Syst. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 3039–3049,
 (MASS), 2018, pp. 19–27. Dec. 2017.
[84] S. E. Coull and K. P. Dyer, “Traffic analysis of encrypted messag- [109] T. Al-Shehari and F. Shahzad, “Improving operating system fingerprinting services: Apple iMessage and beyond,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. ing using machine learning techniques,” Int. J. Comput. Theory Eng.,
 Commun. Rev., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 5–11, 2014. vol. 6, no. 1, p. 57, 2014.
[85] Y.-C. Chen, Y. Liao, M. Baldi, S.-J. Lee, and L. Qiu, “OS fingerprinting [110] D. Barradas, N. Santos, and L. Rodrigues, “Effective detection of
 and tethering detection in mobile networks,” in Proc. Conf. Internet multimedia protocol tunneling using machine learning,” in Proc.
 Meas., 2014, pp. 173–180. USENIX Security Symp., 2018, pp. 169–185,.
[86] M. AlSabah, K. Bauer, and I. Goldberg, “Enhancing Tor’s performance [111] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained webpage finusing real-time traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. gerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,”
 Commun. Security, 2012, pp. 73–84. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2021.
[87] Y. Shi and S. Biswas, “Website fingerprinting using traffic analysis [112] Z. A. Qazi, J. Lee, T. Jin, G. Bellala, M. R. Arndt, and G. Noubir,
 of dynamic webpages,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., 2014, “Application-awareness in SDN,” ACM Special Interest Group Data
 pp. 557–563. Commun., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 487–488, 2013.
[88] H. F. Alan and J. Kaur, “Can Android applications be identified using [113] S. Garg, S. K. Peddoju, and A. K. Sarje, “Network-based deteconly TCP/IP headers of their launch time traffic?” in Proc. ACM Conf. tion of Android malicious apps,” Int. J. Inf. Security, vol. 16, no. 4,
 Security Privacy Wireless Mobile Netw., 2016, pp. 61–66. pp. 385–400, 2017.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
822 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

[114] S. Wang, Z. Chen, Q. Yan, B. Yang, L. Peng, and Z. Jia, “A mobile [137] M. Shen, J. Zhang, K. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Liu, and X. Du, “DeepQoE:
 malware detection method using behavior features in network traffic,” Real-time measurement of video QoE from encrypted traffic with deep
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 133, pp. 15–25, May 2019. learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 28th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQoS),
[115] F. Meghdouri, T. Zseby, and F. Iglesias, “Analysis of lightweight feature 2020, pp. 1–10.
 vectors for attack detection in network traffic,” Appl. Sci., vol. 8, no. 11, [138] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 p. 2196, 2018. “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neu-
[116] A. Sivanathan et al., “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in ral networks for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5,
 smart cities and campuses,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. pp. 18042–18050, 2017.
 Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2017, pp. 559–564. [139] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequence-to-image
[117] M. Miettinen, S. Marchal, I. Hafeez, N. Asokan, A.-R. Sadeghi, and based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional
 S. Tarkoma, “IoT sentinel: Automated device-type identification for neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), 2017,
 security enforcement in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Distrib. pp. 1271–1276.
 Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), 2017, pp. 2177–2184. [140] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet finger-
[118] M. R. Shahid, G. Blanc, Z. Zhang, and H. Debar, “IoT devices recog- printing: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with n-shot
 nition through network traffic analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security,
 Data (Big Data), 2018, pp. 5187–5192. 2019, pp. 1131–1148.
[119] J. Bao, B. Hamdaoui, and W.-K. Wong, “IoT device type identifica- [141] P. Wang, F. Ye, X. Chen, and Y. Qian, “DataNet: Deep learning based
 tion using hybrid deep learning approach for increased IoT security,” encrypted network traffic classification in SDN home gateway,” IEEE
 in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput. (IWCMC), 2020, Access, vol. 6, pp. 55380–55391, 2018.
 pp. 565–570. [142] M. Yeo et al., “Flow-based malware detection using convolutional neu-
[120] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “OS fingerprinting: New techniques and ral network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2018, pp. 910–913.
 a study of information gain and obfuscation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. [143] J. Feng, L. Shen, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, and H. Li, “A two-layer deep
 Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2017, pp. 1–9. learning method for Android malware detection using network traffic,”
[121] G. Dimopoulos, I. Leontiadis, P. Barlet-Ros, and K. Papagiannaki, IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 125786–125796, 2020.
 “Measuring video QoE from encrypted traffic,” in Proc. Internet Meas. [144] P. Yujie, N. Weina, Z. Xiaosong, Z. Jie, H. Wu, and C. Ruidong, “End-
 Conf., 2016, pp. 513–526. to-end android malware classification based on pure traffic images,”
[122] I. Oršolić, P. Rebernjak, M. Sužnjević, and L. Skorin-Kapov, “In- in Proc. 17th Int. Comput. Conf. Wavelet Active Media Technol. Inf.
 network QoE and KPI monitoring of mobile YouTube traffic: Insights Process. (ICCWAMTIP), 2020, pp. 240–245.
 for encrypted IoS flows,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Netw. Service [145] M. Shen, Z. Gao, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Efficient fine-grained web-
 Manag. (CNSM), 2018, pp. 233–239. site fingerprinting via encrypted traffic analysis with deep learning,”
[123] W. Pan, G. Cheng, H. Wu, and Y. Tang, “Towards QoE assessment in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQOS), 2021,
 of encrypted YouTube adaptive video streaming in mobile networks,” pp. 1–10.
 in Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQoS), 2016, [146] S. Dargan, M. Kumar, M. R. Ayyagari, and G. Kumar, “A survey of
 pp. 1–6. deep learning and its applications: A new paradigm to machine learning,” Archives Comput. Methods Eng., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1071–1092,
[124] I. Orsolic, D. Pevec, M. Suznjevic, and L. Skorin-Kapov, “YouTube
 2020.
 QoE estimation based on the analysis of encrypted network traffic using
 [147] Y. Li et al., “Deep content: Unveiling video streaming content from
 machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
 encrypted WiFi traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Symp. Netw. Comput.
 2016, pp. 1–6.
 Appl. (NCA), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[125] M. Seufert, P. Casas, N. Wehner, L. Gang, and K. Li, “Stream-based
 [148] X. Ji, Y. Cheng, W. Xu, and X. Zhou, “User presence inference
 machine learning for real-time QoE analysis of encrypted video streamvia encrypted traffic of wireless camera in smart homes,” Security
 ing traffic,” in Proc. 22nd Conf. Innov. Clouds Internet Netw. Workshops
 Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, pp. 1–10, Sep. 2018.
 (ICIN), 2019, pp. 76–81.
 [149] P. Prasse et al., “Malware detection by analysing network traffic with
[126] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable webneural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Security Privacy Workshops (SPW),
 site fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. USENIX Security Symp., 2016,
 2017, pp. 205–210.
 pp. 1187–1203.
 [150] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “Deep-full-range: A deep
[127] Q. Wang, A. Yahyavi, B. Kemme, and W. He, “I know what you did on learning based network encrypted traffic classification and intruyour smartphone: Inferring app usage over encrypted data traffic,” in sion detection framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190,
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2015, pp. 433–441. 2019.
[128] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- [151] X. Fan, G. Gou, C. Kang, J. Shi, and G. Xiong, “Identify OS
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE from encrypted traffic with TCP/IP stack fingerprinting,” in Proc.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018. IEEE 38th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf. (IPCCC), 2019,
[129] R. B. Jackson and T. Camp, “Amazon echo security: Machine learning pp. 1–7.
 to classify encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Comput. [152] D. Bekerman, B. Shapira, L. Rokach, and A. Bar, “Unknown mal-
 Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), 2018, pp. 1–10. ware detection using network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
[130] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Can’t you hear Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2015, pp. 134–142.
 me knocking: Identification of user actions on android apps via traf- [153] P. Matoušek, O. Ryšavỳ, M. Grégr, and M. Vymlátil, “Towards identific analysis,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Data Appl. Security Privacy, 2015, fication of operating systems from the Internet traffic: IPfix monitoring
 pp. 297–304. with fingerprinting and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data
[131] F. Yan et al., “Identifying WeChat red packets and fund transfers via Commun. Netw. (DCNET), 2014, pp. 1–7.
 analyzing encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. 17th IEEE Int. Conf. [154] N. Msadek, R. Soua, and T. Engel, “IoT device fingerprinting: Machine
 Trust Security Privacy Comput. Commun. 12th IEEE Int. Conf. Big learning based encrypted traffic analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless
 Data Sci. Eng. (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2018, pp. 1426–1432. Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), 2019, pp. 1–8.
[132] T. Gu, Z. Fang, A. Abhishek, H. Fu, P. Hu, and P. Mohapatra, [155] S. Rahmat, Q. Niyaz, A. Mathur, W. Sun, and A. Y. Javaid, “Network
 “IoTGaze: IoT security enforcement via wireless context analysis,” in traffic-based hybrid malware detection for smartphone and tradi-
 Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 884–893. tional networked systems,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Annu. Ubiquitous
[133] G. Xu et al., “Am I eclipsed? A smart detector of Eclipse attacks for Comput. Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), 2019,
 ethereum,” Comput. Security, vol. 88, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 101604. pp. 322–328.
[134] Y. Wan, K. Xu, G. Xue, and F. Wang, “IoTargos: A multi-layer security [156] G. A. Ajaeiya, N. Adalian, I. H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab,
 monitoring system for Internet-of-Things in smart homes,” in Proc. “Flow-based intrusion detection system for SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
 IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 874–883. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2017, pp. 787–793.
[135] G. Maiolini, A. Baiocchi, A. Iacovazzi, and A. Rizzi, “Real time iden- [157] B. Bezawada, M. Bachani, J. Peterson, H. Shirazi, I. Ray, and I. Ray,
 tification of SSH encrypted application flows by using cluster analysis Behavioral Fingerprinting of IoT Devices. New York, NY, USA: Assoc.
 techniques,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Res. Netw., 2009, pp. 182–194. Comput. Mach., 2018.
[136] X. Qin, T. Xu, and C. Wang, “DDoS attack detection using flow [158] S. Aneja, N. Aneja, and M. S. Islam, “IoT device fingerprint using
 entropy and clustering technique,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Comput. deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Internet Things Intell. Syst.
 Intell. Security (CIS), 2015, pp. 412–415. (IOTAIS), 2018, pp. 174–179.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
SHEN et al.: MACHINE LEARNING-POWERED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 823

[159] S. V. Radhakrishnan, A. S. Uluagac, and R. Beyah, “GTID: A tech- [184] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie–talkie: An efficient defense against
 nique for physical device and device type fingerprinting,” IEEE Trans. passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. USENIX Security
 Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 519–532, Sep./Oct. 2015. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2017, pp. 1375–1390.
[160] “Shodan Search Engine.” 2021. Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online]. [185] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
 Available: https://www.shodan.io/ fingerprinting,” in Proc. USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security),
[161] “FOFA.” 2021. Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: 2020, pp. 717–734.
 https://fofa.so/ [186] Q. Yin et al., “Automated multi-tab website fingerprinting attack,”
[162] “ZoomEye—Cyberspace Search Engine.” 2021. Accessed: May 16, IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., early access, Aug. 16, 2021,
 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.zoomeye.org/ doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2021.3104869.
[163] G. Maier, F. Schneider, and A. Feldmann, “A first look at mobile hand- [187] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Defeating DNN-based
 held device traffic,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Passive Active Netw. Meas., traffic analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial pertur-
 2010, pp. 161–170. bations,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. USENIX Security,
[164] Y. Song, Q. Huang, J. Yang, M. Fan, A. Hu, and Y. Jiang, “IoT device Aug. 2021, pp. 2705–2722.
 fingerprinting for relieving pressure in the access control,” in Proc. [188] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “VAR-CNN and dynaflow:
 ACM Turing Celebration Conf. China, 2019, pp. 1–8. Improved attacks and defenses for website fingerprinting,” 2018,
[165] “P0F V3.” Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: arxiv.abs/1802.10215.
 https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/p0f3/ [189] T. Wang, “The one-page setting: A higher standard for evaluating web-
[166] J. Du, F. R. Yu, G. Lu, J. Wang, J. Jiang, and X. Chu, “MEC-assisted site fingerprinting defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 immersive vr. video streaming over terahertz wireless networks: A Commun. Security (CCS), 2021, pp. 2794–2806.
 deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, [190] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A sysno. 10, pp. 9517–9529, Oct. 2020. tematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
[167] J. Beznazwy and A. Houmansadr, “How China detects and blocks defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security,
 shadowsocks,” in Proc. ACM Internet Meas. Conf., 2020, pp. 111–124. Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Nov. 2014, pp. 227–238.
[168] M. Oche, R. M. Noor, and C. Chembe, “Multivariate statistical [191] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted traffic
 approach for estimating QoE of real-time multimedia applications classification of decentralized applications on Ethereum using feature
 in vehicular its network,” Comput. Commun., vol. 104, pp. 88–107, fusion,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 27th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQoS),
 May 2017. 2019, pp. 1–10.
[169] J. Nightingale, P. Salva-Garcia, J. M. A. Calero, and Q. Wang, [192] A. H. Lashkari, A. F. A. Kadir, H. Gonzalez, K. F. Mbah, and
 “5G-QoE: QoE modelling for ultra-HD video streaming in 5G A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards a network-based framework for android malnetworks,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 621–634, ware detection and characterization,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Annu. Conf.
 Jun. 2018. Privacy Security Trust (PST), 2017, pp. 233–23309.
[170] H. Wu, X. Li, G. Cheng, and X. Hu, “Monitoring video resolution of [193] M. Zolotukhin, T. Hämäläinen, T. Kokkonen, A. Niemelä, and
 adaptive encrypted video traffic based on HTTP/2 features,” in Proc. J. Siltanen, “Data mining approach for detection of DDoS attacks uti-
 IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM lizing SSL/TLS protocol,” in Proc. Internet Things Smart Spaces Next
 WKSHPS), 2021, pp. 1–6. Gener. Netw. Syst., 2015, pp. 274–285.
[171] J. Du, F. R. Yu, X. Chu, J. Feng, and G. Lu, “Computation offload-
 [194] A. A. Ahmed, W. A. Jabbar, A. S. Sadiq, and H. Patel, “Deep learninging and resource allocation in vehicular networks based on dualbased classification model for botnet attack detection,” J. Ambient
 side cost minimization,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 2,
 Intell. Humanized Comput., to be published.
 pp. 1079–1092, Feb. 2019.
 [195] G. Hu and D. Venugopal, “A malware signature extrac-
[172] Z. Rao, W. Niu, X. S. Zhang, and H. Li, “Tor anonymous traffic idention and detection method applied to mobile networks,” in
 tification based on gravitational clustering,” Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl.,
 Proc. IEEE Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf., 2007,
 vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 592–601, 2018.
 pp. 19–26.
[173] W. Feng, Z. Hong, L. Wu, M. Fu, Y. Li, and P. Lin, “Network protocol
 recognition based on convolutional neural network,” China Commun., [196] Y. He et al., “Deep-reinforcement-learning-based optimization for
 vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 125–139, 2020. cache-enabled opportunistic interference alignment wireless networks,”
[174] T. Bujlow, T. Riaz, and J. M. Pedersen, “A method for classifica- IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 10433–10445,
 tion of network traffic based on C5.0 machine learning algorithm,” Nov. 2017.
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), 2012, [197] Y. Mirsky, A. Shabtai, B. Shapira, Y. Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Anomaly
 pp. 237–241. detection for smartphone data streams,” Pervasive Mobile Comput.,
[175] S. Alcock and R. Nelson, “Libprotoident: Traffic classification using vol. 35, pp. 83–107, Feb. 2017.
 lightweight packet inspection,” WAND Netw. Res. Group, Hamilton, [198] “Infogainattributeeval.” Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online].
 New Zealand, Rep., Aug. 2012. Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://weka.sourceforge.io/doc.dev/weka/attributeSelection/
 Available: http://www.wand.net.nz/publications/lpireport InfoGainAttributeEval.html
[176] K. Wei et al., “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms [199] “Cfssubseteval.” Accessed: May 16, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://
 and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, weka.sourceforge.io/doc.dev/weka/attributeSelection/CfsSubsetEval.
 pp. 3454–3469, 2020. html
[177] B. Liu, M. Ding, S. Shaham, W. Rahayu, F. Farokhi, and Z. Lin, “When [200] E. Fernandes, J. Jung, and A. Prakash, “Security analysis of emerging
 machine learning meets privacy: A survey and outlook,” ACM Comput. smart home applications,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP),
 Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–36, 2021. 2016, pp. 636–654.
[178] E. De Cristofaro, “A critical overview of privacy in machine learning,” [201] S. Sun et al., “Understanding and detecting mobile ad fraud
 IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 19–27, Jul./Aug. 2021. through the lens of invalid traffic,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
[179] H. C. Tanuwidjaja, R. Choi, and K. Kim, “A survey on deep learning Conf. Comput. Commun. Security Virtual Event (CCS), Nov. 2021,
 techniques for privacy-preserving,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. pp. 287–303.
 Cyber Security, 2019, pp. 29–46. [202] K. Ye, M. Shen, Z. Gao, and L. Zhu, “Real-time detection of cryptocur-
[180] H. Dong, C. Hua, L. Liu, and W. Xu, “Towards integrated terrestrial- rency mining behavior,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Blockchain Trustworthy
 satellite network via intelligent reflecting surface,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–9.
 Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2021, pp. 1–6. [203] Y. Liu, F. R. Yu, X. Li, H. Ji, and V. C. M. Leung, “Blockchain and
[181] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware machine learning for communications and networking systems,” IEEE
 encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1392–1431, 2nd Quart.,
 in Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Qual. Service (IWQoS), 2016, 2020.
 pp. 1–10. [204] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
[182] Y. Fu et al., “Service usage analysis in mobile messaging apps: A detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 multi-label multi-view perspective,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Comput. Commun. Security, 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 2017, pp. 877–882. [205] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal,
[183] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. K. Wright, “Toward “New directions in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc.
 an efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2021,
 Comput. Security, 2016, pp. 27–46. pp. 3366–3383.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
824 IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS & TUTORIALS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FIRST QUARTER 2023

 Meng Shen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. Jiawen Kang (Member, IEEE) received the
 degree in computer science from Shandong Ph.D. degree from the Guangdong University of
 University, Jinan, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. Technology, China, in 2018. He was a Postdoctoral
 degree in computer science from Tsinghua Fellow with Nanyang Technological University,
 University, Beijing, China, in 2014. He is a Singapore, from 2018 to 2021. He currently
 Professor with the Beijing Institute of Technology, a Professor with the Guangdong University of
 Beijing. He has authored over 50 papers in Technology, China. His research interests mainly
 top-level journals and conferences, such as ACM focus on blockchain, security, and privacy protection
 SIGCOMM, IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED in wireless communications and networking.
 A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS, and IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS
AND S ECURITY . He has guest edited special issues on emerging technologies
for data security and privacy in IEEE N ETWORK and IEEE I NTERNET OF
T HINGS J OURNAL. His research interests include data privacy and security,
blockchain applications, and encrypted traffic classification. He received the Shui Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Best Paper Runner-Up Award at IEEE IPCCC 2014 and IEEE/ACM IWQoS Ph.D. degree from Deakin University, Australia,
2020. He was selected by the Beijing Nova Program 2020 and was the in 2004. He is currently a Professor with
winner of the ACM SIGCOMM China Rising Star Award 2019. the School of Computer Science, University of
 Technology Sydney, Australia. He has published
 four monographs and edited two books, more than
 400 technical papers, including top journals and
 top conferences, such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS ,
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTERS, IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS
 AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , IEEE
 Ke Ye received the B.Eng. degree in software engi- T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING, IEEE
 neering from Shandong University, Weihai, China, in T RANSACTIONS ON E MERGING T OPICS IN C OMPUTING, IEEE/ACM
 2020. She is currently pursuing the master’s degree T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING, and INFOCOM. His h-index is 66. He
 with the Department of Computer Science, Beijing initiated the research field of networking for big data in 2013, and his research
 Institute of Technology. Her research interests outputs have been widely adopted by industrial systems, such as Amazon
 include anonymity networks and traffic analysis. cloud security. His research interest includes big data, security and privacy,
 networking, and mathematical modeling. He is currently serving a number of
 prestigious editorial boards, including IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS
 AND T UTORIALS (Area Editor), IEEE Communications Magazine, and IEEE
 I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL. He served as a Distinguished Lecturer of
 IEEE Communications Society from 2018 to 2021. He is a Distinguished
 Visitor of IEEE Computer Society, a Voting Member of IEEE ComSoc
 Educational Services Board, and an Elected Member of Board of Governor
 of IEEE Vehicular Technology Society.

 Xingtong Liu received the B.Eng. degree in Qi Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 information security from Hunan University, degree from Tsinghua University, where he is cur-
 Changsha, China, in 2020. She is currently pursuing rently an Associate Professor with the Institute for
 the master’s degree with the Department of Network Sciences and Cyberspace. He has worked
 Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology. with ETH Zurich and the University of Texas at San
 Her research interests include anonymity networks Antonio. His research interests include network and
 and traffic analysis. system security, particularly in Internet and cloud
 security, mobile security, and big data security. He
 is currently an Editorial Board Member of the IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE
 C OMPUTING and ACM Digital Threats: Research
 and Practice.

 Ke Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the Department of Computer Science
 Liehuang Zhu (Senior Member, IEEE) is a and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 Professor with the Department of Computer Science, China, where he serves as a Full Professor. He
 Beijing Institute of Technology. He is selected into has published more than 200 technical papers and
 the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in holds 11 U.S. patents in the research areas of next-
 University from Ministry of Education, China. His generation Internet, blockchain systems, Internet of
 research interests include Internet of Things, cloud Things, and network security. He has guest-edited
 computing security, Internet, and mobile security. several special issues in IEEE and Springer Journals.
 He is an Editor of IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS
 J OURNAL. He is also the Steering Committee Chair
 of IEEE/ACM IWQoS. He is a member of ACM.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 07:23:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.