IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023 3717

 Robust Anomaly-Based Insider Threat Detection
 Using Graph Neural Network
 Junchao Xiao , Lin Yang, Fuli Zhong , Xiaolei Wang , Hongbo Chen , and Dongyang Li

 Abstract—Misuse or malicious access to critical assets of of the organization’s information or information system infrasinformation systems by insiders usually causes significant loss tructures [1]. Insider threats can also be non-malicious [2]. The
 to organizations. The issue of insider threat detection for misuse or malicious behavior from someone in the organizainformation systems has received many researchers’ attention
 in both security and data mining fields, and a lot of related tion usually causes damage to confidential or commercially
 research results were presented. However, there are still many valuable information, or even results in the sabotage of comchallenges in capturing the behavior difference between malicious puter systems. Insiders often have authorized access to the
 insiders and normal users accurately, such as lack of labeled organization’s information systems and detailed knowledge
 insider threats, the subtle and adaptive nature of insider threats, about the network. Threats caused by insiders are usually chalcomplexity, heterogeneity, sparsity of the underlying data, etc.
 To detect insider threats with large and complex audit data, a lenging to detect. Cybersecurity report [3] claimed that more
 Multi-Edge Weight Relational Graph Neural Network method than half of organizations have experienced insider threats
 (MEWRGNN) for robust anomaly detection is proposed in this in recent years. Insider threat attacks account for a quarter
 paper. Unlike most existing approaches, the MEWRGNN adopts of all types of organizing attacks. This number is still risseveral graph neural networks to capture the contextual rela- ing [3]. In the meantime, some discovered insider betrayals
 tionship of user behaviors over a period of time, which is
 a critical factor for achieving accurate anomaly identification. may sell secrets, customer information, intellectual property,
 The MEWRGNN achieves a certain degree of interpretability and other important privacy data [4]. Network information
 through ranking the contribution of different edge-representation system is a critical part of an organization to maintain the
 features. Evaluation experimental results demonstrate that the efficient operations. Most sensitive data such as employee
 MEWRGNN can learn a model from limited sample data information, intellectual property and transaction records are
 sets, and achieve quick and accurate insider threat detection
 performance. In addition, other feature ranking results allow stored in the information systems which malicious insiders
 providing security analysts with understandable insights for may easily access. The insider threat problem required to be
 investigating the detected insider threats. well addressed to ensure the security of information systems
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, insider threat, graph neural in organizations or companies.
 network. Insider threats are different from external threats, they
 mainly come from the organization or company, and generally have the characteristics of high risk, concealment and
 I. I NTRODUCTION diversity. (i) High risk: Insider threats are more harmful than
 external threats because adversaries have the internal knowl-
 NSIDER threat is known as a kind of malicious threat to the
 I information security of companies or organizations. Insider
 Threat is often defined as a malicious insider who intentionedge of the organization and are more likely to gain access to
 the organization’s core assets (such as intellectual property and
 user data), and cause considerable losses to the organization’s
 ally exploits his or her privileged access to the organization’s
 core assets [5]. (ii) Concealment: The adversary comes from
 network, system, and/or data, taking actions in a manner that
 organization, and the insider threat often has strong camounegatively affected the confidentiality, integrity or availability
 flage, which will lead to quite a challenge for its detection by
 Manuscript received 29 October 2021; revised 15 March 2022, existing security mechanisms. Internal attacks do not need to
 24 June 2022, and 12 November 2022; accepted 13 November 2022. Date of pass through firewalls and other devices. Thus they can easpublication 16 November 2022; date of current version 9 October 2023. This ily evade the detection of traditional external security devices.
 work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
 (Grant No. 62102466), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Internal attacks often occur during working hours. The mix-
 Universities, Sun Yat-sen University (Grant No. 22qntd1602). The associate ture of attack data with normal data increases the difficulty
 editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication of malicious insider data mining. Additionally, internal adverwas S. Kanhere. (Corresponding authors: Fuli Zhong; Hongbo Chen.)
 Junchao Xiao, Fuli Zhong, and Hongbo Chen are with the saries with knowledge of organizational security defense are
 School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, more likely to evade security detection [5], [6]. (iii) Diversity:
 Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: xiaojch3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; In the Internet era, the organization’s core assets and busizhongfli@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chenhongbo@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
 Lin Yang and Xiaolei Wang are with the National Key Laboratory of ness are highly informatized, resulting in a lower threshold
 Science and Technology on Information System Security, Institute of System for internal attacks and diversification of attack elements. From
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100039, China. the initial computer login users to employees, contractors, part-
 Dongyang Li is with the Command and Control Engineering College, Army
 Engineering University of PLA, Nanjing 211101, China. ners and service providers, adversaries can use logic bombs
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3222635 to paralyze the system, steal intellectual property rights, or
 1932-4537 
 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 take the advantages of their positions to carry out electronic assisting the organization’s information system administrators
 fraud [5]. in discovering potential insider threats.
 CERT Insider Threat Center classified insider threats into The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
 two categories. One is the intentional behavior, such as • Inspired by graph neural network, a preprocessing
 information system sabotage, intellectual property theft and method is proposed to transform the user behavior log
 information technology fraud; The other is the negligence with time-series features into a graph structure to capture
 of employees in using authorized resources, which leads to the contextual relationship of user behavior over a period
 information leakage [4]. This paper focuses on detecting the of time. In the graph, nodes and edges preserve the confirst category, i.e., intentionally malicious behavior detection. text of each behavior log, which can help improve the
 Based on the works [7] and [4], insider threats of intentionally detection accuracy.
 malicious behavior are mainly divided into four categories, • The combined graph neural networks method is proposed
 they are sabotage, theft, fraud and espionage. Sabotage is to extract different user behavior features. Based on these
 the act of malicious insider employees deliberately damage features, the proposed MEWRGNN model can accurately
 or destroy the organization’s information system [8]. Theft detect insider threats with certain interpretability.
 refers to the theft of intellectual property. Insiders send the • The proposed MEWRGNN is evaluated with the CERT
 intellectual property to a new employer or a competing orga- dataset, and multiple experiments have been conducted
 nization for the profit purpose [8]. Fraud refers to internal for performance tests and comparison. The obtained
 personnel who have the financial authority to abuse organi- results show that MEWRGNN outperforms several basezational finances [9]. Espionage is about a malicious insider line methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency.
 who downloads corporate information in a planned and orga- Additionally, based on the edge weight values, the simunized manner to obtain strategic economic, military, or other lation experiment with cutting different types of edges
 benefits [10], [11]. that the weight given by MEWRGNN can guide the
 Insider threats detection mainly faces two challenges: (i) In feature selection and provide security analysts with intermost organizations, malicious behaviors of insiders occur pretable results.
 infrequently, the available records of malicious behaviors are The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
 limited [12], so extracting suitable features from the lim- Section II, insider threat research work is introduced. The preited malicious behavior data becomes one of the challenges. liminaries of this work, the preprocessing process of input
 (ii) Mass data of different types, such as network traffic, data sample, and related theory of GNNs are presented in
 website and file access records, mail receiving and sending Section III. In Section IV, the MEWRGNN approach is
 records, need to be investigated and processed [13]. How to explained in detail. Evaluation results are shown in Section V.
 fuse such mass data to extract the complex relationship is Followed by the conclusion in Section VI.
 another challenge. Most existing approaches [13], [14], [15],
 [16], [17] usually adopt rule-based or statistic-based techniques which are hard to solve these challenges very well. II. R ELATED W ORK
 Rule-based methods are often valid for certain specific dataset In the past few years, researchers have developed a variety
 types. While statistic-based methods usually involve feature of insider threat detection methods [6], [8], [18]. Liu et al. [18]
 engineering, leading to delay in insider threat detection. This introduced the organization’s insider threats in detail as well
 paper uses the CMU CERT r6.2 insider threat dataset with a as various types of threats. Homoliak et al. [8] chose a new
 large amount of normal behavior data and a small amount of classification method to study insider threats. Yuan and Wu [6]
 malicious behavior data which is consistent with real-world reviewed the advantages and challenges of insider threat detecsituations. we introduce the Graph Neural Network (GNN) tion using deep learning technique. Representative insider
 method to capture the contextual relationship between users’ threat detection methods mainly include psychology-based
 different behaviors over time to ensure that the proposed methods, machine learning-based methods and graph-based
 method can deal with various datasets and reduce insider methods [11].
 threat detection time delay. A Multi-Edge Weight Relational Some security researchers attempt to solve the insider
 Graph Neural Network model (MEWRGNN) is proposed to threat problem from the psychological perspective [19], [20].
 improve the detection accuracy, efficiency, and interpretabil- Greitzer and Hohimer [19] analyzed human behavior data
 ity. The MEWRGNN method employs Relational Graph based on psychological theory, and proposed a predictive
 Convolutional Network (R-GCN) to process graphs with model to detect insider threats. Brdiczka et al. [20] explored
 multi-edge weights. Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) is the method of psychological context, and constructed a graph
 applied to extract relational features between nodes. CAN- learning model to predict threat behaviors of internal personnel
 Graph Attention Networks (CAN-GAT) is utilized to discover in the organization. Analyzing insider threats with psychocritical edges in graphs. The MEWRGNN method can enhance logical theory can accurately locate threats based on human
 the interpretability of the model by locating the features that psychology. The above method confirms that the combination
 contribute the most to the model performance in the multi- of each employee’s psychological test form and appropriate
 edge weight graph. The model’s multi-feature fusion capability psychological theory can help to accurately detect insider
 is improved by combining several GNNs and a multi-edge threats. However, this method requires a large amount of
 weight graph. The proposed approach is mainly aimed at expert knowledge and prior knowledge to provide decision

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3719

 support for detection. Data characteristics analysis should be vision, chemistry, and so forth [28], [29]. For its superior
 carried out in advance for each dataset. performance in these application fields, GNN technique was
 Academic and industrial communities have recently focused applied to inside threat detection [30]. Jiang et al. [30] conon machine learning and deep learning techniques for anomaly- structed graph format model with users’ behaviors and their
 based insider threat detection. The learning model can extract connection relationships, and trained the GCN based anomaly
 the user’s normal behavior characteristics, and identify abnor- detection model with the formed input graphs, and then
 mal behaviors based on the degree of their deviation from detected the insider threats with the obtained detection model.
 the normal behaviors. If an abnormal alarm is triggered, it In this method, a large amount of data is input into the model
 may indicate that the user’s behavior has changed signifi- directly for the training task, which will result in much more
 cantly. It can be treated as an early warning of insider threats. training time cost and higher hardware conditions require-
 Parveen et al. [21] abstracted the insider threat problem as a ment. As distinct from previous works in the literature, the
 streaming data analysis problem, and used the one-class sup- MEWRGNN model is proposed to detect insider threats in
 port vector machine (SVM) to deal with drifting features. This this paper. The presented model can automatically discover
 method can effectively solve the problem of insufficient labeled the relationship between internal personnel through the conabnormal data. Insider threat detection methods using Recurrent structed graph data, extract detection features, and reduce
 Neural Network [22], Convolutional Neural Network [23] and the amount of data required for each detection. It helps to
 other deep learning models were reported in recent years. improve the model’s versatility and decreases the delay of
 Chattopadhyay et al. [24] applied statistical single-day features threat detection.
 to construct a time series vector, and used a deep autoencoder
 neural network to implement threat detection to obtain better
 results than multilayer perceptron. These methods take advan- III. P RELIMINARIES
 tage of the powerful ability of deep learning technique to In this section, the CMU CERT datasets used in this
 capture abstract features. Stream online learning [25], [26] is a research is introduced, then the methods of dataset prepromethod of insider threat detection based on machine learning cessing and how the user behavior logs are transformed into
 and deep learning as well. It attempts to capture an abstract graphs are presented, followed by the introduction of related
 representation of the user behavior. Tuor et al. [25] chose theory of GNN.
 deep neural networks to build different models for each user
 and organization for anomalous network activity detection.
 Böse et al. [26] proposed the real-time anomaly detection in A. CERT Insider Threat Dataset
 streaming heterogeneity for the streaming anomaly detection The synthetic CMU CERT datasets [31] were used to evalat scale. Parveen and Thuraisingham [27] designed an incre- uate methods in many recent studies. CERT dataset contains
 mental learning model of streaming data for insider threat 5 log files which record the computer-based operations of all
 detection via using unsupervised learning algorithm. Detection employees in a simulated organization. Its data generation promethods based on machine learning and deep learning have cess reflects the practical constraints. The description of log
 a certain ability to detect unknown threats. Machine learning- files are as follows.
 based methods can perform an accurate insider threat detection • Logon.csv – The file records the login and logout operas long as they collect enough data and extract suitable features. ations of all employees.
 It is difficult to judge whether the behavior record is normal • Email.csv – The file records the sending and receiving
 or not based on only a small number of behavior records in operations and the text content of emails.
 the threat detection. To improve the detection accuracy of the • Http.csv – The file records the browser’s upload, downdetection model, multiple behavior records are required for each load, update and text content.
 sample that is input into the model for detection. However, • File.csv – The file records file opening, writing, copying
 when enough behavioral records have been collected to make and deleting operations.
 up one input sample, the malicious behavior may have passed • Decive.csv – The file records the connection and disconhours or even days [15]. nection of the removable drive.
 Researches on insider threat detection based on graph model So far, several versions of the CERT Insider Threat Dataset
 were presented in the past few years [17], [20]. Liu et al. [17] have been released, among which the version r6.2 is used more
 studied the log2vec which is a heterogeneous graph embedding widely. Version r6.2 records the activities of 5 malicious insidbased modularized method for cyber threats detection in enter- ers and 3995 normal users from January 2010 to June 2011.
 prise, and applied the similarity feature of each user behavior The average activity log for each user is about 40,000. The
 log as one of the basis to construct graph structure samples following five insider threat scenarios are involved with the
 for abnormal user detection. Graph model based method can CERT version r6.2.
 use features like sequential relationships among log entries to • User ACM2278, who has never used a removable drive
 improve the threat detection accuracy [17], but often requires before, assessed the system after work, used the removtoo much prior knowledge and a relatively high amount of able drive and uploaded data to wikileaks.org.
 computation which leads to threat detection delay. • User CMP2946, browsed job search websites, searched
 In recent years, Graph Neural Network (GNN) technique for jobs from competing companies, and used a thumb
 has been widely used in the knowledge graph, computer drive to steal company data before leaving the company.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 TABLE I
 T HE N UMBER OF N ORMAL AND M ALICIOUS ACTIVITIES
 OF E ACH I NSIDER

 Fig. 1. The process of converting the Activity field of log of ACM2278 into
 a numeric representation.

 • System administrator PLJ1771 felt dissatisfied. He downloaded the keylogger and uploaded it to the supervisor’s
 computer using a thumb drive. The next day, he used his
 supervisor account to log into the system and sent out
 many alarming emails, causing panic and people to leave
 the organization immediately.
 • User CDE1846, logged into other users’ computers,
 searched for interesting files and sent these files to their
 home email addresses.
 • User MBG3183, as a laid-off worker, uploaded documents to Dropbox for his profit.
 Table I shows the statistics on the number of activities of the
 insiders, including their normal activity and malicious activity.
 Fig. 2. The process of converting a storage address recorded in text form
 One can find that the insider activity data is imbalanced. into a numeric representation.

 B. Dataset Preprocessing shows the process of converting the activity field of ACM2278
 The activity logs of 4000 users are scattered into five files, log into the numeric representation form. Other user logs are
 i.e., Logon.csv, email.csv, http.csv, file.csv, and decive.csv. To converted with the similar method.
 facilitate the analysis of user activities, each user’s activity log Other fields of the log are of text representations with
 is extracted from the five files to form a single user’s activity many words. To convert these texts into a numeric reprelog. Take user ACM2278 as an example, one extracts the activ- sentation form, Word2Vec [34], [35], [36], [37] is applied.
 ity log of user ACM2278 from the five files and arranges them Word2Vec is a group of correlation models for word-vectors
 in chronological order, finally gets 31547 log records. The log generation, in which the models are composed of shallow
 format of the synthesized ACM2278 is shown in Table II. neural networks and are trained for reconstruction of lin-
 Other user logs are obtained in the similar way. Related guistic word text. After well training, Word2Vec model can
 description of each column of the log format is presented in map each word to related numerical vector, and help to capthe Appendix of this paper. ture the relation between words. As an unsupervised learning
 Most user behavior activity logs extracted from the five files method, Word2Vec is widely used to measure the correlation
 are recorded in text format. It is necessary to convert the logs between words in the natural language processing research
 of text format into those of digital format so that the GNN field. It is also suitable for achieving the numeric represenframework can process these logs data properly. tation of some fields of activity log. Since the “File_tree”,
 As shown in Table II, the date field records the date and “Attachments” and “Filename” fields store file addresses. To
 time when the activity occurred. To facilitate computer pro- use Word2Vec method, these file address texts will be word
 cessing, the date field is converted into a Unix timestamp [32]. segmented, written as
 The User and PC fields are deleted so that the remaining data
 {W1 , W2 , . . . , WN } = D(S1 , S2 , . . . , SL ) (2)
 fields mainly include attribute parameters of user behavior
 activity, which helps the GNN model capture user activities where Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , L) is the i-th storage address record,
 and maintain its generality. The size field is already of numeric Wi (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ) is the i-th separated word from Si ,
 representation and does not need to be converted any more. and D(·) is the word segmentation program. The gensim
 The activity field has only a dozen of different activities. toolkit [38] is used to train Word2Vec vectors for the separated
 It is suitable for using a factorization method [33] to obtain words {W1 , W2 , . . . , WN }, written as
 the numeric representation of corresponding activities. The  
 formula is written as Ŵ1 , Ŵ2 , . . . , ŴN = Mf ({W1 , W2 , . . . , WN }) (3)

 {1, 2, . . . , N } = F (data(activity)) (1) where Mf represents the trained Word2Vec model. Base on
 experience, one defines a 100-dimensional vector to represents
 where data(activity) is the text description form of the activ- a word. To reduce the dimensionality of the activity log, we
 ity field of the activity log, the text is converted into an performed dimensionality reduction for each word. The dimeninteger of numeric representation through factorization method sion reduction process consists of four steps, i.e., steps A, B,
 denoted by F (·), N represents the number of different activi- C, and D in Fig. 2. In step A, file addresses are separated into
 ties generated by the user. The same activities of different users words by specific symbols such as ‘,’ , ‘:’ and ‘;’. In step B,
 are converted into exact numeric representation form. Fig. 1 each word is mapped to a representation of 100 numbers (for
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3721

 TABLE II
 T HE ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

 TABLE III
 T HE N UMERIC R EPRESENTED ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

 TABLE IV
 T HE N ORMALIZED ACTIVITY L OG F ORMAT OF ACM2278

 example, x1 , x2 , . . . , x100 represents ‘R’) through Word2Vec the feature of “Content” field. Another two aggragation funcmethod. In step C, the arithmetic mean of the 100 numbers tions, arithmatic median and mode (mode is the value that
 representing the word is calculated, and then used to represent appears most frequently in a set of data.), are also applied to
 the word. In step D, the sum of the numbers representation of calculate aggregation values with the numerical representation
 each word obtained in step C is calculated. Thus the numeric of each word (step C of Fig. 2) for comparison analysis. The
 representation of the file address is obtained. experimental results show that the obtained detection accu-
 The e-mail addresses stored in the “TO”, “CC”, “BCC” and racy and some other detection evaluating indicators results
 “From” fields, and the Web addresses stored in the “URL” field when using the aggregation function median and the arithmetic
 are converted into their numeric representations in a similar average, are the same. For the mode function, the obtained
 way to the file addresses. The word segmentation symbols of results (shown in Table VIII) are not so good as the above
 the e-mails are ‘@’ and ‘;’, and the word segmentation symbol ones when detecting user ACM2278. Furthermore, the arithof the URL is ‘:’. metic average calculation is fast and can facilitate further
 The “Content” field stores a large number of words. The pre- analysis [40].
 trained Word2Vec model (wiki-news-300d-1M) proposed by The “To_removable_media” and “From_removable” fields
 Mikolov et al. [39] is used to convert the text in the “Content” stores Boolean variables, and the transition rule is TRUE to 1,
 field to its numeric representation. Pre-trained Word2Vec and FALSE to 2. Other default values in the activity log are
 model trained with one million words, including Wikipedia filled with 0. Table III shows the result of the numeric repre-
 2017, UMBC webbase corpus and statmt.org news dataset. sentation of the activity log of ACM2278 listed in Table II. In
 Same as other fields for storing text formats, if the dimension Table III, the “date” field is replaced with “timestamp” field
 of the activity log is too high, it will increase the computa- and the “user” and “PC” fields are deleted.
 tional cost of the model in the training and detection phases. To unify the values of different fields and accelerate the
 To keep the dimension of the activity log within a reason- convergence speed of the GNN model in the training phase,
 able range and reduce the computational cost, aggregation some fields in Table III need to be normalized. According
 function is used to calculate the aggregation value of con- to Table III, the 13 fields from “timestamp” to “URL” all
 verted numbers. Based on experience, one performs sensitivity need to be normalized (Min-Max Normalization [41]), and
 analysis on arithmatic average aggregation function with the note that the numeric representations of the “Content” field by
 first 50 to 200 words of the “Content” field of the activity Word2Vec have been normalized. As an example for explanalog to search for the suitable ones. Based on the results in tion, the normalized activity log format of ACM2278 is shown
 Table VII, the first 100 words are finally selected to represent in Table IV.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 Fig. 3. The process of converting activity logs into graphs.
 Fig. 4. The graph composed of the first 5 records of ACM2278 activity log
 through definition 1.
 C. Graph Structure
 To capture the contextual relationship of different behaviors
 over a period of time and give full play to the advantages of Let G represent a graph composed of nodes and undirected
 the Word2Vec, the user activity log is transformed into a graph edges, which can be constructed with definition 1 or 2 and
 with topological structure. denoted as
 The graph construction method is based on the theory G = (V , E ) (6)
 proposed by Li et al. [42]. They proposed two methods for
 converting time series data into graphs, one is Visibility Graph The nodes represent the position of activity logs in the
 (VG), and the other is Horizontal Visibility Graph (HVG), graph, while the undirected edges represent the contextual
 which is defined as follows. relationship between activity logs.
 Definition 1 (VG): Given a time series T = (t1 , . . . , tn ), In Table IV, except for the “timestamp” field, the values of
 its VG representation G = (V, E) has n nodes, where V = the other fields are stored in the corresponding nodes as node
 (v1 , . . . , vn ). An edge e = (i , j ) ∈ E iff ∀k , i < k < j, features. The value of node features represented by a vector
 (1 ≤ i, j ≤ n), such that inequality tk < tj + (ti − tj ) jj −k B ∈ R112 is written as
 −i is
 satisfied. B = {b1 , b2 , . . . , b112 } (7)
 Definition 2 (HVG): Given a time series T = (t1 , . . . , tn ),
 its HVG representation Ĝ = (V , E ) has n nodes, V = where bi is the i-th numerical representation in Table IV
 (v1 , . . . , vn ). An edge e = (i , j ) ∈ E iff ∀k , i < k < j, (calculated from “File_tree” field). For example, b1 is
 (1 ≤ i, j ≤ n), such that inequality ti , tj > tk is satisfied. the numerical representation of the “File_tree” field, b2 is the
 For insider activity log processing, in the above definitions, numerical representation of the “Activity” field, and b112 is the
 T denotes the user activity log, and ti , (i = 1, 2, . . . , n) is numerical representation of the 100-th word in the “Content”
 the energy value of i-th activity item. Mean value calculated field.
 according to the 113 fields of each log record (e.g., log records Let vector V̂ represent the set of nodes in the graph,
 of ACM2278 in Table IV), is used as the related energy value.
 V̂ = {v̂1 , v̂2 , . . . , v̂n } (8)
 It is proved in [42] that the VG can represent the global features of time series, while the HVG can represent the local where v̂i is the i-th node which stores the corresponding node
 features. feature Bi .
 To construct the graph structure of user activity log, each The edges in the graph can also store features. According to
 activity item is considered as a node, and each graph contains the stored edge features, the edges can be divided into three
 n nodes. Let V ∈ Rn be a vector as types: Time-based edge, distance-based edge and attentionbased edge.
 V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vn } (4)
 The time-based edge stores the absolute value of the differwhere vi is the i-th node. The left part of Fig. 3 shows the ence of the timestamps corresponding to the two nodes at the
 process of converting activity logs into nodes when n = 5. ends of this edge. This means that the time-based edge fea-
 Let vector E ∈ Rz consist of the undirected edges of ture represents the time interval between the two activity logs.
 the graph structure to represent the contextual relationship Fig. 4 shows the graph composed of the first five records of
 between nodes, ACM2278 activity log based on definition 1, and the feature
 calculation display of time feature edges.
 E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , ez } (5)
 Euclidean distance is used to calculate the distance-based
 where ei is the i-th undirected edge in the graph. For exam- edge feature, written as
 ple, e1 = (v1 , v2 ) represents that there is an undirected edge 
  112
 between nodes v1 and v2 . The right part of Fig. 3 shows the     2
 graph constructed by definition 1 when n = 5 in Eq. (4). dist v̂i , v̂j =  v̂ik − v̂jk (9)
 The connection method and number of edges are determined k =1
 according to the definition (1 or 2) used and the energy value where v̂i and v̂j are the nodes at both ends of an edge. v̂ik
 of activity item. represents the k-th value (bk ) of the node feature (Bi ) stored

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3723

 Fig. 5. The graph construction of the activity log and the training and detection process of the MEWRGNN model.

 in the i-th node (vi ). v̂jk is similar to v̂ik . The distance-based edge, respectively, which store the corresponding edge feature
 edge feature indicates the similarity of the two corresponding values.
 activity logs. Euclidean distance is chosen as the distance- Let ĜT , ĜD and ĜA represent the graphs using timebased edge feature since it is more suitable for calculating based edges, distance-based edges and attention-based edges,
 two rows of data with numerical values, such as floating-point respectively, and they are written as
 and integer. It was applied in most instance-based learning
 models [41]. ĜT = V̂ , ÊT (13)
 The attention-based edge feature is automatically calculated ĜD = V̂ , ÊD (14)
 by the MEWRGNN model, which will be described in detail
 later. ĜA = V̂ , ÊA (15)
 Let vectors ÊT , ÊD and ÊA ∈ Rz represent the sets of edge
 features of time feature edges (i.e., time-based edges), distance The input sample for the proposed model is composed of
 feature edges (i.e., distance-based edges) and attention feature three types of graphs, i.e., ĜT , ĜD and ĜA corresponding to
 edges (i.e., attention-based edges), respectively, written as the types of edge features ÊT , ÊD and ÊA , respectively. As
 shown in the upper part of Fig. 5 (where GT , GD and GA
 ÊT = {êT 1 , êT 2 , . . . , êTz } (10) represent the graphs using time-based edges, distance-based
 ÊD = {êD1 , êD2 , . . . , êDz } (11) edges and attention-based edges, respectively.), if the graph is
 ÊA = {êA1 , êA2 , . . . , êAz } (12) constructed with 5 nodes (in Eq. (8), n = 5). These 5 nodes
 can be used to construct 3 graphs (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA which
 where êTi , êDi and êAi are the edge features of the i-th are corresponding to GT , GD and GA , separately) with the
 time feature edge, distance feature edge and attention feature same topology and node features but different edge features.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 The constructed 3 graphs are treated as an input sample of the are the learnable weight vectors. N (i ) denotes the set of one-
 MEWRGNN model. hop neighbors of node vi . “·” denotes dot-product operation.
 The constructed graph will be marked as an anomaly graph (·)T represents transpose, and LeakyReLU (·) is a non-linear
 if there are nodes with malicious activity logs in this graph. activation function, written as
 Otherwise, it will be labeled as normal graph if there are no 
 x xi ≥ 0
 nodes with malicious activity logs in the graph. yi = xii (22)
 bi xi < 0
 where bi ∈ (1, +∞), bi = 100 is set as the default value.
 D. Graph Convolutional Network
 GCN [43] is a classic GNN originally used for semi- IV. A NOMALY D ETECTION U SING MEWRGNN M ODEL
 supervised classification of graph structure data. Its multi-layer
 A. Approach Overview
 case can be formed by the layer-wise rule as
 1 1
 In insider threat detection, GNN method is a powerful tool
 H (l+1) = σ D̃ − 2 ÃD̃ − 2 H (l) W (l) (16) for graph structure data processing to facilitate extracting the
 contextual relationship between different behaviors of users
 where Ã = A + I indicates the adjacency matrix of the graph over a period of time. It can achieve excellent performance
 which is added self-connections, A is the adjacency matrix of in the classification of various graph structures [47], [48] and
 the undirected graph, I ∈ RN ×N is the identity matrix, H (l) ∈ has significant potential for insider threat detection [17]. For
 RN ×D is the matrix of activations in the l-th layer, W (l) processing the text information in activity log efficiently with
 represents the shared trainable weight matrix for node-wise GNN-like method, Word2Vec is used to derive the numeric
 feature transformation, σ(·) is the activation function. representations of the text. In this paper, the MEWRGNN
 model is designed to capture the contextual relationship
 E. Relational Graph Convolutional Network between different behaviors of users over a period of time.
 The designed model is shown in Fig. 5 where the upper part
 R-GCN [44] is an extension of the classic model GCN.
 is the process of transforming the activity log into a graph, the
 GCN only explores the topological structure features of data
 lower left part is the training process, and the lower right part
 to obtain node representation but does not fully explore the
 presents the detection process. The constructed graph transforedge information on the graph. While the R-GCN supplements
 mation process is applied to explore the contextual relationship
 this aspect, and it can be formulated as
 between activity logs over time to form input sample for the
 ⎛ ⎞
 MEWRGNN model. The training process captures the poten-
 (l+1) (l) (l) 1 (l) (l)
 hi = σ ⎝W0 hi + Wr hj ⎠ (17) tial features of the activity log, and obtains a suitable trained
 c
 r i,r model, while the detection process determines whether the
 r ∈R j ∈Ni
 activity logs are abnormal or not via using the trained model.
 (l) (l)
 where hi ∈ Rd is the hidden state of node vi in the
 l-th layer of the neural network, d (l) is the dimension of this B. MEWRGNN
 layer’s representation, Nir denotes the set of one-hop neigh- The proposed MEWRGNN model is implemented based
 bors of node vi under relation r ∈ R. ci,r = |Nir | denotes on three models presented bellow (RGCNT, RGCND and
 a normalization constant, |Nir | is the number of one-hop RGNNGAT). The input samples for the MEWRGNN Model
 neighbors of node vi under relation r. are three kinds of graphs (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA ). First, the node
 feature in V̂ of the input sample is linearly transformed twice,
 F. CAN-Graph Attention Networks and then 6 weights are obtained through the softmax function,
 written as
 CAN-GAT [45] is a variant of Graph Attention Networks
 (GAT) [46], and it can be formulated as y1 = W1 V̂ + b1 (23)
 (l) (l) y2 = W2 y1 + b2 (24)
 zi = ReLU W (l) hi (18)
 M = softmax (y2 ) (25)
 (l)  (l)T (l)  (l)T (l)
 eij = LeakyReLU V 1 zi · V 2 zj (19) where Wi and bi (i = 1,2) are the learnable parameter matrix
 (l) and bias, respectively. Eq. (23) and Eq. (24) are related to
 (l)
 exp eij
 αij =  (20) the calculation of the fully connected layers of the classic
 (l)
 k ∈N (i) exp eik
 neural network. The dimension of input sample is reduced
 ⎛ ⎞ from 112 to 57 through the first layer (Eq. (23)), and to 6
 (l+1) (l) (l) further through the second layer (Eq. (24)). softmax is regarded
 hi = σ⎝ αij zj ⎠ (21) as a normalized function. Let M ∈ R6 be a vector, written as
 j ∈N (i)
 exp(y2i )
 (l)
 Mi = 6   (26)
 where hi is the node features of the i-th node of l-th layer, j exp y2j
 W (l) is the learnable weight matrix of l-th layer. ReLU (·) = where y2i and y2j are the values of i-th and j-th dimensions
 T T
  (∗)
  (∗) and V
 max (0, ·) is non-linear activation function. V of y2 , respectively. Mi is the value of i-th dimension to be
 1 2

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3725

 (1)
 normalized. Eqs. (23)-(25) are the calculation of the learning where the αij calculated by Eq. (33) is stored in êAij as an
 parameters from node features to weights (M1 , M2 , M3 , M4 , (2)
 edge feature. Eq. (34) update node features hAi according to
 M5 , M6 ), of which the process is shown in the lower part of (1)
 Fig. 5. the value of edge feature αij . In the same way, the second
 Input samples ĜT , ĜD and ĜA are used for feature layer of RGNNGAT is written as:
 extraction with different GNN layers. (2) (2) (2)
 zi = ReLU WA hAi (35)
 Relational Graph Convolutional Network Time (RGCNT)
 (2) T T
 layers process the input sample ĜT to capture time features eij = LeakyReLU  (2) z (2)
  (2) z (2) · V
 V (36)
 1 i 2 j
 of activity log. The related calculations are written as
 (2)
 ⎛ ⎞ (2)
 exp eij
 (2) 1 (1) (1)
 αij =  (2)
 M6 (37)
 hTi = σ ⎝ W hTj êTij M1 ⎠ (27) k ∈N (i) exp eik
 cij T
 j ∈N (i) (3) (2) (2)
 ⎛ ⎞ h Ai = αij zj (38)
 (3) 1 (2) (2) j ∈N (i)
 hTi = σ ⎝ W hTj êTij M4 ⎠ (28)
 cij T
 j ∈N (i) The node features calculated from each GNN layer need to
 be fused to facilitate classification. The node features of each
 (1) graph are fused into hg as
 where WT is the shared trainable weight matrix of first layer,
 (1) N
 hTj denotes the feature of the j-th node in ĜT , êTij represents (3)
 j =1 hrj
 edge feature of the edge connecting nodes v̂i and v̂j , hTi and
 (2) hg = (39)
 N
 (2) r ∈R
 WT are respectively used as the input and the shared trainable weight matrix of the second layer of RGCNT, the meaning where R = {T , D, A}. To implement anomaly detection, the
 of other symbols are similar to what they are in Eq. (17). dimension of the fusion features hg is reduced from 112 to 2
 Relational Graph Convolutional Network Distance with the formula as
 (RGCND) layers process the input sample ĜD to capture
 y3 = W3 hg + b3 (40)
 the distance features (similarity) of activity log. The related
 calculations are written as where y3 ∈ R2 denotes the output of a linear transformation
 ⎛ ⎞ calculation, and it is fed into the softmax function to achieve
 (2) 1 (1) (1) predicted results,
 hD i = σ ⎝ W hDj êDij M2 ⎠ (29)
 cij D exp(y3i )
 j ∈N (i)
 ⎛ ⎞ YP i = k   (41)
 1 j =1 exp y3j
 (3) (2) (2)
 hD i = σ ⎝ W hDj êDij M5 ⎠ (30)
 cij D where YPi  , ∀i = 1, 2, represents the probability that the
 j ∈N (i)
 prediction result is normal or abnormal, and k = 2 is the
 (1) number of categories. Eqs. (23)-(41) constitute a complete
 where WD is the shared trainable weight matrix of first layer,
 (1)
 MEWRGNN model in which the GNN layer structure is
 hDj denotes the feature of the j-th node in ĜD , êDij repre- shown in the lower part of Fig. 5.
 sents edge feature of the edge connecting nodes v̂i and v̂j , For the train calculation of the MEWRGNN model, the loss
 (2) (2) function to evaluate the error between predicted category and
 hDi and WD are respectively used as the input and the
 shared trainable weight matrix of the second layer of RGCND, true category is defined as
 the meaning of other symbols are similar to what they are in m
 1  
 Eq. (17). Leer (w , b) = − Yi log YP i (w , b) (42)
 Relational Graph Neural Network Graph Attention m
 i=1
 Networks (RGNNGAT) layers process the input sample ĜA
 where Yi denotes the true category and YP i denotes predicted
 to capture importance features of activity log. The RGNNGAT
 one, w and b are the weight and bias of the MEWRGNN model
 of the first layer is written as:
 in hidden layers respectively.
 (1) (1) (1) As batches of groups of inputs are applied to train the
 zi = ReLU WA hAi (31)
 MEWRGNN model, the actual summation effect is the loss
 (1)  (1)T (1)  (1)T (1) of a batch Lbat , written as
 eij = LeakyReLU V 1 zi · V 2 zj (32)
 u
 (1) (i)
 (1)
 exp eij Lbat (w , b, u) = Leer (w , b) (43)
 αij =  (1)
 M3 (33) i=1
 k ∈N (i) exp eik
 where u denotes the number of groups of inputs to form a
 (2) (1) (1)
 h Ai = αij zj (34) batch. In this paper, u = 5 denotes that a batch is composed
 j ∈N (i) of 5 graph structure data of activity logs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 T HE N UMBER OF ACTIVITY L OGS OF N ORMAL U SERS D ETECTION ACCURACY OF MEWRGNN M ODEL W ITH D IFFERENT
 C ONFIGURATIONS ,(ACCURACY R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

 The Lbat (w , b, u) is selected as the final loss function and
 optimization object in the training phase of the MEWRGNN
 model. The optimal target is to minimize the error calculated by the loss function. In the training phase, the Adam
 optimization algorithm [49] is used to search parameter set P ∗ ,
 P ∗ = arg min Lbat (w , b, u) (44)
 {w ,b}∈Ω

 By using parameter set P ∗ , the MEWRGNN model can
 implement insider threat detection for user activity logs.

 V. E VALUATION
 In this section, the implementation of the presented
 MEWRGNN model, and the experimental settings are
 explained first. Then the effectiveness, accuracy and
 interpretability of the MEWRGNN model are evaluated.
 Comparison experiments with several baselines are presented. negatives (TN), true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), and
 Following by the discussion of the efficiency evaluation. false positives (FP).
 TP
 A. MEWRGNN Model Implementation precision = , (45)
 TP + FP
 The architecture of the proposed MEWRGNN Model is TP + TN
 shown in Fig. 5. One of its input samples includes three graphs accuracy = , (46)
 TP + FP + FN + TN
 with different edge features (ĜT , ĜD and ĜA ). First, the TP
 node features stored in V̂ undergo several linear transfor- recall = , (47)
 TP + FN
 mations to obtain the weight feature Mi (i = 1, 2, . . . , 6) precision × recall
 (with Eqs. (23)-(26)). Then, the input samples with different F1 = × 2, (48)
 precision + recall
 edge features are processed by different GNN layers to obtain FP
 salient features (with Eqs. (27)-(38)). Finally, these salient FPR = . (49)
 FP + TN
 features undergo fusion and feature transformation to output
 Table VI shows the detection accuracy results of the
 detection results (with Eqs. (39)-(41)). In the training phase,
 MEWRGNN model with different configurations, and the
 the number of training iterations of each model is set to 5,
 accuracy is recorded in percentage. For the detection of each
 and the Adam method with a learning rate of 0.001 is used
 user, the MEWRGNN model is trained with Pcert of the
 for model training.
 user’s activity logs, and then is applied to detect the rest
 (1 − Pcert ) of user’s activity logs. Such an experiment is
 B. User Activity Log Dataset
 implemented 100 times with the same experimental setup
 The CERT Insider Threat Dataset version r6.2 is applied as for the user detection, and the mean value of the obtained
 original experimental data. The activity logs of malicious users 100 detection accuracy values for the related user is listed
 (ACM2278, CMP2946, PLJ1771 and CDE1846) are extracted in the table. VG and HVG denote that the input sample
 from the dataset in chronological order to facilitate analysis. for the model is a graph constructed with Definition 1 and
 Activity logs data of MBG3183 are used as test data only, Definition 2, respectively. VG-HVG represents that the first
 since there are just four abnormal activity logs in the dataset input sample of the model is the graph constructed accordwhich is insufficient to generate enough training and test data. ing to Definition 1, and the second input sample graph is
 And the activity logs of 500 normal users (such as DNS1758, constructed with Definition 2, the other input samples are con-
 RSR2681, QCD0386 and RJH0219) in the dataset are selected structed by these two methods alternately. n = 20 denotes
 for comparison experiments. The number of activity logs of that the value of n in Eq. (4), i.e., a graph consists of 20
 malicious users and four normal users is shown in Table I and nodes (activity logs). Pcert (e.g., 60%) represents the percent-
 Table V, respectively. age (e.g., 60%) of each user’s normal and abnormal activity
 logs that are used as the training datasets, while the rest are
 C. Accuracy Evaluation used as the test datasets. For constructing abnormal datasets,
 The accuracy, recall, precision, F1 scores, and False Positive the abnormal activity logs of each abnormal user are put
 Rate (FPR) are calculated by collecting the number of true together to form the abnormal datasets. Pcert (e.g., 60%) of

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3727

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
 D ETECTION R ESULTS OF MEWRGNN IN THE C ASES OF U SING T HE ACCURACY R ESULTS OF THE MEWRGNN M ODEL ON THE
 D IFFERENT N UMBER OF W ORDS S ELECTED AS F EATURES F ROM THE D ETECTION OF N ORMAL U SER ACTIVITY L OGS
 “C ONTENT ” F IELD , (ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE
 A RE R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

 TABLE X
 D ETECTION ACCURACY OF U SERS ’ N ORMAL ACTIVITY P RIOR TO
 L EAVING THE C OMPANY, A FTER T HEY A RE D ETECTED AS A NOMALOUS
 U SERS

 TABLE XI
 D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE C ASES T HAT M ODEL T RAINING AND
 T ESTING U SE D IFFERENT U SER DATA (DATA IN “T EST ” C OLUMN A RE
 A LL F ROM THE N ORMAL ACTIVITY L OGS OF THE C ORRESPONDING
 U SER , AND THE ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE
 R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

 TABLE XII
 TABLE VIII D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE C ASES T HAT T RAINING AND T ESTING
 D ETECTION R ESULTS FOR U SER ACM2278 W HEN THE M ODEL U SES P HASE U SE D IFFERENT U SER DATA (“T EST ” C OLUMN DATA A RE A LL
 D IFFERENT AGGREGATION F UNCTIONS , (ACCURACY, P RECISION , F ROM THE A BNORMAL ACTIVITY L OG OF THE C ORRESPONDING U SER ,
 R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %) AND THE ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE A RE
 R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)

 the abnormal activity logs of each abnormal user constitute In general, insider threat detection model should has good
 the abnormal training datasets, and the rest constitute the capability to detect abnormal user activities and recognize norabnormal test datasets. It can be seen from Table VI that the mal user activities. Table IX shows the detection accuracy
 MEWRGNN model has good robustness, the performance of performance of the proposed model on normal user activthe model is not affected greatly in the cases that the graph ity logs. It indicates that the proposed method has a suitable
 construction method, the number of nodes used in one con- recognition rate for normal user activity logs.
 structed graph, and the percentage of training datasets, vary The activity log dataset of abnormal user often contains a
 in a certain range. An arithmetic average value of detection large number of normal activity logs and limited abnormal
 accuracy results is calculated for each parameter configuration activity logs, since an abnormal user usually performs normal
 model, to evaluate the model’s overall performance (As is the activities after implementing threat activities that will generate
 “Average” in the table). The table shows that, by using the corresponding logs. Table X shows the recognition accuracy
 definition 1 method to construct the graph of 30 nodes as an of these abnormal users’ normal activity logs. It shows even
 input, 80% of the activity logs as the training datasets, the if the users have been identified as abnormal, their normal
 model obtains the best results. Next, we choose this group of activity logs can still be classified correctly.
 configuration parameters for the model to conduct an in-depth To verify that the proposed model can capture the behavstudy. ior characteristics of each user well, we select the training
 Table VII shows the experimental results of sensitivity anal- datasets from one of the users and the test datasets from the
 ysis on the number of words (indicated with nwords ) selected different ones to conduct simulation experiments. Table XI and
 as features in the “Content” field, with the parameter config- Table XII are the detection results of the cases that the training
 uration selected from Table VI. We can see that the model and testing data do not come from the same user simultaneobtains the best performance by selecting the first 100 words ously. The column“train” in the table represents the model
 in the “content” field as features. is trained with the corresponding user training datasets. E.g.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 Fig. 6. The visualization of the user ACM2278’s test datasets using t-SNE technology.

 TABLE XIII
 the user PLJ1771 in the “train” column in the first row of T HE I NFLUENCE OF E ACH W EIGHT ON THE D ETECTION OF THE M ODEL
 Table XI means that the user PLJ1771’s training datasets are T RAINED W ITH THE DATA OF U SERS PLJ1771 AND QCD0386,
 used to train the model. The user data in the “test” column in R ESPECTIVELY, (ACCURACY R ECORDED IN P ERCENTAGE %)
 Table XI all come from the normal activity logs in the respective test datasets. While the user data in the “test” column
 in Table XII all come from the abnormal activity logs in the
 respective test datasets. It can be seen from Table XI that, if
 someone logs into the system with another person’s account,
 the model will treat him as an abnormal user even if his operation is normal. Table XII shows that the user using other
 person’s accounts to enter the system and perform malicious
 operations are more likely to be detected.
 The above experiment results demonstrate that the proposed
 model can be applied to insider threat detection in various
 scenarios, and the model has strong stability.

 the time feature edge (Eq. (27)). We separately analyze the
 D. Interpretability Evaluation MEWRGNN model trained with the activity logs of users
 The data features extracted by the MEWRGNN model PLJ1771 and QCD0386 to explain the impact of different
 can be visualized. Fig. 6 shows the scenario of the user types of features on the model’s performance. Table XIII
 ACM2278’s test datasets while using the t-SNE [50] shows the influence of each weight on the detection of the
 technology for dimensionality reduction and visualization. model trained with the data of users PLJ1771 and QCD0386,
 Fig. 6 (a), shows the scene that the datasets are directly respectively. In the table, accuracy represents the detection
 visualized by using the t-SNE technology. It can be seen that accuracy of the entire MEWRGNN model. The number listed
 normal data points and abnormal data points are mixed and below (Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6) is the value of the weight. −Rg
 closely spaced. The two types of data are inseparable linearly. (R = {T , D, A}, g = {1, 2}) denotes to delete the corre-
 The visualization result of the ACM2278 test datasets pro- sponding GNN layer on the trained MEWRGNN model to test
 cessed by the MEWRGNN model are displayed in Fig. 6 (b), the effect of this layer on the detection ability. For example,
 which shows that the normal and abnormal data are separated -D1D2 means to test the accuracy of the model after deletclearly, and are almost linearly separable. Fig. 6 shows that ing Eqs. (29)-(30) from the trained MEWRGNN model, and
 the MEWRGNN model is good at extracting abstract feature -T2A2 means to test the accuracy of the model after deletrepresentation and feature transformation. ing Eqs. (28), (35)-(38) from the trained MEWRGNN model.
 To analyze the MEWRGNN model from a quantita- It can be seen from Table XIII that M2 and M5 have the
 tive perspective, we focus on explaining the 6 weights largest weight proportions, and they are related to the RGCND
 (Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6) of the model. Each weight is closely layer. The update of the node feature in the RGCND layer
 related to the update of node features and edge features depends on distance feature edges. If the RGCND layer of
 of a certain layer. For example, the weight M1 is related the model is deleted (-D1D2, -T1T2D1D2, -D1D2A1A2, -D2,
 to the update of the RGCNT node of the first layer and -T2D2, -A2D2), the detection accuracy of the model directly

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3729

 Fig. 7. The weight distribution of normal data and abnormal data in the user ACM2278 test datasets.

 drops. Although other weights have small values, they still are input into the model to generate box plots with 6 weights
 contribute a little to the model (-T1T2A1A2). In addition, the under normal and abnormal activities, respectively. In box-plot
 model detection accuracy in the table does not change, which (Fig. 7), the hollow dots represent the abnormal points of data.
 may be because the deleted GNN layer weight value is too The green horizontal line in the box represents the median of
 small and does not have much impact on the model. The the data distribution. The upper and lower edges of the box
 above experiment shows that the distance feature (the sim- are the upper and lower quartiles of the data, respectively.
 ilarity of nodes) is an important feature that contributes to The whisker edges extending from the upper and lower edges
 the model’s detection ability. Mi , (i = 1, . . . , 6) can indicate of the box respectively represent the maximum and minimum
 each feature’s contribution of distance, time, and attention to values in the datasets. Mi _normal, (i = 1, . . . , 6) represents
 the model’s detection ability. The value of Mi , (i = 1, . . . , 6) the weight value generated by using the normal activity logs,
 is automatically calculated by the trained MEWRGNN model and Mi _abnormal, (i = 1, . . . , 6) represents the weight value
 according to different input samples to ensure that the model generated by using the abnormal activity logs. It can be seen
 can automatically evaluate the importance of different features. from Fig. 7 that the weight range generated by the normal
 To intuitively experience the 6 weights (Mi , i = 1, . . . , 6) data is closer, and the deviation distance of the abnormal
 that the MEWRGNN model automatically outputs based on point is smaller, which shows that normal activity logs have a
 the input samples. The test datasets of the user ACM2278 certain regularity and generally change in a certain range. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 TABLE XIV
 weight distribution of abnormal data is wider, and the devi- C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF THE P RESENTED M ODEL AND OTHER
 ation distance of abnormal points is farther. This shows that BASELINE M ETHODS
 the abnormal data has a certain degree of randomness.

 E. Comparison With Other Baseline Methods
 To compare the proposed approach with other baseline
 methods, we choose GNN’s classic model GCN and other
 machine learning methods (k-nearest neighbors, Naive Bayes,
 Decision Trees, Multi-layered perceptron) to perform insider
 threat detection experiments with the same public datasets.
 Table XIV shows the averaged evaluation results using 5-fold
 cross-validation with replacement.
 The obtained results clearly demonstrate that the comprehensive performance of the MEWRGNN model outperforms
 those of other detection methods. The MEWRGNN model
 has high detection capabilities on multiple normal and abnormal users. GCN and MEWRGNN are comparable in detecting
 users ACM2278, PLJ1771, and DNS1758. However, GCN is
 inferior to MEWRGNN in other user detection. The Decision
 Tree approach performs poorly in detecting users CMP2946
 and CDE1846. One can see that the MEWRGNN model is
 superior to Multi-layered perceptron (2 hidden layers, 112 hidden units) developed based on classical neural networks.
 Although Multilayer Perceptron has excellent ability to identify malicious activities of most users, the accuracy of activity
 detection for users CDE1846 and CMP2946 are slightly lower.
 K-nearest neighbor method (The parameter K is set to 2, 3,
 and 5, respectively.) also has high accuracy in classifying most
 user activities. However, it is not sensitive to the activities of
 user RSR2681. The Naive Bayes method has low accuracy
 in identifying most user activities. Analyzing Table XIV, we
 can see that the MEWRGNN and GCN model has high recognition accuracy for the activities of multiple users. However,
 other baseline methods can only accurately recognize the activities of individual users. This shows that the MEWRGNN
 and GCN model combined with the graph structure can mine
 the correlation between activities, captures better features, and
 improves recognition accuracy. Moreover, MEWRGNN can
 improve the detection accuracy based on GCN by adding
 multi-class relations (time-based edges, distance-based edges,
 and attention-based edges).
 Table XV shows the FPR of two methods to detect malicious behavior. FPR represents the rate at which malicious
 behavior is predicted to be normal behavior. We can see
 that MEWRGNN’s malicious behavior detection performance
 for users ACM2278 and PLJ1771 are slightly lower than
 the method proposed by [15], but the overall detection
 performance is better than the one in [15]. Reference [15]
 uses a rule-based unsupervised method to implement detection.
 The malicious behaviors of users CMP2946 and MBG3183 are
 not very aggressive, resulting in relatively high false alarms
 on [15]. MEWRGNN uses GNN to learn the normal behavior characteristics of each user, which help decrease the false
 alarm rate to a certain extent.
 Reference [14] used malicious users ACM2278, PLJ1771,
 CDE1846 and 500 other normal users to conduct evaluation that Area Under the Curve (AUC) obtained in Reference [14]
 experiments. We use the same malicious user and 500 normal is 0.901. The AUC of our proposed method reaches 0.996.
 users for comparative evaluation. The evaluation result shows When using all malicious users and 500 normal users, the AUC
Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3731

 TABLE XVI
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION D ELAY T IME FOR E ACH M ALICIOUS
 B EHAVIOR B ETWEEN MEWRGNN AND [15], (U NIT: DAY )

 Fig. 8. The model detection time.

 TABLE XV
 C OMPARISON OF THE P ERFORMANCE OF M ALICIOUS B EHAVIOR
 D ETECTION B ETWEEN MEWRGNN AND THE M ETHOD IN [15]
 various malicious behaviors relatively quickly. However, it
 takes more than three days for the one in [15] to detect the
 malicious behavior of CDE1846.

 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 A novel robust anomaly-based insider threat detection
 approach (i.e., MEWRGNN) using GNN model has been
 proposed. By using the combined graph neural networks, time
 series like user behavior logs are transformed into a graph for
 of our proposed method is 0.995. AUC is used to evaluate the node feature construction and contextual features extraction.
 model comprehensively. The higher the value, the better the Multiple node feature extraction can characterize the conperformance. From the results above, the proposed method has textual relationship of different user behavior over a period
 better performance. of time better. Anomaly-based insider threat detection process with the combined several GNNs is presented in detail.
 F. Performance Analysis Then the MEWRGNN is evaluated upon the public known
 In an insider threat detection system, it is generally neces- CERT dataset. The results show that the proposed model has
 sary to identify abnormal user activities in a timely manner. strong robustness, and can achieve a high detection accuracy
 Therefore, the detection time is an important metric for evalu- and better performance. The MEWRGNN model possesses
 ating insider threat detection systems. The detection time [51] certain interpretability as well, and the weight of each edge
 is defined as: type can indicate the edge feature’s influence on the model’s
 ability.
 td = tf − to , (tstart ≤ to ≤ tend ) (50) For future work, we will study how to use the relationwhere tf is the moment when the insider threat is detected ships among the internal personnel in the datasets better, to
 and to is the moment when the insider threat has appeared in automatically build the graph structure while adding more
 the information system of the organization or enterprise. The features to the weight edge to find better abstract repredetection time td denotes the length of time from when the sentation, to improve the detection accuracy of the model
 insider threat enters the information system to when the threat further. The hourly threat detection delay may still be slightly
 is detected. tstart and tend are the start and end time of collect- longer, and more real-time detection techniques need further
 ing 30 activity Logs. tf can be divided into two phases: data study.
 collection tc and model detection tm . Therefore, the detection
 time is equivalent to A PPENDIX
 T HE D ESCRIPTION OF E ACH C OLUMN IN THE
 td = tc − to + tm (51) L OG F ORMAT
 Fig. 8 describes the time course of model detection. We • “Date” field records the time of user activity.
 can see that during the activity log collection, the insider • “User” field records the user who generated the activity.
 threat may occur at any time between tstart and tend . When • “PC” field records the host used by the user who
 to = tstart , the detection time is maximum (td = tc +tm ), and generated the activity.
 when to = tend , the detection time is minimized (td = tm ). • “File_tree” field records the storage address of the mobile
 Considering that insider threat operations generally occurs device.
 within a continuous period of time. • “Activity” field records the type of operation of the activ-
 The detection delay of insider threats is mainly from col- ity. For example, “Send” means sending e-mails and
 lecting enough activity logs, while the time spent in the model “WWW Visit” means browsing Webs.
 detection phase is negligible. Table XVI presents the delay • “TO” field records the recipient’s email address.
 time for MEWRGNN and the method in [15] to detect each • “CC” field records the email address where the carbon
 malicious behavior. Collecting 30 activity logs with varying copy is sent.
 times, MEWRGNN presents the arithmetic average of the • “BCC” field records the email address where a blind
 detection delay time. We can see that MEWRGNN can detect carbon copy is sent.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 3732 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 20, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2023

 • “From” field records the sender’s email address. [14] L. Liu, C. Chen, J. Zhang, O. De Vel, and Y. Xiang, “Doc2vec-based
 • “Size” field records the size of the email. insider threat detection through behaviour analysis of multi-source security logs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust Security Privacy Comput.
 • “Attachments” field records the storage address of email Commun., Guangzhou, China, 2020, pp. 301–309.
 attachments. [15] D. C. Le and N. Zincir-Heywood, “Anomaly detection for insider threats
 • “Content” field records the contents of emails, websites using unsupervised ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
 vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1152–1164, Jun. 2021.
 and files in a text format. [16] D. Li, L. Yang, H. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Ma, and J. Xiao, “Image-based
 • “Filename” field records the storage address and type of insider threat detection via geometric transformation,” Security Commun.
 the file accessed by the user. Netw., vol. 2021, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 1777536.
 [17] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng,
 • “To_removable_media” field records whether the file on
 “Log2vec: A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for
 the host is moved to a removable device, (“TRUE” is for detecting cyber threats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
 the case that the file is moved to a removable device, Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, London, U.K., Nov. 2019,
 pp. 1777–1794.
 while “FALSE” is for the opposite case). [18] L. Liu, O. De Vel, Q.-L. Han, J. Zhang, and Y. Xiang, “Detecting and
 • “from_removable_media” field records whether the file preventing cyber insider threats: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 on the removable device is moved to the host, (“TRUE” Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1397–1417, 2nd Quart., 2018.
 for yes, while “FALSE” for no). [19] F. L. Greitzer and R. E. Hohimer, “Modeling human behavior to anticipate insider attacks,” J. Strategic Security, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 25–48,
 • “URL” field records the Web address that the user visits. 2011.
 [20] O. Brdiczka et al., “Proactive insider threat detection through graph
 learning and psychological context,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT Privacy Workshops, 2012, pp. 142–149.
 [21] P. Parveen, Z. R. Weger, B. Thuraisingham, K. Hamlen, and L. Khan,
 The authors would like to thank the Editor and anonymous “Supervised learning for insider threat detection using stream mining,”
 reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Tools Artif. Intell., Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011,
 pp. 1032–1039.
 [22] F. Yuan, Y. Cao, Y. Shang, Y. Liu, J. Tan, and B. Fang, “Insider threat
 R EFERENCES detection with deep neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci.,
 vol. 10860. Cham, Switzerland, 2018, pp. 43–54.
 [1] G. Silowash, D. Cappelli, A. Moore, R. Trzeciak, T. J. Shimeall, and [23] T. Hu, W. Niu, X. Zhang, X. Liu, J. Lu, and Y. Liu, “An insider
 L. Flynn, “Common sense guide to mitigating insider threats (4th threat detection approach based on mouse dynamics and deep learning,”
 edition),” Dept. Softw. Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–12, Feb. 2019.
 PA, USA, Rep. CMU/SEI-2012-TR-012, Dec. 2012. [Online]. [24] P. Chattopadhyay, L. Wang, and Y.-P. Tan, “Scenario-based insider threat
 Available: https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalReport/ detection from cyber activities,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 5,
 2012_005_00_34033.pdf no. 3, pp. 660–675, Sep. 2018.
 [2] CERT Insider Threat Center. “Insider threat vulnerability assessment.” [25] A. Tuor, S. Kaplan, B. Hutchinson, N. Nichols, and S. Robinson,
 Software Engineering Institute. Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available: https:// “Deep learning for unsupervised insider threat detection in structured
 resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/Brochure/2015_015_001_51650.pdf cybersecurity data streams,” Oct. 2017, arXiv:1710.00811.
 [3] “2018 insider threat report,” Crowd Res. Partners, Rep., 2018. [Online]. [26] B. Böse, B. Avasarala, S. Tirthapura, Y.-Y. Chung, and D. Steiner,
 Available: https://crowdresearchpartners.com/insider-threat-report/ “Detecting insider threats using RADISH: A system for real-time
 [4] M. Collins et al., “Common sense guide to mitigating insider threats,” anomaly detection in heterogeneous data streams,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 11,
 Dept. Softw. Eng. Inst., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, no. 2, pp. 471–482, Jun. 2017.
 USA, Rep. CMU/SEI-2016-TR-015, 2016. [Online]. Available: http:// [27] P. Parveen and B. Thuraisingham, “Unsupervised incremental sequence
 resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?AssetID=484738 learning for insider threat detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
 [5] G. Yang, J. Ma, A. Yu, and Z. Meng, “Survey of insider threat detection,” Security Inform., Washington, DC, USA, 2012, pp. 141–143.
 J. Cyber Security, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 21–36, 2016. [28] D. Nathani, J. Chauhan, C. Sharma, and M. Kaul, “Learning attention-
 [6] S. Yuan and X. Wu, “Deep learning for insider threat detection: Review, based embeddings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs,” 2019,
 challenges and opportunities,” 2020, arXiv:2005.12433. arXiv:1906.01195.
 [7] D. Cappelli, A. Moore, and R. Trzeciak, The CERT Guide to [29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A compre-
 Insider Threats: How to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to Information hensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage, Fraud). Upper Saddle River, NJ, Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
 USA: Addison-Wesley, Jan. 2012. [30] J. Jiang et al., “Anomaly detection with graph convolutional networks
 [8] I. Homoliak, F. Toffalini, J. Guarnizo, Y. Elovici, and M. Ochoa, “Insight for insider threat and fraud detection,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun.
 into insiders and IT: A survey of insider threat taxonomies, analysis, Conf., 2019, pp. 109–114.
 modeling, and countermeasures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 2, [31] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach
 pp. 1–40, 2019. to generating insider threat data,” in Proc. IEEE Security Privacy
 [9] T. Casey, “A field guide to insider threat,” White Paper, Oct. 2015. Workshops, 2013, pp. 98–104.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ [32] L. Zeigermann, “TIMESTAMP: Stata module to obtain a UNIX
 324068663_A_Field_Guide_to_Insider_Threat_Understanding_Insider_ timestamp and the current time of a user-specified timezone,” Dept.
 Threat_Vectors_to_Further_Improve_Enterprise_Security_Strategies Economics, Boston College, Newton, MA, USA, Statistical Software
 [10] M. N. Al-Mhiqani, R. Ahmad, W. Mohamed, A. Hassan, and Components Rep. S458182, 2016.
 K. Hameed, “Cyber-security incidents: A review cases in cyber-physical [33] “Pandas.factorize.” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://pandas.pydata.org/
 systems,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 499–508, pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.factorize.html
 2018. [34] B. Shi, J. Zhao, and K. Xu, “A word2vec model for sentiment analysis
 [11] M. N. Al-Mhiqani et al., “A review of insider threat detection: of Weibo,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Serv. Syst. Serv. Manag., Shenzhen, China,
 Classification, machine learning techniques, datasets, open challenges, 2019, pp. 1–6.
 and recommendations,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 15, pp. 1–41, 2020. [35] J. Lilleberg, Y. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Support vector machines and
 [12] A. Azaria, A. Richardson, S. Kraus, and V. S. Subrahmanian, Word2vec for text classification with semantic features,” in Proc.
 “Behavioral analysis of insider threat: A survey and bootstrapped Int. Conf. Cogn. Inform. Cogn. Comput., Beijing, China, 2015,
 prediction in imbalanced data,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst., vol. 1, pp. 136–140.
 no. 2, pp. 135–155, Jun. 2014. [36] Y.-A. Chung, C.-C. Wu, C.-H. Shen, H.-Y. Lee, and L.-S. Lee, “Audio
 [13] D. C. Le, N. Zincir-Heywood, and M. I. Heywood, “Analyzing data Word2Vec: Unsupervised learning of audio segment representations
 granularity levels for insider threat detection using machine learning,” using sequence-to-sequence Autoencoder,” in Proc. INTERSPEECH,
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 30–44, Mar. 2020. San Francisco, CA, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 765–769.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 XIAO et al.: ROBUST ANOMALY-BASED INSIDER THREAT DETECTION USING GNN 3733

 [37] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Distributed Lin Yang received the M.S. degree in automarepresentations of words and phrases and their compositionality,” tion and the Ph.D. degree in communication and
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 26, 2013, electronic system from the National University of
 pp. 3111–3119. Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan, in 1995
 [38] R. Řehůřek and P. Sojka, “Software framework for topic modelling and 1999, respectively. Since 2005, he has been a
 with large corpora,” in Proc. LREC Workshop New Challenges NLP Senior Engineer with China Electronic Equipment
 Frameworks, Valletta, Malta, May 2010, pp. 45–50. [Online]. Available: and System Engineering Corporation. His research
 http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en interests include computer security, information
 [39] T. Mikolov, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, C. Puhrsch, and A. Joulin, system security, network security, trusted computing,
 “Advances in pre-training distributed word representations,” 2018, security protocol analysis, and big-data security.
 arXiv:1712.09405.
 [40] “Arithmetic average advantages and disadvantages.” Macroption.
 Accessed: Jun. 21, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.macroption.
 com/arithmetic-average-advantages-disadvantages/#advantage-1-fastand-easy-to-calculate
 [41] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: Practical Fuli Zhong received the B.S. degree in electronic
 Machine Learning Tools and Techniques. Burlington, MA, USA: Morgan information engineering and the Ph.D. degree in nav-
 Kaufmann, 2011, pp. 131–137. igation, guidance and control from the University
 [42] D. Li, J. Lin, T. F. D. A. Bissyandé, J. Klein, and Y. Le Traon, of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
 “Extracting statistical graph features for accurate and efficient time series Chengdu, China, in 2011 and 2019, respectively. He
 classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Extending Database Technol., Vienna, is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the School
 Austria, 2018, pp. 1–12. of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
 [43] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph University. His research interests include cybersecuconvolutional networks,” Sep. 2016, arXiv:1609.02907. rity and resilience, machine learning, cyber-physical
 [44] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. van den Berg, I. Titov, system, prognostics and health management, fulland M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional duplex wireless communications, signal processing,
 networks,” in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., vol. 10843. Cham, optimization, complex nonlinear dynamic systems, state estimation, and
 Switzerland, 2018, pp. 593–607. identification and control of dynamic systems.
 [45] J. Xiao, L. Yang, F. Zhong, H. Chen, and X. Li, “Robust anomalybased intrusion detection system for in-vehicle network by graph neural
 network framework,” Appl. Intell., to be published.
 [46] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903. Xiaolei Wang received the M.S. and Ph.D.
 [47] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph degrees in computer science and technology from
 attention network,” Sep. 2020, arXiv:2009.02040. the College of Computer, National University of
 [48] Z. Chen, D. Chen, Z. Yuan, X. Cheng, and X. Zhang, “Learning Defense Technology, China, in 2014 and 2019,
 graph structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly respectively. His research interests include malware
 detection in IoT,” Apr. 2021, arXiv:2104.03466. analysis, program analysis, and software security and
 [49] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” defense.
 Dec. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 [50] L. Van Der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
 [51] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
 Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.

 Hongbo Chen received the Ph.D. degree from
 the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2007. He is
 currently a Professor with the School of Systems
 Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
 where he is the Dean with the School of Systems
 Science and Engineering. His main research interests
 include modeling, simulation and analysis of complex systems, intelligent unmanned systems, and
 design of aerospace vehicle.

 Junchao Xiao received the M.S. degree from Dongyang Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 Shanghai Maritime University, China, in 2018. He with the Army Engineering University of PLA. His
 is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the research interests include insider threat detection and
 School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun network measurement and monitor.
 Yat-sen University. His research interests include
 deep learning, network security, and intrusion detection system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY CALICUT. Downloaded on April 07,2026 at 01:26:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.