860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

 Task Allocation Under Geo-Indistinguishability
 via Group-Based Noise Addition
 Pengfei Zhang , Xiang Cheng , Sen Su , and Ning Wang

 Abstract—Locations are usually necessary for task allocation in spatial crowdsourcing, which may put individual privacy in jeopardy
 without proper protection. Although existing studies have well explored the problem of location privacy protection in task allocation under
 geo-indistinguishability, they potentially assume the workers could perform any tasks, which might not be practical in reality. Moreover,
 they usually adopt planar laplacian mechanism to achieve geo-indistinguishability, which will introduce excessive noise due to its
 randomness and boundlessness. To this end, we propose a task alloCAtioN approach via grOup-based noisE addition under Geo-I,
 referred to as CANOE. Its main idea is that each worker uploads the noisy distances between his true location and the obfuscated
 locations of his preferred tasks instead of uploading his obfuscated location. In particular, to alleviate the total noise when conducting
 grouping, we put forward an optimized global grouping with adaptive local adjustment method OGAL with convergence guarantee. To
 collect the noisy distances which are required for subsequent task allocation, we develop a utility-aware obfuscated distance collection
 method UODC with solid privacy and utility guarantees. We further theoretically analyze the privacy, utility and complexity guarantees of
 CANOE. Extensive analyses and experiments over two real-world datasets confirm the effectiveness of CANOE.

 Index Terms—Spatial crowdsourcing, task allocation, privacy protection, geo-indistinguishability

 Ç

1 INTRODUCTION different regions. Obviously, since each worker has different
 familiarities with different regions, to maximize the quality
 PATIAL crowdsourcing (SC) is a typical representative of
S crowdsourcing, which engages the crowds to accomplish
spatial tasks, e.g., giving out coupons and monitoring enviof recommendations, the problem can be modeled as the
 task allocation problem while considering preferences. However, disclosing the naturally required locations may pose a
ronmental conditions, by physically moving to other locasignificant risk to the workers as the uploaded locations
tions [1]. In SC, due to the limitation of time or space, each
 might imply living habits or other sensitive information.
worker can only be assigned to do the limited tasks initiated
 Without proper privacy protection, the workers may be
by the initiator. For example, an individual worker may only
 unwilling to participate in the SC system.
have time to do nearby tasks that are near the places of work
 Geo-indistinguishability (Geo-I) [7] has been proposed as
or residence. The task that is far away from these locations
 a practical standard to address location privacy protection
should not be assigned to him. Thus, how to assign a certain
 problem. Unlike the spatial cloaking technique [8], which
worker the task that he can do objectively is a key issue. Task
 replaces a worker’s location with a restricted region, the proallocation [2], [3], [4], which assigns a worker to his preferred
 tection level of Geo-I is independent of adversaries’ prior
task under the constraint on minimizing average travel disknowledge. Moreover, it does not assume a trusted server.
tance, is an effective way to address this issue. In particular,
 Furthermore, it can be achieved in a simple and efficient way
average travel distance denotes the average distance needed
 using the planar laplacian (PL) mechanism. Through PL,
for the selected workers to perform their assigned tasks. The
 locations will be locally perturbed before being sent to the
smaller, the better. For instance, in location-based services,
 server. Since exact locations never leave from workers’ devisuch as personalized product recommendation [5], [6], the
 ces, it can protect both workers and other adversaries, such
initiators of the spatial crowdsourcing want different workas the server, against damages due to potential privacy
ers to be responsible for product recommendation in
 breaches. Recently, PL has been adopted in many famous
 applications, including LP-Guardian [9], LP-Doctor [10] and
 secure nearby-friends discovery system [11].
 The authors are with the State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications In this article, we systematically study the problem of
 (BUPT), Beijing 100876, China. E-mail: {zpf.bupt, chengxiang, susen, task allocation with preferred tasks while protecting workwangn}@bupt.edu.cn. ers’ locations under Geo-I. Specifically, each worker first
Manuscript received 23 April 2022; revised 15 September 2022; accepted 13 excludes the tasks he doesn’t want to do and lets the
October 2022. Date of publication 19 October 2022; date of current version 13 remaining tasks as his preferred tasks or just chooses the
May 2023.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
 tasks he wants to do. Then the server assigns each task to a
of China under Grants 62072052 and 61872045, and in part by the Founda- worker under the constraint on minimizing average travel
tion for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Founda- distance while guaranteeing Geo-I for each worker’s location of China under Grant 61921003. tion. Although existing studies [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]
(Corresponding authors: Xiang Cheng and Sen Su.)
Recommended for acceptance by N. Cao. have well explored the problem of location privacy protec-
Digital Object Identifier no. 10.1109/TBDATA.2022.3215467 tion for task allocation, they potentially assume the workers
 2332-7790 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See ht_tps://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 861

could perform any tasks, which might not be practical in convergence guarantee. To refine groupings locally, we forreality. Moreover, due to the randomness and boundless- malize two optimization problems to adaptively determine
ness of PL [18], the injected noise may be excessive. the grouping for each worker, including the number of
 We note that in the real world, workers prefer to select groups and the number of tasks in each group.
nearby tasks that are near the places of work or residence. It After obtaining the optimized grouping for each worker,
leads to the aggregations of tasks’ locations in the corre- he adds noise for each group to collect and uploads the
sponding preference sets. Thus, if some tasks are close to required distances for subsequent task allocation. We note
each other in terms of locations, they can be represented by that we should make the generated representative location
one location. This fact drives us to advocate the idea of for each group be close to tasks’ locations in the same group
group-based noise addition. It is intended to strike a balance and be far away from tasks’ locations in other groups. In
between location privacy and location utility. Specifically, as addition, recall that the straight-forward adoption of PL
an extreme example, when multiple locations in a certain may introduce excessive noise. To this end, instead of
worker’s preference set are the same, there is even no extra adopting PL, we develop a utility-aware obfuscated disinformation loss except for the added noise in the way of tance calculation method called UODC. Its main idea is to
adding noise by using a location in this preference set, and let each generated obfuscated location be limited to the
the noise needs to be added only once. To improve the util- range formed by tasks’ locations in the same group. We theity of task allocation under Geo-I, we propose to add noise oretically prove it guarantees Geo-I and show its utility
by group-based noise addition on the basis of minimizing superiority compared with PL. In UODC, we first formalize
the overall noise. Note that, in this way, we may need to an optimization problem to generate a grouping representasplit the privacy budget for multiple grouping representa- tive location for each group by minimizing intra-group distive locations. Although directly announcing the obfuscated tances and maximizing inter-group distances. Then, we
workers’ locations with PL guarantees Geo-I and avoids the generate a noisy representative location by probability samproblem of splitting the privacy budget, the obfuscated pling with each corresponding group. Finally, each worker
locations might deviate from the true locations significantly, uploads the calculated noisy distances from his true locaas the injected noise of adopting PL for achieving Geo-I is tion to each noisy representative location to the server.
unbounded, which will lead to excessive noise of the calcu- The key contributions of this paper are summarized as
lated distances. In contrast, in the way of group-based noise follows:
addition, since each generated obfuscated location is limited
to the range formed by the corresponding tasks’ locations in  We present CANOE for task allocation under Geo-I
the same group, desirable data utility can be expected. based on group-based noise addition. Its main idea
Moreover, the privacy budget of each worker only needs to is that each worker uploads the noisy distances
be split just a few times in practice due to the existence of between his true location and the obfuscated locathe aggregations of the tasks’ locations in each preference tions of his preferred tasks instead of uploading his
set. As such, we believe that CANOE can provide an accept- obfuscated location.
able trade-off for real-world deployments.  To alleviate the total noise when conducting group-
 To this end, we propose a task alloCAtioN approach via ing, we put forward an optimized global grouping
grOup-based noisE addition under Geo-I, referred to as with adaptive local adjustment method OGAL based
CANOE. Its main idea is that each worker uploads the noisy on our noise analysis. We prove its convergence
distances between his true location and the obfuscated loca- guarantee.
tions of his preferred tasks instead of uploading his obfus-  To collect the noisy distances which are required for
cated location. In particular, we use one location to subsequent task allocation, we develop a utilityrepresent a group of geographically close locations. This aware obfuscated distance collection method UODC.
indicates only one piece of noise will be added to the above We formally give its privacy and utility guarantees.
locations in the same group.  We theoretically give the privacy, utility and com-
 In CANOE, two kinds of noise are involved in obtaining plexity guarantees of CANOE. Extensive analyses
the appropriate groupings, which are the information loss and experiments over two real-world datasets concaused by representing multiple locations by one location firm the effectiveness of CANOE.
and the injected noise for privacy protection. We group the The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss
locations in each worker’s preference set through the con- related work in Section 2. We give the preliminaries in Secstraints deduced by minimizing the sum of the above two tion 3. The details of CANOE are presented in Section 4. The
types of noise, and put forward an optimized global group- experimental results are discussed and analyzed in Secing with adaptive local adjustment method called OGAL tion 8. Finally, we summarize our work in Section 9.
based on our noise analysis. In OGAL, the server first gives
coarse-grained global groupings and broadcasts the group- 2 RELATED WORK
ings to each worker. Then, each worker refines the received
 The related work falls into the following two aspects.
groupings locally. Specifically, to conduct grouping globally,
we formulate a mixed-integer nonlinear program (MINLP)
problem with a non-convex constraint. Due to the NP-hard 2.1 Privacy-Preserving Task Allocation With
characteristic, based on benders decomposition (BD) and Obfuscation
alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [19], We briefly discuss existing privacy-preserving task allocawe devise an alternate optimization method with tion approaches in spatial crowdsourcing while adopting
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

obfuscation technologies (e.g., geo-indistinguishability (Geo- and [30], have conducted systematic studies on the classic
I) [7] or differential privacy [20]). methods of location privacy protection. In particular, the
 Zhang et al. [21] conduct task allocation based on a notion of Geo-I [7] has gained wide attention.
designed differentially private geocoding method to pre- Bordenabe et al. [31] explore the possibility of constructserve workers’ locations. To et al. [12] propose a differen- ing a mechanism that minimizes the service quality loss,
tially private framework for protecting the privacy of using linear programming technique. Yu et al. [32] propose
workers’ locations. They [13] further propose an analytical another notion to supplement Geo-I. Oya et al. [33] present
method to ensure the high success rate of task allocation. To a new method to maximize the conditional entropy utility.
improve task allocation utility, Wang et al. [14] integrate the Pyrgelis et al. [34] focus on releasing aggregated location
phase of adding noise and the phase of task allocation into time-series. Chatzikokolakis et al. [35] aim to improve utility
an optimization problem together while guaranteeing dif- for continuous and discrete scenarios. ElSalamouny et al.
ferential privacy. They [15] also propose a method to maxi- [36] consider a more realistic case in which the region to be
mize each mobile worker’s future location coverage under a protected is continuous with a non-zero area. Takagi et al.
guaranteed location privacy protection scheme. Similar to [37] identify an extra privacy loss for road networks. Oya
[15], Qian et al. [22] focus on improving the service quality et al. [38] provide an alternative formulation of Geo-I.
using task allocation for vehicle networks. In addition, Though existing studies may provide good utility for a
they [23] design a similar solution for mobile edge cloud single location, they are no longer capable of obtaining relienvironment. To satisfy personalized demand for each able results under our setting. On one hand, the obfuscated
worker, Wang et al. [24] provide a personalized probabilis- locations could be far from the true locations. On the other
tic winner selection mechanism. However, the utility of [24] hand, we cannot directly use PL for multiple locations as
significantly depends on the choice of hyper parameters, the privacy budget could be very small, which will inevitawhich could not be automatically determined. For jointly bly result in poor performance. Besides, the performances
protecting the location privacy of workers and tasks, To of [33], [34] rely heavily on the choice of hyper parameters,
et al. [16] propose a three-phase framework which quanti- which may result in the different results.
fies the achievable probabilities. Following [16], Tao et al.
[17] make the first attempt at differentially private task allo- 3 PRELIMINARIES
cation while assuring the competitive ratio. However, these
 3.1 Geo-Indistinguishability
two mainly [16], [17] focus on task allocation aiming to
ensure all tasks are assigned, while we focus on minimize Geo-indistinguishability (Geo-I) is the de facto for protecting
the expected travel distance of selected workers. location privacy [7]. Let X and Z be the set of workers’ pos-
 Task allocation with obfuscation technologies has also sible locations and possible obfuscated locations respectively. It is formally defined as follows:
been studied whiling incorporating incentive. Shen et al.
[25] aim to optimize task acceptance rate using a leader-fol- Definition 1 ("-Geo-I). Given a privacy budget ", a randomlower game by introducing edge nodes. Gong et al. [26] ized algorithm achieves "-Geo-I, if and only if
propose a framework to achieve high task coverage by estimating worker density. Xu et al. [27] propose a differential P ðl jl1 Þ  e"r P ðl jl2 Þ;
privacy-based auction mechanism in cloud and edge-coopwhere l1 and l2 are any two locations in X , and l is an
eration systems. Zhang et al. [28] design a game-theoreticobserved obfuscated location in Z. In particular, r denotes the
based task allocation approach for social sensing-based
 distance from true location to the observed obfuscated location.
edge computing systems. However, since they work on the
problems that are different from ours, their approaches are The way to guarantee Geo-I is adopting the planar laplanot suitable for our problem. cian (PL). Specifically, given the privacy budget parameter
 In summary, although existing studies can prevent loca- ", the actual location l0 2 X , and any other location l 2 Z,
tion privacy leakage, they potentially assume the workers we can generate a noisy location by:
could perform any tasks. Moreover, some focus on different
objectives or different scenarios from us. Furthermore, due l ¼ l0 þ ðr  cos ðuÞ; r  sin ðuÞÞ:
to the randomness and boundlessness of PL, the obfuscated In particular, u is sampled from ½0; 2pÞ, and r is obtained
locations of the workers might deviate from the true loca- by:
tions significantly. In this paper, we focus on the scenario    
when workers have preferred tasks while designing a new 1 p1
 r¼ W1 þ1 ;
noise-adding mechanism to collect the information required " e
for task allocation instead of adopting PL. In particular, we
 where W1 is the Lambert function (the -1 branch) and
present group-based noise addition to add noise for the prep 2 ½0; 1Þ:
ferred tasks’ locations rather than workers’ locations, which
 To support multiple computations under Geo-I, composcan provide desirable utility while keeping the same intenite properties are extensively used, including sequential
sity of privacy protection.
 composition property [20] and parallel composition property [39]. In particular, we have:
2.2 Location Privacy Under Geo-Indistinguishability Theorem 1(Sequential Composition). Suppose A1 ; . . . ; Ak
Large amounts of work have been done to protect the loca- are k algorithms over database D, eachP provides "i -Geo-I. A
tion privacy, and many excellent surveys, such as, [29] sequence of algorithms Ai ðDÞ yields ð "i Þ-Geo-I.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 863

 TABLE 1
 List of Frequently Used Notations

 Notation Definition
 W The set of workers
 T The set of tasks
 M The total number of workers
 N The total number of tasks
 wi The i-th worker
 tj The j-th task
 Si The preference set for wi
 r The size of the preference set
 dðÞ The travel distance
 ~
 dðÞ The obfuscated distance
 m The representative location for a group
 m0 The representative location after adding noise
Fig. 1. The research problem.
 dfij The obfuscated distance between wi and m0j
 C The grouping set of a certain preference set
3.2 Problem Statement EG The injected noise
Fig. 1 shows the problem investigated in this paper. Given a EIL The information loss
crowd of active workers in the SC system, denoted by the dðwi ; tj Þ The distance travelled by wi for performing tj
 D The noisy distance matrix
set W ¼ fw1 ; w2 ; w3 ; . . . ; wM g. There exist N (N < M) tasks
published by the initiator to be accomplished, which is represented as T ¼ ft1 ; t2 ; t3 ; . . . ; tN g. Each task has its location
coordinate and corresponding identifier. Each worker has there exist the aggregations of tasks’ locations in each prefhis own location coordinate and preference set Si with the erence set. Thus, if some tasks are close to each other in
size of ri , in which the elements are the identifiers of the terms of locations, they can be represented by one location.
tasks a worker prefers to do. Additionally, we use dðwi ; tj Þ This fact drives us to advocate the idea of group-based noise
to denote the distance the i-th worker wi travels if he is addition. Based on this idea, we present CANOE, whose
selected to perform the j-th task tj , which is in his prefer- main idea is that each worker uploads the noisy distances
ence set. between his true location and the obfuscated tasks’ locations
 We assume that the size of the preference set for each in his preference set instead of uploading his obfuscated
worker is the same, denoted by r, and each worker uses the location directly. In particular, CANOE mainly consists of
same privacy budget ". In addition, suppose that the true an optimized global grouping with adaptive local adjustlocation of each task is publicly available. Furthermore, we ment method OGAL and a utility-aware obfuscated distance
assume that the initiator has recruited adequate workers to collection method UODC. Fig. 2 depicts the workflow of
evenly prefer each task through the existing Target Coverage- CANOE, in which the server and the workers collaborate to
based worker recruitment approaches [40], [41], [42], [43], [44], assign the tasks in each worker’s preference set in a geo-
[45], which is beyond the scope of this paper. How to jointly indistinguishable manner. In particular, CANOE includes
model worker recruitment and task allocation [46], [47], the following phases.
[48], under Geo-I, is an interesting issue that will be studied Phase 1. In this phase, the server first invokes OGAL to
in the future. Once the server assigns a task to a worker, the group all the tasks globally according to their publicly availworker and the task are considered being unreachable. Spe- able locations by formulating a mixed-integer nonlinear
cifically, our problem is to identify a set of tuples with form program MINLP problem with a non-convex constraint,
 < w; t > , where a spatial task t is assigned to worker w, and then broadcasts the groupings to each worker. The
satisfying that t is a task in the preference set of w. It aims to details are given in Section 5.1.
minimize traveling distance while completing all the tasks Phase 2. In this phase, each worker first applies the
with the obfuscated information provided by the workers groupings sent by the server to initially group the locations
under "-Geo-I. in his preference set, and then invokes OGAL to adaptively
 Table 1 summarizes the notations that will be frequently refine his grouping based on the formalized two optimizaused in this paper. tion problems, including the determination of the number
 of groups and the number of tasks in each group. The
 details are discussed in detail in Section 5.2.
4 OVERVIEW OF CANOE Phase 3. In this phase, after local adjustment, each worker
The intuitive scheme is that each worker adds noise using already gets his optimal grouping, which may be different
the planar laplacian (PL) to obfuscate his true location, and from each other. He invokes UODC to calculate the noisy
then calculates the distances between the corresponding distances that are used for task allocation, and uploads the
obfuscated location and his preferred tasks’ locations. After noisy distances to the server. UODC is clearly elaborated in
that, the noisy distances are sent to the server for task alloca- Section 6.
tion. Nevertheless, due to the randomness and boundless- Phase 4. In this phase, based on the uploaded noisy
ness of PL, it may imply excessive noise to be added. distances, the server conducts task allocation to assign
 Actually, due to the fact that workers prefer to select each task to a certain worker according to the algorithm
nearby tasks that are near the places of work or residence, described in [2].
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
864 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

Fig. 2. Overview of CANOE.

 Besides, we give the privacy, utility and complexity guar- Before giving the details of the global grouping method, we
antees of CANOE in Section 7. first quantify the total noise, which is defined by the sum of
 the Injected Noise and Information Loss.
5 OPTIMIZED GLOBAL GROUPING WITH ADAPTIVE
 LOCAL ADJUSTMENT 5.1 Optimized Global Grouping
 5.1.1 Total Noise Quantification
Clearly, two kinds of noise are involved in obtaining the
appropriate groupings. We denote the noise for privacy The Injected Noise is the expectation of noise added for
protection as Injected Noise, and denote the reconstruction guaranteeing Geo-I.
error caused by representing a set of locations by one loca- Definition 2 (Injected Noise) Formally, for a certain group
tion as Information Loss. Too many groups for a certain pref- Ck , the noise added to the group center is
erence set will lead to excessive Injected Noise, while too few
groups will imply too much Information Loss. Z þ1 Z 2p
 Thus, to strike a balance between location privacy and EG ðCk Þ ¼ rDðr; uÞdrdu
location utility, we put forward an optimized global group- 0 0
 Z þ1 Z 2p
ing with adaptive local adjustment method OGAL to mini- "2 "r
 ¼ r re drdu
mize the total noise. The overflow of OGAL is shown in 0 0 2p
Fig. 3. In OGAL, the server first gives the coarse-grained 2
 ¼ : (1)
groupings and broadcasts the groupings to each worker. "
Then, each worker adjusts his own groupings locally.
 In what follows, we first introduce the global grouping Recall that Information Loss is the loss caused by repremethod. Then, we present how to adjust groupings locally. senting all locations in a group with a location. It indicates
 the absolute value of the difference between the distance
 from a certain worker’s true location to a certain task’s
 obfuscated location and the distance from this worker’s true
 location to this task’s true location. We give the following
 example to make it be more clearer.
 Example 1 As shown in Fig. 4, let mk denote the group center
 for the k-th group and m0k denote the group center after adding
 noise. For a certain task tj and the worker wi , if we do
 not adopt group-based noise addition, the travel distance is
 dðwi ; tj Þ. After we adopt group-based noise addition, the travel
 distance is dðwi ; m0k Þ. Thus, Information Loss, which is measured by the distance variation, can be quantified by jdðwi ;
Fig. 3. Overview of OGAL. m0k Þ  dðwi ; tj Þj.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 865

 Theorem 2. The number of tasks in each group should be as near
 equal size as possible.
 Proof. Let Q represent the number of groups. Following
 Lemma 1, by the Cauchy-Buniakowsky-Schwarz inequality,
 we have:
 !
 2Q2 X 2jC jjCk j2 2Q2
 þ Ck 2C
 ¼
 " " "
 2 0 Q
 13
 26   zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{
 2 B C7
 þ 4 jC1 j2 þjC2 j2 þ    þCQ  @12 þ 12 þ    þ 12 A5
 "

Fig. 4. An example to illustrate Information Loss. 2Q2 2    2
  þ jC1 jþjC2 jþ    þCQ  :
 " "
Definition 3 (Information Loss). Formally, for a certain
 group Ck , Information Loss is, When jC1 j¼jC2 j¼    ¼jCQ j, the above inequality
 X      achieves the minimum value. Thus, the size of each
 EIL ðCk Þ ¼ d wi ; m0  d wi ; tj : (2) group should be as evenly as possible. u
 t
 t 2C k
 j k

 Specifically, from Fig. 4, by triangular inequality, we 5.1.2 Global Grouping Determination
have: According to Theorem 2, we should assure the uniformity
       
 d wi ; m0  d wi ; tj   d tj ; m0 for the size of each group. To this end, we design a balancek k
       aware grouping method BAG by formalizing a constrained
 d mk ; m0k þ d mk ; tj  d tj ; m0k : (3) optimization problem. Specifically, suppose there are jCj
 groups and the number of tasks in the k-th group is jCk j.
 Thus, we have:
 The number of tasks in each group is jCj N in the case of bal-
 X      ance. Thus, we should minimize the following objective
 EIL ðCk Þ ¼ d wi ; m0  d wi ; tj 
 tj 2Ck k function
 X     
  d mk ; m0k þ d mk ; tj XjC j  
 t 2C
 j k jC j 2
 jCk j 
 X
 jCk j
     N
 d mk ; tq þ jCk jd mk ; m0k :
 k¼1
 ¼ (4)
 q¼1 X
 jC j
 2jC j X
 jC j
 jC j3
 ¼ jCk j2  jCk j þ 2
 k¼1
 N k¼1 N
 We consider the sum of the Injected Noise and Information
Loss as the total noise, which is shown in Lemma 1. X
 jC j
 jC j3
 ¼ jCk j2 þ  2jC j: (5)
Lemma 1. Let jCj denote the number of groups for a worker, the k¼1
 N2
 total noise after grouping can be quantified as follows:
 ! Since jCj and N are constants, we should minimize
 PjCj
 2jC j2 X 2jC jjCk j2 2
 k¼1 jCk j . Thus, we have the following optimization
 EðtotalÞ ¼ þ Ck 2C
 :
 " " problem
 !2
 N X
 X jC j X
 jC j X
 N
Proof. By summing up the Injected Noise and Information arg min uik dðti ; mk Þ þ aik
 u;m i¼1 k¼1 k¼1 i¼1
 Loss, we have: 8
 X >
 > uik  0
 >
 > PC
 EðtotalÞ ¼ ½EG ðCk Þ þ EIL ðCk Þ < u
 k¼1 ik ¼ 1; i ¼ 1; 2    N
 Ck 2C (
 " # s:t:
 > jC j : (6)
 X 2 X
 jCk j
     >
 > 1 k ¼ arg max uij j¼1
 ¼ 0 >
 : a ¼
 " þ d mk ; tq þ jCk jd mk ; mk ik
 C 2C k
 jC j q¼1
 0 other
 " #
 2jC j 2 X 2jCk jðjCk j  1Þ 2
  þ Ck 2C " þ jCk j " In Eq. (6), the first part of the objective function aims at
 " jC j jC j minimizing the intra-group distances, and the second part
 !
 2jC j2 X 2jC jjCk j2 corresponds to balance constraint, where mik is the member-
 ¼ þ : ship function that indicates P how Pmuch the i-th
 " Ck 2C " jCj 2 PjCjsample2
 belongs to the k-th group, and k¼1 ð N a Þ ¼ k¼1 jCk j .
 u
 t i¼1 ik
 The first two constraints, denoted by Non-negative Constraint
 Actually, we should make the total noise as small as pos- and Normalizing Constraint respectively, represent that the
sible, and give the following theorem. memberships are not negative and the sum of memberships
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

is 1. These two jointly indicate that each task belongs to one N X
 X jC j
group in C. The third constraint, denoted by Boolean con- Lðu; m; Þ ¼ uik dðti ; mk Þ þ XT X
straint, represents that each task belongs to only one group. i¼1 k¼1
 !
 We note that, this formulated problem is a mixed-integer X
 N X
 jC j
 uik
non-linear program (MINLP) problem with a non-convex þ i e 1 :
constraint, which is denoted by Boolean constraint with i¼1 k¼1
respect to the membership u and grouping center m. It is
 Let the first-order derivative of lagrangian with respect
NP-hard [49]. While existing non-linear optimization techto mk be 0, we can get:
niques can only deal with convex objectives effectively.
Thus, a specialized solution is required to solve this non- PN
 i¼1 uik  tk
convex MINLP [50]. mk ¼ P N
 : (11)
 Based on Benders Decomposition [51], we devise an alter- i¼1 uik
nate optimization method with convergence guarantee. Our Let the first-order derivative of lagrangian with respect
overall strategy is to decompose Eq. (6) into two modules. to uik be 0, with the Exponential constraint, we can get:
Each module corresponds to optimize one variable while
fixing the other. Thus, we can iteratively solve the two mod- ti  mk
 uik ¼  ln PjC j : (12)
ules until convergence.
 k¼1 ðti  mk Þ
 At the beginning, we need to enforce the Boolean Constraint. Motivated by the alternating direction multiplier X-subproblem
method (ADMM) [19], we introduce the auxiliary matrix X, When fixing u and m, the objective function of X-subwhere an element in X is aik in Eq. (6). Thus, the objective problem is shown as follows:
function in Eq. (6) can be converted to
 arg min XT X
 X
 (
 N X
 X jC j
 1 k ¼ arg max uij j¼1
 jC j
 arg min uik dðti ; mk Þ þ XT X: (7) s:t: aik ¼ : (13)
 u;m;X i¼1 k¼1 0 other

Thus, we alternately optimize u; m and X. To deal with the Boolean Constraint, we introduce an auxu; m-subproblem iliary matrix Z, and the above objective function is further
 When fixing X, the objective function of u; m-subproblem transformed into:
is shown as follows: arg min XT X
 X
 s:t: X  Z ¼ 0: (14)
 N X
 X jC j
 arg min uik dðti ; mk Þ þ X X
 T
 Based on ADMM, the above equation is transformed into
 u;m i¼1 k¼1
  an unconstrained optimization problem:
 uik  0  2
 s:t: PC : (8) t 1 
 u ¼ 1; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . N 
 arg min Z Z þ X  Z þ U 
 T
 ; (15)
 t F
 k¼1 ik
 Z;U;t 2
 We deal with the Non-negative Constraint and the Normal- where t > 0 is a scaling factor and U is the lagrange
izing Constraint jointly and transform them into a Exponen- multiplier.
tial Constraint: Let the first-order derivative of lagrangian with respect
 to Z be 0, we can get:
 X
 jC j
 euik ¼ 1; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . N: (9) Z ¼ ð2I þ t Þ1  ðtX þ U Þ; (16)
 k¼1
 where every element in I is 1 and I has the same scale with
 X.
 Thus, we have When Z, U and t are fixed, the optimal solution of X is
 equivalent to
 N X
 X jC j
  2
 arg min uik dðti ; mk Þ þ XT X  1 
 X ¼ min  X  Z þ U  :
 t F
 u;m i¼1 k¼1

 X
 jC j
 s:t: euik ¼ 1; i ¼ 1; 2 . . . N: (10) Thus, we have:
 k¼1 (
 jC j
 Xik ¼ 1 k ¼ arg max vij j¼1 ; (17)
 Obviously, such Exponential Constraint can replace the Non- 0 other
negative Constraint and the Normalizing Constraint together as
the output of the exponential function is non-negative. where V ¼ Z  1t U.
Accordingly, we give the lagrangian of Eq. (10): The overall procedure is shown in Algorithm 1.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 867

Algorithm 1. Balance-Aware Grouping Thus, we have:
 Input: jCj: the number of groups;
 T : the set of tasks; X
 jC j
 N2
 t: the scaling factor; x2k  : (21)
 k¼1
 jC j
 Output: X: the groupings;
 1: initialize u and m and U ¼ 0; Thus, the objective function in Eq. (15) is greater than
 2: initialize X according to u; N2
 jCj .
 3: while not converge do This concludes the proof. t
 u
 4: update mk using Eq. (11);
 5: update uij using Eq. (12); Theorem 3. By Benders Decomposition and ADMM, the
 6: update Z using Eq. (16); problem in Eq. (6) can at least convergence to a local optimum.
 7: update X using Eq. (17);
 8: set U ¼ U þ tðX  ZÞ; Proof. As for u; m-subproblem, since an arbitrary norm on
 9: set t ¼ 1:1t; R is convex, non-negative summation and compound
10: return X; affine mapping are convex-preserving operations, by the
 lagrange multiplier approach, the problem shown in
 Eq. (10) can at least convergence to a local optimum.
 As for X-subproblem, according to Lemmas 2 and 3,
5.1.3 Convergence Analysis
 the problem shown in Eq. (15) can also convergence to a
To prove the convergence of Algorithm 1, we need to local optimum. u
 t
prove that the above two subproblems are monotonically
bounded. 5.2 Adaptive Local Adjustment
Lemma 2. The objective function in Eq. (15) is non-increasing Given the global groupings, we now design an adaptive
 while enlarging Z. local adjustment method ALA. The underlying idea is to
Proof. We only need to prove that the Hessian Matrix about achieve fine-grained partitions over dense groups and
Z is positive definite. We have Hessian Matrix: coarse-grained partitions over sparse groups to minimize
 the total noise. In this way, each worker can adaptively
 2 3
 @2 JðZÞ @2 JðZÞ determine the optimal grouping, including the number of
 @Z11 @Z11  @Z11 @ZN jC j 7
 6 tasks in each group and the number of groups. Specifically,
 6 7
 D2 JðZÞ ¼ 6 .. .. .. 7 we first derive another constraint. Then, based on the new
 6 . . . 7
 4 5 derived constraint, as well as the constraint in Theorem 2,
 @2 JðZÞ @2 JðZÞ
 @ZN jC j @Z11  @Z11 @Z11 we formalize two optimization problems to enforce these
 2 3 two constraints jointly.
 2þt  0
 6 .. .. .. 7 Actually, we should make the total noise of CANOE be
 ¼4 . . . 5: less than that of adding noise to each task’s location in a
 0  2 þ t worker’s preference set. To achieve this goal, suppose for a
 certain group, the number of tasks is jCk j. The privacy bud-
 Obviously, D2 JðZÞ > 0. Thus, Hessian Matrix is posi- get for each task is "0 ¼ jC" j if we add noise independently.
 k
 tive definite. In this case, the Information Loss is the change of travel dis-
 This concludes the proof. t
 u tance only caused by adding noise. Thus, the Information
 Loss for the k-th group is jCk j "20 . To make our group-based
Lemma 3. The objective function in Eq. (15) is bounded. noise addition be better than the above method, we let the
Proof. EIL ðCk Þ  jCk j "20 , and get the following theorem.
 Obviously,
  2 Theorem 4. Let m and jCk j denote the group center and the
 t 
 X  Z þ 1 U   0: number of tasks for the k-th group respectively. Additionally,
  (18)
 2 t F let tq denote a task in the group, and the sum of the inner distance of this group should satisfy the following constraint,
 As for Z T Z, it is equivalent to the following optimization problem: jCk j
 X   2jCk jðjCk j  1Þ
 d m; tq  :
 X
 jC j
 q¼1
 "
 arg min x2k
 x k¼1

 X
 jC j Proof. Let EIL ðCk Þ  jCk j "20 , we have:
 s:t: xk ¼ N: (19)
 j Ck j
 X
 k¼1   2jCk j2  
 d m; tq   jCk jd m; m0k
 By the Cauchy-Buniakowsky-Schwarz inequality, we q¼1
 "
 have: 2jCk j2 2 :
 ¼  jCk j
 X
 jC j
    2 " "
 x2k 12 þ    þ 12  x1 þ    þ xjC j ¼ N 2 : (20) 2jCk jðjCk j  1Þ
 ¼ t
 u
 k¼1 "
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

 For convenience, we denote the constraint in Theorem 2 group center is ranked second. It follows the same manner for
by Balance Constraint, and denote the constraint in Theo- the remaining group centers. In this way, the sorting can be
rem 4 by Intra-group Constraint. We need to meet them completed (Line 2). Next, each worker initializes every elejointly as much as possible. Since, obviously, the fewer ele- ment of f with positive infinity except for f00 ¼ 0 (Line 3).
ments in a group, the Intra-group Constraint can be more After that, he solves the problem in Eq. (22) and gets u (Lines
likely satisfied, and it is conducive to the realization of Bal- 4-8). Finally, he merges a group until d1 > d2 or d1 > u (Line
ance Constraint. Therefore, our overall strategy is presented 9). It follows the same manner for the remaining workers.
as follows. First, we deal with Intra-group Constraint and
design a dynamic programming based method by minimiz- Algorithm 2. MMS
ing the maximum sum within each group of a worker. Input: C: the initial grouping for a worker;
Then, we design a migration-based adjustment method to Output: C: the adjusted grouping for a worker;
achieve Balance Constraint through as few times as possible. 1: split C;
 2: initialize and sort G;
5.2.1 Achieving Intra-Group Constraint 3: initialize f;
Obviously, if the maximal sum of distance within each group 4: for i ¼ 1 to jGj do
satisfies the Intra-group Constraint, we can easily enforce the 5: for j ¼ 1 to jCj do
Intra-group Constraint for each group of a worker. To this 6: for k ¼ 1 to k <n i do o
 P
end, we first formulate the following problem by determin- 7: set fij ¼ min fij ; maxðfkj1 ; iq¼kþ1 Gq :d1 Þ ;
ing the minimized maximal Intra-group distance. jCj
 8: set u ¼ fjGj ;
Problem 1. Given a non-negative structure set G. Every element 9: merge G to C according to u and Intra-group Constraint;
 Gi in G includes a group Ck and two attributes Gi :d1 and 10: return C;
 PjCk j
 Gi :d2 , where the two attributes indicate q¼1 dðm; tq Þ and
 2jCk jðjCk j1Þ
 " respectively. Each group in G has been sorted
 according to the relative distance from the true location of each 5.2.2 Achieving Balance Constraint
 worker. We aim to merge jGj groups into jCj non-empty con- After tackling Intra-group Constraint by MMS, we now
 tinuous groups, and minimize maximal d1 . enforce the Balance Constraint through determining the optimal number of tasks in each group. According to Lemma 1,
 We give the following example to illustrate the above when groupings are relatively balanced, we need to keep
problem. the number of groups as small as possible. Moreover, after
Example 2. Suppose we have 5 groups, which form an ordered array MMS, there may be too many locations in some groups and
½8; 2; 4; 9; 8. Thus, we have jGj ¼ 5. Suppose jCj ¼ 2. The merged too less locations in other groups. Thus, we migrate tasks
groups are ½8; 2; 4 and ½9; 8 as the maximum sum is 17, which is among groups to adjust them, and propose a Migrationthe smallest in all cases. Note that, ½8; 2; 9 is not a valid group as based Grouping Adjustment method MGA.
the elements 2 and 9 in the original ordered array are not adjacent. To reduce the cost, that is the number of migrations,
 To solve the above problem, we design a method to Min- when conducting local adjustment, we first formalize the
imize the Maximum Sum based on dynamic programming, following problem.
called MMS. In particular, let fkr denote the maximum value Problem 2. Given an array Pwith non-negative integers
when merging the first k groups into r groups, the state jCj
 ½x1 ; x2 . . . xjCj  (xi 2 Zþ and i¼1 xi ¼ r), where r is the
transfer equation is shown as follows: number of elements in the preference set. We aim to find the
 ! minimum number of migration required to make all elements of
 X
 k
 the array be equal as much as possible. That is,
 fkr ¼ max fjr1 ; Gq :d1 : (22)
 q¼jþ1 X
 jC j
 arg min jx  xi j:
 It indicates that the maximum value of the Intra-group x i¼1
distance from the first k groups (k  jGj) when merged into
r (r  jCj) groups, is the larger of the value, when merging j We then give the following theorem to tackle the above
groups (j  k) into r  1 groups and merging the j þ 1-th to problem.
k-th groups into only one group. Each worker traverses all k
and r, and returns Theorem 5. For Problem 2, the optimal solution is its median.
 Proof. Suppose x1  x2 . . .  xjCj . Let hðxÞ and x denote
 jC j
 u ¼ fjGj : (23) the objective function and the corresponding optimal
 solution respectively.
 Algorithm 2 shows the main steps of MMS. In MMS, with If hðxÞ ¼ jx  x1 j þ jx  xjCj j; x 2 ½x1 ; xjCj , x ¼ xjCj .
the initial groupings set C, each worker first splits each group If hðxÞ ¼ jx  x2 j þ jx  xjCj1 j; x 2 ½x1 ; xjCj1 ,
into two groups, where a random location is taken out. Thus, x ¼ xjCj1 .
jGj ¼ 2jCj (Line 1). Then, he sorts G and calculates corre- If hðxÞ ¼ jx  xk j þ jx  xkþ1 j; x 2 ½xk ; xkþ1 , x ¼ xkþ1 .
sponding d1 and d2 . Specifically, for sorting, the group center According to the Mathematical Methods of Induction,
that is nearest to the worker’s true location is ranked first, and since ½xk ; xkþ1     ½x2 ; xjCj1  ½x1 ; xjCj , the optimal
the center of another one group who is nearest to the above solution is its median xkþ1 . Specifically, we have
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 869

  6.1 Design of UODC
  fxk ; xkþ1 g jC j ¼ 2k In the first phase, to generate a representative location mk
 x ¼ : (24)
 xkþ1 jC j ¼ 2k þ 1 for the group Ck , we formalize the following optimization
 problem
 This concludes the proof. u
 t 0 PjCh j 12
 XjCk j X
 jC j t
 @mk  j¼1;tj 2Ch ; A :
 j
 arg min ðmk  ti Þ2 
Algorithm 3. MGA mk i¼1;t 2C h¼1;h6¼k
 jCh j
 i k
 Input: C: the grouping obtained by MMS; (25)
 Output: C: the adjusted grouping for a worker;
1: calculate the number of elements in a group ; In Eq. (25), the first part of the objective function indi-
2: calculate the median jCj ; cates that we make mk be close to ti , which is also in the
3: for each group Ck in C do group Ck . The second part indicates that mk should stay as
4: if jCk j < jCj then far away from the tasks’ locations in other groups as possi-
5: merge the locations from the near group or groups; ble, where jCj is the number of groups for a worker. To min-
6: return C; imize the objective function in Eq. (25), we should make the
 partial derivative be equal to 0, we have
 Algorithm 3 shows the main steps of MGA. In MGA, by
feeding the grouping obtained by MMS, each worker first PjC j PjCh j PjCk j
 h¼1;h6¼k j¼1;tj 2Ch ; tj  i¼1;ti 2Ck ti
calculates the number of elements in a group (Line 1). Then, mk ¼ : (26)
he calculates the median jCj according to Eq. (24) (Line 2). jC jjCk j1
Next, for each group Ck in C, a worker finds the nearest one
 In the second phase, we note that if a location is far away
or more groups in which the number of elements is greater
 from the true location, the probability that it is regarded as
than jCj , and migrates elements from it or them. The
 the obfuscated location should be decreased. Thus, we let
migration stops once satisfying the Intra-group Constraint or
 the probability of sampling the obfuscated location m0k
the number of elements in the migrated groups is larger
 within Ck be negatively correlated with the distance
than jCj (Lines 3-4). Finally, he obtains C (Line 5).
 between m0k and mk . Therefore, we generate m0k by Eq. (27).
6 UTILITY-AWARE OBFUSCATED DISTANCE
 "  e2dðmk ;mk Þ
 " 0
  
 COLLECTION P m0k jmk ¼ P "
 2dðmk ;zÞ
 : (27)
 z2Ck "  e
After obtaining the optimized grouping for each worker, he
adds noise for each group to collect and uploads the
required distances for subsequent task allocation. Specifi-
 Algorithm 4. UODC
cally, we first obtain a representative location for each
group, and then add noise for this location. A straightfor- Input: Cli : the grouping for the i-th worker;
ward approach is to regard the average location within each li : the location for the i-th worker;
group as the representative location and calculate the dis- M: the number of workers;
tances from a worker’s true location to the obfuscated repre- ": the privacy budget;
 Output: D: the distance matrix;
sentative location while adopting PL. However, we note
 1: while i  M do
that each generated representative location for a certain
 2: for each group Ck in Cli do
group should be close to tasks’ locations in the same group
 3: computes "0 ¼ jC" j ;
and be far away from tasks’ locations in other groups. In li
 // determine the representative location for
addition, the straight-forward adoption of PL may intro- each group
duce excessive noise due to the randomness and boundless- 4: generate mk by Eq. (26);
ness of the laplacian distribution. // generate the noisy representative location
 To this end, we propose a utility-aware obfuscated dis- 5: sample m0k from Ck by Eq. (27) using "0 ;
tance collection method UODC with solid privacy and util- 6: compute the distance between li and m0k ;
ity guarantees by keeping each generated representative 7: record the distance in D;
location within the range formed by the tasks’ locations in 8: return D;
the same group. It mainly consists of two phases. In the first
phase, we formalize an optimization problem by minimizing intra-group distances and maximizing inter-group dis- 6.2 Analysis of UODC
tances. In the second phase, we let each worker generate a 6.2.1 Privacy Analysis
noisy location for each representative location, and finally
uploads the calculated noisy distance from his true location Theorem 6. For any worker with privacy budget ", UODC satto each noisy representative location to the server for subse- isfies "-Geo-I.
quent task allocation. We prove that UODC satisfies Geo-I Proof. By definition, to prove UODC satisfies "-Geo-I, we
and show its utility superiority with solid utility analysis. need to prove
 In the following, we first present the details of the two P ðzjxÞ
phases. Then, we give the privacy and utility guarantees of  e"dðx;yÞ :
 P ðzjyÞ
UODC.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

 "dðx;zÞ
 Since P ðzjxÞ ¼ P "e 2 "dðx;vÞ , by the triangular inequal- since there is no any prior information, according to the
 "e 2
 ity, we have v2V Maximum Entropy Theory, we assume o is sampled from a
 P uniform distribution with range ð0; 1Þ. Thus, the mean and
 " 2"dðy;vÞ
 P ðzjxÞ "  e2dðx;zÞ v2V "  e
 1
 variance of o are 12 and 12 respectively. Therefore, we have:
 ¼  P
 P ðzjyÞ "  e2dðy;zÞ
 " 2"dðx;vÞ
 v2V "  e  
 P " "
 X
 n
 "d o " 1 1
 " "  e2dðy;xÞ2dðx;vÞ i 2
 oe 0 i  n  d0 þ : (32)
  e2ðdðy;zÞdðx;zÞÞ  v2V
 P 2"dðx;vÞ
 2 3 2
 v2V "  e
 i¼1

 " " Pn "
  e2dðx;yÞ  e2dðx;yÞ Moreover, to obtain 2d0 oi , we formulate the followi¼1 e
 ing problem.
 e "dðx;yÞ
 :
 Problem 3. Given o Uð0; 1Þ, what is the probability density
 This concludes the proof. u
 t "
 function of e2d0 o ?
 "
6.2.2 Utility Analysis To solve Problem 3, let an auxiliary variable h ¼ e2d0 o .
 Thus, we have
Theorem 7. The average error and maximum error of UODC  " 
 are both less than PL. P ðH  hÞ ¼ P e2d0 O  h
  
Proof. We adopt E to denote the average error of UODC, 2 ln h
 ¼P 0O
 which can be quantified by the weighted distance from "d0
 each possible obfuscated location to the true location. The Z 2 ln h :
 "d0
 weight can be defined by the probability of reporting a ¼ 1  dO
 0
 possible obfuscated location according to the true loca- 2 ln h
 tion. Additionally, suppose there are n tasks in a group. ¼
 "d0
 Thus, we have:
 X
 n Since P 0 ðH  hÞ ¼ "d2 h , we have
 0
 E ½dðm; tÞ ¼ pðti jmÞ  dðm; ti Þ (
 2 "
 i¼1
 1  h  e2d0
 pdfðhÞ ¼ "d0 h
 X "e2dðm;tj Þ
 n " :
 ¼  dðm; ti Þ: (28) 0 otherwise
 Pn
 "e2dðm;tj Þ
 "
 i¼1 j¼1
 u
 t Thus, we have
  " 
For the computational purpose, we use the constant d0 and a 2 e2do  1
 EðhÞ ¼ :
secondary variable oi to represent dðm; ti Þ, where d0 denotes "d0
the maximum distance between m and ti , and oi denotes the
contribution of ti for m. Moreover, since the larger oi , the Therefore. we have
smaller dðm; ti Þ. Thus, we set   
 n 6" d0 þ 12
 dðm; ti Þ ¼ ð1  oi Þ  d0 : (29) E ½dðm; tÞ  d0 1
 n  EðhÞ
  !
 "do n 6" d0 þ 12
 Hence, we have: ¼ d0 1  "d  :
 2 e2 o  1
 Xn "
 ð1  oi Þe2d0 ð1oi Þ  
 E ½dðm; tÞ ¼ d0 1 "
 Pn "d0 ð1oj Þ d0  d0
 i¼1 j¼1 e
 2 2 6
 Pn "
 ð1  oi Þe2d0 oi Since the expected error of PL is EPL ¼ 2" , in what fol-
 ¼ d0 i¼1Pn "d o :
 2 0 j
 j¼1 e lows, we need to compare E½dðm; tÞ with EPL . We construct
  " " "  gð"; d0 Þ ¼ E½dðm; tÞ  EPL . If gð"; d0 Þ < 0, we can claim that
 o1 e2d0 o1 þ o2 e2d0 o2 þ    þ on e2d0 on
 ¼ d0 1 " " " the average error of UODC is less than PL. Specifically, we
 e2d0 o1 þe2d0 o2 þ    þ e2d0 on
 have
 (30)  
 1 " 2
 According to the Taylor Expansion [52], we have ex  gð"; d0 Þ ¼ d0  d0 
 2 6 "
x þ 1. Thus, we have 12 :
 ¼ d0 ð3"d0 Þ  (33)
 Xn
 " Xn
 " "
 oi e2d0 oi  d0 oi þ 1 oi 12
 i¼1 i¼1
 2 ¼ 3d0   "d20
 "
 " X n Xn
 qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ pﬃﬃﬃ
 ¼ d0 o2i þ oi : (31)
 2 i¼1 Since 12 2 2
 " þ "d0 > 2 12  d0 ¼ 4 3d0 , we can claim
 i¼1
 gð"; d0 Þ < 0 for any " and d0 .
PnAccording to the Law of2 Large2 Numbers [53], we have As for the maximum error, the maximum error of UODC
 i¼1 xi ¼ n  EðxÞ and Eðx Þ ¼ E ðxÞ þ DðxÞ, where EðxÞ is d0 , which is limited while the maximum error of PL is posand DðxÞ are the mean and variance respectively. Moreover, itive infinity due to the boundlessness of the laplacian
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 871

distribution. Thus, the maximum error of UODC is also less This concludes the proof. t
 u
than PL.
 Based on Lemma 4, we give a comprehensive analysis of
 CANOE on privacy guarantee in Theorem 8.
7 ANALYSIS OF CANOE
 Theorem 8. For any worker with privacy budget ", CANOE
In this Section, we theoretically analyze the privacy, utility
 satisfies "-Geo-I.
and complexity of CANOE.
 Proof. By definition, to prove our CANOE satisfies "-Geo-I,
 we need to prove
7.1 Privacy Guarantee
At beginning, we give Lemma 4 to quantify the distance
 P ðGðl1 Þ ¼ l jl1 Þ
between any two locations after adding noise based on our  e"dðl1 ;l2 Þ :
group-based noise addition. P ðGðl2 Þ ¼ l jl2 Þ

Lemma 4. For any two tasks’ locations with the distance less Similar to Theorem 6, we have P ðGðl1 Þ ¼ l jlÞ ¼
 than r (dðl1 ; l2 Þ  r), the distance is still less than r after they  " dðGðlÞ;l Þ
 " e 2jCj
 are grouped. For notation convenience, the grouping method is jCj
 P  " dðGðlÞ;zÞ . Thus, we have
 denoted by G. That is, it holds dðGðl1 Þ; Gðl2 ÞÞ  r. " e 2jCj
 z2V jCj

Proof. Let x and y represent the longitude and latitude of a P ðGðl1 Þ ¼ l jl1 Þ " dðGðl Þ;Gðl ÞÞ
 1 2
 
  ejC j :
 task respectively. We have P ðGðl2 Þ ¼ l jl2 Þ
 Pm Pm 
 i¼1 xi i¼1 yi
 According to Lemma 4, for each task, we have
 Gðl1 Þ ¼ þ r  cos u; þ r  sin u
 m m
 P ðGðl1 Þ ¼ l jl1 Þ " dðl ;l Þ
 and  ejC j 1 2 :
 P ðGðl2 Þ ¼ l jl2 Þ
 Pn Pn 
 j¼1 xj j¼1 yj
 Gðl2 Þ ¼ þ r  cos u; þ r  sin u According to sequential composition property in Then n
 orem 1, for each worker, we have
 where m and n represent how many locations the two
 groups are formed from. P ðGðl1 Þ ¼ l jl1 Þ
  e"dðl1 ;l2 Þ :
 Obviously, we have P ðGðl2 Þ ¼ l jl2 Þ

 dðGðl1 Þ; Gðl2 ÞÞ This concludes the proof. u
 t
 ﬃ
 sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
 Pn Pn
 Pm 2 Pm 2
 i¼1 xi j¼1 xj i¼1 yi j¼1 yj
 ¼  þ  7.2 Utility Guarantee
 m n m n
 vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
 2 ﬃ
 u
 u ! 2 !2 3 In what follows, we present the utility analysis to explain
 u 1 4 X m X n X m X n
 why CANOE performs better in Theorem 9.
 ¼t n xi  m xj þ n yi  m yj 5:
 ðmnÞ2 i¼1 j¼1 i¼1 j¼1 Theorem 9. If a worker is eventually assigned to a task,
 CANOE makes he be more likely to be assigned to the optimal
 Therefore, we have task, which can make the average travel distance be smaller,
 than directly adding noise to his true location.
 dðGðl1 Þ; Gðl2 ÞÞ Proof.
 vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
 8 2
 u 32 9 Recall that we assume that the size of the preference
 u > s1
  >
 smn
 u > zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ >
 u > 4x  x  þ    þ x
 >
 >  5 > >
 > set for each worker is the same, denoted by r, and each
 u >
 > i1 j1 iðmnÞ x jðmnÞ >
 >
 u >
 < >
 =: worker uses the same privacy budget ". We introduce
 u 1 auxiliary variables p1 and p2 to denote the probabilities
 ¼u 2 3 2
 uðmnÞ2 >
 ﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ >
 t1
 u >
 > 6zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ  ﬄ}|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{ zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ
 
 tmn
 >
 > of being assigned to the optimal task when directly addu >
 > 7 > >
 t >
 > þ 4 y  y þ    þ y  y 5 >
 > ing noise to workers’ locations and adopting the pro-
 >
 :
 i1 j1 iðmnÞ jðmnÞ >
 ; posed CANOE respectively.
 Clearly, we have p1 ¼ r1 . For CANOE, we discuss p2 in
 two cases.
 P PN 2
 Since ð N 2
 i¼1 ai Þ  N i¼1 ai , we have
 Case 1: If there is only one group, we have p2 ¼ r1 .
 Thus, we have p2 ¼ p1 .
 dðGðl1 Þ; Gðl2 ÞÞ Case 2: If there are more than two groups, we first
 sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ introduce auxiliary variable a1 ; a2 . . . ai . . . ajCj , where jCj
 1    
  2
 mn s21 þ t21 þ    þ s2mn þ t2mn is the number of groups and ai is the number of elements
 ðmnÞ in the i-th group.
 sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ :
 1 If the tasks in the preference set are evenly divided
  mnðmn  r Þ 2 1 1
 into jCj groups, we have p2 ¼ jCj  r=jCj : Thus, p2 ¼ p1 .
 ðmnÞ2 If the tasks in the preference set are not evenly divided
 ¼r into jCj groups, we have
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023
  
 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
 p2 ¼   þ  þ    þ  ; Then, he invokes OGAL to adaptively refine his grouping
 jC j jC j a1 jC j a2 jC j ai jC j ajC j based on Algorithms 2 and 3. In particular, for Algorithm 2,
 (34) a worker first splits his grouping C, initializes and sorts the
 constructed structure set G, taking Oð1Þ and OðrÞ þ
 where a1 þ a2 þ ai þ ajCj ¼ r and 1  ai < r. Thus, we
 OðjCjlogjCjÞ, as the sorting algorithm usually can be done in
 have
 OðjCjlogjCjÞ. Then, he obtains the minimized the maximum
 1 1 1 1 sum (Lines 4-7), consuming OðjCj2  ðjCj  1ÞÞ. Finally, he
jC j2 p2 ¼ þ þ   þ merges G to C, using OðjCjÞ. Since log x x  1 according
 a1 a2 ai aj C j
 to the Taylor Expansion, the total time complexity of Algoa1 þ a2 þ ai þ ajC j a1 þ a2 þ ai þ ajC j
 ¼ þ rithm 2 is OðjCj þ rÞ þ OðjCj3  jCjÞ þ Oð1Þ for each
 a1  r a2  r worker. For Algorithm 3, each worker first calculates the
 a1 þ a2 þ ai þ aj C j a1 þ a2 þ ai þ ajC j elements in a group and obtains the median, taking OðrÞ
 þ   þ
 ai  r aj C j  r and OðjCjÞ respectively. Then, he merges each group, using
     
 jC j 1 a2 a1 a3 a1 jCj  Oð1Þ. Hence, the total time complexity of Algorithm 3
 ¼ þ  þ þ þ þ  : (35) is jCj  Oð1Þ þ OðjCjÞ þ OðrÞ for each worker. At last, each
 r r a1 a2 a1 a3
 worker conducts Algorithm 4 in Phase 3. In particular, he
 pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ first generates representative location using r locations and
 a
 Since x þ y  2 xy for any x; y  0, we have aji þ aaji  samples an obfuscated location for each group, leading to
 2. Thus, we have OðrÞ and OðjCjÞ respectively. Then, he computes and
 uploads the obfuscated distances to the server, which can
 jC j 2 jC j  ðjC j  1Þ be done in 2  OðrÞ. Hence, the total time complexity of
 jC j2  p2  þ 
 r r 2 Algorithm 4 is 3  OðrÞ þ OðjCjÞ for each worker. Therefore,
 jC j2 the total time complexity on the worker side is
  : (36)
 r
 h i
 Therefore, we have p2  r1 . Thus, p2  p1 . M  O jC j3 þ 2  jC j þ 6  OðrÞ þ ðjC j þ 1Þ  Oð1Þ : (38)
 In summary, we have p2  p1 . t
 u

7.3 Time Complexity From Eqs. (37) and (38), we can see that the total time
To show the efficiency of CANOE, we analyze the increased complexity is linear w.r.t. the number of tasks N or workers
computational cost compared with the non-private task M. Moreover, the time consumptions of each worker and
allocation approach on both the worker side and the server the server largely depend on the number of groups jCj
side. Generally, the time for balancing privacy and utility except for N and M. Furthermore, we have jCj < r, and we
trade-off is increased while the time for striking utility and notice that the size of the preference set r is normally not
efficiency trade-off is reduced. The reasons lie in that, we unreasonably large due to crowdsourcing system overhead
have increased the extra time for conducting grouping and and economic budget. Besides, in practice, it is reasonable
adjusting each grouping, but have reduced the time for cal- to assume that the server and each worker have strong comculating the needed distances due to the adoption of group- puting power, and making use of distributed computing
based noise addition. can further improve the runtime. As such, we believe that
 Specifically, on the server side, the server participates in CANOE can provide an acceptable utility and efficiency
Phase 1 and Phase 4. Since the approach in [2] need to be per- trade-off for real-world deployments.
formed both for non-private task allocation and CANOE in
Phase 4, the operations in Phase 4 are not included. We only 8 EXPERIMENTS
need to calculate the time consumption of invoking Algo- In this Section, we first present the experimental setup. We
rithm 1 in Phase 1. Specifically, in Algorithm 1, the server then evaluate the performance of CANOE over two realfirst initializes u, m, U and X (Lines 1-2), leading to world datasets by varying different parameters. Finally, we
OðN  jCjÞ, OðN  jCjÞ, Oð1Þ and OðN  jCjÞ, as there are jCj verify the advantages of CANOE’ key building blocks.
group centers and each initialization involves N tasks. Datasets. In our experiments, we use two real-world data-
Moreover, initialization with 0 usually can be completed in sets for evaluation, T-Drive [54] and Tokyo [55].
Oð1Þ. Then, similarly, in each iteration, each of updates for
mk , uij , Z, X and U also takes OðN  jCjÞ. Additionally,  T-Drive: It, TD for short, contains trajectories of more
updating t takes Oð1Þ. Suppose the number of iterations is than 9,019 taxis and hundreds of thousands of pasn, the total time complexity on the server side is sengers. Similar to [16], we assume that the drivers
 are SC workers and the passengers are SC tasks. We
 3  OðN  jC jÞ þ Oð1Þ þ n  ½5  OðN  jC jÞ þ Oð1Þ randomly sample 500 workers and 368 tasks.
 ¼ ð5  n þ 3Þ  OðN  jC jÞ þ ðn þ 1Þ  Oð1Þ: (37)  Tokyo: It, TKY for short, contains the locations of 325
 subway stations and 503 offices in Tokyo. There are
 On the worker side, there are four parts of computations about 573,708 check-ins. Similar to [24], we assume
from Phase 2 and Phase 3. First, in Phase 2, each worker that the office locations of users are the locations of
applies the groupings sent by the server to initially group workers and the locations of subway stations are the
the locations in his preference set, leading to OðrÞ for him. locations of tasks.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 873

 As for the preference set, as a common practice [56], we TABLE 2
choose the first r tasks closest to workers as the preferred Parameters That will Affect CANOE
tasks of each worker. Meanwhile, we ensure that each task
 Notation Values Description
is within at least one worker’s preference set.
 Evaluation Metrics. We use the average travel distance " 0.1,0.3,0.5,0.8,1 Privacy budget
(ATD) [14] to evaluate the performance of CANOE. In par- r 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 Number of preferred tasks
 M 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 Number of workers
ticular, we compute the real total euclidean distance (in km) N 100, 150, 200, 250, 300 Number of tasks
of the selected workers and their assigned tasks divided by jCj 10, 15, 20, 25,30 Number of groups
the number of allocated tasks
 X 
 ATD ¼ dðw; tÞ jAj; (39) obfuscated location falling into the nearby locations with its
 ðw;tÞ true location. On the other hand, through group-based noise
 addition, a task is more likely to be assigned to the optimal
where A is the set of final task allocation (worker, task) worker, which can minimize the average travel distance
pairs, and dðw; tÞ is the euclidean distance between the according to Theorem 9. These two jointly make CANOE be
selected worker w and the assigned task t. The smaller, the less sensitive to ". In contrast, for DGO, the optimal worker
better. assigned to each task may not prefer it. In such a case, the
 Competitors. For the competitors, as mentioned in related task can only be assigned to the nearest worker, resulting in
work, existing studies are designed specifically with the larger ATD. For IBA, when the server decides which worker
assumption that each worker can perform any tasks rather should be assigned to a task by judging the distance
than one of a set of preferred tasks. Thus, for a fair compari- between this task and each worker, it conducts multiple
son, we let all workers in the following competitors can probability comparisons for a certain worker in one iteraonly be assigned to one of a limited number of tasks and tion, which results in the calculated probability contains
ensure that all the tasks are assigned. large error. Thus, it may lead to the wrong judgment, and
 unavoidably results in poor performance. For PBA, due to
  NoPriv: To show the utility loss due to privacy pro- the randomness of probability approximation when posttection, we include a non-private version of CANOE, processing the obfuscated locations generated by PL, they
 denoted by NoPriv. Both NoPriv and CANOE adopt may be far away from the true locations. For TBA, it generthe approach in [2] for task allocation. ates obfuscated locations based on the prior locations’
  DGO [14]: It is a differential geo-obfuscation approach, scopes, while different scopes will exhibit different results,
 which adds noise to each worker’s location, namely which makes it fail to be effectively applied for real-world
 differential geo-obfuscation. deployments. Moreover, the locations’ scopes may not be
  IBA [24]: It focuses on personalized privacy-preserv- available in advance in practice.
 ing task allocation while adopting the laplace mecha- Impact of r. Figs. 5c and 5d show ATD when varying the
 nism [20] with incentive that can allocate tasks number of preferred tasks for each worker r, which denotes
 effectively, namely incentive based task allocation. the number of elements in the preference set. We can
  PBA [16]: It is a probability-based algorithm to assign observe that, with the increment of r, all the approach gets
 tasks by adopting the laplacian mechanism, namely better performance. This is because on the premise of a fixed
 probability-based task allocation. number of tasks, a larger r provides a higher possibility for
  TBA [17]: It uses a tree-based privacy mechanism to each task to be assigned to a well-matched worker.
 find the nearest reachable worker for each task, Impact of M. Figs. 5e and 5f show ATD when varying the
 namely tree based task allocation. number of workers M. We can observe that, with the
 The benefits for task preference have well demonstrated increase of M, all the approaches get a better performance.
by the existing non-private task allocation approaches [3], This is because with more candidate workers, a task is more
[4], [56] while we focus on the privacy issue under this sce- likely to be assigned to a proper worker, who really is close
nario. Therefore, we do not compare CANOE against the to this task. Thus, ATD will be smaller.
previous methods without preference, which are all orthog- Impact of N. Figs. 5g and 5h show ATD when varying the
onal to our work. number of tasks N. Generally, ATD becomes lower with the
 increment of N. This is because with more tasks while the
8.1 Performance Comparison number of workers remains unchanged, there are fewer
Five parameters will affect the performance of CANOE, choices for each task.
which are shown in Table 2, where the values marked by Impact of jCj. Figs. 5i and 5j show ATD when varying the
bold font represent the corresponding default values. number of groups jCj. In general, ATD remains stable when
 Impact of ". Figs. 5a and 5b show ATD of each competitor varying jCj. This is because, with local adjustment, we can
and CANOE when varying the privacy budget ". We can adaptively determine the grouping for each worker, which
see that CANOE outperforms all the competitors in all cases, makes our solution be more robust.
and the relative superiority of CANOE is more emphasized
while " enlarges. The reasons can be explained as follows.
On the one hand, for each group, by incorporating the tasks’ 8.2 Effectiveness of OGAL
locations in the same group to limit the range of the gener- We do three parts of experiments to make a comprehensive
ated obfuscated location, it leads to a high chance of the and thorough evaluation on OGAL. We first verify the
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

Fig. 5. Performance comparison.

effectiveness of OGAL on the whole. Then, we verify the and local grouping, which can make the total noise be
effectiveness of the building blocks BAG and ALA, which minimized.
are used to conduct globally grouping and locally fine-tune To verify the effectiveness of the building block BAG, we
each grouping respectively. design three baselines, which are NEC, NBA and NBC. For
 To verify the effectiveness of OGAL, we compare it with NEC, it let uik ¼ 0 if uik < 0 without our designed Exponenthree baselines, which are GG, LG and GL. For GG, the tial Constraint. For NBA, it feeds random values for S when
server only groups the tasks, and each worker applies the solving S-subproblem, which aims to verify our alternative
grouping sent by the server to group the tasks in his prefer- optimization scheme. For NBC, it conducts grouping without
ence set. For LG, each worker performs grouping locally. Balance Constraint, which aims to verify our noise analysis.
For GL, the server first groups the tasks using the existing Figs. 6c and 6d show the results. We have the following
KMeans clustering rather than our designed balance-aware observations. First, NBA and NBC lead to poor performance.
clustering, and sends the grouping to each worker. Then, This is because, without Balance Constraint, it may introduce
each worker conducts grouping locally using KMeans again too much noise for NBC. In addition, the formalized optimiinstead of conducting local adjustment, with the received zation problem may not converge for NBA. Second, NEC
grouping from the server as the initialization. performs better than NBA and NBC, and performs worse
 Figs. 6a and 6b show the results. We have the following than BAG. This verifies the effectiveness of minimizing
observations. First, LG performs better than GG when " noise and Exponential Constraint, as without Exponential Congradually enlarges. This is because the number of elements straint it will divide the tasks that should be originally
in the preference set is far less than the total number of divided into multiple groups into the same group, which
tasks. Thus, GG will introduce too much information loss will introduce too much information loss. Third, BAG perfor a worker. Second, GL performs better than LG, which forms the best, as the total noise is minimized with converdemonstrates the effectiveness of group-based noise addi- gence guarantee.
tion. Third, our OGAL significantly outperforms the base- To verify the effectiveness of the building block ALA, we
lines. The reason lies in that, we have better global grouping design five baselines, which are NDB, NIC, NDI, MMS, and
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 875

 Fig. 7. Effectiveness of UODC.

 determination method and obfuscated location generation
 method. For PLO, we get the average representative location
 in each group and adopt PL to add noise. For PGO, we get the
 average representative location in each group and adopt the
 designed noise addition method in Eq. (27) to add noise. For
 PLV, we determine the representative location only considering that it stays as far away from the tasks in other groups as
 possible, and adopt PL to add noise. For PGV, the only difference from PLV is that we adopt the noisy location generation
 method in Eq. (27) to generate obfuscated locations. For PLN,
 we adopt the representative location determination method
 in Eq. (26) and PL to determine each representative location
 and generate obfuscated locations respectively.
 Fig. 7 shows the results. We have the following observations. First, PGO and PGV perform better than the others
 except for UODC. This is because the designed obfuscated
 location generation method contributes more to the accu-
Fig. 6. Effectiveness of OGAL. racy improvement. Second, PGV performs better than PGO,
 and PLN performs better than PLV, which demonstrate the
MGA. For NDB, it does not conduct the operations from effectiveness of the representative location determination
Theorem 5. For NIC, it does not tackle the Intra-group Con- method. Third, UODC performs the best. This is because
straint in Theorem 4. For NDI, it tackles the Intra-group Con- the designed representative location determination method
straint without dynamic programming. For MMS, it only can make the information loss be minimized, and the
conducts MGA to determine the optimal number of tasks in designed obfuscated location generation method can make
each group. For MGA, it only conducts MMS to determine the injected noise be minimized.
the optimal intra-group distances.
 Figs. 6e and 6f show the results. We have the following
observations. First, MMS performs better than MGA, and 9 CONCLUSION
NDB performs better than the others except for ALA. This is In this article, we present a geo-indistinguishable task allobecause MMS paves the way for conducting MGA. More- cation approach, called CANOE, which can provide desirover, according to Theorem 9, the injected noise is less than able utility while still achieving rigorous Geo-I guarantee.
PL. Since, the Intra-group Constraint is close related to PL, we We theoretically give its privacy, utility and complexity
can still get a better performance even without MMS to guarantees. In CANOE, two methods, optimized global
tackle the Intra-group Constraint. Second, MMS and MGA grouping with adaptive local adjustment method OGAL,
perform the worst. This demonstrates that we should tackle and utility-aware obfuscated distance collection method
MMS and MGA jointly for local adjustment. This is because UODC, are proposed to reduce the negative effect of adding
only performing one method cannot minimize the overall noise. Experimental results with component-wise analyses
noise. Third, ALA performs the best. This is because by the validate the effectiveness of CANOE.
dynamic programming based method MMS to get the optimal intra-group distances and the median based method
 REFERENCES
MGA to get the optimal number of tasks in each group, we
can minimize the total noise. [1] Y. Tong, Z. Zhou, Y. Zeng, L. Chen, and C. Shahabi, “Spatial
 crowdsourcing: A survey,” VLDB J., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 217–250,
 2020.
 [2] Y. Zhao et al., “Preference-aware task assignment in spatial
8.3 Effectiveness of UODC crowdsourcing,” in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 31st Innov.
To verify the effectiveness of UODC, we design five baselines. Appl. Artif. Intell. Conf. 9th AAAI Symp. Educ. Adv. Artif. Intell.,
Recall that UODC contains two phases, which are determin- 2019, pp. 2629–2636.
ing the representative location for each group and generating [3] Y. Zhao, K. Zheng, H. Yin, G. Liu, J. Fang, and X. Zhou,
 “Preference-aware task assignment in spatial crowdsourcing:
the obfuscated locations respectively. We design PLO, PGO, From individuals to groups,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
PLV, PGV and PLN by changing the representative location vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 3461–3477, Jul. 2022.
 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 9, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2023

[4] Y. Li, Y. Zhao, and K. Zheng, “Preference-aware group task assign- [28] D. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. S. Hu, and D. Wang, “Toward privacy-aware
 ment in spatial crowdsourcing: A mutual information-based task allocation in social sensing-based edge computing systems,”
 approach,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 350–359. IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 11 384–11 400, Dec.
[5] P. Cheng, L. Chen, and J. Ye, “Cooperation-aware task assignment 2020.
 in spatial crowdsourcing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Data Eng., 2019, [29] S. Zakhary and A. Benslimane, “On location-privacy in opportupp. 1442–1453. nistic mobile networks, a survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 103,
[6] Y. Zhao, J. Guo, X. Chen, J. Hao, X. Zhou, and K. Zheng, pp. 157–170, 2018.
 “Coalition-based task assignment in spatial crowdsourcing,” in [30] J. Jiang, G. Han, H. Wang, and M. Guizani, “A survey on location
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Data Eng., 2021, pp. 241–252. privacy protection in wireless sensor networks,” J. Netw. Comput.
[7] M. E. Andres, N. E. Bordenabe, K. Chatzikokolakis, and C. Pala- Appl., vol. 125, pp. 93–114, 2019.
 midessi, “Geo-indistinguishability: Differential privacy for loca- [31] N. E. Bordenabe, K. Chatzikokolakis, and C. Palamidessi, “Optimal
 tion-based systems,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., geo-indistinguishable mechanisms for location privacy,” in Proc.
 2013, pp. 901–914. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014, pp. 251–262.
[8] C. Chow, M. F. Mokbel, and X. Liu, “Spatial cloaking for anony- [32] L. Yu, L. Liu, and C. Pu, “Dynamic differential location privacy
 mous location-based services in mobile peer-to-peer environ- with personalized error bounds,” in Proc. Annu. Netw. Distrib.
 ments,” GeoInformatica, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 351–380, 2011. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2017.
[9] K. Fawaz and K. G. Shin, “Location privacy protection for smart- [33] S. Oya, C. Troncoso, and F. Perez-Gonzalez, “Back to the drawing
 phone users,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014, board: Revisiting the design of optimal location privacy-preservpp. 239–250. ing mechanisms,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
[10] K. Fawaz, H. Feng, and K. G. Shin, “Anatomization and protection 2017, pp. 1959–1972.
 of mobile apps’ location privacy threats,” in Proc. 24th USENIX [34] A. Pyrgelis, C. Troncoso, and E. D. Cristofaro, “What does the
 Conf. Secur. Symp., 2015, pp. 753–768. crowd say about you? Evaluating aggregation-based location
[11] C. Ma and C. W. Chen, “Nearby friend discovery with geo-indis- privacy,” Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol., vol. 2017, no. 4,
 tinguishability to stalkers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Future Netw. Com- pp. 156–176, 2017.
 mun., 2014, pp. 352–359. [35] K. Chatzikokolakis, E. ElSalamouny, and C. Palamidessi,
[12] H. To, G. Ghinita, and C. Shahabi, “A framework for protecting “Efficient utility improvement for location privacy,” Proc. Privacy
 worker location privacy in spatial crowdsourcing,” Proc. VLDB Enhancing Technol., vol. 2017, no. 4, pp. 308–328, 2017.
 Endowment, vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 919–930, 2014. [36] E. ElSalamouny and S. Gambs, “Optimal noise functions for loca-
[13] H. To, G. Ghinita, L. Fan, and C. Shahabi, “Differentially private tion privacy on continuous regions,” Int. J. Inf. Secur., vol. 17,
 location protection for worker datasets in spatial crowdsourcing,” no. 6, pp. 613–630, 2018.
 IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 934–949, Apr. 2017. [37] S. Takagi, Y. Cao, Y. Asano, and M. Yoshikawa, “Geo-graph-indis-
[14] L. Wang, D. Yang, X. Han, T. Wang, D. Zhang, and X. Ma, tinguishability: Protecting location privacy for LBS over road
 “Location privacy-preserving task allocation for mobile crowd- networks,” in Proc. IFIP Annu. Conf. Data Appl. Secur. Privacy,
 sensing with differential geo-obfuscation,” in Proc. Conf. World 2019, pp. 143–163.
 Wide Web, 2017, pp. 627–636. [38] S. Oya, C. Troncoso, and F. Perez-Gonzalez, “Is geo-indistinguish-
[15] L. Wang, G. Qin, D. Yang, X. Han, and X. Ma, “Geographic differ- ability what you are looking for?,” in Proc. Workshop Privacy Elecential privacy for mobile crowd coverage maximization,” in Proc. tron. Soc., 2017, pp. 137–140.
 Conf. Assoc. Adv. Artific. Intell., 2018, pp. 200–207. [39] F. McSherry, “Privacy integrated queries: An extensible platform
[16] H. To, C. Shahabi, and L. Xiong, “Privacy-preserving online task for privacy-preserving data analysis,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Manage.
 assignment in spatial crowdsourcing with untrusted server,” in Data, 2009, pp. 19–30.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2018, pp. 833–844. [40] Y. Yang, W. Liu, E. Wang, and J. Wu, “A prediction-based user selec-
[17] Q. Tao, Y. Tong, Z. Zhou, Y. Shi, L. Chen, and K. Xu, tion framework for heterogeneous mobile CrowdSensing,” IEEE
 “Differentially private online task assignment in spatial crowd- Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 2460–2473, Nov. 2019.
 sourcing: A tree-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data [41] L. Pu, X. Chen, J. Xu, and X. Fu, “Crowdlet: Optimal worker
 Eng., 2020, pp. 517–528. recruitment for self-organized mobile crowdsourcing,” in Proc.
[18] N. Wang et al., “Collecting and analyzing multidimensional data 35th Annu. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–9.
 with local differential privacy,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., [42] E. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Wu, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “An efficient pre-
 2019, pp. 638–649. diction-based user recruitment for mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE
[19] Y. Wang, L. Wu, and S. Wang, “A fully-decentralized consensus- Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 16–28, Jan. 2018.
 based ADMM approach for DC-OPF with demand response,” [43] G. Gao, J. Wu, M. Xiao, and G. Chen, “Combinatorial multi-armed
 IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2637–2647, Nov. 2017. bandit based unknown worker recruitment in heterogeneous
[20] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. D. Smith, “Calibrating crowdsensing,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020,
 noise to sensitivity in private data analysis,” in Proc. Theory Cryp- pp. 179–188.
 togr. Conf., 2006, pp. 265–284. [44] W. Liu, Y. Yang, E. Wang, and J. Wu, “Dynamic user recruitment
[21] X. Zhang, J. Ding, X. Li, T. Yang, J. Wang, and M. Pan, “Mobile with truthful pricing for mobile crowdsensing,” in Proc. IEEE
 crowdsensing task allocation optimization with differentially pri- Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 1113–1122.
 vate location privacy,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–6. [45] G. Gao, H. Huang, M. Xiao, J. Wu, Y.-E. Sun, and Y. Du, “Budgeted
[22] Y. Qian, Y. Ma, J. Chen, D. Wu, D. Tian, and K. Hwang, “Optimal unknown worker recruitment for heterogeneous crowdsensing using
 location privacy preserving and service quality guaranteed task CMAB,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 3895–3911,
 allocation in vehicle-based crowdsensing networks,” IEEE Trans. Nov. 2022.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4367–4375, Jul. 2021. [46] M. J. Krieger, J.-B. Billeter, and L. Keller, “Ant-like task allocation
[23] Y. Qian, Y. Jiang, M. S. Hossain, L. Hu, G. Muhammad, and S. U. and recruitment in cooperative robots,” Nature, vol. 406, no. 6799,
 Amin, “Privacy-preserving based task allocation with mobile pp. 992–995, 2000.
 edge clouds,” Inf. Sci., vol. 507, pp. 288–297, 2020. [47] B. Guo, Y. Liu, L. Wang, V. O. K. Li, J. C. K. Lam, and Z. Yu, “Task
[24] Z. Wang et al., “Personalized privacy-preserving task allocation allocation in spatial crowdsourcing: Current state and future
 for mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 18, directions,” IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1749–1764,
 no. 6, pp. 1330–1341, Jun. 2019. Jun. 2018.
[25] H. Shen, G. Bai, Y. Hu, and T. Wang, “P2TA: Privacy-preserving task [48] J. Wang et al., “HyTasker: Hybrid task allocation in mobile crowd
 allocation for edge computing enhanced mobile crowdsensing,” sensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 598–611,
 J. Syst. Archit., vol. 97, pp. 130–141, 2019. Mar. 2020.
[26] W. Gong, B. Zhang, and C. Li, “Privacy-aware online task assign- [49] J. E. Spingarn, “Applications of the method of partial inverses to
 ment framework for mobile crowdsensing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. convex programming: Decomposition,” Math. Program., vol. 32,
 Conf. Commun., 2019, pp. 1–6. no. 2, pp. 199–223, 1985.
[27] Q. Xu, Z. Su, M. Dai, and S. Yu, “APIS: Privacy-preserving incen- [50] K. S. Srivastava and S. R. Pattanaik, “Solving nonconvex feasibility
 tive for sensing task allocation in cloud and edge-cooperation problem on a sphere and a closed ball by Douglas-Rachford algomobile Internet of Things with SDN,” IEEE Internet of Things rithm,” Asia-Pacific J. Oper. Res., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 2 050 042:1–
 J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 5892–5905, Jul. 2020. 2 050 042:20, 2021.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
ZHANG ET AL.: TASK ALLOCATION UNDER GEO-INDISTINGUISHABILITY VIA GROUP-BASED NOISE ADDITION 877

[51] N. Parikh and S. P. Boyd, “Block splitting for distributed opti- Sen Su received the PhD degree from the Unimization,” Math. Program. Comput., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 77–102, 2014. versity of Electronic Science and Technology,
[52] H. Feng and S. Li, “A tracking differentiator based on Taylor China, in 1998. He is currently a professor with
 expansion,” Appl. Math. Lett., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 735–740, 2013. the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommuni-
[53] R. Ghasemi, A. Nezakati, and M. R. Rabiei, “A strong law of large cations. His research interests include data prinumbers for random sets in fuzzy banach space,” Adv. Fuzzy vacy, cloud computing, and internet services.
 Syst., vol. 2020, pp. 8 185 061:1–8 185 061:10, 2020.
[54] J. Yuan, Y. Zheng, X. Xie, and G. Sun, “Driving with knowledge
 from the physical world,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Mining, 2011, pp. 316–324.
[55] D. Yang, D. Zhang, V. W. Zheng, and Z. Yu, “Modeling user activity preference by leveraging user spatial temporal characteristics
 in LBSNs,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 45, no. 1, Ning Wang is currently working toward the maspp. 129–142, Jan. 2015. ter’s degree with the Beijing University of Posts
[56] B. Zhao, P. Xu, Y. Shi, Y. Tong, Z. Zhou, and Y. Zeng, “Preference- and Telecommunications, China. His major is
 aware task assignment in on-demand taxi dispatching: An online computer science. His research interests include
 stable matching approach,” in Proc. 33rd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. data mining and data privacy.
 31st Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell. Conf. 9th AAAI Symp. Educ. Adv. Artif.
 Intell., 2019, pp. 2245–2252.

 Pengfei Zhang is currently working toward the
 PhD degree with the Beijing University of Posts
 and Telecommunications, China. His major is
 computer science. His current research interest
 focuses on privacy protection in mobile crowd-
 " For more information on this or any other computing topic,
 sensing systems.
 please visit our Digital Library at www.computer.org/csdl.

 Xiang Cheng received the PhD degree in computer science from the Beijing University of Posts
 and Telecommunications, China, in 2013. He is
 currently a professor with the Beijing University of
 Posts and Telecommunications. His research
 interests include privacy-enhanced computing,
 data mining, and knowledge engineering.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 06:46:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.