Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

TGPrint: Attack ﬁngerprint classiﬁcation on encrypted network traﬃc
based graph convolution attention networks
Leiqi Wang a,b , Xiu Ma a,b , Ning Li a , Qiujian Lv a,∗ , Yan Wang a,b , Weiqing Huang a,b ,
Haiyan Chen c
a
 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
b
 School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
c
 Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, China

A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Nowadays, most network traﬃc is encrypted, which protects user privacy but hides attack traces, further
Attack classiﬁcation hindering identifying attacks to inspect traﬃc packages. Machine Learning (ML) methods are widely applied
Encrypted network traﬃc to attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc owing to no need for manual analysis. However, existing studies only
Unseen attack
 concentrate on basic statistical features and cannot obtain the crucial attack behaviors hiding in the encrypted
Attack graph
 traﬃc. Worse still, attackers constantly update attack vectors to evade detection, which means outdated features
Graph neural networks
 extracted from historical traﬃc fail to recognize unseen attacks.
 As a solution, we propose an attack classiﬁcation approach, attack ﬁngerprint based on graphs of time-window
 (TGPrint). We ﬁrst ﬁlter normal traﬃc ﬂows using ML models to eliminate the impact of useless, noisy data
 for attack classiﬁcation and maintain suspicious traﬃc. Then, we create attack graphs to depict interaction
 behaviors of attack-victim hosts from suspicious traﬃc containing crucial attack behaviors. Besides, we divide a
 speciﬁc duration for each attack to precisely elaborate attack graphs, where temporal, statistical, and aggregate
 features are extracted to portray attack behaviors. Finally, we utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to mine
 and grasp the crucial behavior patterns from attack graphs to generate ﬁngerprints and classify attacks, even
 unseen attacks. Extensive experiments are conducted on well-known datasets to verify our approach. It achieves
 a precision of 99% in attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc, an average higher than other ML methods of
 50%. Meanwhile, it classiﬁes unseen attacks with an average accuracy of over 80% and has a strong robustness
 to false positives.

1. Introduction DPI has been proven ineﬃcient in attack classiﬁcation tasks because
 it directly goes against the purpose of encryption protocol, which is to
 Guaranteeing those online activities and the sensitive information keep user data conﬁdential. Therefore, how to detect and reveal attack
exchanged daily remain private, Transport Layer Security (TLS) pro- behaviors based on encrypted traﬃc has become a vital research hot
tocol was created in 1999 (Dierks, 1999) which provides encryption spot.
for the application layer (Roques et al., 2019). Gartner estimated that
 Given the above constraints, ML on the encrypted network for attack
80% of global web traﬃc would be encrypted by 2019 (Cisco, 2019).
 classiﬁcation is a natural solution without complicated manual analysis.
However, privacy does not guarantee security. Attackers have started
 The application of ML to recognize attacks in encrypted network trafto leverage TLS to hide their persistent malicious activities. Patternmatching techniques are hard to recognize attacks in encrypted traﬃc, ﬁc classiﬁcation has been well studied in the past decades (Luo et al.,
such as port identiﬁcation and Deep Packet Inspection (DPI). Port-based 2020; Zhai et al., 2020; Nychis et al., 2008; Koch et al., 2014; Torroledo
approaches encounter failures in identifying attacks due to dynamic et al., 2018a; Yao et al., 2019). Unfortunately, the promise of ML has
port techniques (Madhukar and Williamson, 2006; Erman et al., 2007). been slow to materialize in the network security domain (Anderson and

 * Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: wangleiqi@iie.ac.cn (L. Wang), maxiu@iie.ac.cn (X. Ma), lining@iie.ac.cn (N. Li), lvqiujian@iie.ac.cn (Q. Lv), wangyan@iie.ac.cn (Y. Wang),
huanweiqing@iie.ac.cn (W. Huang), chenhy@craes.org.cn (H. Chen).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2023.103466
Received 30 January 2023; Received in revised form 22 August 2023; Accepted 31 August 2023
Available online 12 September 2023
0167-4048/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

McGrew, 2017). There are three main challenges for ML-based attack • We construct attack graphs to precisely depict interaction behavclassiﬁcation approaches. iors of attack-victim hosts with a time window ratio 𝜏 to divide a
 speciﬁc duration for each attack’s encrypted traﬃc.
 Challenge 1: Imprecise features without attack behavior pat- • We run extensive experiments on three well-known datasets to
terns. The sophisticated features decide the model’s detection eﬀective- demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of TGPrint, which achieves a preciness because of garbage in, garbage out. Features in attack classiﬁcation sion of 99% in attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc, an average
studies on encrypted traﬃc are mainly classiﬁed into two aspects: 1) higher than other ML methods of 50% and achieves an average
statistical and temporal traﬃc features (e.g., packet size, traﬃc direc- accuracy of over 80% in unseen attacks classiﬁcation.
tion, transmission time) (Gu et al., 2008; Arora et al., 2014; Anderson et
al., 2018) and 2)TLS handshake features (e.g., handshake message sta- 2. Related work
tus, encryption suite). The former focuses on the detailed transmission
information, and the latter grasp TLS session details. 2.1. Attack classiﬁcation
 An attack lasts between attack-victim hosts, while attack behaviors
leave traces in the traﬃc. However, these two features, exclusive of the 2.1.1. Pattern-matching approaches
interaction information, cannot be abstracted to crucial high-level at- Pattern-matching approaches focus on manually set rules to look for
tack behavior patterns. The attack behavior patterns can enhance the the particular malicious program or the data patterns reﬂected from the
models’ capability of attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc because packet traﬃc. Port mapping classiﬁes traﬃc by mapping the port in the
they reﬂect the attacks’ behavior characteristics from interaction ac- TCP/UDP message header to the speciﬁc attack. However, some applitivities. The interaction information of hosts’ traﬃc restores the attack cations use dynamic ports (Madhukar and Williamson, 2006), which
behavior patterns, which are crucial for attack classiﬁcation. may change during data transmission; some applications use ports of
 other standard protocols for data transmission in order to avoid system
 Challenge 2: Unseen attack with new attack vectors. Various at- restrictions (Erman et al., 2007), thus achieving port steganography.
tack vectors can implement an attack. For example, bruteforce attack DPI (Park et al., 2013) parses the network packets as a whole during the
vectors involve a variety of protocols, such as HTTP and FTP. Diﬀerent traﬃc analysis process and determines whether the traﬃc in the packets
attack vectors execute diﬀerent operations during the attack, and the matches the characteristics of a speciﬁc attack. However, DPI only apmalicious traﬃc generated from diverse attack operations is disparate. plies to plaintext traﬃc and has a high computational overhead. These
ML models learn traﬃc characteristics based on the attack already seen approaches are no longer suited for attack classiﬁcation in encrypted
and make accurate judgments when the same attack reappears. The traf- traﬃc. TLS certiﬁcates sent by web servers in plaintext can also help
ﬁc the new attack vector generates is diﬀerent from the known, making detect phishing websites or anomalous connections (Richman, 2022).
the model misjudge. Hence, attackers usually change the attack vectors, Blacklists maintaining certiﬁcates from malicious servers and checking
which makes the classiﬁcation model confused and unable to detect the all incoming certiﬁcates against that list are the easiest way of dealing
attack activities. Therefore, the ability to identify unseen attacks with with certiﬁcates (Suricata, 2010; Abuse, 2022). However, this method
new attack vectors is a critical assessment criterion in addition to the must be updated regularly by trusted people, and mistakes resulting in
evaluation, such as accuracy. This paper deﬁnes an unseen attack as a blocked websites can frustrate users. These approaches are no longer
known attack with a new attack vector. suited for attack classiﬁcation in encrypted traﬃc.
 To address the above challenges, we need to propose an approach.
It can mine the crucial attack behavior patterns in encrypted traﬃc for 2.1.2. Machine learning approaches
accurate attack classiﬁcation. Meanwhile, it identiﬁes unseen attacks ML algorithms have been the critical research direction in recent
based on these crucial patterns, which reveal fundamental techniques years, whose main idea is to determine what attack there is by anafor the same attack with diﬀerent attack vectors. The emergence of lyzing the encrypted network traﬃc features (Anderson and McGrew,
GNN has demonstrated the capability of learning complex behavior and 2017; FRANTISEK S, 2017; Alqudah and Yaseen, 2020; Lopez-Martin et
extracting high-level features from big data to create the signature or al., 2017; Torroledo et al., 2018b; Duessel et al., 2017). Anderson (An-
ﬁngerprint of analyzed data (Pham et al., 2021; Kipf and Welling, 2016; derson and McGrew, 2017) demonstrates six ML algorithms perform
Veličković et al., 2017). High-level attack behaviors with complex inter- well with malicious traﬃc classiﬁcation when confronted with real netactions among hosts could be graph-structured for recognizing attacks. work data. Frantisek (FRANTISEK S, 2017) compares four ML methods,
Inspired by this, we propose an attack classiﬁcation approach TGPrint, XGBoost, Random Forest, Neural Network, and SVM, for TLS encrypted
which uses attack graphs as a ﬁngerprint for attack classiﬁcation on en- malicious traﬃc detection. They conclude that XGBoost and Random
crypted traﬃc. TGPrint ﬁrst eliminates noise from normal traﬃc ﬂows Forest methods are eﬀective, and the accuracy of XGBoost and Ranusing ML tools and leaves suspicious traﬃc to construct attack graphs. dom Forest is about 95%. Besides, Deep Learning (DL), a new branch
Then, TGPrint clusters attack-victim hosts’ traﬃc and divides them ac- of ML, is also fully applied to attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc.
cording to a speciﬁc time window set for each attack to portray attack Ivan (Torroledo et al., 2018b) analyze and summarize forty features in
behaviors as a graph precisely. Thirdly, TGPrint constructs a set of at- four classes for detecting malware and phishing signatures using LSTM
tack graphs where ports are nodes, attack-victim hosts’ communication and obtain 94.87% and 88.64% accuracy, respectively.
relationships are edges, and temporal, statistical, and aggregate fea- However, feature processing is a signiﬁcant challenge in ML aptures are edge attributes to generate each attack’s ﬁngerprint. Finally, proaches, which can directly aﬀect the network’s classiﬁcation perfor-
TGPrint exploits GCAN’s learning ability of graph representation to gen- mance and require much work. How to extract and represent the limited
erate ﬁngerprints and mines crucial attack behavior patterns to classify features in the encrypted traﬃc are the key to identifying attacks accuattacks. rately.
 In summary, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
 2.1.3. Deep learning’s challenges
 • We propose TGPrint to classify attacks precisely in encrypted traﬃc Despite its eﬀectiveness, deep learning also has some limitations
 based on attack ﬁngerprints, which obtain the high-level crucial when applied to attack identiﬁcation. Deep learning models require
 attack behavior patterns. a large amount of labeled data for training (Mohamad Tahir et al.,
 • We use GCAN to mine behavior patterns from attack graphs to 2015). However, in the ﬁeld of cyber security, obtaining labeled attack
 identify unseen attacks and reveal fundamental techniques of the data can be challenging due to the limited availability of comprehenattack, which adapt to the behaviors’ changing over time. sive and diverse datasets. Moreover, the distribution of attacks is often

 2
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

Fig. 1. Traﬃc distribution is diﬀerent in the attack with various attack vectors in HIKARI and CICIDS. Left one is from HIKARI and the other two are from CICIDS.
(For interpretation of the colors in the ﬁgure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

highly imbalanced, with rare attacks being signiﬁcantly outnumbered 3.2. Graph neural networks for graph representation
by normal network traﬃc. On the other hand, deep learning models
may struggle to generalize well to previously unseen attack types or Graphs, a data structure consisting of nodes and edges, provide an
variations (Chou and Jiang, 2021a). This limitation arises from the re- intuitive representation of abstract relationships and interactions. Mathliance on labeled training data, as the models may not have learned the ematically, a graph 𝐺 is deﬁned as a tuple (𝑉 , 𝐸) where 𝑉 is the set of
relevant features or patterns necessary to detect novel attacks. nodes, and 𝐸 is the set of edges linking to the nodes. Each node, 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉
 is associated with n-dimensional vectors 𝑥𝑣 , 𝑛 ∈ ℕ. With the prevalence
2.2. Unseen attack classiﬁcation of graph-structured data, there is an increasing need for graph representation learning (Chen et al., 2020). Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are
 Coping to recognize unseen attacks is particularly important in net- a practical framework for the representation learning of graphs. GNNs
work security (Popoola et al., 2021; Duessel et al., 2017; Hindy et al., follow a neighborhood aggregation scheme, where the representation
2020; Bar and Hajaj, 2022; Sarhan et al., 2021), where new attack vector of a node is computed by recursively aggregating and transformvectors are constantly emerging and continue to break through cyber ing representation vectors of its neighboring nodes (Xu et al., 2018).
security defenses. The low accuracy rate that occurs when identifying Many variants of GNNs with diﬀerent neighborhood aggregation and
unseen attacks causes signiﬁcant damage to network security. Sarhan graph-level pooling schemes have been proposed. Graph isomorphism
(Sarhan et al., 2021) maps the network data features using ML models network (GIN) (Xu et al., 2018) can achieve maximum discriminative
to distinguish semantic attributes from seen attack classes and detect power by producing the embedding of the entire graph when given emthe unseen classes by constructing the relationships between known and beddings of individual nodes. Graph convolution network (GCN) (Kipf
zero-day attacks. Popoola (Popoola et al., 2021) proposes the federated and Welling, 2016) scales linearly in the number of graph edges via a
DL (FDL) method for zero-day botnet attack detection to avoid data pri- localized ﬁrst-order approximation of spectral graph convolutions and
vacy leakage in IoT-edge devices. Hindy (Hindy et al., 2020) proposes learns hidden layer representations that encode both local graph strucan auto-encoder implementation beneﬁting greatly from encoding- ture and features of nodes. Graph Attention Networks (GAT) (Veličković
decoding capabilities in zero-day attack detection. Bar (Bar and Hajaj, et al., 2017) leverages masked self-attentional layers and speciﬁes dif-
2022) and Duessel (Duessel et al., 2017) inspired by natural language ferent weights to diﬀerent nodes in a neighborhood by stacking layers
processing (NLP), incorporate syntactic context into attack detection to which nodes can attend their neighborhoods’ features. This paper
 uses GIN, GCN, and GAT layers to construct the model and represent
and increases unseen attack detection accuracy. These studies work a lot
 and classify the attack.
on feature processing to detect unknown attacks. However, they need to
focus on interaction behaviors between attack-victim hosts in an attack
 4. Approach
and ﬁnd fundamental techniques.
 This paper aims to ﬁngerprint persistent attacks on encrypted net-
3. Background
 work traﬃc. Fig. 2 shows an overview of our approach TGPrint: we take
 network traﬃc of attack-victim hosts as input and generate ﬁngerprints
3.1. Attack vectors that identify attacks. After feature extraction, TGPrint ﬁrst removes normal ﬂows to eliminate the noise using ML tools and leaves suspicious
 Attack vectors are the means and methods used to achieve an attack, traﬃc. Subsequently, TGPrint clusters suspicious attack-victim hosts’
and various attack vectors can accomplish an attack. Diﬀerent attack traﬃc and divides them according to a speciﬁc time window for each
vectors execute diﬀerent operations during the attack, and the mali- attack. After that, TGPrint portrays attack behaviors as a graph and
cious traﬃc generated from diverse attack operations is disparate. Fig. 1 constructs a set of graphs for each attack type. Then, TGPrint exploits
shows the traﬃc distribution of Bruteforce and DDoS with diﬀerent at- GCAN to generate ﬁngerprints and mines crucial attack behavior pattack vectors from three datasets. Traﬃc is mapped into 2-dimensions to terns. Finally, the generated ﬁngerprints can recognize attacks precisely
show the diﬀerence between various attack vectors of the same attack, based on attack behavior patterns from attack graphs.
Bruteforce and DDoS, intuitively. Bruteforce has two attack vectors,
HTTP and XML, in HIKARI, and four attack vectors, SSH, FTP, Web, 4.1. Feature processing
and XSS, in CICIDS. DDoS has two attack vectors, HOIC and LOIC, in
CICIDS. The traﬃc distribution changes considerably when the attack 4.1.1. Feature select
vector is changed. Even if the classiﬁcation model has seen the attack We analyze TLS handshake information in attack traﬃc to select feabefore, it can still not identify it when a new attack vector comes. Un- tures used to construct an attack graph. Server names, TLS version, and
like 0day attacks, unseen attacks in this paper refer to the emergence of TLS certiﬁcate are three we mainly considered (Shen et al., 2016). We
a new attack vector in the same type of attack. For example, in brute- ﬁrst extracted the server names but found no malicious webs in them.
force, an XML-based implementation of the attack is an unseen attack Instead, as shown in Table 1, attacks frequently happen on standard
for the original http-based one. Therefore, the ability to unseen attack web pages such as Google, Facebook, and cloud server websites. It clarrecognition is essential in evaluating a model. iﬁes whether a web page is malicious and is of little help in judging the

 3
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

Fig. 2. Overview of the creation and matching of attack ﬁngerprints. (A) Extract features from the network traﬃc. (B) Attack traﬃc denoising, maintaining
suspicious ﬂows. (C) Cluster the suspicious ﬂows from two communicating hosts. (D) Divide the suspicious ﬂows from host pairs by time window. (E) Construct
attack graphs based on port nodes, communication edges, and behavior attributes. (F) Match attack ﬁngerprints generated from attack graphs by the GCAN model.

 Table 1 Table 2
 Rank of the Frequency in Server Name When Features of Top 40 MI Scores.
 Attacking.
 Rank Features Category
 Rank Server Name Counts
 1 fwd_subﬂow_bytes Statistical
 1 vic3.clouds.web.id 1216 2 bwd_iat.tot Aggregate
 2 www.google-analytics.com 33 3 bwd_subﬂow_pkts Statistical
 3 www.facebook.com 29 4 fwd_iat.min Aggregate
 4 api.autopilothq.com 28 5 fwd_header_size_min Aggregate
 5 stats.g.doubleclick.net 25 6 bwd_iat.max Aggregate
 6 connect.facebook.net 24 7 fwd_subﬂow_pkts Statistical
 7 static.xx.fbcdn.net 21 8 bwd_iat.min Aggregate
 8 oricer.com.ec 20 9 payload_bytes_per_second Aggregate
 9 googleads.g.doubleclick.net 20 10 bwd_pkts_payload.tot Statistical
 10 hackmag.com 20 11 fwd_iat.tot Aggregate
 12 ﬂow_iat.tot Aggregate
 13 ﬂow_iat.min Aggregate
 14 ﬂow_iat.max Aggregate
attack. Then, we extract the TLS version and TLS certiﬁcates. Since the
 15 ﬂow_iat.std Aggregate
TLS version is usually uniform, we do not consider the relationship be- 16 fwd_data_pkts_tot Statistical
tween the TLS version and attack classiﬁcation. Because checking the 17 fwd_pkts_payload.std Aggregate
certiﬁcate or not is up to the policy of the application server, TLS cer- 18 fwd_header_size_tot Statistical
tiﬁcates are not necessary for communication connections established 19 down_up_ratio Aggregate
 20 bwd_iat.std Aggregate
on the TLS protocol. The impact of the certiﬁcate also could be ignored.
 21 fwd_bulk_packets Statistical
Finally, we use 86 features shown in section 4.1.2, including statistical, 22 idle.max Aggregate
temporal, and aggregate features. 23 fwd_iat.std Aggregate
 24 ﬂow_pkts_payload.max Aggregate
 25 ﬂow_pkts_payload.min Aggregate
4.1.2. Feature evaluation
 26 fwd_iat.max Aggregate
 Using the Mutual Information (MI), we compute the MI score of each 27 bwd_pkts_payload.min Aggregate
feature with the attack label and ranked the results. Table 2 shows the 28 active.std Aggregate
forty highest-ranked features and provides all the correlation scores. 29 active.avg Aggregate
The table shows that features with high MI belong to various types. 30 idle.min Aggregate
 31 bwd_pkts_payload.max Aggregate
Statistical features are the basic information of the payload and pack-
 32 bwd_header_size_tot Statistical
age during communication; temporal features are information such as 33 bwd_bulk_bytes Statistical
transmission time; aggregate features are calculated from statistical and 34 fwd_header_size_max Aggregate
temporal features. Hence, we construct attack ﬁngerprints from multi- 35 bwd_data_pkts_tot Statistical
 36 ﬂow_duration Temporal
ple features and utilize them to accomplish attack classiﬁcation.
 37 bwd_URG_ﬂag_count Statistical
 ∑∑ 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) 38 ﬂow_CWR_ﬂag_count Statistical
𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌 ) = 𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) log (1)
 𝑥∈𝑋 𝑦∈𝑌
 𝑝(𝑥)𝑝(𝑦) 39 fwd_URG_ﬂag_count Statistical
 40 bwd_subﬂow_bytes Statistical

4.1.3. Attack traﬃc denoising
 Attack classiﬁcation is according to traces hidden in traﬃc to iden- However, attack evolution increases the diﬃculty of attack identitify attacks. Normal traﬃc is noise because it is not the purpose of attack ﬁcation because of evolution uncertainty, and preset labels for unseen
classiﬁcation. Furthermore, that has far more than attack traﬃc, so the attacks are diﬃcult. We observe the models’ classiﬁcation performance
trained model is more sensitive to normal behavior, which violates the on attack-only traﬃc arranged in chronological order. As the attack
intention of attack classiﬁcation. Meanwhile, normal behavior patterns samples increase, unseen attacks may emerge. Fig. 3 shows that the
hardly change because normal people have a ﬁxed daily routine. There- model’s ability to identify attacks decreases as the attacks evolve, which
fore, normal traﬃc can be identiﬁed stably, accurately, and eﬀortlessly urges us to improve the model’s generalization. However, complex ﬁnwith a simple model. gerprinting for normal traﬃc is useless because it can not improve

 4
 L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Fig. 3. The attack identiﬁcation of models on attack traﬃc.

 the classiﬁcation accuracy but will increase the workload unrelated to 4.2.3. Attack graph construction
 identifying attacks. Hence, we utilize a separate tool to detect and iso- High-level attack behaviors with complex interactions among hosts
 late normal traﬃc to eliminate the noise introduced by large amounts are a natural graph structure where nodes represent hosts and edges
 of normal traﬃc. Signiﬁcantly, after removing normal traﬃc, the re- represent interaction activities. The similar step, converting traﬃc ﬂows
 maining suspicious traﬃc contains known and unseen attack traﬃc, to graphs (Yao et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020; Hammann et al., 2019; Pham
 which can be further classiﬁed precisely. The model does not easily as- et al., 2021).
 sume unseen attacks as normal, leaving suspicious traﬃc for further In this paper, an attack type has a set of attack graphs whose nodes
 identiﬁcation, which lays the foundation for an accurate unseen attack are the host’s ports, edges indicate the communication behaviors beclassiﬁcation. Since methods such as SVM, KNN, Random Forest, and tween ports, and edges’ attributes describe the behaviors. The edges’ at-
 DNN can achieve 99% accuracy as mentioned in the research (Ferriyan tributes indicate the attack communication behaviors through features,
 et al., 2021), a total of four ML models are chosen to verify the eﬀec- which are statistical, temporal, and aggregate features (as described in
 tiveness of this step. 4.1.2). The node vectors of a graph are two hosts’ ports without IP because the IP address is useless for edge attributes in each graph, which
 4.2. Attack ﬁngerprinting has the same IP pairs after the cluster. Finally, an attack graph is the
 attack behavioral record between the attack-victim hosts in one time
 4.2.1. Cluster based on host pair window. In 4.2.4, TGPrint uses these attack graphs to mine hidden at-
 TGPrint clusters the suspicious traﬃc according to the host’s IP pairs tack behavior patterns for attack classiﬁcation.
 because of the attacker’s persistent behaviors toward the victim host.
 After clustering the traﬃc according to IP pairs, it is possible to analyze
 4.2.4. Attack ﬁngerprint classiﬁcation
 the communication interactions between the two hosts and to obtain
 TGPrint uses attack graphs generate ﬁngerprints as credentials in atattack behaviors.
 tack classiﬁcation. As a result, the attack label is classiﬁed according to
 ﬁngerprints, representing attack graphs. We aim to obtain a representa-
 4.2.2. Division based on time window
 tion learning approach g() that helps identify the label 𝑦 of an entire
 Attack duration is unstable and varies in diﬀerent persistent attacks. { }
 graph, 𝑦 = g(), where a set of graphs 1 , ..., 𝑁 ⊆ 𝐺 and their labels
 TGPrint divides attack traﬃc for each IP pair to adapt to the behaviors’ { }
 𝑦1 , ..., 𝑦𝑁 ⊆ 𝑌 is given.
 changing over time. When dividing traﬃc, the longer the time window
 We use GNNs to construct the representation learning approach
 is, the more traﬃc is captured, and the more diverse attack behaviors
 g(). GNNs can learn the high-dimensional graph structure and extract
 are observed. However, each attack duration is diﬀerent. Various time
 information from the relationship between hosts and theirs traﬃc bewindows according to attack types can divide traﬃc more precisely in
 haviors (Pham et al., 2021). So we utilize the GNNs to represent the
 the correct type. So we set the time window ratio 𝜏, a parameter that
 could generate a speciﬁc time window for each attack to divide traﬃc attack graphs, generate attack ﬁngerprints and classify attacks. As disand precisely construct attack graphs. The deﬁnition of 𝜏 is followed. cussed in 3.2, GIN (Xu et al., 2018) can produce embedding of the
 𝑛𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑠 is the number of ﬂows captured by the time window, and 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 attack graph’s nodes, indicating the ports’ relationships between attackis the number of the corresponding attack ﬂows. victim hosts. GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2016) can extract the feature
 representation of local host ports and their traﬃc behaviors and encode
 𝑛𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑠
 𝜏= (2) them. GAT (Veličković et al., 2017) can leverage Attention Mechanism
 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 to specify diﬀerent weights to port nodes and ﬁnd the more essential
 The details of time window generation are shown in Algorithm 1. neighborhood nodes. On this basis, we construct the model GCAN as a
 g(). The model structure is shown in Fig. 4.
 Algorithm 1 Time window generation and use for each attack. GCAN model mainly consists of three layers, GIN layer, GCN layer,
 Input: 𝜏, 𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 , 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 and GAT layer. We employ the GIN layer, which has the same size
 Output: 𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 as the input graph. The GCN layer has the input and output size of
1 for 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 ∈ 𝐴𝑇 𝑇 𝐴𝐶𝐾𝑠, generate time window by 𝜏 for 𝐿𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 in 𝐴𝑇 𝑇 𝐴𝐶𝐾𝑠 do 128 and the GAT layer has the input and output size of 128. The Top-
2 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 = len( 𝐹 𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 ) Time window = 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 × 𝜏 𝑛 = 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 ⧵ Time window
 if count ⩽ 𝑛 then
 KPooling layer is added between each two graph layer because it could
3 for 𝑖𝑡ℎ in range (0, 𝑛) do select the most important K nodes based on feature values (e.g. de-
4 Construct attack graphs based on 𝑖𝑡ℎ time window ﬂows count = count + 1 gree of nodes, activation of nodes, etc.) to improve the representational
5 end power and eﬃciency. At this point, the vector output from the graph
6 end
 layers is the attack ﬁngerprint. The output of GCAN is transformed from
7 return 𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘
 attack ﬁngerprints to attack labels by activation functions. RELU is se-
8 end
 lected as activation function to increase the computational eﬃciency
 because of its simple computational complexity. The ﬁnal output is a

 5
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

Fig. 4. Architecture of GCAN Model for Attack Classiﬁcation. Attack graphs are the input. Attack ﬁngerprints are the output of graph layers. Labels are the output
of GCAN.

 Table 3
 Attacks used in CICIDS.

 Attack Tool Duration

 FTP – Patator one days
 SSH – Patator one days
 Bruteforce
 Web one days
 xss one days

 DDos Low Orbit Ion Canon (LOIC) for UDP, TCP,or HTTP requests two days

4-dimensional attack probability matrix after softmax. The result of at- Table 4
tack classiﬁcation is label with the highest probability in the output. Attacks used in HIKARI-2021.

 Attack Label Total Flows
5. Evaluation and analysis
 Bruteforce Attack 5584
 Bruteforce-XML Attack 5145
5.1. Datasets Probing Attack 23388
 XMRIGCC CryptoMiner Attack 3279

 We use CICIDS and HIKARI 2021 datasets to evaluate TGPrint’s effectiveness and superiority in attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc. traﬃc to verify TGPrint. Fortunately, Ferriyan (Ferriyan et al., 2021)
 propose a new dataset, HIKARI-2021, to solve this ﬂaw, which provides
5.1.1. CICIDS-2017&CICIDS-2018 realistic traﬃc from a real production network. Hence, we conduct
 CICIDS-2017 (C.I. for Cybersecurity, 2017) and CICIDS-2018 extensive experiments on all these datasets. All datasets are sorted in
(Sharafaldin et al., 2018) datasets were created by the Canadian In- chronological order. We select 80% from each dataset for training and
stitute for Cyber Security at the University of Brunswick in 2017 and the rest 20% for testing.
2018. CICIDS-2017 was proposed for intrusion detection and consisted
of several attack scenarios. CICIDS-2018 was produced as an optimized 5.2. Experimental setup
version in the next year. Bruteforce, DoS, Heartbleed, Web Attack, Inﬁltration, Botnet, and DDoS attacks are produced using publicly available We implement a prototype of TGPrint in Python using the Scikittools and codes. We use Bruteforce and DDoS attacks in experiments learn and Torch libraries for ML and graph computation. We ﬁrst
(Table 3). conﬁrm the optimal solutions of two parameters, batch size and time
 window ratio 𝜏 on HIKARI2021, which has the same setup and net-
5.1.2. HIKARI-2021 work conﬁgurations as CICIDS. Then evaluate our approach with ML
 HIKARI-2021 is a dataset containing encrypted synthetic attacks and models on an attack classiﬁcation task on three datasets. Afterward, we
normal traﬃc (background and benign) (Ferriyan et al., 2021). Brute- evaluate the TGPrint’s eﬀectiveness to identify unseen attacks. Finally,
force, probing, and XMRIGCC CryptoMiner are three chosen attacks we compare ML tools during normal traﬃc denoising and analyze the
because WordPress, Joomla, and Drupal are among the ten most pop- impact of false positives from the denoising step.
ular open-source CMSs, with a combined market share of almost 50%. The compared models are outstanding in attack classiﬁcation on en-
Ferriyan made this dataset according to the needed content and the way crypted traﬃc mentioned in 2.1.2, which are RF, LR, XGBoost, DNN,
of attack generated and extracted the features adopted to CICIDS using and LSTM. Their input features are the same 86 features as graph edge
Zeek. attributes. Moreover, Hindy’s unseen attack detection method, autoen-
 As well-known datasets, many studies (Chou and Jiang, 2021b) are coder (Hindy et al., 2020), is also compared because it was validated
veriﬁed on CICIDS-2017&CICIDS-2018. However, these sets are col- in CICIDS-2017. The conventional performance metrics for multi-class
lected in emulated environments rather than real-world networks and classiﬁcation, accuracy, precision, and F1-Score are used in this paper
do not have background data. Experiments only on CICIDS lack proof to evaluate the performance of models. The speciﬁc deﬁnitions are as
of TGPrint’s eﬀectiveness in real networks, so we need more real-world follows, where 𝑁 is the number of attack types. Thus the evaluation

 6
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Fig. 5. Model performance on normal-only traﬃc test sets.

 Table 5
 Confusion Matrix.

 Actual Positive Actual Negative

 Classiﬁed Positive True Positive, TP False Positive, FP
 Classiﬁed Negative False Negative, FN True Negative, TN

 Table 6
 The result of attack traﬃc denoising.

 Accuracy Precision Recall F1 score

 DNN 0.93 0.93 1 0.96
 KNN 0.91 0.93 0.91 0.92
 SVM 0.89 0.88 0.89 0.89
 Random Forest 0.93 1 0.93 0.96

metric is the average of the attack classiﬁcation performance in all categories (Table 5). Fig. 6. The accuracy of TGPrint with two batch sizes on attack classiﬁcation.

 1 ∑ 𝑇𝑃
𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (3) 5.3.2. Impact of batch size for attack classiﬁcation
 𝑁 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃
 1 ∑ 𝑇𝑃 +𝑇𝑁 Batch size is a critical parameter in the training process of GCAN
𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = (4) since it impacts the experimental results signiﬁcantly. 16 and 32 are
 𝑁 𝐹𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁 + 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 chosen because of their high experiment use. A series of experiments are
𝐹 1𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 2 ⋅ (5) conducted on the HIKARI2021 dataset. We compare the classiﬁcation
 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
 accuracy with diﬀerent time window ratios 𝜏 when the batch size is 16
5.3. Analysis of results and 32.
 The red dashed line is the baseline for an accuracy of 0.8. The results
5.3.1. Feasibility assessment of attack traﬃc denoising in Fig. 6 show that accuracy is higher when the batch size is 32 in attack
 To eliminate noise traﬃc in attack classiﬁcation, we use the ML classiﬁcation. This is because an attack graph contains more behavior
model to remove normal traﬃc before identifying attacks. SVM, KNN, information useful for attack classiﬁcation when the time window rate
Random Forest, and DNN are used as tools. We ﬁrst evaluate them on increases. However, the accuracy decreases as the time window rate
the whole HIKARI 2021. Also, we set a series test set only containing exceeds 0.4 when the batch size is 16. The model fails to obtain the
normal traﬃc and in chronological order to check the generalizability. complete attack behavior information and quickly falls into local opti-
By comparing the detection accuracy, precision, and recall of the mod- mal if the batch size is too small for training. Therefore, we chose 32 as
els on these data, we judge the feasibility of the methods for normal the batch size in later experiments.
traﬃc denoising. The results on the whole HIKARI 2021 are shown in
Table 6 and on series sets are shown in group Fig. 5. 5.3.3. Impact of time window for attack classiﬁcation
 As shown in Table 6, SVM, KNN, Random Forest, and DNN achieve Time window ratio 𝜏 decides the number of attack behaviors in a
good identiﬁcation capabilities that accurately distinguish between nor- graph, so it is considered a vital parameter, and we conduct a series
mal and attack traﬃc. Except for SVM, the models can achieve accuracy of experiments to explore the optimal value. We choose 32 as batch
recall and F1 values over 90%. Although results indicate that ML mod- size and accomplish the attack classiﬁcation task with increasing time
els can accurately distinguish normal and attack traﬃc in attack traﬃc window ratio 𝜏 to evaluate its impact. The results are shown in Fig. 7.
denoising, it is still uncertain how well they identify normal traﬃc. The red dashed line is the baseline for an accuracy of 0.8. As ex-
 In group Fig. 5, the x coordinate is the proportion of test samples pected, the classiﬁcation accuracy for attack ﬁngerprints is aﬀected by
to all normal traﬃc. The results demonstrate that the Random Forest the change in the time window ratio 𝜏. The results show that the classiperforms best, scoring high evaluation metrics in normal traﬃc, which ﬁcation accuracy improves with 𝜏 increasing. The increase is non-linear
indicates that the model accurately identiﬁes normal traﬃc. We believe and even decreases in a small range. As the time window ratio increases,
this is because normal behavior is ﬁxed and constant, so the charac- more network behaviors are joined, but the ﬁnal performance can also
teristics of normal traﬃc are also accessible for the model to learn. be aﬀected by improper behavior division which interrupts the integrity
Moreover, no decrease is in model recognition over time. Hence, ML of a behavior. Moreover, when the 𝜏 exceeds 0.5, the method’s performodels can be used for attack traﬃc denoising and accurately identify- mance stabilizes and no longer improves. It is believed that when 𝜏 is
ing normal traﬃc. In TGPrint, we choose Random Forest as the tool. small, it cannot accurately portray the attack behaviors over time. Con-

 7
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Table 9
 Classiﬁcation results of diﬀerent model structures
 on the HIKARI 2021.

 Layers Accuracy Precision F1 score

 GIN+GCN 0.83 0.99 0.83
 GIN +GAT 0.83 0.99 0.83
 GCAN 0.86 0.99 0.89

 Table 10
 Classiﬁcation results of diﬀerent model structures
 on the CICIDS.

 Layers Accuracy Precision F1 score

 GIN+GCN 0.46 0.99 0.61
 GIN+GAT 0.54 0.87 0.62
 GCAN 0.67 0.99 0.8

Fig. 7. The accuracy of TGPrint with diﬀerent Time window rates on attack
classiﬁcation. studies focus on the classiﬁcation ability based on ﬂow level but ignore
 that attack is continuous and traﬃc is associated with each other.
 Table 7 To show the representation ability of our method for attacks, we
 Performances of diﬀerent methods in attack classiﬁcation
 draw the scattergrams to observe the distribution diﬀerences before and
 on HIKARI 2021.
 after TGPrint. The results are shown in Fig. 8. The distribution of the
 Methods Accuracy Precision F1 score original traﬃc ﬂows overlaps, but after TGPrint, the attack ﬂows are
 Random Forest 0.32 0.58 0.41 mapped to another concentrated area and can be distinguished clearly.
 Logistic Regression 0.32 0.33 0.48 This result strongly proves the rationality and validity of TGPrint in
 XGBoost 0.24 0.5 0.42 design. On the one hand, attack ﬁngerprint adds behaviors of attack-
 DNN 0.12 0.25 0.04
 victim hosts over time, compensating for the limited features to some
 LSTM 0.2 0.48 0.27
 TGPrint 0.86 0.99 0.89 extent. On the other hand, the three graph network layers in GCAN
 obtain the critical attack behavior patterns from the information and
 relationships so that attacks can ﬁnally be precisely distinguished. As
 Table 8 the GIN layer produces embedding of the attack graph’s nodes, which
 Performances of diﬀerent methods in attack classiﬁcation is necessary for graph representation, we use the GIN layer respecon CICIDS. tively with GCN and GAT layers to conduct classiﬁcation experiments
 Methods Accuracy Precision F1 score on HIKARI 2021. The results in Table 9 and Table 10 demonstrate that
 Random Forest 0.29 0.14 0.22
 the structure of GCAN is reasonable, which better captures attack be-
 Logistic Regression 0.47 0.23 0.32 havior patterns.
 XGBoost 0.52 0.27 0.36
 DNN 0.22 0.69 0.45 5.3.5. Performance of unseen attack classiﬁcation
 LSTM 0.16 0.64 0.79
 Whether a model classiﬁes accurately facing unseen attack repre-
 TGPrint 0.67 0.99 0.80
 sents the ability to counter unknown risks. We choose DDoS and bruteforce as the attack labels having new attack vectors and perform a series
versely, when the time window is long enough, an attack graph may of unseen attack classiﬁcation experiments. We constructed two attack
not provide more behavioral information because the attacker will try scenarios: one unseen attack and multiple unseen attacks. We compare
again when they encounter an obstacle. Therefore too much traﬃc only TGPrint with four ML models having good performance in attack clasadds an increased burden on the training of attack graphs without help siﬁcation and Hindy’s study (Hindy et al., 2020). They also veriﬁed
to improve the classiﬁcation performance. the autoencoder on unseen attack detection on CICIDS, and we directly
 Besides, the results also show that although 𝜏 aﬀects the model ef- quote the results from the paper. The results are recorded in Table 11
fectiveness, choosing a shorter time window may result in higher gains, and Table 12.
i.e., faster identiﬁcation of attack type, compared to the loss in perfor- Obviously, except for TGPrint, all other methods have a weak ability
mance. In practice, the users can conﬁgure this parameter according to to identify unseen attacks, even though they can obtain high evaluathe actual requirements to achieve optimal results. tion metric scores in individual scenarios. In the HIKARI2021 dataset,
 TGPrint can identify Bruteforce implemented by XML based on the
5.3.4. Performance of attack classiﬁcation ﬁngerprints of Bruteforce implemented by HTTP. In CICIDS datasets,
 Attack classiﬁcation on encrypted traﬃc is the primary purpose of TGPrint can successfully identify unseen Bruteforce based on four attack
this paper, so we conduct experiments on three datasets and compare vectors, SSH, FTP, Web, and XSS, separately. In the multiple unseen at-
TGPrint with the other ﬁve ML models on the performance of attack tacks scenario, TGPrint could identify them with an accuracy of more
classiﬁcation. The experimental results are shown in Table 7 and Ta- than 0.6, up to 0.71. Although the evaluation metrics are lower than
ble 8. XGBoost regarding unseen attacks combining XSS and LOIC, XGBoost’s
 The results prove that TGPrint achieves the highest scores in the identiﬁcation scores in all other scenarios are much lower than TGevaluation metrics, especially in the precision of attack classiﬁcation. Print’s. Hence, it can be concluded that TGPrint can identify unseen
It owes to the fact that an attack graph extracts the behaviors of each attacks accurately.
attack, and GCAN obtains the crucial attack behavior patterns as a ﬁn- TGPrint can identify unseen attacks because GCAN generates attack
gerprint to classify attacks. Nevertheless, other models perform poorly ﬁngerprints from attack graphs and reveal fundamental techniques of
on both datasets, even with the same features. Models perform inad- the attack. Diﬀerent attack vectors have the same attack tactics. TGPrint
equately because they fail to grasp the crucial features. The previous grasps these tactics by crucial attack behavior patterns generated from

 8
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Fig. 8. The distribution of attack traﬃc before and after TGPrint.

 Table 11
 Performance on unseen attacks in HIKARI 2021.

 Attack New Vector Method Accuracy Precision F1 score

 TGPrint 0.8 0.67 0.5
 Random Forest 0.72 0.52 0.6
 Bruteforce XML Logistic Regression 0.5 0.5 0.5
 XGBoost 0.5 1 1
 DNN 0.1 0.25 0.01
 LSTM 0.1 0.41 0.26

 Fig. 9. The classiﬁcation performance of the models decrease as the number of false positives increases.

attack graphs to classify unseen attacks. GCAN’s representation ability existing false positives. In conclusion, TGPrint is a stable method recould successfully obtain these attack behavior patterns. Hence, TGPrint garding classiﬁcation capability and robustness to false positives.
is a practical approach to tackling unseen attacks. Although TGPrint is robust in false positives, the degradation of classiﬁcation performance leads to more losses. Fortunately, attack traﬃc
 denoising performance can be improved, reducing the crippling eﬀect of
5.3.6. Impact of false positive alarms
 false positives in attack classiﬁcation and allowing the model to main-
 Although ML models can accurately identify normal traﬃc, they
 tain high accuracy.
still have false positives, impacting subsequent classiﬁcation tasks. For
example, if normal traﬃc is identiﬁed as attack traﬃc, these false posi-
 5.3.7. Attack discussion
tives impact the construction of attack graphs. In attack ﬁngerprinting, The classiﬁcation performance of TGPrint varies across diﬀerent atnormal is not the target label, so where false positives will be classi- tack types. The optimal outcomes are presented in Table 13. Probing
ﬁed signiﬁcantly impacts the model’s classiﬁcation ability. As TGPrint and Bruteforce attacks are accurately recognizable, identiﬁcation of
clusters traﬃc ﬂows according to host pair, false positives are added DDoS is signiﬁcantly improved, and CryptoMiner encounters challenges
in attack graphs to generate ﬁngerprints to classify attacks. Hence, we in recognition due to limited sample availability (Table 4). Resampling
add normal ﬂows in the attack graph as false positives and conduct at- was not employed, as the diﬀerence in the count of distinct attack
tack classiﬁcations on HIKARI 2021 to test TGPrint’s resistance to false samples remains minimal. The small number of CryptoMiner traﬃc
positives. We choose LSTM as a comparison algorithm because it also samples results in a constraint on the number of attack traﬃc ﬂowhas a time window. Fig. 9 depicts results to classify attacks with false generated graphs. Consequently, TGPrint’s ability to suﬃciently learn
positives. CryptoMiner’s attack patterns is hindered, leading to reduced classiﬁ-
 The red dashed line is the baseline for an accuracy and F1 score of cation performance for CryptoMiner attacks. Conversely, attacks with
0.8. As expected, the models’ accuracy and F1 score decrease signiﬁ- ample samples and diverse attack vectors, like Probing and Bruteforce,
cantly as false positives increase. TGPrint’s classiﬁcation performance achieve accurate recognition due to more eﬀective learning of attack
decreases at the beginning but stabilizes after false positives increase to patterns, resulting in improved classiﬁcation accuracy.
a certain level. LSTM’s classiﬁcation performance decreases with false Furthermore, TGPrint exhibits proﬁciency in categorizing persistent
positives added. These results show that TGPrint is feasible to weaken attacks. The four attacks listed in the table, Bruteforce, DDoS, probing,
false positives as it grasps crucial attack behavior patterns although and CryptoMiner, demonstrate consistent attack behaviors over time.

 9
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

 Table 12
 Performance on unseen attacks in CICIDS.

 Attack New Vector Method Accuracy Precision F1 score

 Bruteforce SSH TGPrint 1 1 1
 Random Forest 0 0 0
 Logistic Regression 1 1 1
 XGBoost 0.12 0.06 0.1
 DNN 1 1 1
 Hindy (Hindy et al., 2020) 0.81 - -

 Bruteforce FTP TGPrint 1 1 1
 Random Forest 0 0 0
 Logistic Regression 0.02 0.01 0.2
 XGBoost 0 0 0
 DNN 1 1 1
 Hindy (Hindy et al., 2020) 0.20 - -

 Bruteforce XSS TGPrint 1 1 1
 Random Forest 0.01 0 0.01
 Logistic Regression 0.96 0.48 0.49
 XGBoost 0.43 0.14 0.2
 DNN 1 1 1

 Bruteforce Web TGPrint 1 1 1
 Random Forest 0.13 0.04 0.08
 Logistic Regression 0.45 0.15 0.21
 XGBoost 0.36 0.09 0.13
 DNN 1 1 1

 DDoS+ Bruteforce SSH+ LOIC TGPrint 0.71 0.5 0.67
 Random Forest 0 0 0
 Logistic Regression 0.63 0.33 0.33
 XGBoost 0.37 0.33 0.19
 DNN 0.63 0.5 0.39

 DDoS+ Bruteforce Web+ LOIC TGPrint 0.6667 0.67 0.8
 Random Forest 0 0 0
 Logistic Regression 0.06 0.16 0.22
 XGBoost 0.08 0.21 0.14
 DNN 0.13 0.5 0.11

 DDoS+ Bruteforce XSS+ LOIC TGPrint 0.67 0.677 0.8
 Random Forest 0.02 0.16 0.22
 Logistic Regression 0.04 0.32 0.32
 XGBoost 0.98 0.76 0.84
 DNN 0.04 0.5 0.04

 DDoS+ Bruteforce XSS+ HOIC TGPrint 0.6667 0.6667 0.8
 Random Forest 0.01 0.15 0.2
 Logistic Regression 0.02 0.31 0.02
 XGBoost 0.96 0.38 0.42
 DNN 0.03 0.5 0.03

 Average TGPrint 0.84 0.81 0.88

 Table 13 6. Limitation
 Optimal Performance of TGPrint in Diﬀerent Attacks.

 Attack Accuracy/top 1 Precision/top 1 F1 score/top 1
 This paper proposes TGPrint to classify attacks in encrypted traﬃc.
 However, there are two limitations existing.
 Bruteforce 0.8 0.99 0.8
 DDoS 0.73 0.5 0.67 Feasibility in real networks. Although TGPrint is veriﬁed on
 Probing 0.99 0.99 0.99 datasets from a real network environment, how feasible it would work
 CryptoMiner 0.8 0.5 0.5
 in a real network still needs to be determined. More practical factors, such as identiﬁcation eﬃciency, resource occupancy, and network
 structure, should be considered in a real network. In TGPrint, the time
Despite variations in attack implementations, their persistent network window rate 𝜏 also aﬀects the performance in real networks. These
behaviors on victim hosts are captured in traﬃc records. By construct- eﬀects cannot be judged on experiment results on datasets alone. In fuing attack graphs and learning patterns within deﬁned time windows, ture research, TGPrint should implement in real-time in real networks.
TGPrint excels in identifying attacks characterized by persistent net- Meanwhile, the calculation should be carried out in time complexity
work behaviors. and space complexity to verify the performance of TGPrint.
 However, TGPrint’s eﬃcacy in dealing with non-persistent attacks Incomplete attack types. The types of attacks are incomplete and
remains uncertain. Learning attack patterns from a single-ﬂow attack limited in datasets, and more attack types are in real networks. This
graph poses challenges for TGPrint. The model struggles to discern at- paper proves TGPrint’s classiﬁcation performance on collected attacks,
tack patterns in such scenarios. Subsequent research endeavors are to but its performance on other attacks in real networks needs further disdelve deeper into TGPrint’s classiﬁcation capabilities, thereby provid- cussion. TGPrint identiﬁes bruteforce, inﬁltration, mining, and DDoS,
ing a more comprehensive understanding of its potential. but if a worm occurs, TGPrint may misdiagnose because there is no

 10
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

corresponding attack ﬁngerprint. While attacks will not be classiﬁed Anderson, B., Paul, S., McGrew, D., 2018. Deciphering malware’s use of tls (without deas normal, there may be misclassiﬁcations between diﬀerent attacks. cryption). J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Tech. 14 (3), 195–211.
 Arora, A., Garg, S., Peddoju, S.K., 2014. Malware detection using network traﬃc analysis
Therefore, the ﬁngerprint database generated by TGPrint decides the
 in Android based mobile devices. In: 2014 Eighth International Conference on Next
performance of attack classiﬁcation and aﬀects network security. An in- Generation Mobile Apps, Services and Technologies. IEEE, pp. 66–71.
complete attack ﬁngerprint database will give wrong judgment in attack Bar, R., Hajaj, C., 2022. Simcse for encrypted traﬃc detection and zero-day attack detecclassiﬁcation, which hinders subsequent response to security events. In tion. IEEE Access.
future work, we need to collect more encrypted attack traﬃc and enrich C.I. for Cybersecurity, 2017. Intrusion detection evaluation dataset (cic-ids2017). https://
 www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html.
the attack ﬁngerprint database to classify accurately.
 Chen, F., Wang, Y.-C., Wang, B., Kuo, C.-C.J., 2020. Graph representation learning: a
 survey. In: APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 9.
 Universality of diﬀerent encryption methods. While TLS stands
 Chou, D., Jiang, M., 2021a. A survey on data-driven network intrusion detection. ACM
as the predominant encryption protocol, alternatives like Tor and VPN Comput. Surv. 54 (9), 1–36.
persist. Concealed attacks within these methods necessitate attention. Chou, D., Jiang, M., 2021b. A survey on data-driven network intrusion detection. ACM
Consequently, the capacity to classify attacks within diﬀerent encryp- Comput. Surv.
tion methods remains pertinent. In HIKARI 2021, encryption utilizes Cisco, 2019. Encrypted traﬃc analytics. White paper. https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/
TLS-based HTTPS, while in CICIDS, manual encryption conceals pay- solutions/enterprise-networks/enterprise-network-security/eta.html.
 Dierks, T., 1999. The tls protocol version 1.0. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/
load data. TGPrint’s classiﬁcation performance was assessed on both rfc2246.
encryption methods, but the ﬁndings fall short of demonstrating its Duessel, P., Gehl, C., Flegel, U., Dietrich, S., Meier, M., 2017. Detecting zero-day attacks
universal applicability to encrypted traﬃc. Thus, further investigation using context-aware anomaly detection at the application-layer. Int. J. Inf. Secur. 16
is required to address attack classiﬁcation in diverse encryption-based (5), 475–490.
traﬃc scenarios. Erman, J., Mahanti, A., Arlitt, M., Williamson, C., 2007. Identifying and discriminating
 between web and peer-to-peer traﬃc in the network core. In: Proceedings of the 16th
 International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 883–892.
7. Conclusion Ferriyan, A., Thamrin, A.H., Takeda, K., Murai, J., 2021. Generating network intrusion
 detection dataset based on real and encrypted synthetic attack traﬃc. Appl. Sci. 11
 This paper presents TGPrint, a novel attack classiﬁcation approach (17), 7868.
 FRANTISEK S, S.G., 2017. Machine learning for network https analysis. In: BRUCON Conthat obtains crucial attack behavior patterns and deals with unseen atference.
tack classiﬁcation. We ﬁrst use Random Forest for attack traﬃc denois- Gu, G., Perdisci, R., Zhang, J., Lee, W., 2008. Botminer: Clustering Analysis of Network
ing to remove the normal traﬃc. Then, we propose a novel parameter Traﬃc for Protocol-and Structure-Independent Botnet Detection.
time window ratio 𝜏 to divide a speciﬁc duration for each attack to Hammann, S., Radomirović, S., Sasse, R., Basin, D., 2019. User account access graphs. In:
elaborate attack graphs precisely. Finally, we utilize GCAN to mine and Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
 Security, pp. 1405–1422.
grasp the crucial behavior patterns from attack graphs to generate ﬁn-
 Hindy, H., Atkinson, R., Tachtatzis, C., Colin, J.-N., Bayne, E., Bellekens, X., 2020. Utilgerprints and classify attacks. Extensive experiments are conducted on ising deep learning techniques for eﬀective zero-day attack detection. Electronics 9
three datasets to verify TGPrint. The experimental results show that TG- (10), 1684.
Print achieves a precision of 99% in attack classiﬁcation on encrypted Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2016. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph convolutional
traﬃc, an average higher than other ML methods of 50%. It also clas- networks. ArXiv preprint. arXiv:1609.02907.
 Koch, R., Golling, M., Rodosek, G.D., 2014. Behavior-based intrusion detection in ensiﬁes unseen attacks with an average accuracy of over 80% and has a
 crypted environments. IEEE Commun. Mag. 52 (7), 124–131.
solid robustness to false positives. Lopez-Martin, M., Carro, B., Sanchez-Esguevillas, A., Lloret, J., 2017. Network traﬃc classiﬁer with convolutional and recurrent neural networks for Internet of things. IEEE
CRediT authorship contribution statement Access 5, 18042–18050.
 Luo, Z., Xu, S., Liu, X., 2020. Machine learning-based scheme for detecting tls malicious
 encrypted traﬃc. J. Netw. Inf. Secur. 6 (1), 77–83.
 Leiqi Wang: Writing – original draft preparation, Conceptualiza- Madhukar, A., Williamson, C., 2006. A longitudinal study of p2p traﬃc classiﬁcation.
tion, Methodology. In: 14th IEEE International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation. IEEE,
 Xiu Ma: Methodology. pp. 179–188.
 Ning Li: Software. Mohamad Tahir, H., Hasan, W., Md Said, A., Zakaria, N.H., Katuk, N., Kabir, N.F., Omar,
 M.H., Ghazali, O., Yahya, N.I., 2015. Hybrid Machine Learning Technique for Intru-
 Qiujian Lv: Writing – reviewing & editing.
 sion Detection System.
 Yan Wang: Supervision. Nychis, G., Sekar, V., Andersen, D.G., Kim, H., Zhang, H., 2008. An empirical evaluation
 Weiqing Huang: Resources, Validation. of entropy-based traﬃc anomaly detection. In: Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGCOMM
 Haiyan Chen: Reviewing. Conference on Internet Measurement, pp. 151–156.
 Park, J.-S., Yoon, S.-H., Kim, M.-S., 2013. Performance improvement of the payload signature based traﬃc classiﬁcation system using application traﬃc locality. J. Korean
Declaration of competing interest Inst. Commun. Inf. Sci. 38 (7), 519–525.
 Pham, T.-D., Ho, T.-L., Truong-Huu, T., Cao, T.-D., Truong, H.-L., 2021. Mappgraph:
 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial mobile-app classiﬁcation on encrypted network traﬃc using deep graph convointerests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence lution neural networks. In: Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
 pp. 1025–1038.
the work reported in this paper.
 Popoola, S.I., Ande, R., Adebisi, B., Gui, G., Hammoudeh, M., Jogunola, O., 2021. Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack detection in iot-edge devices. IEEE Int.
Data availability Things J. 9 (5), 3930–3944.
 Richman, S., 2022. This new covert channel uses ssl/tls handshakes. https://www.
 extrahop.com/company/blog/2018/stop-ssl-tls-exﬁl/.
 Data will be made available on request.
 Roques, O., Maﬀeis, S., Cova, M., 2019. Detecting malware in tls traﬃc. In: The IEEE
 Conference on Local Computer Networks 30th Anniversary (LCN’05).
References Sarhan, M., Layeghy, S., Gallagher, M., Portmann, M., 2021. From zero-shot machine
 learning to zero-day attack detection. ArXiv preprint. arXiv:2109.14868.
Abuse, 2022. abuse.ch. ssl blacklist. https://sslbl.abuse.ch/. Sharafaldin, I., Lashkari, A.H., Ghorbani, A.A., 2018. Toward generating a new in-
Alqudah, N., Yaseen, Q., 2020. Machine learning for traﬃc analysis: a review. Proc. Com- trusion detection dataset and intrusion traﬃc characterization. In: ICISSp, vol. 1,
 put. Sci. 170, 911–916. pp. 108–116.
Anderson, B., McGrew, D., 2017. Machine learning for encrypted malware traﬃc classiﬁ- Shen, M., Wei, M., Zhu, L., Wang, M., Li, F., 2016. Certiﬁcate-aware encrypted traﬃc clascation: accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity. In: Proceedings of the 23rd siﬁcation using second-order Markov chain. In: 2016 IEEE/ACM 24th International
 ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, pp. 1–10.
 pp. 1723–1732. Suricata, 2010. Open information security foundation. https://suricata.io/.

 11
L. Wang, X. Ma, N. Li et al. Computers & Security 135 (2023) 103466

Torroledo, I., Camacho, L.D., Bahnsen, A.C., 2018a. Hunting malicious tls certiﬁcates Ning Li received master’s degree from Beijing University of Posts and Telecomwith deep neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 11th ACM Workshop on Artiﬁcial munications, Beijing, China. He is now an associate senior engineer in the institute of
 Intelligence and Security, pp. 64–73. information engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
Torroledo, I., Camacho, L.D., Bahnsen, A.C., 2018b. Hunting malicious tls certiﬁcates with anomaly detection, user behavior analysis, and network security operation and maintedeep neural networks. In: The 11th ACM Workshop. nance technology.
Veličković, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., Bengio, Y., 2017. Graph
 attention networks. ArXiv preprint. arXiv:1710.10903. Qiujian Lv received Ph.D. degree from information and communication engineering
Xu, K., Hu, W., Leskovec, J., Jegelka, S., 2018. How powerful are graph neural networks? from the School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of
 ArXiv preprint. arXiv:1810.00826. Posts and Telecommunications. She is now an associate senior engineer in the institute
Xu, X., Du, X., Zeng, Q., 2020. Attacking graph-based classiﬁcation without chang- of information engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests include
 ing existing connections. In: Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, anomaly detection and data mining.
 pp. 951–962.
Yao, Y., Su, L., Lu, Z., Liu, B., 2019. Stdeepgraph: spatial-temporal deep learning on Yan Wang received master’s degree from Beijing University Of Technology, Beijing,
 communication graphs for long-term network attack detection. In: 2019 18th IEEE China. She is now a senior engineer in the institute of information engineering, Chinese
 International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Commu- Academy of Sciences. Her research interests include anomaly detection and network senications/13th IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering curity situational awareness.
 (TrustCom/BigDataSE). IEEE, pp. 120–127.
Zhai, M., Zhang, X., Zhao, B., 2020. Survey of encrypted malicious traﬃc detection based Weiqing Huang is a research professor, PhD supervisor of Institute of Information
 on deep learning. J. Netw. Inf. Secur. 6 (3), 66–77. Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is also a professor in the School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
 signal processing theory and technology, electromagnetic acousto-optical detection and
 Leiqi Wang received bachelor from University of Science and Technology Beijing, in protection.
2018. She is presently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include deep learning and
 Haiyan Chen received Ph.D. degree from School of Chemistry and Chemical Engimalicious network traﬃc detection.
 neering, University of Pisa, Italy. Her research interests include biodegradation studies of
 pollutants in environmental media and ecological remediation of pollutants.
 Xiu Ma is presently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her current research interests include network attack
detection and analysis.

 12