IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 3111

6G-Enabled Consumer Electronics Device Intrusion
 Detection With Federated Meta-Learning and
 Digital Twins in a Meta-Verse Environment
 Suli He, Chengwen Du, and M. Shamim Hossain , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The widespread adoption of consumer electronics of Things (IoT)-enabled Consumer Electronics (CE) devices
devices coupled with the emergence of 6G technology has led across diverse sectors like healthcare, transportation, and smart
to the establishment of an extensive network of interconnected cities, the 6G network has grown in significance, ensuring
devices, forming the underlying infrastructure of the Internet
of Things (IoT). Nevertheless, this interconnectivity introduces a dependable and secure connectivity [5]. Nevertheless, the
myriad of security concerns, given that these devices become adoption of IoT-enabled CE devices introduces novel secususceptible to malicious activities and unauthorized breaches. rity challenges, exposing the network to potential malevolent
Moreover, conventional intrusion detection systems encounter attacks. Of particular note, Digital Twins (DTs) [6], [7], acting
difficulties in managing imbalanced data scenarios, wherein as virtual replicas of physical entities, have gained paramount
the count of normal instances vastly exceeds that of intrusion
instances. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework importance within the Metaverse by enabling cost-effective
for 6G-enabled consumer electronics device intrusion detection, simulation and optimization of physical systems [8]. Yet,
leveraging the power of federated meta-learning and digital twins the sensitive data emanating from DTs and the vulnerability
within a Meta-Verse environment. By leveraging the distributed of these virtual entities to attacks have engendered security
intelligence of meta-learning across a network of devices, our apprehensions [9].
framework enables efficient and accurate detection of intrusions
while mitigating the impact of imbalanced data. Furthermore, by Digital twin-enabled 6G Consumer Electronics Devices
utilizing digital twins within a Meta-Verse environment, we create (CEDs) hold the potential to revolutionize our interaction
a scalable and controlled setting for experimentation, enabling the with the physical world, enabling real-time monitoring, analdevelopment and evaluation of intrusion detection algorithms in a ysis, and control of metaverse systems [10]. However, the
realistic yet controlled manner. Our experimental results demon- escalating proliferation of CEDs and digital twins introduces
strate the effectiveness of the proposed framework in detecting
intrusions on 6G-enabled consumer electronics devices. The fed- a concomitant escalation in data privacy and security risks.
erated meta-learning approach achieves superior performance The substantial volume of data amassed by CEDs and digital
compared to traditional intrusion detection methods, especially twins can encompass sensitive information, comprising perin imbalanced data scenarios. sonal and corporate data, thereby rendering them susceptible to
 Index Terms—Federated meta learning, intrusion detection, cyberattacks and unauthorized access [11]. To safeguard data
metaverse, meta learning, digital twin, consumer electronics. privacy and security in 6G-enabled CEDs with Digital Twins,
 organizations must adopt robust security protocols, encompassing data encryption, authentication, and access control [5].
 I. I NTRODUCTION Moreover, instituting periodic security audits and risk assess-
 HE BURGEONING Computer, Communication, and ments is crucial for identifying potential vulnerabilities and
T Consumer (3C) electronics industry is being propelled by
the escalating demand for consumer electronic devices, includthreats. Employing secure communication channels and data
 anonymization techniques further diminishes the risks associing smartphones, tablets, and wearable consumer products [1], ated with data privacy and security in this context. Through
[2]. The emergence of the 6G network has transformed the these measures, organizations can ensure the security and
connectivity landscape for 3C electronic devices, affording compliance of their metaverse systems with data privacy regfaster speeds, diminished latency, and augmented capacity [3], ulations, concurrently yielding valuable insights for enhanced
[4]. In conjunction with the pervasive integration of Internet decision-making and business operations.
 To mitigate security risks associated with DT 6G-enabled
 Manuscript received 22 June 2023; revised 28 August 2023; accepted 1 CEDs in Metaverse, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) [12],
October 2023. Date of publication 3 October 2023; date of current version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the Researchers Supporting [13], [14], [15], [16] are employed to continuously analyze the
Project number (RSP2023r32), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. access behavior of CEDs and identify potential attacks [17].
(Corresponding author: M. Shamim Hossain.) Anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) catego-
 Suli He and Chengwen Du are with the Department of Electronics, Software
Engineering Institute of Guangzhou, Guangzhou 510990, China (e-mail: rize access behaviors into normal and anomalous based
m15626131598_1@163.com; dxfaihxp@163.com). on the extent of deviation between observed behavior and
 M. Shamim Hossain is with the Department of Software Engineering, the model [18], [19], [20], [21]. The adoption of Machine
College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh
12372, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: mshossain@ksu.edu.sa). Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) techniques has surged
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3321846 for creating IDS solutions capable of identifying malicious
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3112 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

threats [22]. However, aggregating data management across In this paper, we propose a novel anomaly detection
Consumer Electronics Devices (CEDs) could engender data framework, rooted in federated meta-learning, tailored for
privacy concerns. CED owners often resist sharing local data intrusion detection in Digital Twin (DT) 6G-enabled Consumer
to preserve privacy, resulting in a data island dilemma that Electronics Devices (CEDs) within metaverse environments.
complicates the development of a robust intrusion detection Our approach aims to tackle the challenges stemming from
model [23]. non-i.i.d. data distribution and class imbalance encountered
 Therefore, the learning-based IDS model needs to be fur- in Intrusion Detection System (IDS) tasks. Specifically, our
ther developed to address the above two challenges. Federated framework, called FML-DT, utilizes meta-learning and DT
Learning (FL) [24] is an efficient distributed learning approach strategies to develop a sampling strategy for selecting the
that enables CEDs participating in training to jointly build a most effective samples to train intrusion detection models. The
global intrusion detection model without disclosing local pri- FML-DT approach enables clients to benefit from the metavate data. FL enables devices to perform training on local sampler provided by the server while ensuring data privacy by
data and send only local model parameters to the server training the meta-sampler separately from local model trainfor model aggregation [25], [26]. This approach establishes ing. This approach effectively mitigates the class imbalance
a parallel framework in the CED ecosystem for cooperative problem of local data. Additionally, we propose a dynamic
global intrusion detection model training while preserving data clustering and ranking algorithm for the model upload stage of
privacy [27]. FL. The algorithm clusters client-side models based on client-
 Despite the privacy-preserving nature of FL in addressing supplied information vectors, which consist of a set of local
the local data privacy concern, a significant challenge persists non-private information. It then evaluates the performance
in the form of severe class imbalance during local training, as of each model and ranks them accordingly. This algorithm
highlighted in the work by Wang et al. in [28]. Furthermore, addresses the issue of global model performance degradation
within the heterogeneous FL-based metaverse environment, caused by the non-i.i.d nature of the data by dynamically
the Non-independent and Non-identically Distributed (non- removing local models with training state biases. Overall, our
IID) nature of training data, arising from variations in the proposed approach provides a novel solution for intrusion
proportions of local data among CEDs, has a substantial detection in DT 6G-enabled CEDs, which can significantly
impact on the effectiveness of intrusion detection models, as enhance the performance and effectiveness of IDS systems in
noted by Zhao et al. in [29]. Consequently, applying existing real-world scenarios.
FL approaches directly to intrusion detection in CEDs fails to The main contributions of this paper include:
produce intrusion detection models of high quality. Moreover, • We propose a federated meta learning algorithm to
the training data held by each CED device exhibits a signifi- address imbalance data in heterogeneous metaverse envicant imbalance between normal and abnormal access behavior. ronments, which effectively mitigates the negative impact
Typically, normal behavior data dominates the training dataset, of imbalance data on intrusion detection performance.
while abnormal behavior data is relatively scarce, resulting in • We leverage meta-learning in FL to construct a
a class imbalance problem [30]. Consequently, the bias intro- meta-sampler that learns the sampling strategy. The metaduced by this class imbalance during local training imposes sampler is optimized through reinforcement learning
limitations on the performance of IDSs. during the meta-training stage to continuously sample
 Presently, the challenge of class imbalance is mitigated the balanced dataset on the client side. This approach
through the adoption of Imbalanced Learning (IL) algorithms, significantly mitigates the impact of the class imbalance
exemplified by He et al.’s ADASYN algorithm [31]. These problem in the training data.
methods seek to rectify bias through data resampling tech- • We propose a federated clustering algorithm that
niques, explored by Wang et al. in [32], or reweighting addresses the non-i.i.d data problem by dynamically clusstrategies, demonstrated by Duggal et al. [33]. However, these tering and ranking client-side models using information
techniques are susceptible to instability and exhibit high com- vectors provided by clients. The proposed algorithm
putational demands in practical applications, as underscored reduces the negative impact of extreme non-i.i.d data
by Japkowicz in [34]. Recently, meta-learning techniques have among clients on the FL training process, resulting in
emerged as a promising avenue to surmount these limitations, improved model performance.
as evidenced by Moniz and Cerqueira in [35]. Yet, these • We conduct extensive evaluations on the intrusion
approaches’ generalization capacity is limited due to their detection datasets, and the experimental results demonreliance on a model-specific optimization process. While cer- strate that our proposed framework is highly effective
tain studies have refined FedAvg [24] through modifications and produces intrusion detection models with superior
to the loss function and utilization of control variables to rec- performance.
tify client-side bias, these measures offer only partial remedies
for non-IID data issues. Regrettably, these methods fall short
 II. R ELATED W ORKS
in the realm of intrusion detection models within real-world
scenarios, encompassing both local data class imbalance and A. Intrusion Detection for DT 6G-Enabled Metaverse
non-i.i.d data dispersion across clients. Consequently, a com- With the increasing use of Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs
prehensive federated intrusion detection framework remains in metaverse, the need for effective intrusion detection systems
indispensable to navigate the complexities of heterogeneous is paramount to ensure data privacy and security [18]. An IDS
metaverse environments. is designed to monitor network traffic and identify potential
HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs 3113

 TABLE I
security breaches or unauthorized access attempts [8]. Within S UMMARY OF M AIN S YMBOLS
the context of Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs, IDSs play a
pivotal role in detecting anomalies within data flows and pinpointing system vulnerabilities. IDS employs various methodologies including signature-based, anomaly-based, or hybrid
techniques for threat identification. Furthermore, the integration of machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms
enhances the detection prowess of IDS [10], [36].
 Nevertheless, with the proliferation of CEDs and the exponential growth of Digital Twins, IDS face the challenge of
managing and processing vast volumes of data in real-time
to enable prompt alerting. Hence, it becomes essential to
integrate IDS with cloud-based analytics and big data tech- among clients, thereby reducing the weight variance in FedAvg
nologies, as highlighted in the work by Sasikumar et al. in [9], arising from non-i.i.d. data. Another avenue, detailed in [43],
to ensure its efficacy. Through the implementation of a robust augments FedAvg’s performance on non-i.i.d. data through a
IDS, organizations can enhance their capability to identify and reinforcement learning-based client selection mechanism. The
respond to potential security breaches or unauthorized access FL server, equipped with an agent, orchestrates client compuattempts, thereby fortifying the security and dependability of tations in each round, employing a reward function to evaluate
their Digital Twin 6G-enabled Metaverse systems. Among the the global model’s validation data accuracy. Notwithstanding,
most popular approaches to CEDs intrusion detection, machine these solutions entail client data sharing, thereby raising data
learning-based methods have demonstrated great potential and privacy concerns [15], [19], [20]. Moreover, the extant research
promise [18]. For example, in [36], the authors introduced insufficiently addresses the effective resolution of the non-i.i.d.
a new regularizer in traditional machine learning to address and class imbalance issues among client data in FL. Hence,
the challenges posed by high-dimensional, sparse, and lack of our objective is to devise an FL-grounded intrusion detection
abnormal data in network data. In another study, the authors system tailored for heterogeneous IoT environments, capably
of [37] proposed a smart intrusion detection algorithm for IoT tackling these challenges within real-world scenarios.
based on big data mining, using a combination of generative
adversarial network (GAN) and convolutional neural network
 III. P RELIMINARIES
(CNN). However, these typical deep neural network methods require the aggregation of data from different devices for A. Federated Learning
centralized training, which can raise serious privacy concerns. Federated Learning (FL) is an innovative collaborative
 To address these challenges, scholars have introduced a machine learning paradigm that facilitates the collective trainpioneering distributed model training framework known as ing of models by decentralized participants, eliminating the
Federated Learning (FL) [24]. In recent investigations, col- necessity to share their sensitive data [44]. Within a typilaborative intrusion detection approaches grounded in FL cal supervised FL framework, a server denoted as S interacts
have emerged, as exemplified by the blockchain-utilizing with K clients. Each client holds a comprehensive labeled
strategy proposed in [38] for secure storage of training mod- dataset D, while the server lacks direct access to any indiels. Addressing intricate industrial systems, the DeepFed vidual client’s data. The main objective of FL is to aggregate
technique was advanced in [39] to discern cyber threats. the locally trained models from all clients while maintaining
Furthermore, [40] and [41] presented FL-based intrusion data privacy, thereby obtaining a global model that exhibits
detection algorithms proactively identifying intrusions in CED comparable performance to centralized learning. One of the
networks. Despite their performance-centric focus, these meth- widely employed strategies in FL is FedAvg [24]. The FedAvg
ods have yet to adequately confront the prevalent issues approach involves the distribution of the global model to each
of data class imbalance and non-i.i.d. disparities among client, and the clients subsequently train their respective modclients encountered in authentic intrusion detection scenarios. els locally using their available datasets. Following local model
Consequently, a more robust remedy is requisite to tackle these training, each client transmits its locally trained model back
challenges effectively. to the server. The server then aggregates the model parameters by averaging them and subsequently sends the updated
 global model back to the clients. This iterative cycle persists
B. Imbalanced Learning until the global model achieves convergence. By harnessing
 The challenges stemming from data class imbalance and computational resources across multiple clients and amalganon-i.i.d. data substantially impact the performance of FL- mating their models, FL achieves elevated model accuracy,
trained neural networks [28]. To combat data class imbalance concurrently upholding the confidentiality of individual client
among clients, a centralized monitoring system is proposed data. The description of the symbols used in the manuscript
in [42], aimed at detecting class imbalance within training is summarized in Table I.
data. Monitors employ client-contributed partial data to esti- In practice, clients are permitted to communicate local
mate class distribution. Similarly, [32] presents a strategy to model updates to the server, eliminating the necessity of data
enhance the global model’s accuracy by sharing training data sharing while achieving the objective of collectively training
3114 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed system.

aggregated models. Consequently, the aim of FL centers serves as the optimal weight for FL. Consequently, the optimal
around the minimization of the ensuing objective function: objective for FL can be formulated as follows:
 
 K
 nk 1  K  
   
 f (ω) = Fk (ω), Fk (ω) = i (ω), (1) min E(x,y)∼p̂(k)  f x; w(k) , y) , (3)
 n nk ω data
 k=1 i∈Dk k=1
Here, n represents the total sample count. To effect the
minimization of the aforementioned objective function, a col- In scenarios involving class imbalance, the distribution p̂(k)
 data
laborative T-round training protocol is executed jointly by the of the training data for any client k can exhibit an imbal-
 (k)
server and clients. In this process, each client employs a local ance, where p̂data represents the data distribution of client k.
optimizer (such as SGD) on their local dataset Dk to refine the In such situations, the weight update for the FL server can be
received global model ωt , subsequently conveying the model expressed as follows:
updates to the server. Aggregating the updates furnished by K
  nk
clients, the server employs AGR algorithms to derive an opti- ωt+1 = ωkt+1 ,
mized global model denoted as ω∗ . This sequence of steps is k=1
 n
reiterated over multiple rounds (e.g., T rounds) until the global K
  nk η 
 nk
    
model attains convergence. = ωkt − ∇ω t  f x; ωkt , y . (4)
 n n k
 k=1 i=1
B. Class Imbalance in FL
 It can be seen from the above formula that if the data is unbal-
 The issue of class imbalance constitutes a pervasive chal- anced, it is difficult for us to obtain the optimal solution, so
lenge across diverse real-world contexts, frequently resulting the performance of the model may decline.
in marked deterioration of ML model performance. In the Moreover, the class imbalance issue in FL can be categorealm of FL, which operates within a decentralized frame- rized into different types [45]: (i) Local imbalance, where a
work, class imbalance introduces further complexities. These client’s local dataset exhibits class imbalance if the ratio of the
imbalances can manifest within individual client datasets or number of samples in the majority class to the number of samextend globally. Nonetheless, FL introduces distinct challenges p
 ples in the minority class equals IR = maxp {Ni }/minp {Ni }.
 p
attributed to the confidential nature of client data distributions, (ii) Global imbalance, where an ensemble dataset can be
often safeguarded to uphold user privacy. Consequently, the formed by merging all client datasets, which has a ratio
task of rectifying class imbalance within the FL paradigm is between the total number of samples in the majority class and
notably intricate, diverging from conventional ML approaches the total number of samples in the minority class. This ratio is
 In a recent investigation by [28], it is substantiated through p p
 denoted as IR = maxp { i Ni }/minp { i Ni }. (iii) Mismatch
mathematical analysis that class imbalance in training data can imbalance, where the imbalance of local data possessed by
induce a reduction in the classification accuracy of FL models. each client is distinct from the global data imbalance, and Ni
 p
Under the assumption p̂data = ptest , where ptest signifies the refers to the number of data samples in class p on client i.
distribution of a balanced test set, and in the context of the loss This study focuses on the first two types of problems.
function  and the training data distribution p̂data , the optimal Discussion: The distributed nature of FL poses several chalweight update for deep learning is expressed as follows: lenges to model training, such as communication costs, system
  n     heterogeneity, and statistical heterogeneity. Statistical heterow∗t+1 = w∗t − η∇w∗t  f x(i) ; w∗t , y(i) , (2) geneity in FL arises due to the non-iid nature of training data,
 i=1 which is addressed to some extent by the techniques presented
 and weight w∗ denotes the weight
where (x(i) , y(i) ) ∼ ptest in Section II for intrusion detection data in FL. However, these
vector that attains the highest accuracy on the test set and techniques assume a balanced distribution of data classes,
HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs 3115

which is not always the case in practical scenarios. While of the target IDS task. Specifically, we adopt a meta-learning
class imbalance in FL is considered a variant of the non-iid framework where the model is initially trained on a set of
problem, this view is not entirely accurate. Firstly, the class source IDS tasks and subsequently adapted to a target IDS task
imbalance is not limited to non-iid data scenarios. Secondly, with limited labeled data available. This approach enables the
in non-iid scenarios, the class imbalance is often caused by leveraging of prior knowledge to improve the effectiveness
significant differences in the distribution ratio of each client of intrusion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled
class, leading to greater deviations in the FL model’s training CEDs, where data availability and privacy constraints are
direction. Aggregating global models using biased local mod- critical considerations.
els results in biased models. Furthermore, as the non-iid degree To this end, we formulate the following research questions:
of data increases, the trained model’s performance significantly • How can we design a meta-learning approach for intrudeteriorates. Experimental results show that traditional non- sion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled
iid data solutions are ineffective in addressing class imbalance CEDs?
problems. • How can we transfer knowledge from source IDS tasks
 to improve the performance of the target IDS task with
C. Clustering Algorithms in FL limited data?
 • How does the proposed approach compare to state-of-
 Clustering, a data grouping technique, partitions data based
 the-art IDS methods in terms of detection accuracy, false
on specific criteria into clusters or classes, aiming to enhance
 alarm rate, and training efficiency?
similarity among data points within the same cluster while
 This study endeavors to surmount these challenges through
minimizing dissimilarity among those in distinct clusters [46].
 the introduction of an innovative meta-learning methodology
Clustering’s core aim is to cohesively group data points of the
 for intrusion detection within FL-based Digital Twin 6Gsame category while segregating those of disparate categories.
 enabled CEDs. Our approach capitalizes on shared attributes
In this context, we propose the application of clustering within
 among diverse IDS tasks, thereby augmenting the performance
Federated Learning (FL) to address the issue of statistical hetof the target IDS task. We postulate that our method can
erogeneity, which can contribute to the degradation of global
 proficiently identify intrusion attacks even in scenarios charmodel performance. We propose grouping clients based on
 acterized by scarce labeled data. Furthermore, our objecsimilarities in their data distributions, whereby akin data distritives encompass curtailing communication overhead within
bution clients are allocated to the same cluster. This approach
 FL while upholding paramount data privacy considerations.
diminishes weight discrepancies within clusters at the edge
 By harnessing meta-learning’s potential, our approach is
device level. In the FL setting, we consider K clients and
 poised to facilitate the efficient detection of intrusion attacks
their respective local datasets denoted as D1 , D2 , . . . , DK . We
 in FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs. We anticipartition the K clients and datasets into k (where k (k ≤ K))
 pate its efficacy in mitigating the challenges posed by limdistinct, non-overlapping clusters designated as c1 , c2 , . . . , ck ,
 ited labeled data, enriching IDS performance, and abating
wherein clients within the same cluster share akin data dispotential privacy apprehensions. This research contributes to
tributions. This can be achieved through a straightforward
 the evolution of intrusion detection techniques within the
clustering process.
 realm of FL-based Digital Twin 6G-enabled CEDs, ulti-
    1  k 
 k ni mately heightening the security and dependability of these
 1
 min ni  ω ; DK . (5) systems.
 ω1 ,ω2 ,...,ωK
 k=1 l∈ck nl i∈ck j=1
 ni

D. Problem Definition IV. M ETHODOLOGY
 Digital Twin 6G-enabled Metaverse systems have intro- A. Meta-Training and Meta-Sampling
duced a groundbreaking paradigm across diverse domains, In this section, we will present a comprehensive explanation
encompassing smart cities, autonomous vehicles, and indus- of the meta-training stage of the server and the meta-sampling
try 4.0 [47]. Notwithstanding their transformative poten- stage of the client, utilizing Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2,
tial, the escalating complexity and heterogeneity of these respectively.
systems usher forth substantial cybersecurity challenges, (a) Meta-state. To ensure data privacy within FL, it becomes
with intrusion attacks at the forefront. IDSs have sur- imperative to render the training phase of samplers indepenfaced as potent remedies for detecting and averting such dent from the FL training phase, while circumventing the
attacks. Nevertheless, in the realm of Metaverse environ- usage of client-specific local data. Consequently, the idenments where data is dispersed among numerous CEDs tification of a task-agnostic state that imparts guidance for
and privacy considerations restrict data exchange, traditional meta-sampler training without reliance on the client’s local
IDS methodologies dependent on extensive data may prove data is paramount. To surmount this challenge, we present a
impractical. novel approach, inspired by prior research [48], wherein we
 In this work, our objective is to develop a meta-learning employ the histogram distribution of training and validation
approach for intrusion detection in FL-based Digital Twin 6G- errors as the guiding meta-state for meta-sampler training. This
enabled CEDs. Our proposed approach harnesses knowledge meta-state encompasses histograms of both training and valacquired from similar IDS tasks to enhance the performance idation errors. Concretely, the vector ED is derived utilizing
3116 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Algorithm 1 Meta-Sampling Algorithm Algorithm 2 Federated Learning-Based Meta-Sampling
Input: Majority set Pτ and minority set Nτ from Dτ ; Algorithm
Output: Balanced subset Dτ = Nτ ∪ Pτ ; Input: The server-side model Fs , the server-side dataset Ds ,
 1: Assign each (xi , yi ) in Nτ with weight: the built meta-sampler Q, and the parameters in [49] for RL.
 gμ,σ (|F(xi )−yi |)
 wi = Output: Meta-sampler Q
 (xj ,yj )∈Nτ gμ,σ (|F(xj )−yj |) At the server:
 2: Sample majority subset Nτ from Nτ sampling weights w,
 1: for step = 1, . . . , N do
 where Nτ = |Pτ |
 3: return Balanced subset Dτ = Nτ ∪ Pτ
 2: Initializes ωs
 3: Cuts Ds into the training set DsT and validation set DsV
 4: for Meta training step = 1, . . . , n do
 5: Computes EDsT
the following formula: 6: Computes EDsV
 7: Builds meta-state sn = [EDsT ;EDsV ]
 (x, y) | i−1
 b ≤ abs(Ft (x) − y) b , (x, y) ∈ D
 i
 i
 ÊD = , (6) 8: Takes action from Q(μt |sn ), i.e., μn ∼ Q(μt |sn )
 |D| 9: Uses Algorithm 1 to obtain Dn \\ refer to
where 1 ≤ i ≤ b and (x, y) denotes a data point, and the clas- Algorithm 1
sification error e is defined as the absolute difference between 10: ωsn+1 =ωsn (Dn )
the predicted probability that x is positive and the label y, i.e., 11: Observes reward rn = A(ωsn+1 , DsV ) -A(ωsn , DsV )
|Ft (x) − y|. The i-th component of ED is denoted as ED i , and 12: Computes sn+1 with ωsn+1 
the number of bins in the histogram is represented as b. 13: Stores transition M = M (sn , μn , rn , sn+1 )
 (b) Meta-sampling. To streamline the sampling process 14: end for
and accommodate the computational capacities of CEDs, we 15: for each gradient step do
refrain from employing an extensive output layer within the 16: Update ψ, ψ, θ , and ωQ according to [49]
meta-sampler to ascertain the sampling probability of data 17: end for
 18: end for
samples. Instead, we streamline the procedure through the
adoption of a Gaussian function:
  2
 1 − 1 x−μ
 gμ,σ (x) = √ e 2 σ , (7) to sample high-quality data for training a high-performance
 σ 2π model.
where e represents Euler’s number, and the meta-sampler For optimization of the meta-sampling process S using
calculates μ ∈ [0, 1] while σ is a hyperparameter. Reinforcement Learning (RL) techniques, we use the Soft
 According to Algorithm 1, the meta-sampling stage can be Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm [50]. SAC stands as an offdescribed as follows: During the meta-sampling phase, the policy deep RL algorithm that functions within the maximum
meta-sampler S first produces a scalar μ by processing the entropy RL framework. It encompasses multiple advantages
input meta-state, which is represented as μ ∼ S(μ|s). Then, over alternative RL approaches, encompassing heightened
the sampling weight of each data sample is determined by exploration capacities, augmented resilience, and adeptness in
applying the Gaussian function discussed earlier to its classi- adapting amidst interference. Furthermore, SAC accelerates
fication error, as indicated in line 2 of the algorithm. Lastly, training due to its adherence to the maximum entropy printhe data samples from the majority set Pτ are sampled using ciple, which promotes more balanced exploration. The SAC
these weights to obtain a balanced dataset. algorithm consists of several key components, such as the
 (c) Meta-training. To address the class imbalance problem state value function Vψ (st ), the target network Vψ (st ), the soft
in FL, we propose to train a meta-sampler S to obtain a bal- Q function Qθ (st , at ), and the tractable policy Sϕ(at|st ). The
anced dataset by iteratively sampling data. The meta-state s update of the corresponding parameters can be found in line
of the client serves as input to S, which outputs a scalar μ 12 of Algorithm 2.
to guide the Gaussian function for calculating the sampling Complexity of Federated Meta Sampling: Here, we assume
weight of each data sample. It should be noted that train- that the cost of the meta-sampler to perform a single gradient
ing the non-differentiable meta-sampler s is an optimization update step is Cupdate (depending on the gradient compuproblem, which we solve using reinforcement learning (RL). tation formula). In our implementation, following the SAC
Algorithm 2 presents the pseudocode for this approach. At optimization strategy, we need to perform nrandom actions
each episode, the classifier F is trained on a randomly balanced before updating the meta-sampler and then need nupdate steps
subset. Then, at each step, the current training state st is used to collect online transitions and perform gradient updates
to obtain the action μ from the meta-sampler. Using this μ, the for ξ(·). Therefore, the overall cost of meta-training can be
meta-sampling stage obtains a balanced subset Dt+1  , which is expressed as O((nrandom + nupdate )NBC) + O(nupdate Cupdate ).
used to update the classifier F to Ft+1 , and obtain a new state For training, we assume that there are c clients joining,
st+1 . We define the reward in RL as the performance difference then the overall time complexity of the proposed attack is
between Ft and Ft+1 on the validation set, using an evalua- O(cN log c(log κ +dBC))+O(c log c((nrandom +nupdate )NBC+
tion function A. The optimization goal of the meta-sampler is nupdate Cupdate )).
HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs 3117

B. Federated Clustering Algorithm Algorithm 3 Federated Learning-Based Clustering Algorithm
 In this section, we explore the use of clustering algorithms Input: The local model ω, the given number of clusters k, the
in FL. However, current methods typically require clustering ranking threshold r, and information vector I;
based on the data distribution of clients, which compromises Output: Clustered aggregation model ωc ;
 1: for each client Ci do
the privacy of the clients and makes them more vulnerable to
attacks. To address this issue, we propose a novel federated 2: Ii ∼ Ci
clustering method suitable for CEDs that clusters clients based 3: Update I with Ii
 4: end for
on a small amount of non-private data.
 5: c = Clustering Algorithm(I, k)
 (a) Information Vector. To address privacy concerns in FL,
 6: for ci in c do
a vector-based data representation is proposed to replace the
traditional data distribution for clustering. This new repre- 7: ωci ∼ Aggregation(ωi ∈ ci )
 8: end for
sentation enables the transmission of lightweight information
 9: ωc = [ωc1 ,ωc2 ,ωc3 ... ωcn ]
without compromising client privacy. The aim is to iden-
 10: ωc = Ranking(ωc , r)
tify a set of data that accurately represents the current client
 11: return ωc
state in a lightweight manner. The proposed approach utilizes three pieces of data, namely the client’s imbalance
ratio (IR), training accuracy, and validation accuracy, to
construct a vector. Under non-i.i.d data partitioning, each are aggregated in step 7. Finally, employing the above equaclient has a unique imbalance ratio that characterizes their tions, the top-k aggregation models with the best performance
data’s class distribution. Training and validation accuracy are are selected.
selected to capture each client’s training state information,
based on the theory discussed in meta-state. It is believed V. E XPERIMENT
that the constructed information vector accurately represents
 A. Experiment Setup
each client’s unique class distribution and training state
information. 1) Datasets and Splits: The UNSW-NB-15 and NSL-KDD
 (b) Clustering and Ranking Algorithm. Subsequent to the datasets are two well-known benchmark data sets commonly
clustering process using the information vector discussed used to evaluate intrusion detection systems (IDS) based on
above, the uploaded models from the clients in the k-th network traffic data. The UNSW-NB-15 dataset was created
cluster are aggregated to obtain the aggregation model ωk by the University of New South Wales (UNSW) in Australia
for that cluster. This leads to the formation of an aggre- and contains 2.5 million network traffic instances captured
gated model for each category. To filter out the models in a simulated environment. The dataset includes various
with subpar training performance, a ranking algorithm has attack categories, such as denial-of-service (DoS), user-tobeen proposed. The ranking algorithm is formulated as root (U2R), remote-to-local (R2L), and probing attacks. It is
follows: considered one of the most comprehensive datasets for evaluat-
 n ing network-based IDS, particularly for deep learning models.
 ∀ωin ← max P(ωij ), 8 The NSL-KDD dataset is a modification of the original KDD
 j=1 Cup 99 dataset, which was created for the 1999 KDD Cup
 competition. The NSL-KDD dataset was created to address
where ij ∈ (1, k), i1 = i2 · · · = in . According to this algo- some of the limitations of the KDD Cup 99 dataset, such as
rithm, we rank the obtained aggregation models and finally the lack of diversity in the attack types and the presence of
obtain a set of aggregation models with the best performance. redundant and irrelevant features. The NSL-KDD dataset con-
Here, ij represents the number of aggregation models, and tains approximately 1.8 million network traffic instances, with
each model is selected only once during the ranking process four attack categories and several normal traffic instances. It
(i1 = i2 , . . . = in ). P(·) is the evaluation function, and n is is commonly used for evaluating both traditional and deep
used as a hyperparameter to control the number of models learning-based IDS approaches. To simulate number-balanced
after ranking. and class-unbalanced non-IID settings, we partition the train-
 Algorithm 3 outlines the workings of the dynamic clustering ing set into multiple subsets, each corresponding to a different
ranking algorithm as follows: in each epoch, the server col- client, and then assign each client a different number of
lects the information vector from each client and employs it for samples from each class.
clustering to determine the cluster assignment of each client. It 2) Training Details: In our experimental setup, we conis noteworthy that the clients provide the information vector at sider a scenario with a total of K = 100 clients. In each
every upload stage, resulting in frequent clustering. Since the communication round, the server randomly selects 10 clients
training status of the clients changes with each iteration, their to participate in the training process. We conduct a total of
clustering also changes correspondingly, making the entire T = 150 or T = 50 iterations, depending on the specific experclustering ranking process a continuous dynamic adjustment. iment. For the hyperparameters, we set the Beta distribution
The frequency of uploading the information vector can be cus- parameter δ to 0.75, the threshold τ to 0.80, the learning rate
tomized based on the requirements of the FL system. Clients η to 0.01, and the local epoch to 5. These values determine
belonging to the same cluster submit updated models, which the weights assigned to the client and server models during
3118 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II TABLE IV
 R ESULTS OF IDS ON THE UNSW-NB 15 DATASET C OMPARING THE P ERFORMANCE OF FML-DT W ITH AND W ITHOUT THE
 P ROPOSED F EDERATED C LUSTER R ANKING A LGORITHM

 TABLE III
 R ESULTS OF IDS ON THE NSL-KDD DATASET

the aggregation process. The weight of the client model is
 Fig. 2. Convergence performance of the proposed FML-DT.
α = 0.4, the weight of the server model is β = 0.4, and
the weight of the global model from the previous round is
γ = 0.2. These weights control the influence of each model 3) Convergence Analysis: In the initial experiment, we first
on the updated global model. To optimize the ResNet-9 ML examined the convergence of FML-DT with the assumpmodel, we employ the Adam optimization algorithm with an tion that there are 100 idle IoT devices. The convergence
initial learning rate of η = 1e − 3. The client training pro- performance of FML-DT is depicted in Fig. 2. It reveals that
cess consists of a single epoch (Eu = 1) with a batch size of the F1 score and loss rapidly converge to near-optimal val-
Bu = 128. Similarly, the server training process involves one ues within 500 training epochs. Furthermore, as the number
epoch (Es = 1) with a batch size of Bs = 128. of training iterations increases, it shows that there is a gradual improvement in the F1 score and a reduction in loss. It
 also indicates that the training process does not exhibit over-
B. Experimental Results fitting. Therefore, we can confidently state that our proposed
 1) IDS Tasks: Table II and Table III demonstrate the IDS FML-DT exhibits fine convergence performance.
performance of the proposed framework on the UNSW-NB 15
and NSL-KDD datasets. From the experimental results, it can VI. C ONCLUSION
be seen that the proposed framework outperforms all base- We proposed an innovative meta-learning approach for
lines and is more stable than them. This is mainly because the intrusion detection in the FL-based metaverse for digital
proposed framework uses a meta-learning strategy to adap- twin 6G-enabled CEDs. The proposed approach addresses the
tively sample efficient samples to improve performance. We challenge of class imbalance by training a meta-sampler to
can also know that the FedProx algorithm used to solve iteratively sample data and obtain a balanced dataset. The use
the non-IID problem is not suitable for the class imbalance of meta-learning also enables the training of the meta-sampler
scenario. without relying on the client’s local data, ensuring data privacy
 2) Ablation Analysis: The results in Table IV demonstrate protection. The experiments conducted on the UNSW-NBthe impact of using the dynamic clustering and ranking algo- 15 and NSL-KDD datasets demonstrated the effectiveness
rithm on the performance of the FML-DT framework. The of the proposed approach in achieving high accuracy while
comparison between using and not using the dynamic cluster- maintaining data privacy.
ing ranking algorithm in two cases, and the F1-Score, AUC,
Recall, and Precision are evaluated. It can be observed that R EFERENCES
using the algorithm leads to the higher detection performances
 [1] M. Choi, A. Azzaoui, S. K. Singh, M. M. Salim, S. R. Jeremiah, and
under the non-IID conditions. When the algorithm is not used, J. H. Park, “The future of metaverse: Security issues, requirements,
the models provided by some clients with the non-IID data and solutions,” Human-Centric Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 12, pp. 1–15,
and class imbalance may cause the global model performance Dec. 2022.
 [2] H. Peng, P.-C. Chen, P.-H. Chen, Y.-S. Yang, C.-C. Hsia, and
to degrade during the model aggregation. Moreover, even L.-C. Wang, “6G toward metaverse: Technologies, applications, and
without using the dynamic clustering and ranking algorithms, challenges,” in Proc. APWCS, 2022, pp. 6–10.
FML-DT’s detection performance is still close to the base- [3] A. Mukherjee, D. De, N. Dey, R. G. Crespo, and E. Herrera-Viedma,
 “DisastDrone: A disaster aware consumer Internet of Drone Things
line method shown in Table II and Table III. By utizling system in ultra-low latent 6G network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
the dynamic clustering and ranking algorithm, it is observed vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 38–48, Feb. 2023.
improved detection performance. This is crucial for the CEDs [4] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
intrusion detection, and it highlights the importance of the vehicle protection” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Sep.
proposed algorithm in FML-DT. 25, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318727.
HE et al.: 6G-ENABLED CED INTRUSION DETECTION WITH FEDERATED META-LEARNING AND DTs 3119

 [5] Y. Liu, X. Yuan, Z. Xiong, J. Kang, X. Wang, and D. Niyato, [27] S. A. Rahman, H. Tout, C. Talhi, and A. Mourad, “Internet of Things
 “Federated learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods, intrusion detection: Centralized, on-device, or federated learning?” IEEE
 and future directions,” China Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 105–118, Netw., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 310–317, Nov./Dec. 2020.
 Sep. 2020. [28] L. Wang, S. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Addressing class imbalance in
 [6] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “Digital-twin- federated learning,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 1–9.
 enabled 6G: Vision, architectural trends, and future directions,” IEEE [29] Y. Zhao, M. Li, L. Lai, N. Suda, D. Civin, and V. Chandra, “Federated
 Commun. Mag., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Jan. 2022. learning with non-IID data,” 2018, arXiv:1806.00582.
 [7] F. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. An, I. You, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Fair resource [30] M. Duan, D. Liu, X. Chen, R. Liu, Y. Tan, and L. Liang, “Selfallocation in an intrusion-detection system for edge computing: Ensuring balancing federated learning with global imbalanced data in mobile
 the security of Internet of Things devices,” IEEE Consum. Electron. systems,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 59–71,
 Mag., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 45–50, Nov. 2018. Jan. 2021.
 [8] R. Minerva, G. M. Lee, and N. Crespi, “Digital twin in the [31] H. He, Y. Bai, E. A. Garcia, and S. Li, “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic
 IoT context: A survey on technical features, scenarios, and archi- sampling approach for imbalanced learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint
 tectural models,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 10, pp. 1785–1824, Conf. Neural Netw., 2008, pp. 1322–1328.
 Oct. 2020. [32] S. Wang, L. L. Minku, and X. Yao, “Resampling-based ensemble meth-
 [9] A. Sasikumar et al., “Blockchain-based trust mechanism for digital twin ods for Online class imbalance learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 empowered Industrial Internet of Things,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., Eng., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1356–1368, May 2015.
 vol. 141, pp. 16–27, Apr. 2023. [33] R. Duggal, S. Freitas, S. Dhamnani, D. H. Chau, and J. Sun, “HAR:
[10] K. M. Alam and A. El Saddik, “C2PS: A digital twin architecture refer- Hardness aware reweighting for imbalanced datasets,” in Proc. Big Data,
 ence model for the cloud-based cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Access, 2021, pp. 1–11.
 vol. 5, pp. 2050–2062, 2017. [34] N. Japkowicz, “Assessment metrics for imbalanced learning,”
[11] H. X. Nguyen, R. Trestian, D. To, and M. Tatipamula, “Digital twin Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algorithms, and Applications.
 for 5G and beyond,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 10–15, New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2013, pp. 187–206.
 Feb. 2021. [35] N. Moniz and V. Cerqueira, “Automated imbalanced classifica-
[12] E. Biermann, E. Cloete, and L. M. Venter, “A comparison of intrusion tion via meta-learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 178, Sep. 2021,
 detection systems,” Comput. Security, vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 676–683, 2001. Art. no. 115011.
[13] E. Kabir, J. Hu, H. Wang, and G. Zhuo, “A novel statistical technique [36] M. Almseidin, M. Alzubi, S. Kovacs, and M. Alkasassbeh, “Evaluation
 for intrusion detection systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 79, of machine learning algorithms for intrusion detection system,” in Proc.
 pp. 303–318, Feb. 2018. SISY, 2017, pp. 277–282.
[14] V. Truong and L. B. Le. “MetaCIDS: A metaverse collaborative intrusion [37] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
 detection system based on blockchain and federated learning.” 2023. detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.22816568.v2 Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[15] A. Makkar, T. W. Kim, A. K. Singh, J. Kang, and J. H. Park, [38] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intru-
 “SecureIIoT environment: Federated learning empowered approach for sion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 securing IIoT from data breach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
 no. 9, pp. 6406–6414, Sep. 2022. [39] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated
[16] E. Tcydenova, T. W. Kim, C. Lee, and J. H. Park, “Detection of adver- deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical
 sarial attacks in AI-based intrusion detection systems using explainable systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624,
 AI,” Human-Centric Comput. Inform. Sci., vol. 11, pp. 1–14, Sep. 2021. Aug. 2021.
[17] C. Alcaraz and J. Lopez, “Digital twin: A comprehensive survey [40] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning
 of security threats,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, attacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in
 pp. 1475–1503, 3rd Quart., 2022. Proc. DISS, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[18] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and [41] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam,
 E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, and O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Security, vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28, smart transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
 2009. no. 3, pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
[19] X. Wang, W. Liu, H. Lin, J. Hu, K. Kaur, and M. S. Hossain, [42] H. He and E. A. Garcia, “Learning from imbalanced data,”
 “AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection for intelligent trans- IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1263–1284,
 portation systems: A hierarchical federated learning approach,” Sep. 2009.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4631–4640, [43] Z. Tang et al., “Data resampling for federated learning with non-IID
 Apr. 2023. labels,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2021, pp. 1–7.
[20] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated [44] Y. Liu et al., “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in
 learning for malware detection in IoT devices,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204, industrial IoT: A communication-efficient on-device federated learn-
 Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108693. ing approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6348–6358,
[21] K. Yadav, B. B. Gupta, C.-H. Hsu, and K. T. Chui, “Unsupervised fed- Apr. 2021.
 erated learning based IoT intrusion detection,” in Proc. GCCE, 2021, [45] Z. Shen, J. Cervino, H. Hassani, and A. Ribeiro, “An agnostic approach
 pp. 298–301. to federated learning with class imbalance,” in Proc. ICLR, 2022,
[22] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning and deep learning methods for pp. 1–12.
 intrusion detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396, [46] A. Ghosh, J. Chung, D. Yin, and K. Ramchandran, “An efficient
 2019. framework for clustered federated learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020,
[23] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach pp. 19586–19597.
 to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. [47] R. Gámez Díaz, Q. Yu, Y. Ding, F. Laamarti, and A. El Saddik, “Digital
 Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018. twin coaching for physical activities: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 20,
[24] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas, p. 5936, 2020.
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized [48] J. Shu et al., “Meta-weight-net: Learning an explicit mapping for sample
 data,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282. weighting,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 1917–1928.
[25] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system: [49] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang,
 Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., “Privacy-preserving traffic flow prediction: A federated learning
 vol. 195, pp. 1273–1282, Nov. 2022. approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763,
[26] Y. Zheng, S. Lai, Y. Liu, X. Yuan, X. Yi, and C. Wang, “Aggregation Apr. 2020.
 service for federated learning: An efficient, secure, and more resilient [50] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Offrealization,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
 pp. 988–1001, Mar./Apr. 2022. actor,” in Proc. ICML, 2018, pp. 1856–1865.