3986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 A Discrepancy Aware Framework for Robust
 Anomaly Detection
 Yuxuan Cai , Dingkang Liang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Dongliang Luo , Xinwei He ,
 Xin Yang , Member, IEEE, and Xiang Bai , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Defect detection is a critical research area in I. INTRODUCTION
artificial intelligence. Recently, synthetic data-based self-
 MAGE anomaly detection plays an important role in many
supervised learning has shown great potential on this task.
Although many sophisticated synthesizing strategies exist,
little research has been done to investigate the robustness
 I safety-critical areas, e.g., industrial manufacturing systems [1], [2], surveillance systems [3], and medical image analyof models when faced with different strategies. In this ar- sis [4]. However, in these areas, acquiring sufficient high-quality
ticle, we focus on this issue and find that existing methods are highly sensitive to them. To alleviate this issue, anomaly images is generally difficult or even impossible. This
we present a discrepancy aware framework (DAF), which limitation hinders the effectiveness of training deep-learning
demonstrates robust performance consistently with simple models through supervised methods. As a result, it has induced
and cheap strategies across different anomaly detection growing research interest [5], [6], [7] in exploring approaches
benchmarks. We hypothesize that the high sensitivity to that focus on training anomaly detection models solely on
synthetic data of existing self-supervised methods arises
from their heavy reliance on the visual appearance of syn- normal images. Nevertheless, the lack of anomaly data during
thetic data during decoding. In contrast, our method lever- training poses significant challenges in extracting discriminative
ages an appearance-agnostic cue to guide the decoder in features for unseen anomaly data during inference.
identifying defects, thereby alleviating its reliance on syn- Recently, some researchers have assumed that models trained
thetic appearance. To this end, inspired by existing knowl- on normal data may fail to reconstruct anomaly patterns, and
edge distillation methods, we employ a teacher-student network, which is trained based on synthesized outliers, to have proposed identifying anomaly regions based on reconstruccompute the discrepancy map as the cue. Extensive exper- tion failures. However, these reconstruction-based methods may
iments on two challenging datasets prove the robustness be easily misled in practice because of the identical shortcut
of our method. Under the simple synthesis strategies, it issue [8]. Another promising research direction is based on
outperforms existing methods by a large margin. Further- self-supervision [9], [10], [11]. Generally, the typical framework
more, it also achieves the state-of-the-art localization performance. follows an encoder-decoder architecture (Fig. 2(a)). Normal
 data is first distorted to generate realistic and diverse outlier
 Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, robustness, self- data. Subsequently, the framework is trained to differentiate
supervised learning.
 normal and synthesized abnormal images. Such a strategy of
 exposing models to the synthesized outliers has demonstrated
 better empirical results, dominating current research in anomaly
 detection. The success of these models heavily relies on gener-
 Manuscript received 19 February 2023; revised 23 June 2023 and ating diverse and close-to-real anomaly images, and much effort
23 August 2023; accepted 13 September 2023. Date of publication 4 has been endeavored to improve anomaly synthesis strategies.
October 2023; date of current version 23 February 2024. This work was For instance, DRÆM [10] uses Perlin noise to generate irregular
supported in part by the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62302188, and in part by the shapes, simulating the shape of real anomalies. NSA [11] inte-
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of China under grates Poisson image editing [12] to eliminate discontinuous
Grant 62225603. Paper no. TII-23-0558. (Corresponding author: Xinwei borders of anomalous patterns, making the anomalies more
He.)
 Yuxuan Cai, Dingkang Liang, and Xiang Bai are with the School of natural.
Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science Despite great success, few attempts have been made to
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: cyx_hust@hust.edu.cn; study the robustness of current methods to different synthesis
dkliang@hust.edu.cn; xbai@hust.edu.cn).
 Dongliang Luo and Xin Yang are with the School of Electronic strategies. However, it has been noted [11] in the community
Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science that the decoder tends to overfit to the synthetic anomaly apand Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: ldl@hust.edu.cn; pearance during the training phase. As a result, the decision
xinyang2014@hust.edu.cn).
 Xinwei He is with the College of Informatics, Huazhong Agriculture boundary tends to generalize poorly to real anomalies during
University, Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail: xwhe@mail.hzau.edu.cn). inference. Moreover, the anomaly patterns generally show large
 Code is available at: https://github.com/caiyuxuan1120/DAF. variances across datasets. Therefore, the synthesis strategy cus-
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3318302. tomized for one dataset may not be well-suited to another. As
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3318302 shown in Fig. 1(b), a carefully-tuned synthesis strategy for

 1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION 3987

 an anomaly image, the teacher and the student will demonstrate
 discrepancy in every nonnormal region, while the segmentation
 probability map generated by the decoder will display a clear
 decision boundary for identifying anomalies.
 To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to investigate the
 robustness of current frameworks to different anomaly synthesis
 techniques. Compared with existing self-supervised methods,
 our method has the following desired properties. First, our
 framework incorporates the teacher-student network into the
 self-supervised paradigm, enhancing its capacity to produce
 discrepant features for anomaly regions. Second, our method
 encodes nonnormal regions derived from the discrepancy map
 rather than the nonnormal appearance. This approach reduces
 overfitting problems for the decoder during training, thus eliminating the heavy reliance on carefully-tuned anomaly synthesis techniques. As shown in Fig. 1(c), our method reaches
 strong performance even with a simple synthesis strategy. Besides, our method also achieves significant performance im-
Fig. 1. (a) Detection performance comparison. (b) Real versus Syn- provements over existing methods, surpassing them by a large
thetic images. (c) Localization performance under diverse synthetic margin in terms of localization capability on MVTecAD [13].
strategies. It also achieves the state-of-the-art detection performance on
 DAGM [14].
 In summary, the main contributions of this article are as
 follows: 1) we introduce a simple and robust self-supervised
 framework named DAF for image anomaly detection and localization, which eliminates the practical need for the complicated tuning steps for synthesis; and 2) we propose to combine
 the teacher-student network with the self-supervised paradigm,
 which utilizes abundant synthesized anomaly images to learn
 the discrepancy features, alleviating the overfitting problem to
 the nonnormal appearance.

 II. RELATED WORK
 Early approaches [15], [16] to image anomaly detection typically work by first extracting the feature descriptors or statistical
Fig. 2. Overview of existing self-supervised methods and ours. information and then, calculating the anomaly scores.
 Recently, with remarkable progress in deep learning, image
 anomaly detection based on deep learning has become a dom-
MVTecAD [13] generates unnatural synthetic data for inant direction. Below, we mainly review the deep learning-
DAGM [14], which may help explain the dramatic performance based approaches, which can be roughly grouped into three
degradation of NSA [11] on DAGM (Fig. 1(a)). Besides, our categories: 1) reconstruction-based; 2) self-supervision-based;
preliminary experiments on two representative self-supervision- and 3) knowledge distillation-based approaches.
based methods, i.e., NSA [11] and DRÆM [10], also indicate
their high sensitivity to different synthesis strategies (Fig. 1(c)).
 To tackle the above issues, in this article, we present a discrep- A. Reconstruction-Based Approaches
ancy aware framework (DAF) [Fig. 2(b)], which can maintain These approaches [17], [18] assume that anomalies are difstrong performance consistently across various existing anomaly ficult to be reconstructed by models trained only on normal
synthesis techniques. The core idea behind our method is re- images. Thus, the anomaly regions can be spotted by examining
leasing the decoder from the constraint of the synthetic anomaly regions with larger reconstruction errors. In these methods, auappearance. To accomplish this, we leverage the appearance- toencoders are frequently adopted as reconstruction models. For
agnostic discrepancy map derived from a teacher-student net- instance, Baur et al. [19] introduced deep spatial autoencoding
work as guidance for the decoder. Since the discrepancy map architectures, which were trained by a pixel-wise reconstruction
is computed based on extracted high-level features, it is less loss and an adversarial loss to improve the construction quality.
affected by the synthetic appearance. Moreover, by processing Besides, generative adversarial networks [20], [21] are also
the discrepancy directly, the decoder will focus on discriminat- attractive models for reconstructing the input image. However,
ing the normal and nonnormal regions. During inference, given the assumption behind the reconstruction methods might not
3988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

always be valid, as neural networks sometimes generalize to TABLE I
 SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
anomalies well and yield good reconstruction results.

B. Self Supervision-Based Approaches
 Driven by the success of self-supervised learning in visual representation learning [22], [23], approaches under this paradigm
have emerged rapidly and advanced the state-of-the-art. For
instance, [24] trains an autoencoder to reconstruct the masked
image to the original one first, and then uses the reconstruction error as the anomaly score. Different from [24], which
constructs masks on images, SSPCAB [25] applies the idea of
masking in convolution blocks. In this way, it can be integrated
into any CNN architecture.
 Recent works [10], [11] proved that anomaly detection benefits from synthesized defects that are close to real ones. These sensitivity of the reconstruction model to anomalies, enabling
works carefully design synthetic data strategies, then train seg- effective identification and classification of abnormal patterns.
mentation models such as U-Net [26] for pixel-level prediction, However, all the aforementioned knowledge distillationensuring that the segmentation model can learn a suitable deci- based methods assume training models using clean data. Resion boundary between normal and abnormal regions. However, cently, SoftPatch [30] has addressed the scenario where the trainthe segmentation model is likely to be ineffective when there ing data is contaminated with real defect data. They proposed a
is a significant difference between the distribution of synthetic patch-level denoising strategy to improve the robustness of the
defects and actual ones. Even though DRÆM [10] tries to model.
prevent the model from overfitting to the synthetic data by Different from previous knowledge distillation-based methintroducing anomaly-free reconstruction, as mentioned above, ods, our method incorporates the teacher-student model into a
the reconstruction model will also fail to restore the anomalous synthetic data-based self-supervised framework. It is designed
region to normal one during inference if the anomaly manifold to distinguish between normal patterns and abnormal ones.
is unseen during training. Moreover, SPD [27] shifts its focus This objective enables our method to establish a discriminato self-supervised pretraining. Specifically, it proposes a novel tive decision boundary. Furthermore, unlike previous arts that
augmentation strategy to encourage models to be locally sen- focus on using the discrepancy for defect localization, our
sitive, making the representations more suitable for the defect method leverages the teacher-student model to incorporate an
detection task. appearance-agnostic cue into the self-supervised framework,
 thereby improving its robustness to synthetic anomaly images.
C. Knowledge Distillation-Based Approaches
 III. OUR METHOD
 This group of approaches detects anomalies by reflecting
images to different representation spaces, assuming that the rep- A. Overview
resentations of normal regions in different spaces are identical The framework consists of a teacher-student network, a segwhile those of abnormal regions will differ. The teacher-student mentation decoder, and a series of auxiliary heads, as shown in
framework is adopted to achieve the different-space reflection. Fig. 3. For clarity and ease of reference, Table I summarizes
For instance, prior works [5], [6], [28] train the student network essential symbols and their corresponding descriptions utilized
to mimic the pre-trained teacher on normal images. As a result, in the following text. Given an input image, the teacher-student
the student and the teacher tend to hold consistency on normal network (T -S) is expected to demonstrate discrepancies on
regions and display discrepancies on anomalies. In the STAD [5] nonnormal regions. To accomplish this, the student is trained
framework, multiple students with the same structure are trained to maintain consistency with the teacher on normal regions
to regress the teacher network. The discrepancies between the during training. The discrepancy maps yielded by the T -S
teacher and students, along with the variance of students, are are subsequently fed into the segmentation head, along with
adopted to represent the anomaly score. MKDAD [28] and representations of synthesized data, to localize anomalies. Fi-
STPM [6] proposed distilling features from various layers of nally, auxiliary heads are employed to further supervise the
the teacher to the corresponding layers of the student. RDAD [7] student model to derive more discriminative representations for
utilized reverse distillation to prohibit comparable anomaly rep- anomalous regions.
resentations in different feature spaces. SSMRKD [29] further
incorporated reverse distillation with the masking strategy and
 B. Teacher-Student Network
constructs a two-stage framework. In the first stage, it uses reverse distillation to construct a reconstruction network, enabling In practice, anomalies occur in various, sometimes unconthe student model to accurately reconstruct normal patterns. In strained formats. Some can be easily discerned by their distinct
the second stage, the masking strategy is applied to enhance the textures or colors from normal patterns, while others may require
CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION 3989

Fig. 3. (a) Overview of our method. (b) The fusion process.

contextual information to be localized. Therefore, both low-level where μ and σ represent the mean and variance, and λ1 and λ2
and high-level representations are vital for accurately local- are adopted for numerical stability.1 The SSIM is in the range
izing anomalies in such challenging scenarios. In our design, of [–1,1]. In particular, when p is the same as q, SSIM (p, q)
the teacher-student framework follows a multiscale knowledge is equal to 1. Based on SSIM , the structural similarity loss is
distillation paradigm to represent anomalies at different levels formulated as follows:
of granularity. 
 3
 Following existing knowledge distillation methods [5], [6], LSSIM = (1 − SSIM (fti , fsi )) , (3)
we adopt a powerful convolutional neural network, pre-trained i=1
on a large-scale dataset ImageNet [31], to initialize the teacher. where fti and fsi represent the ith stage feature maps of the
As for the student, we choose the same architecture, but initialize teacher and the student, respectively. Note that we only constrain
it randomly. Note that any off-the-shelf pretrained networks fti and fsi on normal regions. Finally, we combine the above
could be adopted. Here, we use ResNet18 [32], following two losses to form the training objective of the teacher-student
STPM [6]. For the multiscale knowledge distillation, we transfer framework
the knowledge of three-stage features from the teacher to the
student. The distillation process is elaborated as follows. Lkd = Lcos + LSSIM (4)
 1) Training Strategy: Given an anomaly-free training set 2) Discrepancy Map: Compared with existing knowledge
D = {Im }N m=1 , we first distort each Im ∈ D to obtain the syn- distillation methods [6], [7], rather than directly taking the
thetic anomaly image Pm using predefined anomaly strategies. discrepancy map as the anomaly localization result, we serve
The teacher network takes the anomaly-free image Im as input, it as an additional robust cue for the segmentation task. Taken
while the student network takes the corresponding synthetic a test image Im ∈ RH×W ×3 as input, where H and W denote
anomaly image Pm as input. During training, we keep the teacher the height and width, respectively. The teacher and the student
frozen and train the student to mimic the responses of the teacher output corresponding feature representations fti and fsi . Then,
on normal regions. the discrepancy between fti and fsi is measured by cosine and
 Following previous works [6], [28], cosine similarity is ap- structural similarities. Specifically, the discrepancy map at locaplied to measure the consistency between the representations of tion (x, y) is defined as
the teacher and the student. The cosine similarity loss is defined
as Vti · Vsi
 M(x,y)
 i
 =2− − SSIM (fti , fsi )(x,y) (5)
 ||Vti || · ||Vsi ||
 ⎛ ⎞
 
 3
 1  Vti · Vsi ⎠ where SSIM (·)(x,y) represents the structural similarity of the
 Lcos = ⎝1 − (1) feature patches centered at (x, y), and the patch size is set to
 Nneg ||Vti || · ||Vsi ||
 i=1 Ωneg 11 × 11 in practice. The discrepancy map of each layer M i is
 then upsampled to H × W and summed together as the final
where i denotes the ith stage. Ωneg represents the normal regions discrepancy map M ∈ RH×W .
and Nneg indicates the total number of pixels in normal regions. Feeding the discrepancy map into the following segmentation
Vti and Vsi represent the feature vectors yielded by the teacher head brings two desirable merits. On the one hand, the segand the student, respectively. mentation head can yield more discriminative representations
 However, the cosine similarity only constrains each feature under this strong guidance, thereby localizing anomalies more
vector in isolation, disregarding local contextual information. accurately. On the other hand, the discrepancy map releases the
Thus, we further introduce structural similarity (SSIM ) loss segmentation head from being only constrained by the synthetic
for compensation by considering neighboring vectors. The struc- appearance, enhancing its perception of unseen anomalies. Such
tural similarity is formulated as a strategy can greatly boost the robustness of our method under various simple and cheap synthesis strategies, making our
 method easy to use in practice.
 (2μp μq + λ1 )(2σpq + λ2 )
 SSIM (p, q) = (2)
 (μ2p + μ2q + λ1 )(σp2 + σq2 + λ2 ) 1 λ , λ are empirically set to 1e-1, 9e-4 to avoid division by zero, respectively.
 1 2
3990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

C. Segmentation Head The final anomaly score map is formulated as
 The segmentation head aims at identifying the anomaly re- MScore = G(M + λMS ). (8)
gions. As illustrated in Fig. 3(a), the segmentation head takes
 The G means Gaussian smooth. λ is set to 3 in practice.
both the discrepancy map (i.e., M ) and anomaly features (i.e.,
{fsi }3i=1 ) as the input, where the discrepancy map indicates the
 IV. EXPERIMENTS
location of anomalies while the anomaly features carry both
low-level textual and high-level semantic information. A. Experimental Setup
 The detailed fusion process of the discrepancy map and
 1) Datasets: MVTecAD [13] contains 5354 images, includanomaly features is shown in Fig. 3(b). The segmentation moding ten object categories and five texture categories. The training
ule processes them progressively in a coarse-to-fine manner via
 set has 3629 normal images, while the testing set contains
the three blocks, which is formulated as
 1725 images, covering both normal and anomaly images. Pixel
 c fs3 )
 MS = Seg3 (Seg2 (Seg1 (M  c fs2 )
 c fs1 ) (6) annotations are provided for the anomaly areas.
 DAGM [14] includes ten categories of texture images. The
where Seg1 , Seg2 , Seg3 denote the three blocks of the segmentraining set contains anomaly images, and weak annotations
tation module, and  c denotes concatenation.
 are provided for anomalous regions. During training, we only
 We apply the binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss as the segmenuse normal images. Since the annotations are coarse, we do not
tation loss. Note that the anomaly (positive) pixels are much
 evaluate the localization performance on DAGM.
fewer than normal (negative) pixels. To overcome the imbalance
 2) Model Training: All the images are resized to 256 × 256.
of positive and negative pixels, a hard negative mining strategy is
 The weights of the teacher are frozen, and the remaining compoadopted. Mathematically, the segmentation loss Lseg is defined
 nents are trained using AdamW for 1200 epochs. The batch size
as
  is set to 8, and the weight decay is set to 1e−5. The learning rate
 Lseg = yi logxi + (1 − yi )log(1 − xi ) (7) is gradually increased to 2e−4 in 50 epochs and multiplied by
 i∈Sub 0.2 after 700 and 1000 epochs. We first follow the synthetic
where Sub is a subset sampled from MS , xi is the predicted strategies in DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] and then, adopt a
anomaly probability in Sub, and yi is its corresponding label. series of simple synthetic approaches to further investigate the
 effectiveness of our method. Note that DRÆM [10] introduces
D. Auxiliary Supervision an external dataset (i.e., DTD [33]) for synthesizing.
 3) Evaluation Metrics: Following Salehi et al. [28], we eval-
 In the teacher-student framework, the student is trained to uate the performance of anomaly detection and localization
regress representations of the teacher on normal regions. How- by image-level AUC (I-AUC) and pixel-level AUC (P-AUC),
ever, there is no constraint for the student on anomalous regions, respectively. Meanwhile, following [13] and [10], we also
which hinders the student from providing discriminative repre- focus on the Per-Region-Overlap (P-PRO) and mean Average
sentations for the segmentation head Seg. Precision (P-mAP) to further evaluate localization accuracy.
 To enhance the discrimination capability of the student on 4) Baselines: We mainly compare DAF with knowledge
anomalous regions, we add an auxiliary head after each student distillation-based methods and self-supervision-based methods.
layer, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Each head Auxi takes its corre- For ease of description, we abbreviate these two methods in the
sponding anomaly feature fsi as input, and outputs the probabil- following tables as KD and Self-Sup, respectively, and are as
ity map of the corresponding size. The training strategy is the follows.
same as that of the segmentation head, meaning that we adopt 1) Knowledge distillation-based methods: STAD [5], STPM
the BCE loss and hard mining strategy as the discriminative loss [6], MKDAD [28], RDAD [7]: These methods compare
Ldis . Note that auxiliary heads are discarded during inference, activations of the teacher and student, where features of
incurring no extra cost. anomaly regions are distinct.
 2) Self-supervision-based methods: CutPaste [9], DRÆM
E. Anomaly Localization [10], NSA [11]: These methods introduce extra super-
 During inference, we localize the anomalous regions from vision through synthetic anomalies to help proxy tasks
two aspects. First, since the segmentation head Seg is trained to such as segmentation.
distinguish the normal distribution from that of the abnormal, the
segmentation probability map is expected to localize anomalies B. Evaluation on MVTecAD Using Complicated
accurately. Second, the discrepancy map between the teacher and Strategies
the student can also localize anomalies, since the student is likely 1) Quantitative Analysis: Table II reports the detection and
to demonstrate inconsistency with the teacher on anomalous localization performance on the MVTecAD [13] dataset2 . In our
patterns. Since the discrepancy map is irrelevant to the synthetic method, the image-level score is acquired by the mean of the top
appearance, combining it and the segmentation probability map 50 values of the anomaly score map MScore .
desires both accurate and robust properties.
 In summary, the anomalies are located by incorporating the 2 ∗ represents the reproduced result using the official code. † denotes the
discrepancy map M with the segmentation probability map MS . reproduced results using the unofficial code.
CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION 3991

 TABLE II
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON MVTECAD

 method. Both DRÆM and our method are trained using the
 DRA strategy. It can be observed that RDAD can roughly
 localize anomalies, but the localization areas tend to be larger
 than the ground truth (Row 3, Columns 2,4,5,6). DRÆM can
 sometimes deliver clear decisions for normal and abnormal areas
 (Row 4, Column 5), but it also fails in some cases (Row 4,
 Columns 1–4). The last row suggests that our method achieves
 the most accurate localization, performing well across various
 anomalies and closely matching the ground truth.

 C. Evaluation on MVTecAD Using Simple Strategies
 Simple Texture means that the textures of the synthetic anomalies are random colors, rather than natural textures sampled from
 the DTD dataset [33]. Simple Shape indicates that the shapes
 of synthetic anomalies are rectangles, in contrast to irregular
 shapes. Simple Texture-Shape replaces shapes and textures with
Fig. 4. Visualization of localization results.
 rectangles and randomly sampled colors.
 1) Quantitative Analysis: Table III reports the results. Under
 the Simple Texture strategy, it can be observed that our method
 Compared with knowledge distillation methods, our method achieves competitive results of 97.8% P-AUC, 91.9% P-PRO
achieves a comparable result of 97.6% I-AUC with RDAD [7] and 62.2% P-mAP, while DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] perform
on the detection task. In terms of the localization task, benefiting relatively lower. Specifically, compared with DRÆM, we bring
from the discriminative capacity of the segmentation head Seg, 5.2% (97.8% vs. 92.6%) P-AUC and 5.7% (62.2% vs. 56.5%)
our approach surpasses RDAD by 1.1% P-AUC and 14.0% P-mAP gains, and outperform NSA by 13.4% P-AUC and 19.3%
P-mAP. Compared with self-supervised methods, while using P-mAP. Similarly, compared with these two prior arts, we also
the synthesis strategy of N SAB , we exceed NSA [11] by 1.5% achieve significant improvements under the Simple Texture and
I-AUC and 7.3% P-mAP, respectively. Furthermore, compared Simple Texture-Shape strategies. These results demonstrate the
with DRÆM [10], our method achieves significant improve- superior robustness of our framework.
ments of 13.0% I-AUC and 20.1% P-mAP. Notably, when using 2) Discussions: NSA [11] carefully designs a synthesis
the synthesis strategy of DRA, our detection performance is strategy to simulate natural images. Since the optimization
slightly lower than DRÆM [10] by 0.4%. However, our local- process is only influenced by the anomalous appearance, the
ization performance exceeds it by 0.8% P-AUC. Please note that model is likely to overfit to the synthetic anomalies. Hence, it
the computation complexity (FLOPS), the model size (#param), can perform well if the real anomalies are similar to the synthetic
and the FPS of DRÆM are much higher than ours. When training ones. However, it is challenging to localize anomalies when there
with synthetic data, the supervised method TSDD [34] obtains is a distribution discrepancy between them. DRÆM [10] atrelatively poor performance, indicating that the distribution gap tempts to solve the overfitting issue by jointly using the synthetic
with real anomalies may hurt its generalization. anomaly data and anomaly-free reconstruction. However, the
 2) Qualitative Analysis: Fig. 4 shows localization results reconstruction model also suffers from the overfitting problem,
of the existing state-of-the-art knowledge distillation method failing to restore anomalies when unseen anomalies occur. Our
RDAD [7], the self-supervised method DRÆM [10], and our method benefits from the discrepancy map, which inherently
3992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 TABLE III
 LOCALIZATION PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER SIMPLE AND CHEAP SYNTHESIS STRATEGIES

 TABLE IV
 DETECTION PERFORMANCE ON DAGM [14] UNDER DIFFERENT SYNTHESIS STRATEGIES

indicates the location of anomaly regions, providing strong evi- the self-supervised methods to yield clear decision boundaries
dence for the segmentation head. This alleviates its dependence to classify the normal and abnormal regions. However, these
on the synthetic appearance. Moreover, the supplement of the methods demonstrate unsatisfactory results when the synthetic
discrepancy map can further promote robustness. strategies are simpler, e.g., Simple Texture and Simple Shape.
 In contrast, our method demonstrates strong robustness to these
 synthesis strategies. The improvement is thanks to the discrep-
D. Evaluation on DAGM ancy map, which reveals the location of anomalies, releasing
 Table IV shows the detection performance on DAGM [14]. the segmentation task from the constraint of the anomaly ap-
The two knowledge distillation methods RDAD [7] and pearance. Additionally, the supplement of the discrepancy map
STPM [6] achieve comparable performance (90.2% versus during inference has further enhanced robustness.
90.7%). When training with DRA, the self-supervised methods
DRÆM [10] and NSA [11] outperform knowledge distillation
 E. Ablation Study
methods by a large margin. Our method obtains the state-ofthe-art performance of 99.2%. We assume that DRA can syn- For simplicity and fairness, we conduct all the ablation studies
thesize anomalies that match real ones during training, helping on MVTecAD [13].
CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION 3993

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 ABLATION STUDY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF EACH COMPONENT IMPACT OF THE DISCREPANCY MAP M ON SEGMENTATION

 TABLE VI
 ABLATION STUDY ON THE DISCREPANCY MAP
 TABLE VIII
 ABLATION STUDY ON THE HYPERPARAMETER UNDER DRA STRATEGY

 TABLE IX
 COMPARISON WITH THE MODEL ENSEMBLE

 1) Effectiveness of Different Components: Table V displays
the impacts of different components. Only T -S indicates that
only the teacher-student framework remains, and only the discrepancy map is employed for evaluation. We also only keep
the student and the segmentation head to build a segmentation
network (Only Seg). To demonstrate the effectiveness of the
auxiliary heads, we remove them from the pipeline (W/O Aux).
Compared with only Seg, only T -S shows its advantage in
P-AUC and P-PRO. In contrast, only Seg brings higher P-mAP. 4) Influence of the Hyperparameter in the Synthesis Strat-
W/O Aux brings gains in both detection and localization. By egy: Following DRÆM [10], we evaluate how the hyperparamincorporating the auxiliary heads during training (Ours), we eter β impacts the performance of our method. The result is
achieve the best localization performance. This observation reported in Table VIII, where DTD and Perlin noise are utilized
indicates that the auxiliary heads promote the student to yield to simulate the appearance and shape of anomalies in the DRA
more discriminative representations for anomalies. strategy. β controls the opacity in blending. Compared with
 2) Effectiveness of the Discrepancy Map: We further con- DRÆM, our method is more robust on β. We keep the same
duct several settings to prove that the discrepancy map M is P-mAP as DRÆM, but show advantages in I-AUC (97.6% versus
a useful supplement to the segmentation probability map MS . 97.4%) and P-AUC (97.8% versus 95.0%) when training via
Table VI shows that with M , we have observed 2.6% P-AUC, strategy DRA without β.
14.6% P-PRO, and 1.4% P-mAP improvements under the DRA 5) Model Ensemble versus End-to-End: Table IX reports the
strategy. It can also be observed that the combination of the performance of the model ensemble (Ensem.). Here we train the
discrepancy map M and the segmentation probability map MS teacher-student (T -S), and a segmentation model with auxiliary
brings significant increases in both detection and localization heads alone, then add the discrepancy and the segmentation
performance under the simple strategies. probability map for evaluation. Compared with Ensem., we
 3) Influence of the Discrepancy Map on Segmentation: To achieve improvements in both anomaly detection and localizainvestigate the influence of the discrepancy map on the segmen- tion. The result suggests that with the guidance of the discreptation task, we remove it from the input of the segmentation ancy map, our end-to-end framework could distinguish normal
head Seg. As shown in Table VII, the performance suffers and abnormal regions more accurately.
from degradation when the discrepancy map is not incorporated. 6) Influence of Initialization for the Student: Table X studies
For instance, under the Simple Texture strategy, the detection the impact of parameter initialization on the student S. As
performance drops from 97.5% to 96.5%, while the localization shown, the student initialized randomly performs better, indicat-
P-mAP reduces by 2.1%. We hypothesize that our improvements ing that pre-trained parameters hinder S from yielding disparate
lie in the discrepancy map, which provides an effective cue for representations from the teacher on anomalies. We assume that
the segmentation task. This alleviates the segmentation head the discrepancy map derived from T -S provides only limited cue
from the limitation of the synthetic appearance, thereby enhanc- for the segmentation head Seg in this case, resulting in reduced
ing its capacity to identify previously unseen anomalies. robustness of Seg.
3994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 TABLE X REFERENCES
 IMPACT OF INITIALIZATION FOR THE STUDENT
 [1] X. Ni, Z. Ma, J. Liu, B. Shi, and H. Liu, “Attention network for rail
 surface defect detection via consistency of intersection-over-union(IoU)-
 guided center-point estimation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 3,
 pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2022.
 [2] D. Carrera, F. Manganini, G. Boracchi, and E. Lanzarone, “Defect detection in SEM images of nanofibrous materials,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
 vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 551–561, Apr. 2017.
 [3] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1705–1714.
 [4] Y. Cai, H. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Zhou, and K. Cheng, “Dual-distribution
 discrepancy for anomaly detection in chest X-rays,” in Proc. Med. Image
 Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv., 2022, pp. 584–593.
 TABLE XI
 [5] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
 ABLATION STUDY ON THE LOSSES IN THE T-S FRAMEWORK
 students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
 embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020,
 pp. 4183–4192.
 [6] G. Wang, S. Han, E. Ding, and D. Huang, “Student-teacher feature pyramid
 matching for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf., 2021,
 pp. 1–14.
 [7] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from oneclass embedding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
 [8] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
 [9] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “Cutpaste: Self-supervised
 7) Influence of the Distillation Loss: Table XI shows the learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
effectiveness of the SSIM loss. Since the cosine similarity loss Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 9664–9674.
 [10] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “Draem - A discriminatively
solely distills knowledge at each position in isolation, we in- trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc.
troduce SSIM loss to consider neighboring vectors. The study IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
reveals the effectiveness of the SSIM loss. DAF achieves the [11] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic anomalies
 for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE Eur.
best results when the cosine similarity and SSIM are adopted Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 474–489.
simultaneously. [12] P. Pérez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” in ACM
 8) Limitations: While synthesized anomalies boost perfor- SIGGRAPH Papers, 2003, pp. 313–318.
 [13] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTEC ad–A
mance, the training time increases due to the computationally ex- comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
pensive synthesizing steps. Although adopting simple and cheap Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
ones accelerates the process, it is still slower than unsupervised [14] M. Wieler and T. Hahn, “Weakly supervised learning for industrial optical inspection,” 2007. Accessed: Jan. 10, 2023. [Online].
methods that are solely trained on normal images. Available: https://hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/content/weakly-supervised-
 9) Future Work: In future work, investigating lightweight learning-industrial-optical-inspection
architectures and developing real-time approaches will be im- [15] Ž. Hocenski, S. Vasilic, and V. Hocenski, “Improved canny edge detector
 in ceramic tiles defect detection,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Annu. Conf. Ind.
portant for industrial applications. Moreover, integrating the rich Electron., 2006, pp. 3328–3331.
knowledge derived from large models such as CLIP [35] into our [16] W.-C. Li and D. Ming Tsai, “Defect inspection in low-contrast LCD images
method will be helpful for further enhancing the generalization using hough transform-based nonstationary line detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Ind. Inform., vol. 7, pp. 136–147, 2011.
capacity. [17] W. Liu et al., “Towards visually explaining variational autoencoders,” in
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 8642–8651.
 [18] S. Venkataramanan, K.-C. Peng, R. V. Singh, and A. Mahalanobis, “At-
 V. CONCLUSION tention guided anomaly localization in images,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf.
 Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 485–503.
 In this article, we have observed that the existing self- [19] C. Baur, B. Wiestler, S. Albarqouni, and N. Navab, “Deep autoencoding
 models for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR images,” in
supervised methods are susceptible to the quality of synthetic Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, 2018, pp. 161–169.
data. To improve the robustness of the prior arts, we have [20] H. Yang, Q. Zhou, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “An anomaly feature-editing-based
proposed a simple yet effective framework, named DAF. DAF adversarial network for texture defect visual inspection,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2220–2230, Mar. 2021.
introduces the teacher-student model to yield the discrepancy [21] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidtmap and serves it as an additional cue that reveals the loca- Erfurth, “F-ANOGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with gention of anomalies to the segmentation decoder, alleviating the erative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
 2019.
decoder’s reliance on the appearance of synthetic data. Mean- [22] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Doll’ar, and R. B. Girshick, “Masked
while, the complement of the discrepancy map for segmentation autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
contributes significantly to robustness as well. Extensive exper- Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 15979–15988.
 [23] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. B. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
iments have shown that DAF surpasses previous self-supervised unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
methods significantly when faced with simple synthetic strate- Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019, pp. 9726–9735.
gies in anomaly detection and localization, demonstrating its [24] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, 2021,
excellent robustness. Art. no. 107706.
CAI et al.: DISCREPANCY AWARE FRAMEWORK FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION 3995

[25] N. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive block Xinwei He received the Ph.D. degree in elecfor anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog- tronics and information engineering from the
 nit., 2022, pp. 13566–13576. Huazhong University of Science and Technol-
[26] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional networks ogy (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2020.
 for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Med. Image Comput. Com- He is currently an Associate Professor with
 put. Assist. Interv., 2015, pp. 234–241. the College of Informatics, Huazhong Agricul-
[27] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spot-the-difference tural University, Wuhan. His research interests
 self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in include visual anomaly detection, image cap-
 Proc. IEEE Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408. tioning, 3-D shape analysis, and 3-D object de-
[28] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee, tection.
 “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14902–14912.
[29] G. Tong, Q. Li, and Y. Song, “Two-stage reverse knowledge distillation
 incorporated and self-supervised masking strategy for industrial anomaly
 detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 273, 2023, Art. no. 110611.
[30] X. Jiang et al., “Softpatch: Unsupervised anomaly detection with noisy
 data,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 15433–15445.
[31] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet: Xin Yang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. degree from the Department of Electrical Com-
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255. puter Engineering, University of California,
[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image Santa Barbara (UCSB), CA, USA, 2013.
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, She has authored or coauthored more than
 pp. 770–778. 90 technical papers and holds 12 patents. She
[33] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi, “De- is currently a Professor with the Department
 scribing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern of Electronic Information and Communications,
 Recognit., 2014, pp. 3606–3613. Huazhong University of Science and Technol-
[34] J. Božič, D. Tabernik, and D. Skočaj, “End-to-end training of a two-stage ogy, Wuhan, China. Her research interests inneural network for defect detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., clude medical image analysis and 3-D vision.
 2021, pp. 5619–5626. Dr. Yang was the recipient of the National Natural Science Fund of
[35] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural lan- China for Excellent Youth Scholar and China Society of Image and
 guage supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8748–8763. Graphics Qingyun Shi Female Scientist Award. She is an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MEDICAL IMAGING and Multimedia System,
 an Area Chair of MICCAI’19–21 and ACM MM’18, and a PC member of
 CVPR, ECCV, and ICCV. She is also a Reviewer for top journals such as
 Yuxuan Cai received the M.S. degree in elec- IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE,
 tronics information, in 2022, from the School IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS,
 of Electronic Information and Communications, MedIA, etc.
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, where she is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in artificial intelligence with the School of Artificial
 Intelligence and Automation.
 Her research interests include visual anomaly
 detection.
 Xiang Bai (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the
 Huazhong University of Science and Technol-
 Dingkang Liang (Graduate Student Member, ogy (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2003, 2005, and
 IEEE) is currently working toward the Ph.D. de- 2009, respectively, all in electronics and inforgree in artificial intelligence with the School of mation engineering.
 Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong He is currently a Professor with the School
 University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, HUST.
 China. He is also the Vice Director of the National
 He has served as a Reviewer for several top Center of AntiCounterfeiting Technology, HUST.
 journals and conferences such as IEEE TRANS- His research interests include object recogni-
 ACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE IN- tion, shape analysis, scene text recognition and intelligent systems. He
 TELLIGENCE, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PRO- is an Associate Editor for Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
 CESSING, Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Pattern Recognition Letters, Neurocomputing, and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), International Conference on Computer Frontiers of Computer Science.
Vision (ICCV), and European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
His research interests include computer vision.

 Dongliang Luo received the B.S. degree in
 electronics and information engineering, in
 2020, from the Huazhong University of Science
 and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, where
 he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
 in information and communication engineering
 with the School of Electronic Information and
 Communications.
 His main research interests include anomaly
 detection and OCR.