IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024 2389

A Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning Method for
 Network Intrusion Detection
 Lei Du , Zhaoquan Gu, Member, IEEE, Ye Wang, Le Wang , Member, IEEE, and Yan Jia

 Abstract—With the rapid development of information tech- and industrial cyber-physical systems [23]. These devices and
nologies, the security of cyberspace has become increasingly applications bring convenience to the modern daily life of
serious. Network intrusion detection is a practical scheme humans, but they also have become the target of attackers,
to protect network systems from cyber attacks. However, as
new vulnerabilities and unknown attack types are constantly which significantly threaten the assets and data security of
emerging, only a few samples of such attacks can be captured individuals, enterprises, and even the country [1], [6]. Hence,
for analysis, which cannot be handled by the existing detection detecting and blocking malicious attacks in time is critical for
methods deployed in real systems. To handle this problem, we ensuring the security of networked systems.
propose a few-shot class-incremental learning method called Network intrusion detection is a practical scheme for
Branch Fusion Strategy based Network Intrusion Detection (BFS-
NID for short), which can continuously learn new attack classes detecting attacks. Most of the traditional network intrusion
with only a few samples. BFS-NID includes a feature extractor detection methods utilize rule-based methods to detect intrumodule and a branch classifier learning module. The feature sions, and the detection rule is generated from known attack
extractor module uses a vision transformer to learn better samples [2], [24]. For example, Syrius is proposed in [2]
feature representations in a self-supervised manner, and the which uses benign and malicious traffic samples to generate
parameters of the feature extractor are fixed to avoid catastrophic
forgetting when the model learns incrementally. The branch Suricata’s detection rules. Bayesian networks are adopted
classifier learning module sets re-projection for different branch in [24] to learn attack patterns and translate them into IFsessions to enhance the feature representation ability between THEN detection rules. These methods can detect known
classes and employs a branch fusion strategy to associate the network attacks accurately and efficiently, but cannot deal with
context of learned attack classes with new classes in different variants of known attacks and new types of attacks. In practice,
sessions. We conducted extensive experiments on two popular
network intrusion detection benchmark datasets (CIC-IDS2017 attackers often use a variety of techniques to cover up their
and CSE-CIC-IDS2018) and the results demonstrate that BFS- attack behaviors in order to evade detection, thereby making
NID surpasses the baselines and achieves the best performance. detection more difficult. For example, obfuscation techniques
 Index Terms—Cyber security, network intrusion detection, have been used to generate variants from known attacks that
few-shot class-incremental learning. evade traditional detection methods [4]. In addition, attackers
 might utilize the latest vulnerability to launch attacks, such
 as the 0-day and n-day vulnerabilities. These unknown (new)
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 attacks cannot be effectively detected since they have not
 ITH the emergence of innovative information tech-
W nologies, a large number of devices and applications
have been adopted in various areas, such as autonomous
 appeared before [29]. Even though some cyber security teams
 will analyze such new attacks once they appear, the number
 of samples is quite small.
driving systems [16], Internet of Things smart devices [25], To handle these problems, many researchers attempt to
 Manuscript received 27 April 2023; revised 7 September 2023 and employ Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies for network
4 November 2023; accepted 9 November 2023. Date of publication intrusion detection [7], [12], [37], [38], [40], [41], as AI
13 November 2023; date of current version 15 April 2024. This work was technologies have reached or even surpassed human-like
supported in part by the Major Key Project of PCL(PCL2022A03), National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62372137), and Guangdong performance in many tasks. Regarding the problem of attack
Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies variants, there has been some significant progress [47], but it
(2022B1212010005). The associate editor coordinating the review of this is quite limited to the problem of detecting new attacks.
article and approving it for publication was V. Fodor. (Corresponding author:
Zhaoquan Gu.) The existing methods of detecting new attacks can be
 Lei Du, Zhaoquan Gu, and Yan Jia are with the School of Computer divided into two categories: anomaly-based binary classifica-
Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, tion [7], [38] and fine-grained multi-classification [12], [41].
Guangdong, China, and also with the Department of New Networks,
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China (e-mail: Anomaly detection methods use benign samples for modeling,
21b951040@stu.hit.edu.cn; guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn; jiayan2020@hit.edu.cn). and any behavior patterns that deviate from expectations
 Ye Wang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin are identified as anomalies. For example, Regularization and
Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, and also
with the College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, autoencoders are introduced in [7] to improve potential rep-
Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: wangye2020@hit.edu.cn). resentations for anomaly detection. OnlineBPCA is proposed
 Le Wang is with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, in [38] which converts network traffic into a two-dimensional
Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: wangle@gzhu.
edu.cn). tensor and analyzes the changes of principal directions for
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3332284 anomaly detection. However, anomaly detection is rarely
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 ability of the model [30], pre-assigning virtual prototypes
 in the feature representation space [45], or using a freeze
 pre-trained unified feature extractor [44]. These FSCIL methods employ a standard supervised manner to pre-training
 models. The parameters of the feature extractor are frozen
 to obtain a better feature representation to resist catastrophic
 forgetting. However, the feature representation of the feature
 extractor relies on large-scale labeled samples. Furthermore, as
 incremental learning proceeds, the classifier accommodates an
 increasing number of classes. We find that the feature extractor
 extracts highly similar feature representations for different
 class samples.
 In this paper, we propose a few-shot class-increment learning method for network intrusion detection with a branching
 fusion strategy, called BFS-NID. The proposed method is
Fig. 1. The setting of FSCIL for network intrusion detection. FSCIL can able to learn a generalization feature representation and
continuously learn new attack classes from sessions without forgetting the continually keep with the discriminative ability between all
former attack classes and without overlapping attack classes in sessions. The
base session as the initial model training phase contains sufficient samples,
 seen attack classes. In detail, the method consists of two
while the subsequent sessions as the class increment phase learn new attack modules: a feature extractor module and a branch classifier
classes with only a few samples. After learning of the session, the classifier learning module. The feature extractor module uses a vision
model is able to classify among all seen classes.
 transformer to learn the behavioral patterns of network traffic
 samples and is pre-trained in a self-supervised manner without
deployed in realistic situations due to the inability to provide relying on sample labels. The branch classifier learning module
detailed diagnostic information about attack types and the high includes two stages to learn branch classifiers for different
false positive rate [40]. Fine-grained detection methods are sessions. For each session, the branch classifier has a retrained and evaluated using supervised learning based on pre- projection to enhance the discriminability of the original
defined classes. In the study [12], a system called FT-GCN was feature representation of different classes. The base session
proposed that leverages the underlying traffic flow pattern and with ample samples is used for the training of the initial branch
converts intrusion detection into a special node classification projection layer. The remaining session projection layers are
task for detecting intrusions. PBCNN is a few-shot learning fine-tuned according to the initial projection layer parameters.
method [41] that uses a byte-packet-flow data structure to The learned branch classifiers and new attack samples jointly
automatically extract features to detect attack classes with only optimize a new branch projection layer. Further, the branch
a few samples. However, these methods require the attack fusion strategy associates the contextual relationship between
class of the detected samples to appear in the pre-defined sessions and assists the training and inference of the model.
classes [37]. In the realistic network, new attack classes are The contribution of this work is summarized as follows:
constantly appearing and these detection models cannot cope • To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose
with the classification of the new attack samples. a few-shot class-incremental learning method for network
 In recent years, Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning intrusion detection using grayscale images, which is
(FSCIL) has emerged in several research fields [14], [30], [44], effective against catastrophic forgetting and overfitting.
[45], such as in the computer vision area [26], [46], which • We explore the ability of self-supervised manner feature
for incrementally learning new classes from a few of labeled representation for unseen classes in the cybersecurity area
samples without forgetting previously learned classes [19]. and propose combining branch fusion strategy to enforce
However, few of them study network intrusion detection. We the distinction between new classes and seen classes in
envision that combating the new attacks requires establishing different sessions.
a network intrusion detection system with FSCIL to incre- • We propose a concise and intuitive representation of
mentally learn new attack classes with only a few samples network traffic that converts raw network traffic into
without forgetting previously learned classes. When handling grayscale images while maintaining the time-series relanetwork intrusion detection using FSCIL, it is important to tionship between packets of bi-flows.
maintain the distinction between the emerging new classes We also conduct extensive experiments on two benchmarks,
and the learned classes. The task set is shown in Fig. 1. the CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets, and the
The FSCIL suffers from a serious class imbalance problem results demonstrate that BFS-NID significantly outperforms
between the base session and the new session, which not only the baselines with significant advantages.
makes the model prone to over-fitting to new classes but also The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
exacerbates the catastrophic forgetting of learned attack class discusses the related work about few-shot class-incremental
knowledge. learning and network intrusion detection. Section III intro-
 Previous works have made extensive efforts to resist catas- duces the preliminaries and Section IV describes the
trophic forgetting from different perspectives. For example, representation of network traffic. Section V introduces the
optimizing the feature representation space with the learning proposed method BFS-NID. Afterward, the experimental
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2391

results and discussion are shown in Section VI. Finally, of different classes of samples and avoid the overhead of
Section VII concludes this paper and prospects for future work. storing old data.

 II. R ELATED W ORK B. Class-Incremental Learning
 This section presents related work on network intrusion The goal of class-incremental learning (CIL) is to
detection, class incremental learning, and few-shot class- continuously learn new classes without forgetting the learned
incremental learning. classes. The main challenge is catastrophic forgetting. To
 overcome this challenge, several regularization methods have
 been proposed. Lwf [21] uses regularization terms to preserve
A. Network Intrusion Detection class knowledge that has been learned. MAS [3] and EWC [18]
 Network Intrusion detection methods can be divided into are proposed to use regularization terms to constrain the
rule-based detection methods, anomaly-based detection meth- range of variation of important parameters when learning new
ods, and fine-grained-based detection methods. The rule-based sessions. SDC improves the performance of the model by
detection method uses the known attack patterns in the rule incorporating semantic drift compensation [42]. Other methods
sets to generate alarms. The capability of detection is limited dynamically adjust the structure of the model to adapt to
by the rule sets. Therefore, it is necessary to continuously gen- the learning of new sessions [39]. From another perspective,
erate and update rules to improve the quality of the rule sets. existing methods can be divided into exemplar-based methods
Due to manually generating detection rules for attack samples and nonexemplar-based methods. Exemplar-based methods
is time-consuming and error-prone. Some researchers propose store some of the learned class examples and replay them
automated methods to generate detection rules, such as deep when learning new sessions. The nearest neighbor classifier
packet inspection techniques [2], and Bayesian networks [24]. iCaRL [27] is combined with a distillation loss to prevent
However, these methods are unable to detect unknown attacks. forgetting when learning new sessions. Considering the imbal-
Anomaly-based detection methods use benign samples to ance between the exemplar classes of the base session and new
build models and any biases are identified anomalies. An sessions, LUCIR [15] imposes constraints on the exemplars of
anomaly detection method is proposed in [7] to improve the base session classes when learning new classes. A dynamic
latent representations through regularization and autoencoders. reinforced memory management method RMM [22] optimizes
OnlineBPCA is proposed in [38] which can fast and accurate the incremental phase and different classes. FOSTER [36]
detection anomalies. IDERES [28] adapts network profiling proposes a two-stage learning paradigm for adaptive learning
and machine learning algorithms to identify malicious attack of new classes. However, the CIL method leads to poor
traffic in IoT networks. performance due to the limited number of training samples in
 To effectively detect unknown anomalies, a probabilistic new sessions [46].
method [29] is proposed through constructing samples as a
Bayesian network for identifying zero-day attacks. PPPL [17]
uses the domain adaptation method to build a network C. Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
intrusion detection system for detecting unseen anomalies. Few-shot class-incremental learning was recently proposed,
However, anomaly-based detection methods cannot provide which leverages the knowledge learned from large datasets to
detailed diagnostic information about attacks and have a help learn new classes with few samples [19], [43]. TOPIC
high false positive rate. Other methods use few-shot learn- proposes [33] to preserve the topology structure between
ing to identify new attacks [8]. A meta-learning framework learned classes and new classes during incremental learning.
based method FC-Net is proposed for new attack detection To tackle the overfitting that may be caused by the few samples
by comparing pairs of samples to distinguish classes [37]. of new classes, FSLL [26] proposes to select a few parameters
DPNSA [9] proposes a dynamic prototype network based on for updating. FACT [45] proposed a forward-compatibility
sample adaptation for detecting malware attacks with few method to compress the embedding of learned classes by
samples. However, existing methods can only recognize new virtual prototypes in preparation for learning new classes.
attack patterns by comparison and cannot incrementally learn LIMIT [46] constructs a generalization feature space for the
new attack types that are constantly emerging. To alleviate this new session and utilizes a calibration module to calibrate the
problem, IDFSCIL [35] proposes a few-shot class-incremental semantic relationship between the old classifier and the new
learning strategy that uses meta-learning for initially training prototype. C-FSCIL [14] uses hyperdimensional embedding
on old data and trains new classifiers by fine-tuning new attack and loss functions to preserve the orthogonal relationship
class data. Then, the logit layers of all classifiers are jointly between class vectors. Other methods [30], [44] find that using
optimized on a small amount of old and new class data using pre-trained backbone networks can achieve good performance
a fully connected network. This strategy requires retaining even for new classes that have not been seen before. On the
and replaying small amounts of old data, and the amount of basis of this discovery. A coupled training strategy CEC [44]
retained data will increase as the number of sessions increases. is proposed, which uses a graph model to adapt the classifier
In contrast to IDFSCIL, the method proposed in this work uses to an incremental process across different sessions. F2M [30]
only new data for incremental learning sessions on the base proposes to find a flat minimal region in the base session
model and employs re-projection to improve the discrimination and finetune the new session within the region. Different
2392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

from existing methods, our proposed method performs a re- extracted from network traffic by using quintuple data (source
projection on the original feature embedding of different IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, protocol),
sessions to improve the discriminability of classes and uses and the source IP - port and destination IP - port can be
a branching strategy to fuse classifiers from different branch interchangeable. According to the quintuple, the captured
sessions. network traffic or Pcap files can split into a large number
 of bi-flows, and each one contains many packets. It needs to
 III. P RELIMINARIES be further divided into attack or benign samples for analysis
 FSCIL for network intrusion detection aims to achieve and modeling. We adopt the same process as [41], including
incremental learning of new attack classes with only a few timeout and periodic reset strategies. The timeout strategy
available samples, without forgetting the learned knowledge refers to the information exchange being terminated when
of classes. Let D = {D 0 , D 1 , . . . , D i , . . . , D N } denotes a the communication link has been waiting for a long time.
sequence train datasets of different sessions, where D i = The threshold is set to 64 seconds. Considering only the
 |D i | timeout strategy may still lead to a sample containing too
{(xn , yn )}n=1 is the train dataset of session i. xn is a sample many packets. A periodic reset strategy is further used and
of class yn ∈ C i . C i is the label space of session i. There the threshold is set to 120 seconds. In order to facilitate the
are no overlapped classes across different sessions, i.e., ∀i = processing of the model, the sample needs to be converted
j , C i ∩ C j = ∅. It is noted that each session contains into a unified representation format. There are two mainstream
new classes of attacks identified based on factors such as ways of utilizing the divided samples: statistical features of
time, user/host context, network connections, or operational the sample or raw bytes data in the packets of the sample.
scenarios. The first session provides a large train dataset The former way requires different feature extraction rules
with sufficient samples and classes, which is also denoted as for different protocols that are designed by cybersecurity
the base session. The subsequent sessions only have a few experts, which lack adaptability and feature engineering is
new attack samples and classes, e.g., ∃i > 0, session D i complex and time-consuming. Furthermore, this way pays
contains C new attack classes in the training dataset, and more attention to the information in the packet header and
per class has K attack samples. Hence it is often called a ignores the payload [37]. However, malicious information in a
C-way K-shot. For each session i training, only the dataset of successful attack may be in the protocol header or a payload.
session D i is available, the train datasets of former sessions e.g., SQL injection attacks use benign protocol headers and
are not available. At the evaluation, the model evaluates the a payload containing malicious SQL statements. The latter
test dataset from all encountered classes, i.e., C = ∪s=i s=0 C .
 s
 represents network traffic as visual images, such as bi-flows
FSCIL faces continuous learning of new attack classes with of raw network traffic converted to several color images [5] or
only a few samples. The main challenge is catastrophic to an RGB image [37]. These works demonstrate the promise
forgetting, where the learned classes are forgotten as the model of the converted images for network intrusion detection,
learns new attack classes. Especially for new types of attacks where different classes of images still have different visual
with few attack samples, the problem of catastrophic forgetting representations [47]. However, the existing network traffic
is more serious due to the phenomenon of overfitting. representation uses color images with complex structures or
 Problem Definition: To ensure the security of cyberspace, does not take into account the time-series relationship between
we aim to develop an ideal detection model using the bi-flows packets, which seriously hinders further research in
continuously generated flow data D in real-world network image-based network intrusion detection.
applications, which can incrementally learn new attack classes This section proposes a concise and intuitive representation
C i with few attack samples, and maintain the detection of network traffic, which converts raw network traffic into
performance of the model. grayscale images while maintaining the time-series relationship between packets of bi-flows. Specifically, each sample
 IV. N ETWORK T RAFFIC R EPRESENTATION consists of a different number of packets, and each packet
 Network traffic is a complex data structure, according consists of variable-length bytes. The representation of the
to the OSI model, the network model has seven layers sample uses the first M packets, each packet is represented
for information transmission and exchange. The minimum by the first B bytes. In addition, it is also necessary to check
transmission unit of network traffic is a packet, which includes whether the sample meets the requirements of the number
one or more headers and a payload. For example, an HTTP of packets ≥ M and the length of packet bytes ≥ B ,
protocol packet is composed of a MAC layer header, an IP respectively. If it is insufficient, fill in with 0; otherwise, the
layer header, a TCP layer header, an HTTP layer header, and excess part will be truncated. Then, the B bytes in the packet
 
a payload. The network traffic transmitted by the network are reshaped into a matrix ∈ R h ×w , the M packets are
is captured and further stored as Pcap files for analysis to arranged according to the arrival time series of the packet,
protect the target networked system from malicious attacks. and the final sample is converted into a grayscale image
 
The analysis granularity of network traffic is very impor- ∈ R 1×(h ×M ) ×w . For the convenience of processing, the
tant in cybersecurity research. Summarized in [10], the five grayscale image is set as a square h = w = h  × M . M
commonly used granularities are flows, bidirectional flows and B are set to 16 and 256 respectively, which is consistent
(bi-flows), TCP connections, services, and hosts. This work with [37], [41]. The conversion process is shown in Fig. 2.
uses the bi-flows as analysis granularity. The bi-flows can be Taking a DoS-GoldenEye attack sample as an example, each
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2393

 Section IV, the converted samples are not directly equivalent
 to grayscale images due to the time-series nature of network
 traffic. Thus, the feature extractor should be able to learn
 two aspects of information including the feature of each
 packet and the contextual time series relationship between
 packets in bi-flows samples. CNN learns the pixel-level feature
Fig. 2. The process of converting network traffic to grayscale images. representation of the grayscale image, which cannot capture
First, the captured network traffic is segmented into bi-flows. Then, a timeout the time-series relationship of bi-flows packets. The ViT
strategy and a periodic reset strategy are used to split the bi-flows to obtain divides the grayscale image into multiple patches, and the
samples. After that, packets or bytes are padded or truncated (bytes are padded
in denoted blue and truncated in denoted red) and IP and MAC addresses sequence relationship between patches is represented by posiare anonymized. Finally, the grayscale image is converted by a reshape of B tion encoding. It can meet network traffic data requirements:
bytes and an organization of time-series relationships of M packets. the packets correspond to the divided patches and the timeseries relationship of the packets corresponds to the position
 encoding between the patches. Therefore, we choose ViT as
packet is converted into a matrix ∈ R 4×64 , and the attack the backbone network of the feature extractor. Furthermore, for
sample is represented by a grayscale image ∈ R 1×64×64 . The better generalization, we employ a patch mask data augmentacode is publicly available1 . tion technique to train the feature extractor [13]. As depicted
 Note that there are three key points in the process. Firstly, in Fig. 3 (a), the task of a self-supervised feature exactor is
the first M packets - the first B bytes can represent the to reconstruct grayscale image samples. The grayscale image
whole sample. These packets containing the most important samples are divided into patches, and then patches and position
information are usually transmitted first, and the appropriate embedding are fed into the model. Each patch size is ∈ R 4×64 ,
bytes are sufficient to represent most of the information which corresponds to one packet of bi-flows packets.
in the packet. Second, the sample data conforms to the
grayscale image format. The byte of the packet is encoded
 B. The Branch Classifier Learning Module
hexadecimal with 8 bits, the numerical type of each byte
corresponds to a pixel value in a grayscale image, ranging The pre-trained feature extractor has different optimization
from 0-255. Third, the converted grayscale image does not goals for applications, where the self-supervised pre-trained
contain sensitive information. The MAC and IP addresses have backbone network is a grayscale image reconstruction task,
special significance in cyberspace and will leak user privacy. and the downstream task is an intrusion detection task.
For security and privacy reasons, anonymization is used to Therefore, it is very necessary to optimize the parameters
replace the MAC and IP addresses in packets with all 0s. of the feature extractor before being applied to intrusion
 detection. We follow the way of the Prototype Network [32] as
 the classifier, which is slightly different from the conventional
 V. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : BFS-NID classifier when calculating the classification probability. The
 In this section, we introduce a few-shot class-incremental Prototype Network adopts the idea of metric. In each episode,
learning method for network intrusion detection combined the data fed to the model are the support set and query set.
with branch fusion strategies. The overview of the method The support set contains samples from multiple classes and is
consists of two modules: the feature extractor module and used to compute the prototype vectors of classes. The class
the branch classifier learning module, as depicted in Fig. 3. prototype is the average of the feature embedding of the class
We first present a pre-trained feature extractor using a samples, calculated as:
self-supervised manner. Then, we describe how the branch   1 
classifier helps the learning of the base session and the new pik Dki , φ = fφ (xn ) (1)
 |Dk |
 i
 i
sessions. To coordinate the training and inference of branch (xn ,yn )∈Dk
classifiers, we further propose a fusion strategy.
 pik represents the prototype vector of the k-th class in the
 session i, pik ∈ R 1×d , Dki is the support set, and fφ is the
A. The Feature Extractor Module feature extractor. The predicted label of a query set sample is
 Recently research demonstrated that pre-trained feature the class with the highest similarity score calculated with class
extractors in a standard supervised manner only with base ses- prototype vectors. In the FSCIL task, only the training data is
sion data can achieve competitive performance in the FSCIL available, instead of dividing it into support and query sets, we
task [44]. However, this manner relies on a large number of use it as a query set to train the feature extractor, which is then
labeled samples to train a robust feature extractor for better used as a support set to update the class prototype vectors.
feature representation. Self-supervised learning utilizes the Furthermore, we implement more simple training strategies
intrinsic structural information of samples for representation rather than episodic meta-learning. For this reason, we utilize
learning without labeled samples. Therefore, we employ a self- randomly initialized prototype vectors and feature embedding
supervised manner to pre-train the feature extractor. Generally, of the sample to train the feature extractor and compute the
there are two common network architectures used to extract similarity score.
feature embedding from image samples: Convolutional Neural Consider the procedure of FSCIL using a pre-trained feature
Networks (CNN) and Vision Transformers (ViT) [11]. In extractor. The base session contains a large number of classes
2394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 3. Illustration of our method. BFS-NID mainly includes two modules: (a) The feature extractor module to learn pre-trained backbone network with
basic session data in a self-supervised manner, and (b) the branch classifier learning module, which contains two stages base and new session branch classifier
learning, to learn the parameters of the projection layer for different sessions and uses a fusion strategy to help model training and inference.

and data, while the new session has few classes and limited sessions, the sample feature embedding is used to compute
samples. The problem of class imbalance between the base prototype vectors of the classes in the new session, which are
session and the new session will exacerbate catastrophic continuously merged into the previous classifiers. After the
forgetting. To handle this issue, the base session data is used new session is learned, the fused classifier can be used to
to pre-train and fine-tune the feature extractor, which is frozen classify all seen classes.
during the learning process of subsequent new sessions. To In Eq. (2), a frozen feature extractor is used to extract
this end, the learning of all sessions is divided into two stages: feature embedding of samples for different classes across
the base session stage and the new session stage. In the base different sessions. However, if the feature extractor is designed
session stage, the pre-trained feature extractor is used to extract to extract feature embedding for seen class samples, it is
feature embedding of samples, as follows: inevitable to impair the discriminative representation of different classes in new sessions. To relieve this problem, a
 feax = fθ (x ) (2)
 re-projection for different sessions is proposed to improve
fθ is the pre-trained feature extractor, and the feature embed- the discriminative of feature embedding for different classes
ding of the sample x is denoted as feax . Then, the cosine within the session. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), these sessions
distance cosine is used as a metric function to calculate the are divided into two stages, the base session branch classifier
similarity score between the feature embedding of the sample stage and the new session branch classifier stage, each session
and the prototype vectors of classes in the base session: with a projection layer Proj. In the learning stage of the base
   session branch classifier, finetuning the feature extractor and
 |pik | j
 score(x , Pi ) = ∪j =0 cosine feax , pi (3) training the projection layer Proj0 . During the new session
 branch classifier learning stage, only training the projection
Pi is the class prototype vectors in the session i, |Pi | = layer Proji of the new session:
 j
|C i |. pi represents the prototype vector of the j-th class 
  Proj0 (fθ (x )) x ∈ D i , i = 0
in the session i. The training loss for the base session is feax = (5)
 Proji (fθ (x )) x ∈ D i , i = 0
calculated using the Cross-Entropy loss function, and the
model is optimized using the backpropagation algorithm: The projection layer Proj is a linear transformation that
 transforms the original feature embedding of samples into
   |D i |
  another feature representation space. Since only a few samples
 i
 J D , P i , fθ = − yn log(score(feaxn , Pi ))) (4) of classes are available in the new session, the Proj0 of the
 n=1 base session is used as an initialization for the Proji of the
yn is the ground truth of the sample xn . When the base session new session and then fine-tuned to accommodate the learning
training is completed, class prototype vectors are updated via of classes in the new session.
Eq. (1). Further, these class prototype vectors are stored in the We need to further modify the formula to enable incremental
fully connected layer W for the classification of the i-th session training across different sessions. In Eq. (3) and (4), the
classifier. Such as i = 0, W0j = p0j , where W0 belongs to measure of the similarity score and the training of the model
R n×d , n is the number of classes in the base session, and d is are session-independent, new sessions did not participate in
the dimension of the class prototype vector. In the subsequent training. In addition, in the new session learning, only use
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2395

the samples in the current session, and cannot utilize the Algorithm 1 Our Proposed Method
class prototype vector that has been learned in the previous Require: The sequence sessions datasets D, pre-trained model
session. However, an incremental classifier should break down fθ , a randomly initialized prototype vector matrix W.
the boundaries between sessions. It should continuously adapt Ensure: Network Intrusion Detection Classifier.
to new classes, and maintain the ability to discriminate from 1: // Training the base branch classifier.
learned classes across different sessions. Hence, we metric the 2: Randomly initialize the parameters of the projection layer
similarity score between the feature embedding of samples and Proj0 ;
the class prototype vectors in previous sessions during the re- 3: for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
projection training of the new session. P represents all classes 4: for batch b = 1, 2, . . . , do
that have been seen already. 5: Sample training samples from the base session D 0 ;
 6: Extract feature embedding of samples by Eq. (5);
   |D i |
    7: Calculate the similarity score using Eq. (3);
 
 J i
 D , P , fθ , Proji =− yn log score(feax n , P ) (6) 8: end for
 n=1 9: Update fθ , Proj0 with the loss J  defined in Eq. (6);
 During the incremental learning and inference process of 10: end for
the model, the re-projection of the branch classifier needs 11: Update each prototype vector of the classes in the session;
to be continuously adjusted to select feature embedding of 12: Save the prototype vectors of the base session to W0 and
the sample corresponding to the session. To achieve this Proj0 to Repo.
goal, we propose a branch fusion strategy that fuses the 13: // Incremental training of the new branch classifier.
similarity scores of different branch classifiers. Specifically, 14: for session i = 1, 2, . . . , N do
the similarity scores between the feature embedding of dif- 15: Initialize the parameters of the projection layer Proji
ferent session re-projections of the query sample and known with Proj0 from the repository Repo;
class prototypes are first calculated. Then the similarity scores 16: for epoch p = 1, 2, . . . do
with the corresponding class prototypes in different sessions 17: Sample training samples from the new session D i ;
are selected. Further, the repository Repo is used to store 18: Extract feature embedding of samples by Eq. (5);
the parameters of projection layers in order to facilitate 19: Calculate the similarity score Eq. (3);
management. The process of the algorithm is summarized as 20: Update Proji with the loss J  defined in Eq. (6);
Alg. 1. During the branch classifier training process in the base 21: end for
session, the class prototype vectors and the projection layer 22: Save the prototype vectors of the new session to Wi
are randomly initialized, and then these parameters are fine- and Proji to Repo.
tuned and updated by the similarity score. In new sessions, 23: end for
the class prototype vectors need to be randomly initialized
and updated. The projection layer is initialized with the base
session projection layer and updated by computing a similarity Pcaps files of raw network traffic and CSV files of statistical
score with learned class prototypes. During branch classifier features extracted by CICFlowMeter. As mentioned before,
inference, the feature embedding of query samples is fed we use the Pcaps files of the raw traffic for experiments.
into the corresponding projection layers, and similarity scores Limited by the number of specific attack samples and label
are computed using it and seen class prototype vectors. The mismatches, we choose classes with sufficient samples for
similarity scores of different sessions are fused into a similarity experiments. As shown in Table I, the settings of datasets are
score matrix, and the label predicted by the classifier is the as follows:
one with the highest score. • There are 12 classes in CIC-IDS2017, which are divided
 into 8 classes in the base session and 4 classes in the
 VI. E XPERIMENT new sessions. The 4 classes are divided into two sessions,
 each session contains 2 classes.
 In this section, we evaluate the proposed BFS-NID on
 • The CSE-CIC-IDS2018 includes 14 classes, the base
two popular datasets in network intrusion detection. First, we
 session contains 8 classes and 6 classes are further
present dataset statistics and experimental details. Then, we
 divided into 2 new sessions, each session contains 3
comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the BFS-NID.
 classes.
Finally, we compare with baseline methods, including finetune,
 • In the training phase, each class of the base session con-
CIL, and FSCIL methods.
 tains 2000 samples, while each class of the new session
 only has 5 samples. In the testing phase, each class from
A. Datasets and Experiment Setting different sessions has 100 samples for evaluation.
 Datasets. We used CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 as Implementation Details: We use the Vitlarge model [11] as
benchmark datasets [31], which are widely used in network the backbone network for the experiments of CIC-IDS2017
intrusion detection research. The CIC-IDS2017 dataset collects and CSE-CIC-IDS2018. We modify the parameters of the
five days of network traffic, and the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 con- backbone network, the dimension of the feature embedding
tains ten days of network traffic, both of which include benign is changed to 512, and the patch is modified to 4 × 64.
traffic and 14 classes of malicious traffic. Each dataset provides We follow the MAE [13] to pre-train the backbone network
2396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE I
 T HE S ETTINGS OF D IFFERENT S ESSIONS

 TABLE II
A BLATION A NALYSIS ON T WO B ENCHMARK DATASETS TO A NALYZE THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT M ODULES IN BFS-NID. FE I S THE F EATURE
 E XTRACTOR P RE -T RAINING M ODULE , REPROJ I S THE R E -P ROJECTION , AND BFS I S THE B RANCH F USION S TRATEGY

using a self-supervised manner, modify the decoder feature introduce our designs to observe their impact on predictive
embedding dimension to 384, and keep the patch mask ratio performance. For example, only use the self-supervised
at 75%. Our network is built using the deep learning library features extractor (FE), use the re-projection (REPROJ), and
PyTorch and optimized by SGD. In the base session branch further combine the branch fusion strategy (BFS). From
classifier training stage, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset is iterated Table II, we can observe that the self-supervised model has
40 epochs with a learning rate of 0.05, and the CSE-CIC- competitive incremental learning ability. But it still faces
IDS2018 dataset is iterated 80 epochs with a learning rate of serious overfitting and catastrophic forgetting problems. In
0.002. The training stage of the new session branch classifier the last session, the PD performance dropped by 11.21% and
is iterated 100 epochs on both datasets with a learning rate of 12.88% on the CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 datasets
0.0002, and the batch size is 128. respectively. After adding the REPROJ, the accuracy of differ-
 Evaluation Protocol: To quantitatively evaluate the ent sessions is improved, and the PD performance is improved
performance and resist forgetting the ability of different by 4.13% and 2.88% on the two datasets, respectively. It
methods, follow [46], we use Top 1 accuracy and performance should be noted that although the backbone network uses a
dropping rate (PD) as evaluation indicators. Top 1 accuracy vision transformer as an encoder network, these parameters
is used to indicate the model prediction accuracy, and the will be frozen after the base session branch is trained.
accuracy of the first session is represented by A. PD is used The main reason for the model performance improvement
to measure the accuracy drop rate of the sessions, that is, is the establishment of corresponding re-projection feature
PD=A-B, where A is the accuracy of the base session, and B embedding for different sessions. In addition, when the BFS
is the accuracy of the last incremental session. The model with is considered, the prediction performance of the model will be
a smaller PD means a better anti-forgetting effect. In addition, further improved. We can infer that considering the prototype
we also use multi-class evaluation indicators to measure vector relationship when optimizing the re-projection feature
the false positives and false negatives of network intrusion embedding helps to improve the distinction between the old
detection, which will be reported through the confusion and new classes. These results imply that our proposed method
matrix. can achieve stable performance improvements on the few-shot
 class-incremental learning task.
 To further observe the predictive performance improvement
B. Experimental Analysis brought by the REPROJ, we visualize the feature embedding
 We conducted multiple experiments to evaluate the effec- of test samples and the learned decision boundary in a lowtiveness of modules in the proposed method. Further, we dimensional space using t-SNE [34]. As depicted in Fig. 4, the
compare and analyze the pre-trained models of the standard classes encountered during the incremental learning sessions
supervised manner and the self-supervised manner. Finally, the of two network intrusion detection datasets CIC-IDS2017 and
false positives and false negatives of the proposed method are CSE-CIC-IDS2018 are visualized. Fig. 4 (a) and (c) show the
analyzed during the incremental learning process. decision boundary using the self-supervised manner of the
 Ablation Analysis: We first performed an ablation analy- feature extractor. The decision boundary with the REPROJ
sis on two benchmark datasets to observe the effectiveness is visualized in Fig. 4 (b) and (d). By comparing before
of different modules, as shown in Table II. We gradually and after adding REPROJ, we can observe that the sample
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2397

Fig. 4. t-SNE [34] visualization of data embedding and classifier decision
boundaries before and after the REPROJ on two benchmarks. The shaded area
depicts the decision boundary for each class.

 Fig. 5. Normalized confusion matrices with REPROJ and BFS on two
feature embedding of different classes in the feature space benchmark datasets. We use bold blue lines to separate regions of the base
is clearly separated, while the sample feature embedding session classes and incremental classes of new sessions.
of the same class is tightly embedded or clustered. This
indicates the REPROJ is able to update class prototype
vectors and calibrate decision boundaries through re-projection
feature representation in the new session branch classifier
learning stage, even though a few samples of new incremental
classes. For example, a 2-way 5-shot branch incremental task
contains 2 classes, and only 5 samples of each class are
available.
 We demonstrate the predictive performance of without
and with branch fusion strategy in the last session using a
confusion matrix with normalization. As shown in Fig. 5,
we present the confusion matrix on two datasets, with bold
blue lines separating the classes of the base session and Fig. 6. Comparison of different training manners for pre-trained model on
the new classes of subsequent sessions. The x-axis of the two benchmarks: (a) CIC-IDS2017 and (b) CSE-CIC-IDS2018.
confusion matrix indicates the ground truth, and the y-axis
indicates the prediction by the model. The diagonal elements
of the confusion matrix represent classification accuracy. pre-training manners. As shown in Fig. 6, we evaluate the
Fig. 5 (a) and (c) are the normalization confusion matrix performance of the same backbone network on different
of the datasets CIC-IDS2017 and CSE-CIC-IDS2018 without sessions using two pre-training manners, a standard superadding the branch fusion strategy. The normalization confusion vised manner, and a self-supervised manner. From the figure,
matrix of the branch fusion strategy is shown in Fig. 5 we can observe that the self-supervised manner model has
(b) and (d). By comparison, we can observe that the overall a better resist-forgetting ability. In the CIC-IDS2017, the
false positive rate of all classes has decreased. For example, self-supervised manner of the model maintains superior
in the CSE-CIC-2018, the Benign class was misclassified to performance and PD in different sessions. In the CSE-CICthe other six classes when the branch fusion strategy was not IDS2018, the model of the self-supervised manner has an
added. The number of misclassified to other classes was four explicit advantage in the PD, but the model of the standard
after the addition. The figure demonstrates the branch fusion manner in session 1 has better predictive performance. We
strategy can effectively maintain and utilize the discriminative infer there are two main reasons. First, the self-supervised
relationship between the learned class prototype and the new pre-training model can obtain feature embedding with better
class knowledge, thereby helping the re-projection to complete generalization through representation learning. In addition, the
the adaptive update of the new class feature embedding. data augmentation with patch mask utilizes the transformer
 Analysis of model pre-training manner: Further, we com- structure to simulate the context sequence relationship of
pare the performance impact of BFS-NID employing different different packets to enhance the generalization of the model
2398 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 2 remains the same at 2%. In CSE-CIC-IDS2018, the false
 negative rate of session 1 was 1%, and session 2 increased
 to 5%. It can be observed that BFS-NID has a maximum
 false negative rate of 5%. Then, we analyze the false positives
 in the case of benign and attack binary classification. In
 CIC-IDS2017, benign samples in session 1 are misclassified
 into two attack classes SSH-Patator and Bot with 1% and
 14% probabilities, respectively. The number of misclassified attack classes increased to three in session 2, namely
 SSH-Patator 1%, Bot 13%, and WEB-BruteForce 1%. In CSE-
 CIC-IDS2018, benign samples in session 1 were misclassified
 into four attack classes: DOS-Slowloris 1%, BruteForce-Web
 4%, BruteForce-XSS 1%, DDoS-LOIC-UDP 3%. In session
 2, the number of misclassified attack classes remained the
 same, but the attack classes were modified to BruteForce-Web
 1%, DDoS-LOIC-UDP 1%, Infiltration 8%, and BroteForce-
 SSH 1%. According to observations, BFS-NID produces a
 large false positive rate, 15% of benign samples that are
 misclassified as attacks. We infer the main reason is benign
 data contain a wider diversity, which is very easy to confuse
 with the behavior patterns of existing attack class samples.
 Finally, we analyze the false positives among attack
 classes. Alerts triggered by attacks provide detailed descriptive
Fig. 7. Normalized confusion matrices on two benchmarks between two
sessions. We use bold blue lines to separate regions of the base session classes information for subsequent analysis by cybersecurity experts.
and incremental classes of new sessions. Therefore, we not only need to pay attention to whether an
 attack has occurred but also need fine-grained attack class
 description information. It can be seen from the figure that
further. Second, the standard supervised pre-training model most of the attack classes maintain good distinguishability, but
relies on a large amount of training data and requires the some attack classes are seriously confused. In Fig. 7 (b), the
training data to maintain diversity to obtain better model attack samples of Web-BruteForce are misclassified as SSHgeneralization. On the contrary, when the training data lacks Patator and Web-XSS with 14% and 13%, respectively. The
diversity, higher classification accuracy can be achieved, but Web-XSS samples are misclassified as DoS-SlowHTTPTest
the generalization ability of incremental learning is lost. From at 13% and Web-BruteForce at 20%. In Fig. 7 (d), 49% of
the perspective of the incremental learning task, compared the attack samples of BruteForce-Wed are misclassified as
with the standard pre-training manner the self-supervised BruteForce-XSS, and 14% of BruteForce-XSS are misclassipre-training manner can effectively resist the catastrophic fied as BruteForce-Wed. In addition, DDoS-LOIC-UDP was
forgetting problem. misclassified as DDoS-LOIC-HTTP with 24%. We observe
 False Positive and False Negative Analysis: In the appli- that these severely confused attack classes share some of
cation of network security, false positives and negatives are the same attack tricks and techniques, making it difficult
important indicators that affect whether the intrusion detection to distinguish them from the feature representation level.
system can be deployed. A large number of false negatives For example, in CIC-IDS2017, both brute force and XSS
will lead to the inability to detect intrusion in time, and belong to Web attacks but use different attack methods.
important assets or data will be stolen. Many false positives In CSE-CIC-IDS2018, both DDoS-LOIC-HTTP and DDoSwill lead to excessive manpower and time costs for analysis. LOIC-UDP are distributed denial-of-service attacks, but they
To this end, we present normalized confusion matrices to use different network protocols.
evaluate false positives and negatives in different incremental
learning tasks. Since 100% accuracy was achieved in the
base session phase, we only plot the confusion matrix for C. Comparison With Baseline Methods
the subsequent two incremental phases. As shown in Fig. 7, We compare the performance of BFS-NID with five existing
we report the confusion matrices on two network intrusion baseline methods on two benchmark datasets. The results are
detection datasets, with bold blue lines separating the classes in Fig. 8 and details are shown in Table III. From Fig. 8,
of the base session and the new classes of subsequent sessions. we observe that our proposed method achieves the highest
The x-axis of the confusion matrix indicates the ground accuracy across different sessions and maintains the lowest PD
truth, and the y-axis indicates the prediction by the model. during the overall incremental learning. It is particularly note-
The diagonal elements of the confusion matrix represent the worthy that the accuracy rate of benchmark datasets exceeds
classification accuracy of the model. the existing baseline methods by 1%, and the PD exceeds
 First, we analyze the false negatives of BFS-NID. In CIC- 1%. The finetune suffers from severe catastrophic forgetting
IDS2017, the false negative rate of session 1 and session problems when learning new class knowledge because it
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2399

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON W ITH BASELINE M ETHODS ON CIC-IDS2017 AND CSE-CIC-IDS2018 DATASETS

Fig. 8. Comparison with baselines on two benchmarks: (a) CIC-IDS2017 and (b) CSE-CIC-IDS2018.

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS IN P RECISION , C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ODELS . A LL E XPERIMENTS RUN ON
 R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE NVIDIA T ESLA P100. FLOP S A RE T ESTED W ITH O NE S AMPLE AND
 THE I NFERENCE S PEED (S AMPLES /S ECOND ) I S THE AVERAGE OF 100
 RUNS W ITH A BATCH S IZE OF 100 A FTER H ARDWARE WARM -U P

does not consider the learned class knowledge. The class two aspects. The self-supervised manner pre-trained model
incremental learning methods iCaRL [27] and FOSTER [36], provides better feature representation ability. In addition, BFScan maintain the balanced relationship between the learned NID performs a re-project feature embedding for different
class and the new class knowledge when learning new class incremental stages, which relieves the feature embedding
knowledge, but require many available samples during incre- of samples of other classes from being embedded into an
mental learning. We observe that these methods face serious approximate feature space. Overall, our proposed method
overfitting problems when only a few samples are available. outperforms the baseline methods and achieves the best model
IDFSCIL [35], LIMIT [46] and C-FSCIL [14] are few-shot prediction performance on two network intrusion detection
class incremental learning methods that use standard pre- benchmark datasets.
training models to achieve competitive performance. We also We also observed some flaws in the computational
compared the precision, recall, and f1-score of the last session performance of BFS-NID. In Table V, we show the floatingwith the baseline methods, as shown in Table IV. Compared point operations (FLOPs), memory usage, and inference speed
with them, we think the BFS-NID advantage mainly lies in for all models in the last session. The FLOPs is often used to
2400 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

measure the theoretical complexity of an algorithm or model. [8] Y. Chai, J. Qiu, L. Yin, L. Zhang, B. B. Gupta and Z. Tian, “From
We observe that BFS-NID has high complexity and poor data and model levels: Improve the performance of few-shot malware
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4,
inference performance. Although C-FSCIL has higher FLOPs, pp. 4248–4261, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3200866.
it still demonstrates superior inference speed than BFS-NID. [9] Y. Chai, L. Du, J. Qiu, L. Yin, and Z. Tian, “Dynamic prototype network
The reason is that FLOPs is an indirect measure that ignores based on sample adaptation for few-shot malware detection,” IEEE
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4754–4766, May 2023,
important factors such as memory access cost and model doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2022.3142820.
execution parallel. Furthermore, IDFSCIL and BFS-NID use [10] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directhe same backbone network architecture, show similar FLOPs, tions in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40,
 Jan./Feb. 2012, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2012.6135854.
and have the bottom two inference speeds. We can infer that [11] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
the reason for the low computational performance of BFS- for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
NID is that the backbone network architecture used and the (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–21.
 [12] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow
multiple branches implemented are not conducive to parallel topology-based graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in
operations. An alternative solution may involve alternative label-limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20,
backbone network architectures such as lightweight ViT [20]. no. 1, pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3213807.
 [13] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 VII. C ONCLUSION Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, LA, USA,
 2022, pp. 15979–15988, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01553.
 Network intrusion detection is one of the most critical [14] M. Hersche, G. Karunaratne, G. Cherubini, L. Benini, A. Sebastian, and
ways to find and detect intrusion. However, existing network A. Rahimi, “Constrained few-shot class-incremental learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans,
intrusion detection methods should not be able to incremental LA, USA, 2022, pp. 9047–9057, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00885.
learning of new attack classes with a few samples. The main [15] S. Hou, X. Pan, C. C. Loy, Z. Wang, and D. Lin, “Learning a unified
challenge is catastrophic forgetting and overfitting. In this classifier incrementally via rebalancing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Long Beach, CA, USA, 2019,
paper, we propose BFS-NID for the few-shot class-incremental pp. 831–839, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00092.
learning of network intrusion detection. The BFS-NID con- [16] X. Hou, J. Zhang, C. He, Y. Ji, J. Zhang, and J. Han, “Autonomous
tains the pre-train feature extractor module and the branch driving at the handling limit using residual reinforcement learning,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 54, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 101754,
classifier learning module. The pre-train feature extractor doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2022.101754.
using a self-supervised is used to learn powerful feature [17] M. J. Hashemi, E. Keller, and S. Tizpaz-Niari, “Detecting unseen
representation ability. In the branch classifier learning module, anomalies in network systems by leveraging neural networks,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2515–2528, Sep. 2023,
re-projection is used to enhance the feature embedding, and a doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3220775.
branch fusion strategy helps to correlate different sessions and [18] J. Kirkpatrick et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural
build up the contextual relationship between class prototypes. networks,” 2016, arXiv: 1612.00796.
 [19] A. Kukleva, H. Kuehne, and B. Schiele, “Generalized and incremental
We conduct experiments on two network intrusion detection few-shot learning by explicit learning and calibration without forgetdatasets and the results demonstrate that BFS-NID achieves the ting,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Montreal, QC,
best predictive performance. In future work, we will explore Canada, 2021, pp. 9000–9009, doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00889.
 [20] Y. Li et al., “Rethinking vision transformers for MobileNet size
fine-grained network intrusion detection in the open world, and speed,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023,
and verify the detection performance of the adopted network pp. 16889–16900.
traffic representation method on the encrypted network traffic. [21] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans.
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018,
 doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2773081.
 R EFERENCES [22] Y. Liu, B. Schiele, and Q. Sun, “RMM: Reinforced memory management
 for class-incremental learning,” Proc. 35th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf.
 [1] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Słowińska, G. Theodorakopoulos, and Process. Syst., NeurIPS 2021, pp.3478–3490.
 P. Burnap, “A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home [23] Y. Lian, Q. Yang, Y. Liu, and W. Xie, “A spatio-temporal constrained
 IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9042–9053, hierarchical scheduling strategy for multiple warehouse mobile robots
 Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2019.2926365. under industrial cyber-physical system,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 52,
 [2] L. Alcantara, G. Padilha, R. Abreu, and M. D’Amorim, “Syrius: Apr. 2022, Art. no. 101572, doi: 10.1016/j.aei.2022.101572.
 Synthesis of rules for intrusion detectors,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 71, [24] Q. Liu, H. B. Keller, and V. Hagenmeyer, “A Bayesian rule learning
 no. 1, pp. 370–381, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TR.2021.3061297. based intrusion detection system for the MQTT communication proto-
 [3] R. Aljundi, F. Babiloni, M. Elhoseiny, M. Rohrbach, and T. Tuytelaars, col,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Availab., Rel. Secur., Vienna, Austria, 2021,
 “Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget,” in Proc. pp. 1–10, doi: 10.1145/3465481.3470046.
 15th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), vol. 11207, 2018, pp. 144–161, [25] K. Liu et al., “Security analysis of mobile device-to-device network
 doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01219-9_9. applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2922–2932,
 [4] J. M. Beaver, C. T. Symons, and R. E. Gillen, “A learning system Apr. 2019, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2877174.
 for discriminating variants of malicious network traffic,” in Proc. [26] P. Mazumder, P. Singh, and P. Rai, “Few-shot lifelong learning,” in Proc.
 8th Annu. Cyber Secur. Inf. Intell. Res. Workshop, 2013, pp. 1–4, 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp.2337–2345.
 doi: 10.1145/2459976.2460003. [27] S. A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “iCaRL:
 [5] G. Bendiab, S. Shiaeles, A. Alruban, and N. Kolokotronis, “IoT Incremental classifier and representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Malware network traffic classification using visual representation and Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 2017,
 deep learning,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Conf. Netw. Softw. (NetSoft), Ghent, pp. 5533–5542, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.587.
 Belgium, 2020, pp. 444–449, doi: 10.1109/NetSoft48620.2020.9165381. [28] J. R. Rose et al., “IDERES: Intrusion detection and response system
 [6] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “An intelligent two-layer intrusion using machine learning and attack graphs,” J. Syst. Architect., vol. 131,
 detection system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., Oct. 2022, Art. no. 102722.
 vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 683–692, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TII.2022.3192035. [29] X. Sun, J. Dai, P. Liu, A. Singhal, and J. Yen, “Using Bayesian
 [7] V. L. Cao, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Learning neural represen- networks for probabilistic identification of zero-day attack paths,” IEEE
 tations for network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49, Trans. Inf. Foren. Secur., vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2506–2521, Oct. 2018,
 no. 8, pp. 3074–3087, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2018.2838668. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2018.2821095.
DU et al.: FEW-SHOT CLASS-INCREMENTAL LEARNING METHOD FOR NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 2401

[30] G. Shi, J. Chen, W. Zhang, L.-M. Zhan, and X.-M. Wu “Overcoming Lei Du received the master’s degree from the Hebei
 catastrophic forgetting in incremental few-shot learning by finding flat University of Science and Technology in 2021. He
 minima,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.(NeurIPS), is currently with the School of Computer Science
 2021, pp. 6747–6761. and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
[31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a (Shenzhen), China. He is also with Peng Cheng
 new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research focuses
 Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, (ICISSP), Funchal, Portugal, on cyberspace security, machine intelligence, and
 2018, pp. 108–116. open-world learning.
[32] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
 learning,” in Proc. 31st Annu. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 pp. 4077–4087.
[33] X. Tao, X. Hong, X. Chang, S. Dong, X. Wei, and Y. Gong, “Fewshot class-incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 12180–12189, Zhaoquan Gu (Member, IEEE) received the bachdoi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.01220. elor’s and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
[34] L. Van Der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” in Tsinghua University in 2011 and 2015, respectively.
 Proc. J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, 2008, pp. 2579–2605. He was a Professor and the Associate Dean of
[35] T. Wang, Q. Lv, B. Hu, and D. Sun, “A few-shot class-incremental the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
 learning approach for intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Guangzhou University, China. He is currently a
 Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Athens, Greece, 2021, pp. 1–8, Professor with the School of Computer Science
 doi: 10.1109/ICCCN52240.2021.9522260. and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
[36] F. Y. Wang, D. W. Zhou, H. J. Ye, and D.-C. Zha, “FOSTER: Feature (Shenzhen), China. He is also a Professor with
 boosting and compression for class-incremental learning,” in Proc. 17th the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vision (ECCV), vol. 13685, 2022, pp. 398–414, Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. His research interests
 doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-19806-9_23. include cyberspace security, cyber range, big data analysis, and artificial
[37] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intelligence security.
 intrusion detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020,
 doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2020.2991876. Ye Wang received the Ph.D. degree in information
[38] K. Xie et al., “On-line anomaly detection with high accu- and mathematical science from Victoria University,
 racy,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1222–1235, Australia, in 2019. She is currently a Research
 Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TNET.2018.2819507. Fellow with the Harbin Institute of Technology
[39] S. Yan, J. Xie, and X. He, “DER: Dynamically expandable representation (Shenzhen) and an Assistant Professor with the
 for class incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. National University of Defense Technology. Her
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Nashville, TN, USA, 2021, pp. 3013–3022, research interests include social network analysis,
 doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00303. information content security, and knowledge graph
[40] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional varia- reasoning.
 tional auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning
 approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, 2021, pp. 3538–3553,
 doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3083422.
 Le Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[41] L. Yu, et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 degree in computer science from NUDT, China, in
 for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
 2008. He is currently an Associate Professor with
 Art. no. 108117. doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108117.
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
[42] L. Yu et al., “Semantic drift compensation for class-incremental
 Guangzhou University as well as a Part Time
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Associate Professor with Pengcheng Laboratory,
 Recognit. (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 2020, pp. 6980–6989,
 China. He has authored 20+ journal and conference
 doi: 10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00701.
 papers in these areas, as well as a book in Chinese.
[43] H. Zhao, Y. Fu, M. Kang, Q. Tian, F. Wu, and X. Li, “MgSvF:
 His current research interests include network and
 Multi-grained slow vs. fast framework for few-shot class-incremental
 big data security. He also served as the co-chair and
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., early access, Dec. 9,
 the general chair of international conferences. He is
 2021, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3133897.
 a member of the China Computer Federation.
[44] C. Zhang, N. Song, G. Lin, Y. Zheng, P. Pan, and Y. Xu, “Fewshot incremental learning with continually evolved classifiers,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Nashville, TN,
 USA, 2021, pp. 12450–12459, doi: 10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01227. Yan Jia is a Professor with the Harbin Institute
[45] D.-W. Zhou, F.-Y. Wang, H.-J. Ye, L. Ma, S. Pu, and D.-C. Zhan, of Technology (Shenzhen). She is also a Professor
 “Forward compatible few-shot class-incremental learning,” in Proc. with the Department of New Networks, Peng
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), New Orleans, Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China. As a Principal
 LA, USA, 2022, pp. 9036–9046, doi: 10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00884. Investigator, she has undertaken more than 20
[46] D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, L. Ma, D. Xie, S. Pu, and D.-C. Zhan, “Few- national projects, including the National Key Project
 shot class-incremental learning by sampling multi-phase tasks,” IEEE of 863 Program and the National Natural Science
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 12816–12831, Foundation of China. Her research interests cover
 Nov. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3200865. big data analysis, artificial intelligence, online social
[47] J. Zhao, R. Masood, and S. Seneviratne, “A review of network analysis, and security situation awareness
 computer vision methods in network security,” IEEE Commun. and analysis in cyberspace. She serves as the Vice
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1838–1878, 3rd Quart., 2021, Chairman at the Chinese Information Processing Society of China and the
 doi: 10.1109/COMST.2021.3086475. Chair of the Specialty Committee of Big Search in Cyberspace.