IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024 5059

 A Lightweight Pipeline Edge Detection Model
 Based on Heterogeneous Knowledge Distillation
 Chengyuan Zhu , Yanyun Pu , Zhuoling Lyu , Aonan Wu, Kaixiang Yang , Member, IEEE,
 and Qinmin Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The pipeline safety warning system (PSEW) is resources [1]. Due to the long distance of pipeline transportaan important guarantee for the safe transportation of energy tion, various disruptive events (such as mechanical excavation,
pipelines. Given the constraints of deploying detection models construction, human activities, etc.) may occur in an open
at resource-limited pipeline stations, there is a compelling need
to develop efficient, lightweight models suitable for edge device environment, posing a threat to the safety of pipelines. In
applications. This brief introduces an adaptive heterogeneous 2022, the Nord Stream natural gas pipeline suffered external
model knowledge distillation network (AHKDnet) for edge damage and leakage, resulting in multiple explosions. The oil
deployment of pipeline network detection models. The global pipeline in Kansas, USA, leaked over 14000 barrels of crude
information and long-distance dependency relationships from the oil, causing significant economic losses and environmental
ViT-based teacher network are transferred to the CNN-based
shallow student network. We introduce the learnable modula- pollution. Thus, it is beneficial to conduct intrusion detection
tion parameters to optimize target information enhancement, around pipelines to promptly recognize such hazardous events
reducing the impact of irrelevant information. By embedding and implement corresponding measures. In recent years, the
the model selection at each stage of knowledge distillation, the pipeline safety early warning (PSEW) system based on disperformance collapse of student models caused by misleading tributed optical fiber sensing (DOFS) technology has become
cross-architecture knowledge is avoided, and model convergence
is accelerated. Experiments on three actual scene datasets of an important technology for preventing pipeline damage and
pipeline networks show that AHKDnet outperforms the state- ensuring energy transportation [2]. It employs communication
of-the-art KD methods and has strong generalization ability. optical cables along the pipeline as a sensor array, recog-
Notably, AHKDnet enhances the recognition performance of nizing signal types through signal processing and Artificial
shallow student networks by an average of 10%, highlighting its Intelligence (AI) algorithms. Subsequently, early warning and
efficacy and potential for practical applications. Our method can
provide a new reference for edge deployment of PSEW. verification of hazardous events are conducted. DOFS has
 extensive application prospects in energy, industry and other
 Index Terms—Pipeline network safety, knowledge distillation, fields due to its continuous monitoring, high resolution, and
heterogeneous model, lightweight, distributed optical fiber.
 low cost.
 The key to the PSEW system is the fast and accurate
 I. I NTRODUCTION intrusion detection algorithm. Therefore, effective and reli-
 IPELINE transportation is one of the essential modes able feature extraction and recognition network for damage
P of energy transportation, especially for oil and gas events comes to play and has received notable attention [3].
 In previous studies [4], [5], threshold-based and statistical
 Manuscript received 8 April 2024; revised 21 June 2024; accepted machine learning methods were used for signal processing
2 August 2024. Date of publication 6 August 2024; date of current version and intrusion event recognition in the single environment.
26 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National At present, deep learning methods have become the main-
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20478 and Grant
62106224; in part by the Zhejiang Provincial Nature Science Foundation of stream method of recognition algorithms to address the impact
China under Grant LZ21F030004; and in part by the Guangzhou Science of more complex environments and background noise in
and Technology Plan Project under Grant 2024A04J3749. This brief was the field of DOFS [6], [7]. Yang et al. proposed a realrecommended by Associate Editor J. Chen. (Corresponding authors: Kaixiang
Yang; Qinmin Yang.) time action recognition method for long-distance PSEW
 Chengyuan Zhu and Qinmin Yang are with the College of Control systems [1]. The system can quickly identify and locate
Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310007, third-party damage events by calculating two complementary
Zhejiang, China, and also with the Huzhou Institute, Zhejiang University,
Huzhou 313000, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: zhuchengyuan517@zju.edu.cn; features and constructing a novel action recognition deep
qmyang@zju.edu.cn). learning network. Wu et al. proposed a two-level multi-
 Yanyun Pu is with the College of Control Science and Engineering, task learning (MTL) enhanced smart fiber-optical distributed
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310007, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: yanyun23@
zju.edu.cn). acoustic sensing (sDAS) system to simultaneously realize
 Zhuoling Lyu and Aonan Wu are with the College of Engineers, Zhejiang ground event recognition and localization [8]. These studies
University, Hangzhou 310007, Zhejiang, China (e-mail: zhuolinglyu@ fully confirm that the combination of new intelligent sensors
zju.edu.cn; 22360173@zju.edu.cn).
 Kaixiang Yang is with the College of Computer Science and Engineering, and AI effectively improves the intelligence and safe operation
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, Guangdong, of pipelines [9], [10].
China (e-mail: yangkx@scut.edu.cn). However, there are still some challenges in the actual
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2024.3439361. deployment of pipeline networks. It is usually necessary to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2024.3439361 deploy multiple devices in stations or valve chambers along the
 1549-7747 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

pipeline to achieve comprehensive coverage of monitoring due
to the long transportation distance of pipelines. Stations often
have limited computing power and storage resources, which
affect the size and processing speed of deep learning models.
Currently, many studies [11], [12] aim to test deep models
on a single device without considering the global deployment
of pipeline networks. Our previous research [13], [14] also
found that the performance of using vision transformer (ViT) Fig. 1. (a) The diagram of PSEW deployed in the pipeline network, (b) The
structural models for classification after image encoding of deployment strategy of edge detection models in pipeline networks.
time series signals is better than that of CNN-based structural
models, which can improve the recognition performance of
PSEW systems. Nevertheless, models based on ViT structure require larger data and more parameters, while CNN
structure models have relatively lower computational complexity. Consequently, it is necessary to compress model to
balance the performance and time cost in pipeline network
applications.
 To achieve the goal of deploying efficient lightweight
models at the edge, we propose an adaptive heterogeneous
 Fig. 2. The structure diagram of DAS system.
model knowledge distillation network architecture, AHKDnet
that simultaneously uses a responses-based and features-based
distillation method for model learning in logits space. To The remainder of this brief is as follows. Section II
combine the advantages of ViT structure and CNN structure, introduces the structure of PSEW system and its application
the ViT-based model is regarded as the teacher network, in smart pipeline network. Section III provides a detailed
while the CNN-based model serves as the student network, explanation to AHKDnet. Section IV shows the experimenenabling the student model to learn the global information tal results to demonstrate the superior performance of the
and long-distance dependency relationships extracted by the proposed model. In Section V, this brief is summarized.
teacher model. This also makes the CNN model strengthen the
learning of position information, compensating for the spatial
information loss during convolution and pooling processes. II. PSEW S YSTEM FOR S MART P IPELINE N ETWORK
Therefore, it is necessary to project the features extracted PSEW system is an important component of smart pipeline
from heterogeneous models into a unified spatial alignment network, which can achieve intelligent perception and dynamic
for knowledge distillation (KD). Moreover, we add learnable monitoring of pipelines. At present, PSEW mainly consists of
modulation parameter and model selection at each stage of KD distributed optical fiber acoustic sensing (DAS) system and
to ensure the effectiveness of knowledge transfer. Enhancing unmanned aerial vehicle inspection system. Among them, the
target information can help improve the learning effectiveness DAS system utilizes the high sensitivity of coherent Rayleigh
of student models on teacher models, and alleviate the impact scattering in optical fiber, which can perceive environmental
of target class soft labels when teacher models provide under vibration and acoustic field at long distances with high
prediction. Model selection can accelerate the convergence spatiotemporal resolution. However, the monitoring range of
speed of student models by judging the using/not using KD. a single device is limited, usually within 50km.
Our major contributions are summarized as follows: As shown in Fig. 1 (a), multiple devices need to be installed
 1) We propose an adaptive heterogeneous knowledge distil- in the station or valve chamber of the pipeline network to
 lation network (AHKDnet) for limited edge deployment achieve continuous monitoring of the pipeline. The DAS
 of pipeline intrusion detection models. Compared with system is connected to the sensing fibers laid parallel to the
 the deep learning framework without KD, it can not only pipeline, continuously monitoring the external acoustic signals
 improve the recognition accuracy of student model, but of the pipeline. Fig. 1 (b) shows the deployment strategy of our
 also reduce the actual deployment requirements. lightweight edge detection model for cloud-edge collaborative.
 2) Considering the differences of target class distribution in By training a powerful teacher network in the cloud for KD,
 heterogeneous models, we have improved the modulation the performance of the student network deployed by edge
 parameters that can learn to optimize target information devices can be improved.
 enhancement in the loss function, further reducing the The structure of DAS system is shown in Fig. 2. The system
 impact of irrelevant information in logits space. uses narrow linewidth laser (NLL). The beam is modulated
 3) We introduce the mechanism of model selection based into narrow-band pulsed light by an acousto-optic modulator
 on threshold in the feature distillation of intermediate (AOM). The pulsed light is amplified by an erbium-doped fiber
 layers. It can limit the performance collapse caused amplifier (EDFA) and filtered. The modulated pulsed light
 by misleading cross-architecture knowledge, thus opti- enters the sensing fiber through the coupler and circulator.
 mizing the effectiveness of KD in each stage of the The sensing fiber is disturbed by piezoelectric ceramics (PZT)
 model. to generate Rayleigh backscattered light signal. The optical
ZHU et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PIPELINE EDGE DETECTION MODEL 5061

Fig. 3. The architecture of AHKDnet.

signal is converted by photodetector (PD) and triggered by an measurement allowing cross-architecture comparison achievarbitrary waveform generator (AWG) to collect the signal on able, as it can work with inputs having different dimensions.
the data acquisition (DAQ). Finally, the signal is processed To achieve heterogeneous model KD of intermediate layer
through the warning model deployed on the upper computer. features, the intermediate layer features are transferred to an
 aligned logits space and matched with the final output (logits)
 of the teacher network.
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 DHSIC (K, L)
 Knowledge distillation (KD), as a model compression CKA(K, L) = √ (1)
 DHSIC (K, K) DHSIC (L, L)
method, has broad application prospects in industry [15]. KD
 1
optimizes the student model by minimizing the difference in DHSIC (K, L) = tr(KHLH) (2)
output between the teacher model and the student model, typ- (n − 1)2
ically using soft labels as the training objective for the student where DHSIC denotes the Hilbert-Schmidt independence critemodel. KD aims to extract knowledge from higher accuracy rion. K and L represent Gram matrices of the features. H is
teacher networks to improve the performance of lightweight the centering matrix. The tr() represents the trace of a matrix.
student networks [16]. To integrate the advantages of different
architecture models, we propose the AHKDnet method based B. Learnable Optimization Target Enhancement
on the OFA-KD framework [17] to improve the performance Heterogeneous models have inherent differences in learnof heterogeneous model knowledge distillation in pipeline ing abilities and preferences due to their different inductive
network scenario. OFA-KD projects intermediate features into biases [17]. To enhance the information of target class, we
an aligned latent space, causing specific architecture related added a learnable parameter related to the target class to
information to be discarded. It significantly improves the distil- participate in learning optimization at each stage, achieving
lation performance between heterogeneous system structures. adaptive enhancement of the target information. The difference
Fig. 1 illustrates the framework of AHKDnet. Gramian angle from fixed modulation parameters is that it updates the values
field (GAF) is applied to transform the 30s DAS raw signal of each stage based on gradient contributions. The amount of
into 2D image as model input [13]. The structure of the model information affected by the teacher network varies due to the
consists of heterogeneous KD mechanism, the optimization changes in the receptive field of the CNN model at different
target enhancement with learnable parameters and the feature stages. There are differences in the optimal fixed parameters
distillation of intermediate layers with model selection. for different teacher models, and the most suitable value for
 each stage is also different. The loss function is defined as.
A. Heterogeneous Knowledge Distillation Mechanism  α γ̂  
 Lossahkd = − 1 + ptc log psc − λE ptc log psc (3)
 The ViT-based models have more advantages in event
classification of complex environmental signals, while the where ptc and psc represent the prediction probability of the
CNN-based models have relatively lower computational com- predicted class for the teacher model and the student model,
plexity. The ViT-based models can simultaneously consider respectively. ptc and psc are the probability of the target
both global and local feature extraction in different layers class for the student model and the teacher model. α is
due to the role of self-attention mechanism. The CNN-based used to control the learning rate of γ̂ . γ̂ denotes learnable
models follow a feature extraction process from local to global, modulating parameter to achieve learnable optimization of
making it difficult for shallow networks to retain more refined target information enhancement. α and γ̂ adjust the differences
local spatial information. Previous studies have demonstrated in learning ability and preferences of heterogeneous models
the feature mismatch caused by representation differences based on the probability of target class soft labels provided by
between heterogeneous models by calculating their centered the teacher model. λ is a hyperparameter controls the trade-off
kernel alignment (CKA) [17]. CKA is a feature similarity between one-hot label and soft label.
5062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 71, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I
 C OMPREHENSIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT M ODELS AND D ISTILLERS

C. Adaptive Model Selection With KD AHKDnet is compared with previous KD methods, includ-
 We introduce a model selection mechanism to ensure the ing KD [19], RKD [20], DKD [21], DIST [22], and
gain effect of KD [18]. Specifically, the effect with KD on OFA [17]. We employ ViT-based teacher networks, including
model convergence can be determined by adding the threshold ViT-B [23], Swin-B [24], and PipelineADVinT [14], as well
to optimize the update speed of gradients in the model. We as CNN-based shallow student networks, ResNet18 [25] and
train an additional local model in parallel at each stage, which EfficientNet-B0 [26]. Moreover, we compared the performance
update gradients through heterogeneous model distillation improvement of student networks on two directions of heteroand update gradients without KD learning, respectively. By geneous knowledge distillation, from ViT to CNN and from
calculating the gain of gradient descent on model convergence, CNN to ViT. The performance improvement of the proposed
the stage model with a greater contribution is selected to method was experimentally validated on three datasets. The
use the next round of training using the model. Thus, it accuracy (ACC) is used as an indicator to evaluate the
suppresses the performance collapse of student models caused performance of each model. The higher the accuracy, the
by misleading heterogeneous knowledge and improve the stronger the recognition performance of the model, as shown
convergence performance of student model. below.
  2   TP + TN
  j  j j ACC = (6)
 Gj = gkd  + 2 gi gkd (4) TP + TN + FP + FN
 Gj ≥ ξj , the model with KD; where TP, FP, FN, TN represent true positives, false positive,
 (5)
 Gj < ξj , the model without KD. false negative and true negative respectively.
 The comparative experimental results between the proposed
where Gj is the performance gain by using the KD method at method and previous work indicate that AHKDnet has superior
 j j
stage j. gkd and gi represent gradients with and without KD performance in Table I. Overall, it can improve the accuracy
at stage j, respectively. ξj denotes the threshold of the model of the original student model by approximately 10%. When the
contribution at stage j. If Gj ≥ ξj , the sum of the step size of performance of teacher and student networks is enhanced, the
gradient has a positive contribution to the local model update. distillation effect is also better. PipelineADVinT/EfficientNet-
Then, the local model for the next training round should use B0 improves by 11.79% compared to the original student
KD. On the contrary, there is no need to learn through KD. model, reaching 89.48%. However, the improvement effect
 is limited compared to the improved OFA model, with the
 accuracy increase of approximately 1%. After checking the
 IV. E XPERIMENTS misclassified samples, it was found that improvements in
 The experimental data is collected from DOFS signals in the OFA model can only be effective when special samples are
actual scenes of natural gas pipelines in Zhejiang Province, prone to misleading. This may play a crucial role for practical
including three kinds of DOFS datasets with different sizes, applications in real-time signal recognition. Moreover, it can
types and scenes. We select three types of events on each be seen from the number of parameter and FLOPs that the
pipeline, including intrusion events, interference events, and proposed method can significantly improve the recognition
environmental noise. Each type has 1000 samples, totaling ability of student models with small parameter quantities,
9000 samples. The system sampling frequency is 4Hz, and while reducing computational costs.
the sample signal length is 30s, with a total of 120 sampling Fig. 4 (a) indicates that ViT-based is more suitable as
points. In paper [14], a more detailed introduction is provided the teacher network in pipeline scenarios. Compared with
to the datasets. We convert the original signals into 2D images CNN-based teacher networks, it can significantly improve
by the image encoding method of Gramian Angular Field the performance of trained student networks. On the one
(GAF), and unify the resolution of images to 224x224. It can hand, it is due to the limited performance of shallow ViT
preserve the complete information of the signal and maintain models as student networks. On the other hand, the global
its dependence on time. The CNN-based models are trained information obtained by the ViT model of attention mechanism
using the SGD optimizer with an initialized learning rate of can be transmitted to the CNN model to compensate for the
0.05, while other ViT-based models are trained using the Adam missing feature information during the convolution process.
optimizer (set β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99). All experiments are As shown in Fig. 4 (b), the test results on three datasets
trained for 100 epochs using 5-fold cross validation. show that the proposed method can improve the average
ZHU et al.: LIGHTWEIGHT PIPELINE EDGE DETECTION MODEL 5063

 [7] C. Zhu, Y. Yang, K. Yang, H. Zhang, Q. Yang, and C. L. P. Chen,
 “AI-based energy transportation safety: Pipeline radial threat estimation
 using intelligent sensing system,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024,
 pp. 1–9.
 [8] H. Wu et al., “Smart fiber-optic distributed acoustic sensing (sDAS) with
 multitask learning for time-efficient ground listening applications,” IEEE
 Internet Things, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 8511–8525, Mar. 2024.
 [9] C. Zhu, K. Yang, Q. Yang, Y. Pu, and C. L. P. Chen, “A comprehensive
 bibliometric analysis of signal processing and pattern recognition based
 on distributed optical fiber,” Measurement, vol. 206, pp. 1–17, Jan. 2023.
 [10] K. Yang, Z. Yu, W. Chen, Z. Liang, and C. L. P. Chen,
 “Solving the imbalanced problem by metric learning and oversam-
Fig. 4. (a) Test accuracy curves in different KD directions, (b) Experimental pling,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Jun. 27, 2024,
comparison of the proposed methods on different pipelines. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3419834.
 [11] H. Wu et al., “One-dimensional CNN-based intelligent recognition of
 vibrations in pipeline monitoring with DAS,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37,
 no. 17, pp. 4359–4366, Sep. 2019.
recognition accuracy of the model by 10%, which has strong [12] W. Chen, K. Yang, Z. Yu, Y. Shi, and C. L. P. Chen, “A survey on imbalanced learning: Latest research, applications and future directions,” Artif.
generalization ability and stable improvement on lightweight Intell. Rev., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1–51, 2024.
student networks. [13] C. Zhu, Y. Pu, K. Yang, Q. Yang, and C. L. P. Chen, “Distributed
 optical fiber intrusion detection by image encoding and SwinT in
 multi-interference environment of long-distance pipeline,” IEEE Trans.
 V. C ONCLUSION Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, May 2023.
 [14] C. Zhu, Y. Pu, K. Yang, Q. Yang, and C. L. P. Chen, “A novel visual
 This brief proposed an adaptive heterogeneous model transformer for long-distance pipeline pattern recognition in complex
knowledge distillation network for the pipeline network environment,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 2933–2945,
deployed detection models at the edge. The proposed Jun. 2024.
 [15] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distillation: A
method effectively improves the recognition performance of survey,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, pp. 1789–1819, Mar. 2021.
lightweight CNN-based models by projecting logits space [16] C. Zhang, Y. Liao, S. Han, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, and X. Xie,
for heterogeneous model knowledge distillation. We introduce “Multichannel multidomain-based knowledge distillation algorithm for
 sleep staging with single-channel EEG,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II,
learnable modulation parameter and model selection at each Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 4608–4612, Nov. 2022.
stage of knowledge distillation for target information enhance- [17] Z. Hao et al., “One-for-all: Bridge the gap between heterogeneous
ment and the effectiveness of knowledge transfer. Experiments architectures in knowledge distillation,” in Proc. 37th Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 1–13.
on several pipelines have confirmed the superiority of the [18] D. Wang, N. Zhang, M. Tao, and X. Chen, “Knowledge selection and
proposed method. Experimental results show that the accuracy local updating optimization for federated knowledge distillation with
of AHKDnet is 10% higher than that of the original student heterogeneous models,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 17,
 no. 1, pp. 82–97, Jan. 2023.
model, and about 1% higher than that of SOTA KD method. [19] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 1–9.
 R EFERENCES [20] W. Park, D. Kim, Y. Lu, and M. Cho, “Relational knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
 [1] Y. Yang, Y. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and H. Zhang, “Early safety pp. 3967–3976.
 warnings for long-distance pipelines: A distributed optical fiber sensor [21] B. Zhao, Q. Cui, R. Song, Y. Qiu, and J. Liang, “Decoupled knowledge
 machine learning approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, distillation,” in Proc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
 pp. 14991–14999. pp. 11953–11962.
 [2] Z. Lyu, C. Zhu, Y. Pu, Z. Chen, K. Yang, and Q. Yang, “Two-stage [22] T. Huang, S. You, F. Wang, C. Qian, and C. Xu, “Knowledge distillation
 intrusion events recognition for vibration signals from distributed optical from a stronger teacher,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022,
 fiber sensors,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–10, Nov. 2024. pp. 33716–33727.
 [3] M. Ding, Z. Lin, C. H. Lee, C. H. Tan, and W. Huang, “A multi- [23] A. Dosovitskiy and L. Beyer, “An image is worth 16x16 words:
 scale channel attention network for prostate segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Transformers for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 1754–1758, May 2023. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 770–778.
 [4] J. Tejedor, J. Macias-Guarasa, H. F. Martins, S. Martin-Lopez, and [24] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer
 M. Gonzalez-Herraez, “A contextual GMM-HMM smart fiber optic using shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
 surveillance system for pipeline integrity threat detection,” J. Lightw. pp. 10012–10022.
 Technol., vol. 37, no. 18, pp. 4514–4522, Sep. 2019. [25] G. Li, Z. Yu, K. Yang, M. Lin, and C. L. P. Chen, “Exploring
 [5] H. Meng, S. Wang, C. Gao, and F. Liu, “Research on recognition method feature selection with limited labels: A comprehensive survey of semiof railway perimeter intrusions based on φ-OTDR optical fiber sensing supervised and unsupervised approaches,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 technology,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 9852–9859, Apr. 2021. Eng., early access, May 7, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3397878.
 [6] C. Zhu, Y. Pu, Y. Yang, Z. Lyu, C. Li, and Q. Yang, “Localizing and [26] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convotracking of in-pipe inspection robots based on distributed optical fiber lutional neural networks,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn, 2019,
 sensing,” Adv. Eng. Inform., vol. 60, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 102424. pp. 6105–6114.