2190 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 A Multihead Attention Self-Supervised
 Representation Model for Industrial Sensors
 Anomaly Detection
 Yiqun Qiao , Jinhu Lü , Fellow, IEEE, Tian Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, Kexin Liu ,
 Baochang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hichem Snoussi

 Abstract—Industrial sensors capture critical informa- Index Terms—Anomaly detection, multihead attention
tion for intelligent manufacturing maintenance. To promote self-supervised (MAS) feature representation method, senequipment upgrading and manufacturing processes, intelli- sor time-series data, the industrial Internet of things (IIoT).
gent decisions, and information learning play an important
role. Although deep learning methods historically obtain
excellent results, there is always a tradeoff between fine- I. INTRODUCTION
tuning existing networks or designing models from scratch
 NDUSTRIAL Internet of things (IIoT) has been rapidly
for sensor data processing. In this article, we propose the
multihead attention self-supervised (MAS) representation
model, which is a self-supervised learning-based sensor
 I developing in the last few years, e.g., in smart factories,
 unmanned logistics sorting, and collaborative production. IIoT
feature extraction network. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first time a self-supervised contrastive learning integrates industrial production equipment, industrial sensors,
method using positive samples that represent multidimen- and monitoring devices. Intelligent analysis is embedded into
sional industry sensor data is being used for anomaly de- different industrial production parts through wired and wireless
tection. We review alternative data augmentation methods transmission data. The processing and analysis of data are
proposed for better-representing sensor sequence data. We particularly important in industrial production processes [1].
use this insight to design a new structure that adapts to
the temporal characteristics of the application. We apply And these important data are captured by industrial sensors. The
our method to a real-world water circulation system that collected information extracted from various datasets provides
uses a variety of industrial sensors. The effectiveness of valuable information for subsequent evaluation and decisionthe proposed MAS methods is demonstrated. making. An implementation of IIoT is the timely detection of
 system abnormalities via sensor data, which must be meaningful
 to ensure the safety and stability of industrial production.
 Data generated by many sensors are widely transmitted. Fig. 1
 Manuscript received 1 June 2022; revised 7 December 2022 and depicts an industrial scenario of industrial production processes.
20 March 2023; accepted 13 May 2023. Date of publication 21 June There are a variety of different sensors that can collect industrial
2023; date of current version 19 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant data, such as temperature and vibration. These data are dynamic
2022YFB3305600; in part by the National Science Foundation of China and high-dimensional, processed and stored on edge computunder Grant 92067204, Grant 62141604, Grant 61972016, and Grant ing via data transfer, and further transferred to the cloud by
62032016; and in part by the Beijing Nova Program under Grant
2022122. Paper no. TII-22-2332. (Corresponding author: Jinhu Lü.) network technology [2]. Some tasks, such as status monitoring
 Yiqun Qiao is with the School of Automation Science and Electri- and anomaly detection, have been further implemented. Data
cal Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: processing methods are often adapted to mine information, but
Qfrank@buaa.edu.cn).
 Jinhu Lü is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical En- effective analysis is very important for anomaly detection or
gineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, traffic analysis of an industrial system.
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with the Zhong- Data acquired by industrial sensors are usually in the form of
guancun Laboratory, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: jhlu@iss.ac.cn).
 Tian Wang and Baochang Zhang are with the Institute of Artificial a time series. The status information is represented via a single
Intelligence, the State Key Laboratory of Software Development En- sensor, such as current data, temperature data, vibration data,
vironment, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with and other data from various types of sensors. In some cases, the
the Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: wangtian@buaa.edu.cn; bczhang@buaa.edu.cn). cooperation of multisensor information is required. For example,
 Kexin Liu is with the School of Automation Science and Electrical En- it may be difficult for a single sensor to capture a system-level
gineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, abnormality, but the abnormality can be analyzed from data
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: kxliu@buaa.edu.cn).
 Hichem Snoussi is with the Charles Delaunay Institute (ICD), collected by multiple sensors. For a single sensor, the data
University of Technology of Troyes, 10004 Troyes, France (e-mail: currently obtained often have a particular correlation with data
hichem.snoussi@utt.fr). collected previously, indicating that the data are time-dependent.
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3280337. Data analysis is important for IIoT status surveillance.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3280337 Anomaly detection is one of the key implementations. Abnormal
 1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL 2191

 reconstruction approaches may not be necessary for representation learning.
 It is hard work to train the model when the training set has
 abnormal data. Therefore, we consider that contrast learning
 is appropriate when applied to the field of anomaly detection.
 Meanwhile, Yann LeCun also believes that self-supervision is
 an important point for future AI research [7]. He thinks that
 self-supervised learning (SSL) is one of the most promising
 ways to build background knowledge and approximate a form
Fig. 1. Framework diagram of the IIoT. In industrial sites, data are of common sense in Al systems. Background knowledge can
collected by sensors and transmitted to the edge plane. And further, it is be considered as data generality representations. In the pretransmitted to the cloud plane through the network to accomplish some
tasks, such as state monitoring. Therefore, effective data processing and training stage, the SSL model captures general representations
analysis will aid in the mining of sensor data features and the informa- through certain specific tasks or ingenious design by using
tion contained within them, which is of great importance for industrial unlabeled data. It is difficult to label all the data for AI systems,
production.
 but self-supervision pretraining can learn the representation of
 unlabeled data. So we start to do some preliminary work in
data include values that are too large or too small and can be the field of industrial anomaly detection using self-supervised
defined by using expert knowledge. However, due to complex representation learning methods.
environments and operating conditions, abnormalities are often Despite artificial intelligence technology in different fields
related to normal values. Hardware anomalies, such as various sharing some common intuition and model structure, details for
equipment failures, and anomalies caused by environmental specific fields are quite different. Simply adopting methods from
disturbances are common in industrial systems. These industrial other fields usually leads to bad performance. Hence, in practice,
anomalies can disrupt the entire industrial system’s production, algorithms designed for specific fields should be applied to make
and may even result in extremely significant mishaps. As a the model effective. Specifically, for sensor data, we need careful
result, abnormalities in the system should be captured timely design to modify the algorithms including data preprocession,
and accurately by using many sensors. This is also an important data augmentation, representation, and network structure.
task of industrial internet intelligence and security. In this work, we propose the multihead attention self-
 In a nutshell, there are two types of anomaly detection supervised (MAS) representation model, a novel end-to-end apapproaches: traditional machine learning methods and deep proach for self-supervised representation-based anomaly deteclearning methods. Traditional anomaly detection methods in- tion method. The MAS method allows the existence of outliers
clude time-series models, such as autoregressive moving average in the training set, which is more in line with the characteristics
models [3], Markov models [4], and Kalman filters [5]. These of actual collected data. The method does not depend on the
methods do not generally have high detection accuracy and assumption of a statistical distribution of the data. The main
are also not good enough for high-dimensional long-sequence contributions of our article are as follows.
time-series feature extraction. In deep learning, neural networks 1) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a selfapply to anomaly detection and show better detection perfor- supervised representation contrastive learning method
mance than traditional methods. In the training network phase with positive samples is used for anomaly detection of
of supervised learning, training data must be labeled. Label sam- industrial sensors. The network extracts general features
ples for industrial data require manual labeling by experienced of time-series data via a set of tasks. After the feature
engineers, which is costly and time-consuming. If the quantity extraction work is completed in the pretraining stage, the
of negative samples marked throughout the training process is process is applied to the anomaly detection task.
insufficient, the unbalanced training results will induce inad- 2) For the enhancement of time-series data, we propose three
equate learning. Unsupervised learning refers to solving the different enhancement strategies: adding noise, random
problem of pattern recognition on unlabeled datasets. In anomaly masking, and flipping data. These methods are compared
detection, prediction-based or reconstruction-based methods are via experiments. Since abnormal samples can be regarded
the most used. Unsupervised learning can far exceed supervised as a way of data enhancement and the number of abnormal
learning in terms of training set size. It is normally important samples is typically modest in real-world scenarios, there
to employ a normal dataset during training, and the proportion is no need to remove abnormal data in the pretraining
of the abnormal data in training samples may cause distinct stage.
accuracies. As a result, in real-world scenarios, that means the 3) A sensor data feature extraction network is proposed. The
dataset must be carefully screened and selected. For example, network can extract effective and generic features from
Malhotra et al. [6] introduced an LSTM-based encoder–decoder time series data. In industrial production environments,
model that learns to represent feature vectors of normal time- there are also many sensors with sample values scattered
series behavior for the sensor anomaly detection problem and over a wide range. Only raw sensor data are required when
then applies reconstruction error to detect abnormalities. These utilizing the MAS model.
unsupervised methods rely on the reconstruction of the input The rest of this article is organized as follows. We review
from the output or prediction tasks. However, prediction or related work in Section II and describe our approach in detail in
2192 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Section III. We describe the dataset and perform experimental recovered for reconstruction. The model makes no assumptions
analysis in Section IV, and summarize our work in Section V. about the data type and in unusual instances, can increase the
 reconstruction error. Zhou et al. [21] proposed a variational
 II. RELATED WORK LSTM network based on reconstructed representations for the
 industrial big data network intrusion problem. The work learns
 In this section, we review the existing approaches for induslow-dimensional feature representations from high-dimensional
trial anomaly detection. Since we also use a contrastive learning
 raw data to identify not only the presence of anomalies, but
approach applied for anomaly detection tasks, as contrastive
 also the class of anomalies. In addition, Qi et al. [22] addressed
learning is the key technology of SSL, we also introduce it to
 the issue of cyber-attacks in industrial logistics networks and
anomaly detection.
 proposes the multiaspect data streams detection method. This
 method combines the techniques of locality-sensitive hashing,
A. Industrial Data Analysis isolation forest, and PCA. On the dataset UNSW-NB15, it
 Anomaly detection techniques for IIoT have received much achieves state-of-the-art performance. Su et al. [23] combined
attention in recent years. Anomaly detection methods in IIoT can a Gaussian mixture model with a one-dimensional CNN to
be divided into traditional machine methods and deep learning detect instance anomalies for servers in large data centers. It has
methods. Rodrigo et al. [8] proposed autoregressive integrated also been validated and achieves the best performance on the
moving average model (ARIMA) to detect anomalies in sensors. ByteDance server dataset. Lin et al. [24] proposed an anomaly
The ARIMA method can transform a dynamic time series into detection model that combines VAE and LSTM. The VAE model
a stationary one, and then predict future values based on past is used to construct robust local features over a brief window,
values by setting prediction intervals as criteria for anomaly and the LSTM method is used to estimate long-term correlations
detection. However, this method is typically applied to a one- over VAE-inferred features. Although GAN model and VAE
dimensional time series, while the accuracy deserves further model sometimes have high precision for anomaly detection,
improvement. the computational cost is high and such reconstruction may not
 A growing number of machine learning approaches are being be necessary for feature learning. Instead, various network strucapplied to anomaly detection problems with the development of tures are used to enhance data feature learning. For the problem
deep learning. Some neural networks, such as long short-term of anomaly detection in industrial sensors, it is very important
memory (LSTM) network, have been extensively researched and to design a reasonable model for representation learning.
applied to time series data. Wu et al. [2] proposed a LSTM-
Gauss–Bayes method for outlier detection for IIOT. They combined LSTM and Gaussian Bayesian models to introduce model B. Self-Supervised Representation Learning
prediction errors into a normally distributed Naive Bayesian Self-supervised representation learning has been rapidly demodel to detect anomalies. veloping in recent years and has been applied to the fields
 LSTM is relatively lightweight, however, it cannot be paral- of image processing [25], video processing [26], and natural
lelized during training. The attention mechanism focuses on a language processing [27] with good results.
part of the information while ignoring other parts of the informa- Contrastive learning is a technique that allows a model to
tion. This methodology has been successful in transformers [9]. learn which data points are similar or different to understand the
The attention mechanism is effective and can be trained in general characteristics of a dataset. In general, self-supervised
parallel; it is being gradually applied to anomaly detection representation learning is realized by constructing positive samin time-series data. Liu et al. [10] proposed a LSTM model ples and negative samples and measuring the distance between
of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) based on attention positive and negative samples. The frequent loss function is Inmechanisms for federal learning frameworks, resulting in data foNCE [28], which seeks to bring the distance between positive
acquisition of fine-grained features. Li et al. [11] proposed a sample pairs closer and the distance between negative sample
model using multihead attention mechanism to detect anoma- pairs farther.
lous behavior in ICS network traffic data when smart charging Many current contrastive learning approaches concentrate on
piles. The model does not require preprocessing of the data, it can vision processing and natural language processing. In the field
extract high-dimensional information between the original flows of computer vision, methods of self-supervised representation
better than many other methods (such as CNN-LeNET [12], learning are gradually gaining attention from researchers. Do-
CNN-sVGG [13], CNN-sAlexNET [14], SVM-rbf [15], random ersch et al. [29] suggested using jigsaw puzzles to build an auxforest [16], and decision tree [17]). iliary task. By segmenting the image and predicting the relative
 In addition to the approaches discussed previously, there positions of these parts, the network is trained. Methods based on
are methods for detecting data anomalies based on generative contrast learning have produced positive results in recent years.
adversarial networks (GAN) [18] or variational autoencoders Chen et al. [30] began by emphasizing the significance of various
(VAE) [19]. Both GAN model and VAE model are generative data enhancement methods before arguing that introducing nonmodels that use training data to build real data distributions, and linear transformations between data representation and contrast
then use the learned models and distributions to generate model- loss can improve the quality of the learned representations. Reing to model new data. Gong et al. [20] used a memory module to cently, generative-based self-supervised representation learning
improve the autoencoder, where the most relevant memories are methods have gradually received attention from researchers.
QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL 2193

 TABLE I be described later. The overall structure of contrastive learning
 TABLE OF SYMBOLS, THE CORRESPONDING MEANINGS OF
 DIFFERENT SYMBOLS
 is shown in Fig. 2.
 The data collected by industrial sensors is a continuous
 sequence (x1 , . . . , xn ), with each moment being a vector of
 multisensor. A vector sequence (xi , . . . , xseq ) sampled from
 (x1 , . . . , xn ), and the network generates two different enhanced
 data v  t(x) and v   t (x) by using various data augmentation methods. The data augmentation approaches will be introduced later. Subsequently, the data representations y and y 
 are obtained after the feature extraction network fθ and fδ ,
 respectively. The feature qθ is obtained by y via the projector
 and the predictor, and the feature zδ is obtained by y  via the
 projector. Finally, we calculate the 2 loss between the feature
He et al. [31] proposed a mask-based autoencoder to pretrain the qθ and the feature zδ
backbone network via an asymmetric encoder–decoder structure; the literature [32] improved on this basis by predicting Lθ,δ  q̄θ − z̄δ 22 (1)
the features of the masked region rather than reconstructing the where, q̄θ  qθ /qθ 2 and z̄δ  zδ /zδ 2 . The loss function
original image. in (1) is also the loss function in Fig. 2. The significance of
 At present, there are few kinds of research on contrast learning using the l2 loss function is that representations of the same
in the field of time series anomaly detection. In literature [33], property are closer. In addition, the weight update method of fθ
Deldari et al. first proposed the method of contrastive learning for is stochastic gradient descent, and the weight update method of
time-series change point detection. In this research, a temporal fδ is as follows:
convolutional network [34] is used to extract sequence features.
The effect of batch size, code size, and windows size on the δ ← τ δ + (1 − τ ) θ (2)
outcomes are investigated.
 Finding appropriate auxiliary activities is critical for boost- where, τ is a decay rate, its ranges from 0 to 1. After coming model training accuracy in self-supervised representation pleting the training, we obtain the sequence feature extraction
learning. In the pretraining stage, various auxiliary tasks in the network fθ . For further information on the specific process, see
video, image, and natural language processing are designed to Algorithm 1.
increase the ability of model feature extraction. However, applying contrastive learning methods to industrial time-series data B. Data Augmentation
instead poses some unique challenges. We attempt to address
 We use data augmentation for contrastive learning to compare
the problem of using self-supervised representation learning to
 positive data, e.g., by constructing negative sample pairs as
provide effective representations for anomaly detection.
 in [33]. This article proposes three data enhancement approaches
 for industrial sensor data processing. The following are intro-
 III. METHODOLOGY duced.
 1) Adding Noise: The mean and standard deviation of the
 We introduce a self-supervised representation contrastive
 time-series data gathered by each sensor are calculated sepalearning model [35].
 rately. The approach for introducing Gaussian white noise is as
 From the previous analysis, we know that industrial sensor
 follows:
data is time-dependent. When an abnormality occurs in the
system, many sensors may gather abnormal data concurrently. x = x + γ · noise(0, std) (3)
To build more accurate and efficient detection models, we need
to be able to capture time-dependent characteristics and use where, x is the enhanced data, γ ∈ [0, 1] is noise rate,
information collected from multiple sensors. At the same time, noise(0, std) represents white Gaussian noise with a mean of
a self-supervised representation training strategy is adopted to 0 and a standard deviation of std.
learn more representation of the data. 2) Data Flip: For the sliced sensor data (xi , . . . , xseq ), the
 In this work, we use anomaly detection task to test the perfor- data at each moment is a vector. There are two methods for
mance of the network. The model shows good performance in flipping data. One method flips the series in temporal order and
the anomaly detection task. The following section will describe gets the flipped sequence (xseq , . . . , xi ). An alternate approach
the details. The symbols’ definitions are shown in Table I. is to transpose by dimension, and the resulting data sequence is
 (xi , . . . , xseq ), where xi  , xseq is the transpose of xi , xseq .
 3) Data Mask: Mask or replace a portion of the data in the
A. Data Representation Learning time series at random. First, use the Bernoulli distribution to
 A feature extractor, which maps time-series features into determine the segment to be masked in the data. Each training
a compact embedding representation, is at the foundation of epoch has a different mask position to improve the network’s
contrastive learning. The structure of the feature extractor will ability to extract characteristics from the data.
2194 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the MAS model. The data collected from the sensors are first enhanced via means of data augmentation, followed
by a feature extractor to obtain representations of the data. The output features are obtained from these representations by running them through
a projector/predictor head. The features are normalized before the l2 loss is calculated. The significance of using the l2 loss function is to make the
features obtained by the predictor closer to the features of the projector head. The network’s projector or predictor head is made up of two linear
layers, a BN layer, and an activation function. After the feature extractor finishes training, a fully connected layer is added to complete the data
anomaly detection.

 associations. The use of CNN leads to a proliferation of layers
 Algorithm 1. Multi-Head Attention Self Supervised Feature
 and model parameters, while recurrent neural network or LSTM
 Representation Model.
 has sequential inputs and has gradient explosion or slow training
 problems.
 We employ dilated casual convolution [34] instead of general
 convolution and obtain a large perceptual field while using fewer
 network layers and model parameters in the MAS model. Causal
 convolution allows the output of the net at moment t to be only
 associated with the input before the moment t, as shown in
 Fig. 4. This operation is achieved by zero padding. This can
 avoid the influence of future information on the network output
 at the current moment.
 2) Multihead Attention: The attention mechanism process
 can be described as calculating scores by queries and keys, and
 then multiplying the scores with values to obtain the output. The
 queries, keys, values, and output are all vectors.
 The features extracted by dilated causal convolution are inputted into the multihead attention mechanism. The input then
 undergoes a linear mapping that yields the values of queries (Q),
 keys (K), and values (V ). The dimension of Q and K is dk [31],
 and the dimension of the values is dv . After calculating the dot
 product of the queries and keys, we can obtain the weight of
 values through the softmax layer
  
 Q · KT
 attention = softmax √ V (4)
 dk

 where dk is the scaling factor to prevent the result of the dot
 product from being too large.
 The multihead attention mechanism is an improvement over
 the attention mechanism, which establishes different projection
 information in different spaces. The input matrices are projected
C. Feature Extraction Network differently and stitched together after many output matrices are
 obtained
 1) Dilated Casual Convolution: Industrial sensor data are
time-series data, and the determination of anomalies often re-
 MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = ZW O
quires analysis from a period before the anomaly. Neural net- (5)
works require larger receptive fields to establish longer temporal Z = Concat (head1 , . . . , headh )
QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL 2195

Fig. 3. Structure of the feature extractor. The data collected from industrial sensors are first sliced and sent through a dilated casual convolution
with residual connection, then through a batch norm layer. The extracted features are processed via a multihead attention network with residual
connections, followed by a fully connected layer, to obtain a representation of the data.

 TABLE II
 SENSOR DETAILS, INCLUDING SENSOR TYPE, DATA ACQUISITION UNIT, AND
 QUANTITIES OF DIFFERENT SENSORS

Fig. 4. Difference between normal convolution, causal convolution,
and dilated convolution. Convolution with a kernel size of 3 is shown.
The output of each layer of the causal convolution is obtained from the A. Data Description
corresponding unknown input of the previous layer and the input of its
previous positions. Dilated convolution skips part of the input and the To evaluate the performance of our method in an industrial
filter can be applied to regions larger than the length of the filter itself so sensor environment, a publicly available dataset SKAB [36]
that a large perceptual field can be obtained.
 is used. The dataset contains eight sensor data collected from
 real water circulation systems. The types of sensors and data
where, headi = attention(QWiQ , KWiK , V WiV ), Q ∈ Rn×dk , collection units are shown in Table II.
K ∈ Rn×dk , V ∈ Rn×dv . A linear layer, behind the multihead The dataset adopted in our work has various types of senattention mechanism, is used as the output of the entire net- sors, including acceleration, current, and others. The physical
work. For features extracted by dilated casual convolution, the quantities and ranges of data collected by sensors are different,
multihead attention model is used to capture the implied features and data are time-dependent. The information provided by these
between the multidimensional data. sensors reflects the overall operational status of the experimental
 3) Network Structure: The feature extractor’s overall struc- platform system. The sensors are commonly used in industry;
ture is shown in Fig. 3, which includes dilated casual con- we admit that the scale of the system is small compared to the
volution, batch norm model, RELU, and multihead attention real industrial environment. However, it can reflect the characmechanism. For the data collected from industrial sensors, the teristics of industrial sensor networks. In addition, we apply to
data are first sliced into sequences, and then the features are preprocess the data before training and testing. The specific steps
extracted through dilated casual convolution. The dilated casual are: calculating the mean and standard deviation values of each
convolution has a large perceptual field and a time-dependent sensor data and then performing normalization.
feature that can process sensor input more effectively. The
convolved features are then fed into the multihead attention B. Parameter and Structure
mechanism. The multihead attention model aids in the extraction
 We experiment with the MAS model and some other algoof characteristics from multidimensional data. The batch norm
 rithms on the same dataset. In our experiments, we use Pytorch
and residual modules serve to increase training stability in the
 and Nvidia 2080Ti for model acceleration. We use the SGD optiself-supervised representation learning process. The end of the
 mizer during model training. The target decay rate is τ = 0.999.
network structure is a fully connected layer for feature map-
 In the feature extractor, the output dimension of the two-layer
ping. As a result, the data gathered from the industrial sensors
 dilated casual convolution is 32. Subsequently, the output and
are extracted as characterization information during network
 input dimensions are kept the same size after a multihead attenprocessing.
 tion mechanism is applied. Then going through a batch norm
 and a linear layer, we get a ten-dimensional output. Projection
 IV. EXPERIMENTS and prediction both have the same structure, the dimension of
 In this section, experiments are designed to evaluate the the projection input is ten and the dimension of the output is
MAS method to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed eight. The prediction input is eight and the dimension of output
method. is eight.
2196 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 We compare other machine learning methods with our pro- TABLE III
 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT DATA AUGMENTATION METHODS ON THE RESULTS.
posed MAS method, including LSTM, multivariate state esti- THERE ARE THREE MAIN DATA AUGMENTATION METHODS: ADDING NOISE,
mation technique (MSET), multiscale convolutional recurrent RANDOM MASK, AND DATA FLIPPING
encoder–decoder (MSCRED), LSTM variational autoencoder
(LSTM-VAE), Hotelling’s T-squared statistic (T-squared), autoencoder, and isolation forest.

C. Evaluation Metrics
 We apply accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 to determine the
performance of the model comprehensively [2]. The detailed
formulas for the metrics are as follows:
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (6)
 TP + FN + FP + TN features. As can be observed from simulation results, there is
 TP a certain improvement in detection accuracy when employing
 Recall = (7)
 TP + FN multiple data enhancement with LR flip compared with only
 TP using the two data augmentation methods with LR flip. For the
 Precision = (8) multiple data enhancement methods using UD flip, there is no
 TP + FP
 2 · Precision · Recall significant improvement in the highest accuracy compared with
 F1 = (9) the corresponding two data augmentation approaches using UD
 Precision + Recall
 flip, and both are the same in F1-score. We can see that using
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are four classification results, denoting three means of data augmentation is not always as effective as
true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative, using two. We consider that as the quantity of data augmentation
respectively. methods grows, modified segments of original data will also
 The recall metric represents how many abnormal samples are increase. Too much change in the data will damage its properties.
found. Precision represents how many of the samples judged to The model can effectively learn representations if augmented
be abnormal are true. F1 represents the combined accuracy of data is within a certain range. When too much data augmentation
model detection, which is a combination of recall and precision. is used, the effectiveness of model extraction representation will
 be reduced.
D. Results and Analysis
 Contrastive learning aims to learn representations that are
 1) Data Augmentation: We address the problem of anomaly invariant under different distortions. Intuitively, if anomaly samdetection by contrastive learning. Anomaly detection aims to ples appear in the training phase, their representations will also
distinguish the difference between normal and abnormal sample be learned as well as those of the normal. While contrastive
features. In general, there is an imbalance of samples, and the approaches of SSL learn representations by minimizing the
amount of abnormal events is small. Contrastive learning can get distance between two augmented views of the same data point
a good feature extraction with few negative samples. Data aug- (positive pairs) and maximizing views from different data points
mentation is an important method in contrastive learning. During (negative pairs), recent noncontrastive SSL shows remarkable
the training phase, contrastive learning reduces the distance performance without negative pairs. Compared to contrastive
between similar samples and increases the distance between neg- methods, these noncontrastive methods do not require large
ative samples, to realize the representations of normal samples batch sizes or memory queues [25] to provide negative pairs.
and abnormal samples. The model is adopted to extract features Therefore, excluding the negative pairs, the noncontrastive
of sensor data. Through the method of data augmentation and learning that we use is generally more efficient and conceptually
contrastive learning, the model will extract better features in the simple.
pretraining phase. We use the method of adding noise and random masking as an
 We explore how different data augmentation strategies affect example to explain the effectiveness of data augmentation. After
feature extraction. In this article, we apply three data enhance- adding noise to the data, data will fluctuate within a range. The
ment techniques: adding noise, randomly performing mask, and random mask method selects a set of data points and masks them.
data flipping. The data flip includes an up and down flip (UD These masked data points may be normal or abnormal. When
flip) and a left and right flip (LR flip). The simulation results are the network converges to a nonzero nontrivial solution, the entire
shown in Table III. network can work. The network can learn representations of both
 For using two data enhancement methods, the combination anomaly and normal features from the training data. This is also
of noise and flip is better than the combination of mask and verified by the relevant experiments described in the article. The
flip, but both are slightly weaker than the comparative learning network can achieve a relatively high F1-score with noise and
approach of noise and mask in terms of the F1-score. UD flip masks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the design strategy.
outperforms LR flip in terms of results. This indicates that it is 2) Effect of Augmentation Parameters: We investigate the
easier for the network to extract features when only changing the effect of different enhancement parameters on the simulation
temporal order of the sequence data without adjusting the spatial results. Analyze the effect on the imitation results when different
QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL 2197

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT MASK RATE PARAMETERS ON THE RESULTS. THE RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS
 KEY POINTS INCLUDING ACC, PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1-SCORE
 ARE REPORTED

 Fig. 6. Effect of noise rate parameter on accuracy and F1-score. Acc
 and F1-score have basically the same trend. The Acc and F1-score of
 anomaly recognition are low when the noise rate is small or large. When
 the noise is between 0.05 and 0.3, the network can achieve a better
 result.

Fig. 5. Effect of the mask rate parameter on accuracy and F1-score. It
can be seen that the effects of this parameter on Acc and F1-score are be obtained. Because noise reduces the proportion of relevant
basically synchronized. The Acc and F1-score of anomaly recognition information in the sensor network, the useful features extracted
are low when the mask rate is small or large. The mask rate between by the network will decrease as the noise rate grows, resulting
0.05 and 0.4 is better.
 in a fall in overall anomaly detection accuracy.
 TABLE V
 3) Ablation Study: Experiments for the ablation study are
 EFFECT OF DIFFERENT NOISE RATE PARAMETERS ON THE RESULTS. THE shown the performance of the modules in Table VI.
 KEY POINTS INCLUDING ACC, PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1-SCORE The ablation study results show that the major indexes have
 ARE REPORTED
 obviously reduced when removing dilated casual CNN module
 or multihead attention module. The addition of the BN layer is
 helpful to improve the metric of the model. Experimental results
 show the effectiveness of the modules.
 4) Algorithm Complexity Analysis: The algorithm’s complexity is examined below. In industry, the ability to anomaly
 detection quickly is critical. We analyze the proposed algorithm’s time complexity. We refer to article [9] for the complexity analysis of the algorithm. The algorithm can simply
 be thought of as consisting of two parts: the dilated causal
values of the mask are given separately. For example, mask = 0.2 convolution module and the multiheaded attention module. The
means that 20% of the data are masked out. The evaluation higher proportion of time complexity is the multihead attention
results are shown in Table IV and Fig. 5. As the mask values module. The complexity of the multiheaded attention mecharange from 0.01 to 0.7, the MAS model works better when the nism is O(nd2mh + n2 dmh ). As a comparison, the time commask ratio is between 0.05 and 0.4. The maximum F1-score is plexity of LSTM is O(nd2l ). When dl = dmh , the complexity
obtained when the mask ratio is 0.2. When the mask proportion of our proposed model is slightly higher than that of LSTM.
is too low, the model has a hard time learning data features, In practice, because of its better effect on feature extraction,
which results in lower anomaly detection accuracy. It is also MAS can be experimentally verified to have a lower dimension
difficult for the network to extract useful information because of d. In addition, unlike LSTM, the dilated causal convolution
a large amount of information is masked away when the mask and multihead attention mechanisms can perform operations
proportion is higher. in parallel in practice. Furthermore, to determine the speed of
 Similarly, the impact of noise magnitude on the results is detection of the sensor sequence by the algorithm, we run our
examined further down. In the experiments, the value of the program on the CPU (i7-10875 h). For a given time sequence,
mask rate is given as 0.2 and the noise ratio is given in the the single anomaly detection time is 0.00134 s. The LSTM
range of 0.01–0.7. Table V and Fig. 6 illustrate the evaluation (dl = dmh ) runtime is 0.00086 s, Bi-LSTM runtime is 0.00168,
results. The simulation results demonstrate that when the noise LSTM (dl > dmh ) is 0.00249 s, the running time of LSTM-VAE
rate is small and the F1-score of anomaly detection is low, is 0.00471 s. Experimental comparisons with these classical
the network cannot successfully extract features from the data algorithms prove that our algorithms can be effectively deployed
through contrast learning. It can be inferred that the network does in industrial scenarios.
not learn valuable features from data. When the noise rate level 5) Overall Results: We compare several alternative baseline
is between 0.05 and 0.1, relatively high detection accuracy can approaches on the dataset. The F1-score is an important metric
2198 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE VII data. Compared with other methods, our proposed MAS
COMPARISON OF OUR PROPOSED MAS MODEL WITH OTHER ALGORITHMS
IN SOME METRICS, INCLUDING ACC, RECALL, PRECISION, AND F1-SCORE
 approach achieves good results.
 In the future, we will further investigate the application of
 self-supervised representation learning in anomaly detection.
 In addition, we are looking into other approaches for detecting
 anomalies in industrial sensors. At the same time, we will further
 develop our model to achieve better performance and be more
 adaptable in a wide range of usage scenarios.

 REFERENCES
 [1] Z. Pu, D. Cabrera, Y. Bai, and C. Li, “A one-class generative adversarial
 detection framework for multifunctional fault diagnoses,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Electron., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8411–8419, Aug. 2022.
 [2] D. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Xie, X. Wei, W. Yu, and R. Li, “LSTM learning
 with Bayesian and Gaussian processing for anomaly detection in industrial
 IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5244–5253, Aug. 2020.
 [3] G. E. Box, G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung, Time Series
 Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2015.
 [4] J. Lü and G. Chen, “A time-varying complex dynamical network model and
 its controlled synchronization criteri,” IEEE Trans. Auto. Contr., vol. 50,
 no. 6, pp. 841–846, Jun. 2005.
 [5] S. S. Haykin and S. S. Haykin, Kalman Filtering and Neural Networks,
 vol. 284. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2001.
 [6] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the MAS method with other methods in several
 Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detecmetrics of accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. It can be seen
 tion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2016.
that our method has the highest score on the F1-score. This indicates
 [7] Meta AI, “Self-supervised learning: The dark matter of intelligence,”
that our model trainable strategy can extract the features well from the
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ai.facebook.com/blog/self-supervisedindustrial sensor data.
 learning-the-dark-matter-of-intelligence/
 [8] R. Rodrigo, D. H. Patiño, and G. Schweickardt, “ARIMA and neural
 network for sensors failure detection,” in Proc. Congreso Argentino de
for expressing anomaly detection performance because it rep- Ciencias de la Informática y Desarrollos de Investigación, 2018, pp. 1–6.
 [9] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
resents the harmonic mean of precision and recall. F1-score is Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
only high when both precision and recall are high. Table VII and [10] Y. Liu et al., “Deep anomaly detection for time-series data in industrial
Fig. 7 show and compare the evaluation results. Both isolation IoT: A communication-efficient on-device federated learning approach,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 6348–6358, Apr. 2021.
forests and LSTM are unsupervised learning methods. LSTM [11] Y. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Lv, and W. Wang, “Detecting anomalies in intelligent
can produce good results, outperforming isolation forests. The vehicle charging and station power supply systems with multi-head atten-
MAS method obtains the highest F1-score among all methods, tion models,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 555–564,
 Jan. 2021.
with 81.19% for precision, 78.08% for recall, and 79.6% for [12] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learn-
F1-score. Overall, the findings show that our method can ef- ing applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
fectively extract the temporal properties of sensor data and can pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
 [13] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
better distinguish abnormal values from normal ones. large-scale image recognition,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.
 org/abs/1409.1556
E. Discussion [14] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
 Although self-supervised representation learning does not with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
 pp. 84–90, 2017.
provide data labels in the pretraining stage, it merely allows the [15] W. Sunhem and K. Pasupa, “An approach to face shape classification for
network to learn to extract features of the data on its own through hairstyle recommendation,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Intell.,
comparison learning. When applied to anomaly detection tasks, 2016, pp. 390–394.
 [16] T. K. Ho, “The random subspace method for constructing decision forests,”
a high F1-score can be obtained with simple training, compared IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 832–844,
to other methods. Aug. 1998.
 [17] B. Kamiński, M. Jakubczyk, and P. Szufel, “A framework for sensitivity
 analysis of decision trees,” Cent, Europ. J. Oper. Res., vol. 26, pp. 135–159,
 V. CONCLUSION 2018.
 [18] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 In this article, we focus on detecting system anomalies Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
from sensor data in real-world scenarios. In our work, we [19] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014, pp. 1–14.
first present a contrastive learning strategy for training feature [20] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryextractors, which can be applied to detect anomalies in augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in
industrial sensor data. Subsequently, we propose three different Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1705–1714.
 [21] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced
data augmentation approaches, so that outliers in the training anomaly detection for industrial Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 17,
sequence do not have to be used. Extensive experiments no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May. 2021.
prove that our MAS model is effective. Finally, we present an [22] L. Qi, Y. Yang, X. Zhou, W. Rafique, and J. Ma, “Fast anomaly identification based on multi-aspect data streams for intelligent intrusion
end-to-end neural network to handle the problem of extracting detection toward secure industry 4.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 18, no. 9,
potential time-dependent relationships in high-dimensional pp. 6503–6511, Sep. 2022.
QIAO et al.: MULTIHEAD ATTENTION SELF-SUPERVISED REPRESENTATION MODEL 2199

[23] Y. Su et al., “Detecting outlier machine instances through gaussian mix- Jinhu Lü (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. deture variational autoencoder with one dimensional CNN,” IEEE Trans. gree in applied mathematics from the Academy
 Comput., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 892–905, Apr. 2022. of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
[24] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts, Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2002.
 “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,” He is currently the Dean with the School of
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech Signal Process, 2020, Automation Science and Electrical Engineering,
 pp. 4322–4326. Beihang University, Beijing, China. He is also
[25] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast a Professor with the AMSS, Chinese Academy
 for unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. of Sciences. He is/was a Chief Scientist with
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. National Key Research and Development Pro-
[26] T. Han, W. Xie, and A. Zisserman, “Self-supervised co-training for video gram of China and a Leading Scientist with the
 representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Innovative Research Groups of National Natural Science Foundation of
 2020, pp. 5679–5690. China. He was a Professor at RMIT University, Melbourne VIC, Australia,
[27] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training and a Visiting Fellow at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA. His
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, research interests include cooperation control, complex networks, and
 arXiv:1810.04805. industrial Internet.
[28] A. Van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[29] C. Doersch, A. Gupta, and A. A. Efros, “Unsupervised visual represen-
 Tian Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 tation learning by context prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
 M.S. degree in control science and engineering
 Vis., 2015, pp. 1422–1430.
 from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in
[30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in system optimizafor contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf.
 tion and reliability from the University of Tech-
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[31] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked autoen- nology of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2014.
 He is currently an Associate Professor with
 coders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang
 Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
 University, Beijing, China. His research interests
[32] C. Wei, H. Fan, S. Xie, C.-Y. Wu, A. Yuille, and C. Feichtenhofer, “Masked
 feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training,” in Proc. IEEE include computer vision and pattern recognition.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 14668–14678.
[33] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change point
 detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in Proc. Web
 Conf., 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
[34] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic Kexin Liu received the M.Sc. degree in control
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, science and engineering from Shandong UniarXiv:1803.01271. versity, Jinan, China, in 2013, and the Ph.D.
[35] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self- degree in system theory from the Academy of
 supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese
 pp. 21271–21284. Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2016.
[36] I. D. Katser and V. O. Kozitsin, “Skoltech anomaly benchmark (SKAB),” He is currently an Associate Professor with
 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/1693952 the School of Automation Science and Electrical
[37] R. Singer, K. Gross, S. Wegerich, and D. Henke, “MSET: Multivariate Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
 state estimation technique,” Argonne National Lab.(ANL), Argonne, IL, From 2016 to 2018, he was a Postdoctoral Fel-
 USA, Tech. Rep. ESTSC-001140MLTPL00, 1996. low at Peking University, Beijing, China. His re-
[38] P. Filonov, A. Lavrentyev, and A. Vorontsov, “Multivariate industrial time search interests include multiagent systems and complex networks.
 series with cyber-attack simulation: Fault detection using an LSTM-based
 predictive data model,” 2016, arXiv:1612.06676.
[39] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detec- Baochang Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) retion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. ceived the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416. computer science from the Harbin Institute of
[40] S. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, A. Dai, R. Jozefowicz, and S. Bengio, the Technology, Harbin, China, in 1999, 2001,
 “Generating sentences from a continuous space,” in Proc. 20th SIGNLL and 2006, respectively.
 Conf. Comput. Nat. Lang. Learn., 2016, pp. 10–21. From 2006 to 2008, he was a Research Fel-
[41] D. S. Kim, C. K. Yoo, Y. I. Kim, J. H. Jung, and I.-B. Lee, “Multivariate low at the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
 quality control, illustrated by the air testing of sample bombsights tech- Hong Kong, and also at Griffith University, Brisniques of statistical analysis multivariate quality control, illustrated by the ban, QLD, Australia. His research interests inair testing of sample bombsights techniques of statistical analysis, 1947,” clude pattern recognition, machine learning,
 J. Cml. Eng. Jpn., vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 1025–1034, 2005. and face recognition.
[42] Z. Chen, C. K. Yeo, B. S. Lee, and C. T. Lau, “Autoencoder-based network
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Telecommun. Symp., 2018, Hichem Snoussi received the diploma in elecpp. 1–5. trical engineering from the École Supérieure
[43] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE d’Electricité (Supélec), Gif-sur-Yvette, France,
 8th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. in 2000, and the D.E.A. and Ph.D. degrees in
 Yiqun Qiao received the B.S. degree in au- signal processing from the University of Paristomation from the Dalian University of Technol- Sud, Bures-sur-Yvette, France, in 2000 and
 ogy, Dalian, China, in 2017, and the M.S. degree 2003, respectively.
 in control engineering from Beihang University, From 2003 to 2004, he was a Postdoctoral
 Beijing, China, in 2020. He is currently work- Researcher at the Institut de Recherche en
 ing toward the Ph.D. degree in pattern recog- Communications et Cybernétiques de Nantes,
 nition and intelligent system with the School of Nantes, France. Since 2010, he has been a Full
 Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Professor with the University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, France.
 Beihang University, Beijing, China. His research interests include Bayesian techniques for source separa-
 His research interests include industrial Inter- tion, information geometry, differential geometry, advanced signal pronet and machine learning. cessing techniques, and computer vision.