2720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 A Preference-Driven Malicious Platform Detection
 Mechanism for Users in Mobile Crowdsensing
 Haotian Wang , Jun Tao , Member, IEEE, Dingwen Chi , Yu Gao ,
 Zuyan Wang , Dikai Zou , and Yifan Xu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Exploiting mobile crowdsensing to conduct data the advantages of flexible deployment [1], low requirements on
collection and analysis brings unprecedented opportunities to users knowledge [2], low deployment cost [3], etc. Therefore,
promote the development of the Internet of Things(IoT). How- adopting MCS to carry out data collection and analysis has
ever, malicious platforms may provide untrusted data or illegally
leak users’ information, which leads users in crowdsensing become a mainstream hotspot. Thus far, MCS has been widely
networks to be reluctant to participate in sensing activities. used in various fields, e.g., environmental monitoring, smart
Besides, users are unwilling to report malicious platforms without cities and intelligent transportation systems (ITS) [4], [5], [6].
sufficient incentives. To tackle the problem, a new incentive A typical system framework for MCS is shown in Fig. 1,
mechanism is proposed by modeling users’ preferences in this which includes three parts: the sensing platform, sensing
paper. Specifically, two scenarios are considered to detect malicious platforms when users join sensing activities according to users and task providers [7]. After receiving service requests
the system grasps user’s information, i.e., complete information from the task provider, the sensing platform assigns sensing
scenario and partial information scenario. Different incentive tasks [8], [9], [10], [11]. to sensing users. Meanwhile, the
algorithms are designed for each scenario to optimize the systems sensing platform also has the ability to handle sensing data
incentive cost. In the complete information scenario, we minimize
 and perform other management functions. After receiving the
the total incentive cost by ranking users’ preferences. In the
partial information scenario, uniform Distribution and Laplace sensing task, sensing users will perform the collection of
Distribution are employed to model the distribution of users’ sensing data [12], [13], [14]. Then, sensing users upload the
preferences to find the optimal cost. Specifically, we incorporate data to the sensing platform [15]. When the sensing platform
the concept of non-convexity into design the incentive mech- returns the sensing data to the task provider, a complete
anism, when user preferences obey the Laplace Distribution.
 sensing link is completed. It is noticed that compared to
By conducting an in-depth exploration the properties of Laplace
Distribution, we can transform it into a convex problem to solve traditional wireless sensor networks (WSNs) [16], there is a
it efficiently. The analysis based on these mechanisms lays a significant advantage of MCS in collecting sensing data.
theoretical foundation on the detection of malicious platforms. Although MCS emerges as the significant functionality for
Furthermore, the soundness of modeling and the accuracy of promotion sensing services, new issues and challenges are
analysis are verified through extensive simulation, which also
guides the design of more sophisticated incentive schemes for the
 also exposed due to the following factors. On one hand,
detection of malicious platforms. malicious sensing platforms may provide false information or
 expose users’ privacy [17], [18]. for illegal profits, which may
 Index Terms— Mobile crowdsensing, malicious platforms,
incentive mechanism, uniform distribution, Laplace distribution. destroy the security of MCS and users’ reluctance to actively
 participate in sensing tasks. On the other hand, if there is
 not sufficient incentive, users are reluctant to actively report
 I. I NTRODUCTION malicious sensing platforms in MCS, which will reduce the
 number of users participating in sensing tasks. Therefore,
M OBILE CrowdSensing (MCS) is a new data acquisition
 model that combines crowdsourcing ideas and mobile
device sensing capabilities. The research shows that MCS has
 designing a reliable incentive scheme in MCS to help the
 system detect malicious sensing platforms remains an open
 and vital problem.
 Manuscript received 30 April 2023; revised 7 September 2023 and In mobile crowdsensing, since the difference between nor-
12 December 2023; accepted 2 January 2024. Date of publication 10 January mal platforms and malicious platforms is not obvious, it is
2024; date of current version 24 January 2024. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSF China) under Grant difficult for the sensing system to directly detect malicious
U22B2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript platforms by the historical behavior of platforms. Moreover,
and approving it for publication was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding the detection of malicious platforms can take more time and
author: Jun Tao.)
 Haotian Wang, Dingwen Chi, Yu Gao, Zuyan Wang, Dikai Zou, and cost, when the system is directly involved. Therefore, in this
Yifan Xu are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, South- paper, a new approach is proposed from a fresh perspective,
east University, Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: haotianwang@seu.edu.cn; i.e., a user-incentive-based detecting mechanism for malicious
dwchi@seu.edu.cn; yugao@seu.edu.cn; zywang92@seu.edu.cn; dkzou@seu.
edu.cn; xyf@seu.edu.cn). sensing platforms.
 Jun Tao is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering and the However, user preferences can usually lead to users having
Key Laboratory of CNII, MOE, Southeast University, Nanjing 210000, China, insufficient incentives to report malicious platforms. In this
and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories for Network and Communication
Security, Nanjing 210000, China (e-mail: juntao@seu.edu.cn). paper, user preference is defined as the rational and ten-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3352412 dentious choice made by the user in the face of malicious
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2721

 The rest of this paper is organized as following: Section II
 reviews the related work. In section III, we introduce the problem description and the system model. The model of malicious
 platform detection based on continuous type distribution is
 described in section IV. Performance evaluations are shown
 in section V, and section VI concludes this paper.

 II. R ELATED W ORK
 In this section, we review the related work including the
 Fig. 1. A typical architecture of a crowd sensing system. trust evaluation scheme, the threshold-based filtering scheme
 and the classification-based filtering scheme.
platforms. Specifically, user preference in this paper is similar to human preference, which is actually the result of a A. The Trust-Based Evaluation Scheme
combination of multiple factors. In MCS, users have self-will
 Trust evaluation is an important factor to evaluate the credand exhibit varied preferences, which significantly has cast on
 ibility of users and sensing platforms in MCS. Xia et al. [22]
their responses and attitudes to malicious platforms, e.g., some
 proposed a novel trust inference model, where two trust
users are more tolerant of ad injections from malicious platattributes named subjective trust and recommendation trust,
forms. Furthermore, in order to avoid being reported by users,
 are selected to quantify the trust level of specific nodes. The
malicious platforms may offer compensation, such as coupons
 authors combine subjective trust and recommendation trust to
and money. Therefore, we analyze the user preferences and
 obtain the overall trust of the nodes, which can be used to
the possible compensation offered by malicious platforms.
 classify nodes as either honest or malevolent. Liu et al. [23]
We combine Continuous Probability Distribution [19] with
 designed a novel consensus mechanism to guarantee decentral-
MCS to stimulate users to report malicious sensing platforms.
 ization, i.e., a decentralized intrusion detection framework for
The basic idea is to establish a user reporting scheme based
 network trust evaluation, where intrusion detection and neton the interaction behaviours between users and sensing
 work trust evaluation are integrated into node detection. Since
platforms, where the malicious platforms will be restricted or
 genuine information is discrete, the literature [24] showed a
eliminated for MCS to enhance the service security. In this
 technique for computing malicious node impact for a dynamic
method, the system administrator is not directly involved in
 VANET topology. The author develop a twofold framework to
the detection process. Instead, the approach achieves malichange logical information to continuous information, which
cious platform screening by incentivizing users with detection
 analyzes to deal with the correlation between node discovery
tasks. When the number of times a sensing platform has
 of exchanged information and impact of malicious nodes,
been reported exceeds the threshold we have set, the system
 to assign score to each malicious data for the identification
will determine if it is a malicious platform. Meanwhile, the
 of malicious vehicular nodes. Hu et al. [25] proposed a
designed method under Continuous Probability Distribution
 reliable trust-based recommendation scheme for platooning
can guarantee the individual rationality (IR) [20] and incentive
 services(REPLACE), which collects and models feedback
compatibility (IC) [21] properties.
 from users to design the reputation system. Liu et al. [26]
 The major contributions of this paper are threefold.
 proposed an approach called Perceptron Detection (PD), which
 • We propose a novel and efficient method, i.e., crowd- uses both perceptron and K-means methods to compute IoT
 sensing, to detect malicious platforms in sensing network. nodes’ trust values and detect malicious nodes accordingly.
 Moreover, to motivate enough users to participate in the
 detection task, we design the corresponding user incentive
 model. B. The Threshold-Based Filtering Scheme
 • We consider two scenarios, i.e., the complete information To solve the problem that high thresholds fail to detect
 scenario and the partial information scenario, and design malicious nodes and low thresholds may increase the false
 the incentive mechanism separately. In the complete alarm rate, an outlier-based adaptive threshold approach is
 information scenario, optimal incentives are designed proposed by Chae et al. [27]. The authors created effective
 based on the analysis of user preferences. In the partial rules to analyze internet packets collected from dynamic enviinformation scenario, we take the premise that users’ ronments based on historical information. The result shows
 preferences conform to the Uniform Distribution and the that high thresholds reduce the true positive rate and low
 Laplace Distribution while developing the corresponding thresholds increase the false positive rate. Meng et al. [28]
 incentives to optimize the system cost. designed a blockchain-based trust management scheme, which
 • Besides the proof and analysis of the correctness and dynamically set thresholds to identify malicious nodes more
 complexity, we conduct extensive simulations to evaluate efficiently. Liu et al. [29] proposed a malicious model detection
 the performance of our scheme. The numerical results mechanism based on the isolation forest (iforest), named
 show that the proposed scheme can effectively improve D2MIF. In the D2MIF, an iforest is constructed to compute
 the quality of sensing service and minimize the system the malicious score for each model uploaded by the correincentive costs. sponding participant, and then, the models will be filtered if
2722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

their malicious scores are higher than the threshold, which
is dynamically adjusted using reinforcement learning (RL).
In the [30], Liu et al. proposed a simple voting scheme to
identify malicious nodes, which uses the 1/0 decision. It considers nodes with more than half of the votes as malicious,
however, this scheme is not suitable for the scenario where
the number of nodes is small.

C. The Classification-Based Filtering Scheme
 Singh et al. [31] proposed a framework for the detection of
malicious users, non-malicious users and celebrities, which
uses an attribute set for user classification based on user
characteristics. The authors analyzed the detection mechanism
used for spammers and calculated two parameters user score
and tweet score to detect malicious users. In the [32], a mali- Fig. 2. Framework of MCS networks.
cious detection method based on multi-variate classification
is proposed by Dai. To filter malicious nodes, the author by analyzing the historical behavior of some users and relying
extracted the preferences with known nodes to generate clas- on reports from these users. Depending on the characteristic of
sifiers. Abubaker et al. [33] utilized federated learning for the the sensing network, we assume that users are independent of
detection of malicious nodes, where Support Vector Machine each other in the system. Thus, the system must provide certain
(SVM) and Random Forest (RF) are used in federated learning inducements which motivate the user to report MSP. Then,
to identify and remove malicious nodes. we consider a set of users denoted by u = {u 1 , u 2 · · · u n },
 In the trust-based evaluation scenario, additional costs will where u i is able to choose the sensing platform by their own
be incurred when the system evaluates the trust of the users. wish.
Some malicious users cannot be recognized by the system For convenience, we classify sensing platforms into two
if a reasonable threshold cannot be set in the threshold-based types, one called NSP(normal sensing platform) and the other
filtering scenario. It is also a challenge to ensure fairness when called MSP(malicious sensing platform). To encourage users
using voting to screen malicious users. Most of these existing to join sensing tasks, the NSP must compensate users for
efforts are not applicable to the scenario, where the system the cost of performing sensing tasks. Moreover, the MSP
cannot easily detect malicious users directly. Moreover, when also offers certain motivation.1 In general, the motivation is
malicious users provide motivation to other normal users, the related to users preferences pi . When the motivation provided
normal user may show dishonesty. Therefore, we propose by the MSP meets exactly the u i ’s preference, the user’s
a novel malicious user detection scheme by modeling the favorable opinion of the platform is positive, and the opposite
preference distribution of users. is negative. This leads to the fact that the MSP may have
 different motivations for users with different preferences.
 III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND S YSTEM M ODEL For simplicity, we define the motivation provided by the
 MSP as S, where the S is a constant. After users understand the
 Currently, most of the current motivational work investigates
 behavior of the MSP and systems, users can choose whether
the scenario, where a single sensing platform releases sensing
 to report the MSP. We set the utility for the u i to report and
tasks [15]. Nevertheless, users usually receive sensing tasks
 not report MSP as m i and S + pi , respectively. Thus, the
from different platforms at the same time. Therefore, the
 utility function of u i can be defined as Ui = max{m i , S + pi }.
user’s choice of sensing platforms is crucial. In general,
 In the system, Ci is used to indicate the u i ’s choice. Assuming
voluntary participation in the crowd sensing platform may
 that Ci obeys the Bernoulli Distribution [36], which can be
not be sustainable. This is from the fact that mobile users
 expressed as
need to spend their own resources, e.g., smart phone battery, (
CPU computing power, storage memory, to accomplish the 1 (S + pi < m i )
sensing tasks [34], [35]. In order to save energy and maxi- Ci = (1)
 0 (S + pi > m i ),
mize profitability, users will purposefully choose the sensing
platform. However, malicious sensing platforms can launch ad Here, 1 and 0 indicate that the u i report and not report the
injections, phishing attacks and expose users’ privacy. Thus it MSP, respectively. Clearly, the cost of the incentive provided
 N
is particularly important to design a reasonable mechanism
 P
 by the system is M = mi .
to help the system detect malicious sensing platforms and i=1
motivate users to participate in tasks. We stipulate that the system rewards reporting users
 As shown in Fig. 2, we consider MCS networks consisting when more than N0 users report the MSP. N0 is our preof a number of mobile users and sensing platforms. When the defined threshold and the model’s criterion for choosing
network size is relatively large, it is difficult for the system to N0 is to reduce the likelihood that users may arbitrarily adopt
detect sensing malicious platforms independently. Therefore, 1 Motivation, The MSP offers benefits to users in order to avoid being
the system can indirectly detect malicious sensing platforms reported.
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2723

‘ballot stuffing’ or ‘bad-mouthing’ methods to gain benefits.
In general, if users adopt ‘ballot stuffing’ or ‘bad-mouthing’
methods, then the number of users who choose to report MSP
is difficult to exceed N0 . Therefore, they can’t actually get
additional benefits.
 To avoid malicious users from providing false feedback to
discredit the platform, we propose two approaches, ‘appeal’
and ‘punishment’. ‘Appeal’ means that the reported perceived
platform can provide feedback to the system, and the system
will determine whether the platform is malicious based on
its historical behavior. ‘Punishment’ means that the user who
reports the sensing platform will be flagged once the sensing
platform has been determined by the system to be nonmalicious. When the number of times a user has been flagged
exceeds the set threshold, the system will limit the user to a
period of time where the user will not be able to participate in
the activities of the reporting sensing platform and any sensing Fig. 3. The PDF and CDF of uniform distribution.
tasks to earn rewards.
 To reduce the incentive cost of the system, it needn’t to their preferences by observing users’ interactions over a long
provide additional incentives to users other than N0 . For the period of time, i.e., the partial information is carried out in
MSP, since the preference of the user cannot be known, it will on-demand manner. In this scenario, the incentive mechanism
provide the same motivation to each user. Specifically, the we designed satisfies
problem investigated in this paper is how to ensure that more N N
 X X
than N0 users report the MSP and minimize the system’s cost. P[Ci = 1] = P[m i ≥ S + pi ] ≥ N0 , (2)
 i=1 i=1
 IV. I NCENTIVE M ECHANISM D ESIGN
 where P[Ci = 1] and P[m i ≥ si + pi ] represent the
 In this paper, we divide the system’s knowledge of user’s probabilities of Ci = 1 and m i ≥ si + pi , respectively. Not
preferences into two types: complete information scenario surprisingly, the incentive cost of the system increases with
and partial information scenario. In the complete information P[Ci = 1] and P[m i ≥ si + pi ]. Thus when the incentive cost
scenario, the system has a clear understanding of the user’s is minimal, we have
preferences. However, in the partial information scenario, the
 N N
user’s historical behavior is the only way for the system to X X
 P[Ci = 1] = P[m i ≥ S + pi ] = N0 . (3)
understand the user’s preferences. This section focuses on
 i=1 i=1
these two scenarios to design an incentive mechanism that
minimizes the incentive cost of the system while screening 1) Uniform Distribution: When the system only knows
for malicious platforms. the range of values of user preferences, but not the specific
 preferences of each user, Literature [37] consider the values of
 user preferences within the range of values to be equiprobable
A. Complete Information Scenario
 and user preferences conform to the Uniform Distribution.
 Focusing on the complete scenario, where the users’ infor- Therefore, we also assume that users’ preferences conform to
mation are shared, the system can get the preference of each the Uniform Distribution in this paper. Then, the probability
user. Then, sorted result on the users’ collection preferences density function(PDF) of S + pi is set to
is obtained, which guide the system’s decision. For i < N0 ,
we discuss different cases. X ∼ U ni f or m(a, b),
 Case1: if S + pi ≤ 0, then the u i has sufficient motivation x <a
 
  0
to report the MSP, so the system can set the user’s incentive
 
  1
to 0. f (x) = a≤x ≤b (4)
 Case2: if S + pi > 0, then the system can set the u i ’s  b−a
 
 x > b.
 
 0
incentive to S + pi .
 On the other side, the system can also categorize users based The cumulative distribution function(CDF) of S + pi can be
on preferences. For the scenario, where users are categorized, expressed as
 Z a
users under the same category have the same preferences.
 0d x, x <a
 
However, this analysis of this situation is the same as the
 
 
 
  Z−∞
 
ranking of preferences.
  a Z x
 1
 F(x) = 0d x + d x, a≤x ≤b
  −∞ a b − a
  a
  Z Z x 1
 Z +∞
B. Partial Information Scenario
 x > b.
 
 0d x + dx + 0d x,
 
 
 
 Targeting on the partial information, where users are reluc- −∞ a b−a x
tant to share their preferences, the system can only accumulate (5)
2724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 4. The PDF and CDF of laplace distribution.
 Fig. 5. The shaded area under different values.

where a and b are the lower and upper limits of the Uniform
Distribution, respectively. For different values of a and b, the Then, the total cost of the system can be expressed as
images of CDF and PDF are shown in Fig. 3. ′
 We only consider the scenario, where a ≤ x ≤ b. If b < 0, N0
 X
we can see that S + pi < 0, which means that the users in the M= mi
system have enough motivation to report the MSP. Therefore, i=1
the system does not provide any rewards. When a ≤ 0 and 0 N ′
 1 X a
b > 0, we discuss two Rcases. =
 b−a
 mi − N
 b−a
 0 1
 Case1: if F(x) = N a b−a d x <N0 , we have i=1
 = (b − a)N0 + N0 ′ a, a ≤ m i ≤ b. (11)
 N Z mi N
 X 1 X mi − a
 F(x) = dx = = N0 , (6) Based on the Eq.(11), the total cost of the system has a
 0 b−a b−a
 i=1 i=1 declining trend with the m i increase. Due to a ≤ m i ≤ b,
 from which we know that we can get
 N
 X
 M= mi ′
 N0
 i=1 X
 N
 N0 ′ a ≤ m i ≤ N0 ′ b,
 1 X a i=1
 = mi − N
 b−a
 i=1
 b−a N0 ′ a ≤ (b − a)N0 + N0 ′ a ≤ N0 ′ b, (12)
 = (b − a)N0 + N a, a ≤ m i ≤ b. (7)
 from which the N0 ′ ≥ N0 can be obtained. It has been
 Hence, the system can set the rewards for each user to theoretically proved that a necessary and sufficient condition
(b−a)N0 for N0 ′ = N0 is M = N0 b. Therefore, b is the motivation
 N + a.
 R0 1
Case2: if F(x) = N a b−a d x ≥N0 , we have provided by the system to the N0 users in the system.
 Z b Z 0 2) Laplace Distribution: In general, user preferences are
 1 1 influenced by several factors, e.g., user attributes (age, hobbies,
 N d x = 1−N d x, a ≤ m i ≤ b. (8)
 0 b − a a b − a and temperament), the state of the device, and the degree to
 Then, which the sensing platform affects the user, each of which is
 Z b limited in its effect. Moreover, user preferences may differ at
 1
 N d x ≤N0 . (9) different times and are independent. Laplace Distribution [38]
 0 b−a has the properties of symmetry, sharp peaks and thick tails, and
 In this case, the system does not provide any rewards for adjustable parameters which make it flexible to better describe
users according to Eq.(2). the range of values and degree of user preferences. Therefore,
 We assume that there are N0′ users, who are motivated by according to the law of large numbers, we adopt the Laplace
the system at a > 0. It is obvious that the range of values of Distribution to model the users’ preferences. This means that
N0′ is between 0 and N . Then, we can notice that the value we can denote the PDF of S + pi as
of m i is zero when m i < a. Therefore, we have
 N0 ′ Z m i
 X ∼ Laplace(µ, b),
 X 1
 d x = N0 . 1 |x − µ|
 b − a
 (10) f (x|µ, b) = ex p(− ), (13)
 i=1 0 2b b
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2725

 Fig. 6. x1 moves to 0. Fig. 8. 0 < x1 < x2 < µ.

 Fig. 7. x1 and x2 move to µ. Fig. 9. µ < x1 < x2 .

where µ is the position parameter and b is the scale parameter.
Then, the CDF of Laplace Distribution can be expressed as
 Z x
 F(x) = f (u)du
 −∞
 1 x −µ
  1 − ex p(−
  ), x ≥µ
 = 1 2 b
 µ − x x2 > x1 ′ .
  ex p(−
  ), x <µ Fig. 10.
 2 b
 1
 = [1 + sgn(x − µ)(1 − ex p(−|x − µ|/b))]. (14) side by the same distance. Similarly, we can also move both
 2 x1 and x2 to x = µ, as shown in Fig. 7. Then, we have
 For different values of µ and b, the images of CDF and Z x1 Z 0
PDF are shown in Fig. 4. Thus, our incentive mechanism can ′
 S1 = | f (u)du − f (u)du|
be translated into −∞ −∞
 Z x2 Z 0
 XN X N Z mi =| f (u)du − f (u)du|
 F(x) = f (u)du = N0 . (15) −∞ −∞
 i=1 i=1 −∞ = S2′ , x2 > x1 , (17)
 N 0
 We can see that if 2b −∞ esp(− |x−µ| b )d x ≥ N0 , which
 R Z x1 Z µ
means that more than N0 users will report the MSP in the S1′ = | f (u)du − f (u)du|
system. Hence, we only need to consider the case where Z−∞
 x2 Z−∞
 µ
 N 0 |x−µ|
 b )d x < N0 . First, we have analytically f (u)du − f (u)du|
 R
2b −∞ esp(− =|
investigated the scenario where µ > 0. It can be noticed that −∞ −∞
 N = S2′ , x2 > x1 , (18)
 F(m i ; µ, b) is the integral of f (x) from 0 to m 0 ,
 P
each
 i=1 where S1′ and S2′ represent the change in the area after moving
which is the area enclosed by f (x), x = m i , and y = 0. For x1 and x2 , respectively. Clearly, we can see that the total cost
convenience, the area enclosed can be expressed as si . Then, remains the same and Eq.(15) is still valid.
as shown in the Fig. 5, we translate Eq.(15) into Lemma 2: No two or more elements in P are greater than
 s1 + s2 + · · · + sn =N0 . (16) 0 and less than µ.
 Proof: In Fig. 8, we move x1 and x2 to x = 0 and x = x2 ′ ,
Previously, we transform the incentive problem into a noncon- respectively, under the condition of 0 < x1 < x2 < µ. To keep
vex optimization problem. P is assumed to be the solution to the original area, it should satisfy x1 − 0 > x2 ′ − x2 . However,
the problem, then, the analysis is performed in the form of P. it can be noticed that this will lead to a reduction in the total
 Lemma 1: The symmetric elements in P are moved by area. Hence, P is not the solution to the problem.
equal distances in the same direction and the sum of the Lemma 3: All elements in P that are not less than µ are
enclosed areas remains the same. equal to each other.
 Proof: As shown in Fig. 6, it can be assumed that P Proof: As shown in Fig. 9, let us consider the case where
contains such symmetric elements of x1 and x2 concerning µ. µ < x1 < x2 . For convenience of description, we assume that
We can move x1 or x2 to x = 0 and the other to the opposite there exists x ′ and x1 < x ′ < x2 . Then, we move both x1 and
2726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE I
 M ALICIOUS P LATFORM D ETECTION R ESULTS OF PARTIAL I NFORMATION S CENARIO

 the problem. Then, let us consider the case where x2 is less
 than x1′ . The change in area after moving x1 and x2 is plotted
 in Fig. 11. Similarly, the
 Z x1 Z 0
 S1′ = | f (u)du − f (u)du|
 −∞ −∞
 Z x2 ′ Z x2
 =| f (u)du − f (u)du|
 −∞ −∞
 Fig. 11. x2 < x1 ′ .
 = S2′ , x1 < µ < x2 , (21)

x2 to x = x ′ . Similarly, the distance from x1 to x ′ should be is valid on the premise that |x1 −0| < |x2 −x2 ′ |. It can be noted
greater than the distance from x2 to x ′ to keep the same area that the total cost will decrease as the elements move. Hence,
after moving x1 and x2 . Therefore, if P is not the solution to the problem. At last we investigate the
 Z x′ Z x1 case where x1′ = x2 . It is clear that this case is the same as
 S1′ = | f (u)du − f (u)du| Pr oo f 4.1, the total area of the elements symmetric about µ
 −∞ −∞ remains the same after moving to 0 or µ. However, this leads
 Z x2 Z x′ to inequality between elements larger than µ. Therefore, P is
 =| f (u)du − f (u)du| not the solution to the problem.
 −∞ −∞
 According to the previous proof, we can find that the
 = S2′ , x2 > x1 > u, (19) optimal solution can be obtained only when some elements
is valid, we can get x1 +x2 > 2x ′ . It can be noted that the total are 0 and others are greater than or equal to µ. In other words,
cost will be lower and P is not the solution to the problem. there exist n elements equal to 0 and all elements greater than
 µ are m. Therefore, we have
 Lemma 4: There are no elements in P that are greater than (N − n)F(m) + n F(0) = N0 , (22)
0 and less than µ.
 Proof: Let us consider a scenario where x1 to x2 are the then
two elements in P. According to the symmetry of the function, N0 − n F(0)
 m = F −1 ( ). (23)
the symmetry point x1 ′ can be found,i.e. |x1 − µ| = |x1 ′ − µ|. N −n
Next we will analyze whether P is the solution to the problem Thus from (22) and (23), the cost total can be obtained
under the three scenarios. N0 − n F(0)
 First, we consider the case where x2 is greater than x1′ . M = (N − n)F −1 ( ). (24)
 N −n
We can see from this Fig. 10 that the gray area and the blue
 Based on the fact that 0 ≤ n < N and n is an integer,
area indicate the increased area after moving x1 to µ and the
 the above incentive design problem can be transformed into
decreased area after moving x2 to x2′ , respectively. To keep
 computing the n. The solution process of n is described in
the
 Z µ Z x1 Algorithm 1. After the value of n is determined, the system
 ′
 S1 = | f (u)du − f (u)du| provides incentives to n and N − n users in the system as
 −∞ −∞ 0 and F −1 N0 −n F(0)
 N −n , respectively.
 Z x2 ′ Z x2 Next, we analyze the two cases where µ < 0 and µ = 0.
 =| f (u)du − f (u)du| Similar to lamma 4.3, we can conclude that all elements are
 −∞ −∞
 the same and no element is equal to 0. Therefore, the incentive
 = S2′ , x2 > µ > x1 , (20)
 scheme is to give each user the same m,
is valid, we have |x1 − µ| < |x2 − x2 ′ |. However, the total N0
cost will be reduced, which lead to P is not the solution to m = F −1 ( ). (25)
 N
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2727

Algorithm 1 Laplace Cost Optimization
Require: N ;N0 ;
Ensure: M,n
 1: n ←− 1;
 N −n F(0)
 2: M ←− N F −1 0 N −n ;
 3: while n ≤ N do
 4: M ′ ←− (N − n)F −1 N0 −n F(0)
 N −n ;
 5: if M < M then
 ′

 6: M ←− M ′ ;
 7: n ←− n + 1;
 8: end if
 9: end while
10: return (M, n) Fig. 14. Impact of S and N0 on the total cost.

 Fig. 15. Impact of S on the total cost in the uniform distribution.
 Fig. 12. The participation ratio with different number of MSP and task.

 tasks increases. This is because when the number of tasks is
 relatively less than the number of participants, the number of
 participants who can undertake the task is also relatively small.
 Therefore, the participation ratio of all three scenarios is at a
 low level. As shown in Fig. 13, the participation ratio of the
 four scenarios decreases as the number of users increases when
 the number of tasks is 1000. This is because the increasing
 number of users quickly saturates the number of tasks that can
 be performed.
 From the result of Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, it can be noted
 that in the same condition, the higher the number of MSP the
 lower the participation ratio. The reason is that users may fear
 Fig. 13. The participation ratio with different number of MSP and user. that their interests are being violated by malicious platforms,
 therefore, they refuse to join perception activities.
The results of the partial information scenario are shown in
Table I. B. Complete Information Scenario
 We assume that the user’s preference pi follows the Laplace
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION Distribution pi ∼ Laplace(-10,2) in the complete information
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed scenario. Then, the system evaluates the impact on the total
algorithm and the impact of different parameters on the total cost by changing the motivation of the MSP. To observe
cost through simulation. the total cost, different values of S (from 0 to 100) are set
 previously. As shown in Fig. 14, the total cost tends to increase
 as the number of N0 . It can be observed that the total cost for
A. Impact of MSP different numbers of N0 on the left side is 0. The reason is
 We first evaluate the impact of the number of MSP on the that the sum of the user’s preference and the MSP’s motivation
participation ratio, where the number of sensing platform is 10. is less than 0, i.e., p Ni ≤ −s, which means that more than
With the increased number of tasks when the number of users N0 users will report MSP. Therefore, the system does not
is 200, the impact of the number of MSP on the participation need to provide additional rewards. Simultaneously, as the
ratio is shown in Fig. 12. We can see from this figure that the motivation S increases, we can see that the total cost will also
participation ratio of four scenarios increases as the number of increase. This is due to the fact that the increase of S will lead
2728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 16. Impact of S on the total cost in the laplace distribution. Fig. 17. Impact of b on the total cost in the laplace distribution.

to the decrease in the number of users whose preferences are
not higher than −S.

C. Uniform Distribution Scenario
 In the case, where N = 1000 and N0 = 600, we set the
user’s preferences to obey pi ∼ Uniform(2,8), pi ∼ Uniform
(-8,2), and pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) respectively. As shown in
Fig. 15, we compare the impact of S on total cost in the partial
information scenario and the complete information scenario.
It can be observed that the total cost increases with the
increase of S. The cost of the three cases pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2),
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) and the complete information scenario Fig. 18. Impact of µ on total cost in the laplace distribution.
is 0, when the S is relatively small. The reason is that most
users will choose to report MSP. The slope of pi ∼ Uniform
(-8,2) and pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) will change from N to
N0 when p Ni + S > 0. This is because the total cost is
determined by Eq.(11) in the initial stage, but as S increases
the total cost will be determined by N0 b.
 Furthermore, Fig. 15 demonstrates that the total cost of pi
∼ Uniform(2,8) is higher than that of pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) and
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2) as S increases. Since, under the conditions
of pi ∼ Uniform(2,8), the user’s preferences for MSP are
non-negative, the system needs to provide more incentives for
users to report MSP. This also proves that the cost of pi ∼
Uniform(2,8) is not 0 when S is small. However, in the real
world, pi ∼ Uniform(2,8) is non-existent. Because users have Fig. 19. Impact of N0 on total cost in the laplace distribution.
a negative preference for malicious platforms in most cases.
Users of pi ∼ Uniform(-8,2) are more tolerant than users of
 In the following, we observe the total cost by changing
pi ∼ Uniform(-8,-2) towards MSP, so the total cost of the
 the value of b. In the Fig. 17, it can be observed that the
former is greater than the latter.
 total cost of the partial information scenario shows an upward
 trend as the b increase, where N0 = 600, pi ∼ Laplace(-
D. Laplace Distribution Scenario 2,b) and pi ∼ Laplace(2,b). The reason for this is that the
 Similarly, we set the user’s preference to match pi ∼ total cost of the partial information scenario is determined
Laplace(-8,2) and the threshold is N0 = 600. Then, the by (N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n F(0) −1 N0
 N −n ) and N F ( N ). When n is given
change of total cost in the partial information scenario and by Algorithm 1, the total cost and b are linearly related.
the full information scenario is observed by changing S of But, we can see that the total cost of the full information
MSP, which is plotted in Fig. 16. It can be noted that the total scenario does not increase rapidly with b, which means
cost of the two scenarios increases as the S increases. This that it’s performance is better than the partial information
is because the total cost in both scenarios is a linear function scenario.
of S. Furthermore, when n is determined, the effect of F(0) Simultaneously, the impact of the value of µ on the total
is ignorable. Intuitively, the total cost in the full information cost is plotted in Fig. 18, where N0 = 600. In Fig. 18, it can
scenario is lower than that in the partial information scenario be seen that as the value of µ increases, the total cost also
under a certain S. increases. The reason for this is that an increase in µ means
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2729

 Fig. 20. Comparison of accuracy. Fig. 22. Impact of different number of tasks on participation ratio.

 Fig. 21. Comparison of task coverage ratio. Fig. 23. Impact of different number of users on participation ratio.

that the number of users with a low preference for MSP scenario is higher than uniform distribution scenario and
is decreasing. Thus, the system must pay more rewards to laplace distribution scenario.
motivate users to report MSP. The total cost is determined
by N F −1 ( NN0 ) and (N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n F(0)
 N −n ) for conditions F. Task Coverage Ratio
µ ≤ 0 and µ > 0, respectively. This leads to the fact that
 We assume that the user’s preferences obey pi ∼ Laplace(-
the total cost in the partial information scenario increases at a
 8,2) and N0 = 120. Then, five MSPs are put into the
different rate in the two cases µ ≤ 0 and µ > 0.
 sensing system and release sensing tasks with the other five
 To make the experimental results more rigorous, we investi-
 NSPs. Fig. 21 shows the comparison of the task coverage
gate the change of the total cost under different N0 , where pi
 ratio by TDC(A Trust-Driven Contract Incentive Scheme
∼ Laplace(2,2) and pi ∼ Laplace(4,2). As shown in Fig. 19,
 for Mobile Crowd-Sensing Networks) [37], SGA(A Stackin the partial information scenario, the total cost shows an
 elberg Game Approach Toward Socially-Aware Incentive
upward trend as N0 increases. Simultaneously, we can note
 Mechanisms for Mobile Crowdsensing) [39], APT(Accurate
that the total cost of µ = 2 is lower than the total cost of
 and Privacy-Preserving Task Allocation for Edge Computing
µ = 4 when the N0 is certain. This is because the value of
(N − n)F −1 ( N0 −n F(0) Assisted Mobile Crowdsensing) [40] and our algorithm. Under
 N −n ) increases as µ increases when b is the number of users is 200, we can observe that all four algocertain, which makes the total cost increase. Moreover, in the
full information scenario, the total cost increases slowly as rithms have different degrees of decline as the number of tasks
N0 increases. increases. This is because when the number of participants is
 fixed, the number of participants who can perform tasks will
 reach saturation. It can be noticed that the task coverage ratio
E. Accuracy of MSP Detection of TDC is higher than SGA and APT, but lower than our
 We assume separately that the user’s preferences obey pi algorithm. The reason for this is that the TDC filters MSPs by
∼ Uniform(-8,2) and pi ∼ Laplace(4,2). Next, we analyzed trust thresholds, however, the MSP can provide motivation to
the accuracy of MSPs detection under different N0 , where trick user’s confidence. The reason for the lowest task coverage
S = 60 and N = 1000. From Fig. 20, it can be seen that ratio of SGA and APT is that there is no mechanism to remove
all three scenarios show an increasing trend as N0 increases. MSPs in SGA. SGA encourages users to complete sensing
This is because the increase in N0 reduces the impact of some tasks by offering them rewards, but when the MSPs exist, the
users reporting NSPs, which makes detection more accurate. rewards are not valid for users. APT focus on task allocation
In complete information scenario, the system is fully aware of and users’ privacy protection, therefore, the existence of MSPs
the user’s preferences, which means that most users choose to has the greatest impact on it’s task coverage ratio. To sum up,
report MSPs. Therefore, the accuracy of complete information our algorithm is superior to the other three algorithms.
2730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

G. User Participation Ratio [3] B. Jia et al., “An incentive mechanism in expert-decision-based
 crowdsensing networks,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 122, Jun. 2022,
 Finally, the participation ratios of we proposed and the Art. no. 108834.
other three mechanisms are compared. The user’s preferences [4] C. H. Liu, Z. Dai, H. Yang, and J. Tang, “Multi-task-oriented vehicular
obey pi ∼ Laplace(-8,2) and N0 = 120. Then, we set five crowdsensing: A deep learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Commun. (INFOCOM), Jul. 2020, pp. 1123–1132.
MSPs and five MNPs in the simulation environment. With the [5] A. Cecaj, M. Lippi, M. Mamei, and F. Zambonelli, “Sensing and forenumber of tasks increasing, the evaluation results on the five casting crowd distribution in smart cities: Potentials and approaches,”
mechanisms are plotted in Fig. 22, where the number of users IoT, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 33–49, Jan. 2021.
 [6] Z. Ning et al., “Blockchain-enabled intelligent transportation systems:
is 200. We can observe that the participation ratio of the four A distributed crowdsensing framework,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
mechanisms increases as the number of tasks increases. The vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 4201–4217, Dec. 2022.
reason for this is that when the number of tasks is relatively [7] D. Yang, G. Xue, X. Fang, and J. Tang, “Incentive mechanisms for
 crowdsensing: Crowdsourcing with smartphones,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
less than the number of participants, the number of participants Netw., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1732–1744, Jun. 2016.
who can undertake the task is also relatively small. However, [8] F. Yucel, M. Yuksel, and E. Bulut, “Coverage-aware stable task assignas the number of tasks increases, the participation ratio of the ment in opportunistic mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3831–3845, Apr. 2021.
four mechanisms shows an increasing trend. [9] B. Yin, J. Li, and X. Wei, “Rational task assignment and path planning
 As shown in Fig. 23, the participation ratio of these mecha- based on location and task characteristics in mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE
nisms decreases as the number of participants increases, where Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 781–793, Jun. 2022.
 [10] R. Sleem, N. Mekky, S. El-Sappagh, L. Alarabi, N. A. Hikal, and
the number of tasks is 1000. This is because that the increasing M. Elmogy, “Enhancing task assignment in crowdsensing systems based
number of participants quickly saturates the number of tasks, on sensing intervals and location,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 71,
which can be performed when the number of tasks is fixed. no. 3, pp. 5619–5638, 2022.
 [11] Y. Wu, Y. Suo, F. Yu, and Y. Liu, “A utility-based subcontract method
Thus when the number of remaining tasks is insufficient, many for sensing task in mobile crowd sensing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
participants are unable to undertake tasks. It can be noted that vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1210–1219, Feb. 2022.
the mechanism of we proposed is superior to the other three [12] T. N. Nguyen and S. Zeadally, “Mobile crowd-sensing applications: Data
 redundancies, challenges, and solutions,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol.,
mechanisms. Because APT focuses on user privacy, it has the vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1–15, May 2022.
lowest performance when MSPs are present in the system. [13] X. Xia, Y. Zhou, J. Li, and R. Yu, “Quality-aware sparse data collection
 in MEC-enhanced mobile crowdsensing systems,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 1051–1062, Oct. 2019.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [14] Y. Sun et al., “On enabling mobile crowd sensing for data collection in
 smart agriculture: A vision,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 132–143,
 In this paper, we have analytically investigated the MSP Mar. 2022.
detection problem in MCS. To encourage users to participate [15] N. B. Truong, G. M. Lee, T.-W. Um, and M. Mackay, “Trust evaluation
 mechanism for user recruitment in mobile crowd-sensing in the Internet
in sensing activities, we design the MSP detecting algorithm in of Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 14, no. 10,
terms of user’s preferences. Two scenarios, namely complete pp. 2705–2719, Oct. 2019.
information scenario and partial information scenario, have [16] N. Javaid, “NADEEM: Neighbor node approaching distinct energyefficient mates for reliable data delivery in underwater WSNs,” Trans.
been considered to detect the MSP when users join sensing Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, p. e3805, Aug. 2022.
activities. In the complete information scenario, the system is [17] M. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Yang, and J. Zhang, “Dynamic pricing for privacyfully aware of the user’s preferences. Therefore, we design an preserving mobile crowdsensing: A reinforcement learning approach,”
 IEEE Netw., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 160–165, Mar. 2019.
incentive mechanism that makes users report MSPs by ranking
 [18] B. Zhao, S. Tang, X. Liu, X. Zhang, and W.-N. Chen, “IronM: Privacytheir preferences. We assume that the users’ preferences obey preserving reliability estimation of heterogeneous data for mobile
Uniformly Distributed and Laplace Distributed in the complete crowdsensing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5159–5170,
information scenario. Then the incentive mechanism for them Jun. 2020.
 [19] W. B. Poland III, “Decision analysis with continuous and discrete
is designed, respectively, which to optimize the total incentive variables: A mixture distribution approach,” Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford
cost. These incentive mechanisms help us to understand the Univ., p. 147, 1994. [Online]. Available: https://www.proquest.com/
 dissertations-theses/decision-analysis-with-continuous-discrete/
impact of different user’s preferences on the detection of docview/304113214/se-2.
MSPs, and the corresponding analytical results can serve [20] C. Dai, X. Wang, K. Liu, D. Qi, W. Lin, and P. Zhou, “Stable task
as important guidelines on the design of more sophisticated assignment for mobile crowdsensing with budget constraint,” IEEE
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 3439–3452, Dec. 2021.
detection schemes of MSPs. The soundness of the models [21] P. Sun et al., “Towards personalized privacy-preserving incentive for
and the accuracy of the analysis have been verified through truth discovery in mobile crowdsensing systems,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
extensive simulation. Our simulation results have shown that Comput., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 352–365, Jan. 2022.
 [22] H. Xia, S.-S. Zhang, Y. Li, Z.-K. Pan, X. Peng, and X.-Z. Cheng,
the impact of different factors on total cost and the proposed “An attack-resistant trust inference model for securing routing in vehicincentive mechanism outperforms other benchmarks substan- ular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 7,
tially. pp. 7108–7120, Jul. 2019.
 [23] G. Liu, Z. Yan, W. Feng, X. Jing, Y. Chen, and M. Atiquzzaman,
 “SeDID: An SGX-enabled decentralized intrusion detection frame-
 R EFERENCES work for network trust evaluation,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 70, pp. 100–114,
 Jun. 2021.
 [1] Y. Hu, J. Wang, B. Wu, and S. Helal, “RL-Recruiter+: Mobility- [24] S. Sultan, Q. Javaid, A. J. Malik, F. Al-Turjman, and M. Attique,
 predictability-aware participant selection learning for from-scratch “Collaborative-trust approach toward malicious node detection in vehicmobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 21, no. 12, ular ad hoc networks,” Environ., Develop. Sustainability, vol. 24,
 pp. 4555–4568, Dec. 2022. pp. 7532–7550, Jun. 2022.
 [2] X. Gong and N. B. Shroff, “Truthful mobile crowdsensing for strategic [25] H. Hu, R. Lu, Z. Zhang, and J. Shao, “REPLACE: A reliable trust-based
 users with private data quality,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 27, no. 5, platoon service recommendation scheme in VANET,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 pp. 1959–1972, Oct. 2019. Technol., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 1786–1797, Feb. 2017.
WANG et al.: PREFERENCE-DRIVEN MALICIOUS PLATFORM DETECTION MECHANISM FOR USERS IN MCS 2731

[26] L. Liu, Z. Ma, and W. Meng, “Detection of multiple-mix-attack mali- Dingwen Chi is currently pursuing the B.S. degree
 cious nodes using perceptron-based trust in IoT networks,” Future Gener. with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 Comput. Syst., vol. 101, pp. 865–879, Dec. 2019. Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
[27] Y. Chae, N. Katenka, and L. DiPippo, “An adaptive threshold method interests include edge computing.
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 18th Int. Symp.
 Netw. Comput. Appl., Sep. 2019, pp. 1–4.
[28] W. Meng, W. Li, and L. Zhu, “Enhancing medical smartphone networks
 via blockchain-based trust management against insider attacks,” IEEE
 Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1377–1386, Nov. 2020.
[29] W. Liu et al., “D2MIF: A malicious model detection mechanism for
 federated-learning-empowered artificial intelligence of things,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2141–2151, Feb. 2023.
[30] F. Liu, X. Cheng, and D. Chen, “Insider attacker detection in wireless
 sensor networks,” in Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
 (INFOCOM), May 2007, pp. 1937–1945.
[31] M. Singh, D. Bansal, and S. Sofat, “Detecting malicious users in Twitter
 using classifiers,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Secur. Inf. Netw., Sep. 2014, Yu Gao received the M.S. degree from Yangzhou
 pp. 247–253. University, China, in 2020. He is currently pur-
[32] H. Dai, H. Liu, Z. Jia, and T. Chen, “A multivariate classification suing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber
 algorithm for malicious node detection in large-scale WSNs,” in Proc. Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nan-
 11th Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., Jun. 2012, jing, China. His current research interests include
 pp. 239–245. mobile edge computing (MEC) and mobile ad-hoc
[33] Z. Abubaker, N. Javaid, A. Almogren, M. Akbar, M. Zuair, and networks (MANETs).
 J. Ben-Othman, “Blockchained service provisioning and malicious node
 detection via federated learning in scalable Internet of Sensor Things
 networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 204, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 108691.
[34] S. Zhou, Y. Lian, D. Liu, H. Jiang, Y. Liu, and K. Li, “Compressive
 sensing based distributed data storage for mobile crowdsensing,” ACM
 Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1–21, 2022.
[35] A. Capponi, C. Fiandrino, B. Kantarci, L. Foschini, D. Kliazovich, and
 P. Bouvry, “A survey on mobile crowdsensing systems: Challenges,
 solutions, and opportunities,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21,
 no. 3, pp. 2419–2465, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[36] K. Uribe-Murcia, Y. S. Shmaliy, and J. A. Andrade-Lucio, “Unbiased Zuyan Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 FIR, Kalman, and game theory H∞ filtering under Bernoulli dis- with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 tributed random delays and packet dropouts,” Neurocomputing, vol. 442, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
 pp. 89–97, Jun. 2021. interests include wireless rechargeable sensor net-
[37] M. Dai, Z. Su, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, and N. Lu, “A trust-driven contract works (WRSNs), secure communication, and their
 incentive scheme for mobile crowd-sensing networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. applications in the Internet of Things (IoTs).
 Technol., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1794–1806, Feb. 2022.
[38] W. Croft, J.-R. Sack, and W. Shi, “Differential privacy via a truncated
 and normalized Laplace mechanism,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 37,
 no. 2, pp. 369–388, Apr. 2022.
[39] J. Nie, J. Luo, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, and P. Wang, “A Stackelberg game
 approach toward socially-aware incentive mechanisms for mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 724–738,
 Jan. 2019.
[40] Z. Wang et al., “Accurate and privacy-preserving task allocation for
 edge computing assisted mobile crowdsensing,” IEEE Trans. Computat.
 Dikai Zou is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
 Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 120–133, Feb. 2022.
 with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
 Haotian Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. interests include mobile crowdsensing and edge
 degree with the School of Cyber Science and Engi- computing.
 neering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His
 research interests include mobile crowdsensing and
 resource allocation in VANETs.

 Jun Tao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S.
 degrees in computer science from the Department of
 Yifan Xu (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s
 Computer Science and Engineering, Northeast Unidegree from the School of Computer Science and
 versity, in 1998 and 2001, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China,
 degree in computer science from the Department
 in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from the School of
 of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast
 Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast Univer-
 University, in 2005. He is currently a Full Professor
 sity, in 2021. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow
 and a Supervisor of Ph.D. students in cyber science
 with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 and engineering with the Department of Computer
 Southeast University. His research interests include
 Science and Engineering, Southeast University. His
 mobile crowdsourcing and resource allocation in
 research interests include social networking, D2D,
 VANETs.
 and information security.