IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024 7121

 A Privacy-Preserving Framework for Efficient
 Network Intrusion Detection in Consumer
 Network Using Quantum Federated Learning
 Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
 Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE, and Muhammad Adil , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The proliferation of consumer networks has smart devices and Internet of Things (IoT) applications. These
increased vulnerabilities to network intrusions, emphasizing the networks, characterized by their vastness and diversity, have
critical need for robust intrusion detection systems (IDS). The become critical infrastructures for personal, commercial, and
data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI) approach has gained
attention for enhancing IDS capabilities to deal with emerging governmental operations. However, this expansion has led to a
security threats. However, these AI-based IDS face challenges in surge in network vulnerabilities, making them prime targets for
scalability and privacy preservation. More importantly, they are cyber-attacks. The financial losses are anticipated to increase
time-consuming and may perform poorly on high-dimensional from $6 trillion in 2021 to $10.5 trillion by 2025 [1]. This
and complex data due to the lack of computational resources. To highlights the need to develop reliable, robust, and effecaddress these shortcomings, in this paper, we introduce a novel
framework, called Quantum Federated Learning IDS (QFL-IDS), tive Intrusion Detection systems (IDSs) to protect consumer
that merges Quantum Computing (QC) with Federated Learning networks [2], [3]. Traditional IDS often struggle with scalabil-
(FL) to allow for an efficient, robust, and privacy-preserving ity issues due to the growing volume and complexity of data.
approach for detecting network intrusions in consumer networks. They also face challenges in preserving user privacy while
Leveraging the decentralized nature of FL, QFL-IDS enables ensuring timely and accurate detection of malicious network
multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a global
intrusion detection model while preserving the privacy of indi- traffic. Moreover, the computational demands of processing
vidual user data. Furthermore, we leverage the computational and analyzing such vast datasets can overwhelm conventional
power of quantum computing to improve the efficiency of model computing resources, leading to inefficiencies and delays in
training and inference processes. We demonstrate the efficacy threat detection and mitigation.
of our framework through extensive experiments. The obtained Quantum Computing (QC), particularly Quantum Machine
results show significant improvements in detection accuracy and
computational efficiency compared to the current traditional Learning (QML), emerge as promising technologies that are
centralized and federated learning approaches. This makes QFL- capable of significantly strengthening IDS capabilities by
IDS a promising framework to cope with the new emerging addressing their main issues, including scalability, privacy, and
security threats in a timely and effective manner. computational efficiency [4]. QML leverages the principles of
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection systems (IDS), quantum quantum physics to perform computations, leveraging quantum
computing (QC), federated learning (FL), quantum federated resources like entanglement and superposition of states. This
learning, consumer network. allows quantum computers to handle exponential growth in the
 dimensions of attack data. Unlike traditional computers that
 I. I NTRODUCTION use bits, quantum computers utilize qubits, which can exist
 in multiple states simultaneously. The intrinsic parallelism
 N THE digital era, the expansion of consumer networks
I has been exponential, serving as the backbone for various
 capability of quantum computers allows them to handle highdimensional datasets and execute mathematical operations
 Manuscript received 31 March 2024; revised 3 July 2024; accepted
 and linear algebra much faster than classical computers. In
14 August 2024. Date of publication 12 September 2024; date of current 2019, Google demonstrated quantum supremacy by solvversion 31 December 2024. This work was supported by INRS-EMT. ing a problem in 200 seconds that would take a classical
(Corresponding author: Zakaria Abou El Houda.)
 Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux
 computer 10,000 years, while IBM is actively developing
Télécommunications, UMR INRS-UQO, Institut National de la Recherche larger quantum computers with, a clear roadmap for scal-
Scientifique, Gatineau, QC H3T 1J4, Canada (e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@ ing up quantum technologies with more than 1000 qubits.
inrs.ca).
 Hajar Moudoud is with the Département d’informatique et d’ingénierie,
 These advancements that result from quantum algorithms
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC J1K 2R1, Canada (e-mail: such as Shor’s and Grover’s algorithms, quantum approximate
hajar.moudoud@uqo.ca). optimization algorithm (QAOA), and Boltzmann quantum
 Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of
Computing and Informatics, University of Sharjah, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
 machines (QBM), are rapidly leading to the large deployment
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae). and integration of quantum computer capabilities, in several
 Muhammad Adil is with the Department of Computer Science and fields. Quantum Federated Learning (QFL) merges classical
Engineering, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14215 USA (e-mail:
Muhammad.adil@ieee.org).
 Federated Learning (FL) [5], [6], [7], [8] with quantum com-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3458985 puting to address the rising complexities in data processing.
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7122 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

QFL, will not only preserve data privacy and initiate more the state-of-the-art solutions. Section III describes our system
institutions to share their knowledge to detect zero-day attacks model. The performance evaluation is presented in Section IV.
but also, allow for local training given the fragile nature Section V concludes the paper.
of computing qubits and the difficulty of transferring them
through the networks. QFL leverages the decentralized data II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
processing of FL with the unparalleled computational power The convergence of quantum computing and machine
of QC, offering a transformative solution to enhance IDS learning offers the potential to solve complex computational
capabilities to deal with zero-day attacks. This ensures that problems more efficiently than classical methods, potentially
the initial deployment of QFL can leverage the robustness and advancing the detection and mitigation of emerging cyber
widespread availability of current classical systems, enabling threats, such as zero-day attacks. This section provides an
a smoother transition and more efficient implementation. By overview of QML and reviews key studies that utilize QML
utilizing these pre-optimized parameters, QFL can effectively for attack detection.
bridge the gap between quantum and classical computing environments, promoting a more practical and scalable adoption of A. Quantum Computing
quantum technologies in the immediate future. By harnessing
QC’s potential, QFL significantly enhances the efficiency of Quantum computing represents a fundamental shift from
model training and inference processes [9]. This integration classical computing paradigms, harnessing the principles of
promises to overcome the computational bottlenecks of tra- quantum mechanics to process information in a profoundly
ditional IDS, reducing the training time and an improvement different way. At its core, quantum computing utilizes qubits
in detection accuracy over traditional methods [9], [10]. This (quantum bits) instead of the traditional bits seen in classical
approach not only preserves the privacy of individual users but computing. Quantum computation involves initializing qubits
also reduces the bandwidth requirements typically associated in a certain state, applying a series of quantum gates (quantum
with centralized learning approaches [10], [11]. circuit) to perform operations, and finally measuring the qubits
 In this context, we introduce a novel framework, called to collapse their state to a classical output. The power of
Quantum Federated Learning IDS (QFL-IDS), that merges quantum computing lies in the ability to perform operations on
Quantum Computing (QC) with Federated Learning (FL) to all possible states simultaneously and to exploit interference
allow for an efficient, robust, and privacy-preserving approach and entanglement phenomena to solve certain problems more
for detecting network intrusions in consumer networks. efficiently than classical computers.
Leveraging the decentralized nature of FL, QFL-IDS enables For a system of n qubits, the general state can be described
multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a global as:
 n −1
 2
intrusion detection model while preserving the privacy of
individual user data. Furthermore, we leverage the computa- | = cx |x
tional power of quantum computing to improve the efficiency x=0
of model training and inference processes. We demonstrate where |x represents the binary representation of x in the
the efficacy of our framework through extensive experiments, n-qubit system, and cx are complex coefficients satisfying
 
which show significant improvements in detection accuracy |cx |2 = 1.
and computational efficiency compared to the current tra- Qubits: A qubit is the basic unit of quantum information,
ditional centralized and federated learning approaches. This analogous to the bit in classical computing. Unlike a classical
makes QFL-IDS a promising framework to cope with the new bit, which can be in one of two states (0 or 1), a qubit can
emerging security threats in a timely and effective manner be in a state of superposition, where it represents both 0
while preserving the privacy of consumer networks. and 1 simultaneously. The state of a qubit can be represented
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as as:
follows:
 |ψ = α|0 + β|1
 • We design a novel distributed architecture that enables
 multiple consumer devices to collaboratively train a where |ψ is the quantum state of the qubit, |0 and |1 are
 shared model while preserving their privacy and enhanc- the basis states (analogous to the classical states 0 and 1), and
 ing efficiency via quantum training mechanisms. α and β are complex numbers that satisfy the normalization
 • We propose a novel framework (QFL-IDS) that leverages condition |α|2 + |β|2 = 1. This condition ensures that the total
 FL and QC to ensure an efficient, robust, and privacy- probability (the probability of finding the qubit in either state
 preserving approach for detecting network intrusions in upon measurement) is 1.
 consumer networks. Quantum Gates: Quantum gates manipulate the state of
 • We demonstrate the efficacy of our framework through qubits and are the building blocks of quantum circuits, similar
 extensive experiments using the NSL-KDD public to logic gates in classical circuits. Quantum gates are repredataset, which shows significant improvements in detec- sented mathematically by unitary matrices. A unitary matrix
 tion accuracy and computational efficiency compared to U has the property that its conjugate transpose U † is also its
 traditional AI-based solutions. inverse, i.e., UU † = U † U = I, where I is the identity matrix.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. This property ensures that quantum operations are reversible
Section II presents the background of QML and reviews and preserve the total probability.
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7123

 A simple example is the Hadamard gate (H), which puts a Quantum Circuits (PQC) [14]. Blekos et al. [15] have
qubit into a state of superposition: begun exploring quantum algorithms for feature selection and
   network intrusion detection. Quantum algorithms, such as the
 1 1 1
 H=√ Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) and
 2 1 −1 Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), have been proposed
Applying H to |0 results in: to optimize the feature selection process, potentially improving
 1 the accuracy and efficiency of intrusion detection models.
 H|0 = √ (|0 + |1) Salek et al. [16] integrated classical machine learning models
 2
 with quantum processing units (QPUs) to perform data encod-
This operation puts the qubit into an equal superposition of ing and quantum parallelism. Kukliansky et al. [17] developed
|0 and |1. QNNs within the constraints of current quantum computing
 Quantum Encoding: Encoding classical information into capabilities specifically focusing on Noisy Intermediate-Scale
quantum states involves mapping classical data to qubits or Quantum (NISQ) devices, to detect network attacks. More
groups of qubits. There are several methods for quantum specifically, the authors have developed an optimized multilayencoding, including: ered QNN architecture that leverages quantum computational
 1) Basis Encoding: Basis encoding directly maps classical power that is available today for network attack detection. The
bits to qubits, with each qubit representing a single classical authors Implemented a compact version of this architecture on
bit. For a classical bit string x = x1 x2 . . . xn , the corresponding IonQ’s Aria-1 quantum computer. They achieved an F1 score
quantum state is: of 0.86 using the NF-UNSW-NB15 dataset, demonstrating
 |x = |x1  ⊗ |x2  ⊗ · · · ⊗ |xn , (1) the feasibility and effectiveness of their proposed approach.
 Additionally, the authors introduced a new metric, the certainty
where ⊗ denotes the tensor product, combining individual factor, which quantifies the model’s inherent sharpness and
qubit states into a multi-qubit state. degree of separation between the predicted class probability
 2) Amplitude Encoding: Amplitude encoding maps classi- distribution versus other classes. To address the degradation in
cal data to the amplitudes of a quantum state, allowing for the performance of the current ML models when dealing with big
compact representation of 2n classical values using n qubits. data (i.e., 106 samples or more), Kalinin and Krundyshev [18]
For a normalized classical vector x ∈ RN with N = 2n , the proposed QSVM and QCNN to detect network attacks and
quantum state is: they have compared their obtained results with traditional AIbased IDS in terms of accuracy and efficiency. They have
 
 N−1
 |x = xi |i, (2) developed a novel technique to encode data into quantum
 i=0
 states. Their experimental results demonstrated that QMLbased intrusion detection systems, such as QSVM and QCNN,
where |i represents the i-th basis state in an n-qubit system. can efficiently process large datasets with 98% accuracy,
 3) Angle Encoding: Angle encoding uses the angles of performing at twice the speed of traditional ML algorithms
rotation gates to encode classical data into qubits. A common used for similar tasks. In [19], Suryotrisongko and Musashi
approach is to use the rotation around the Y-axis (Ry ) for a proposed a hybrid quantum-classical deep learning models
single qubit: for detecting Domain Generation Algorithms (DGA)-based
    
 θ θ botnet threats. They proposed a novel approach that integrates
 |x = Ry (θ )|0 = cos |0 + sin |1, (3) quantum computations within a classical deep learning frame-
 2 2
 work. The model incorporates Pennylane’s quantum circuit
where θ is a parameter encoding the classical information.
 embeddings and layer circuits to process features from the
 Botnet DGA dataset, including MinREBotnets, CharLength,
B. Related Work TreeNewFeature, and nGramReputation_Alexa. They have
 The classically optimized nature of QML parameters allows studied the performance of their model under realistic quanfor seamless integration into existing classical communication tum computing conditions by including noise models. Their
infrastructures. Several hybrid quantum-classical AI algo- obtained results showed that the hybrid model can achieve
rithms have demonstrated superior performance compared to high accuracy (up to 94.7% in specific settings), outperforming
classical AI algorithms. These hybrid models utilize quantum traditional deep learning models in intrusion detection. In [20],
gates and circuits that emulate the operational principles of Gouveia and correia proposed an unsupervised QML scheme
classical machine learning models. The most popular ones to detect network attacks. The authors have explored the effiinclude Quantum support vector machine (QSVM) and vari- cacy of a Quantum-Assisted NIDS that incorporates quantum
ational quantum circuits (VQCs), which have shown great circuits as an integral layer within a deep learning model.
performance in detecting network attacks. VQC architectures
include Quantum neural networks (QNNs), Quantum convolutional neural networks (QCNNs) [12], and also Quantum III. S YSTEM M ODEL
recurrent neural networks (QRNNs) [13]. Fully quantum In the following, we present a mathematical formulation of
ML models also have been well investigated to handle the our proposed system model, focusing on quantum data encodcomplex nature of quantum systems, known as Parametrized ing, quantum model training, federated learning aggregation,
7124 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

and the hybrid integration of classical and quantum machine Algorithm 1 QFL-IDS Process
learning. Input: Distributed datasets D across K clients, where each
 dataset Dk consists of pairs (xi , yi )
A. Data Encoding Input: Number of features in each data vector xi after preprocessing, n
 The first step involves encoding classical network data into
 Input: Number of layers in the Quantum Neural Network
quantum states. Given a classical feature vector xi ∈ Rn ,
 (QNN), L
where n is the number of features, the angle embedding
 Input: Total number of federated learning rounds, T
strategy maps each feature xij to a rotation angle for a
 Output: Trained global QNN parameters θglobal and classical
corresponding qubit in a quantum circuit. The encoding can
 model parameters Wglobal
be mathematically expressed as follows for each feature and
 1: Initialize global QNN parameters θglobal and classical
qubit:
         model parameters Wglobal
 QE xij = Rx xij ⊗ Ry xij ⊗ Rz xij |0j , (4) 2: for t = 1 to T do
 3: Distribute the current global parameters θglobal and
where Rx , Ry , and Rz are rotation gates around the x, y, and Wglobal to all K clients
z axes of the Bloch sphere, respectively, applied to the j-th 4: for each client k = 1 to K do
qubit initialized in the state |0. 5: Quantum Encoding:
where θi = 2xi is the rotation angle derived from the i-th 6: Transform each data vector xi in Dk into a
element of the vector x. quantum state |ψi  using angle encoding
 The process for encoding the entire vector x into an n-qubit 7: QNN Processing:
quantum system involves: 8: Apply the QNN with parameters θk to each
 1) Initializing the quantum system in the ground state quantum state |ψi , resulting in |ψi 
 |0⊗n . 9: Measure |ψi  to obtain classical output vec-
 2) Applying the rotation Ry (θi ) to qubit i, for each feature tors oi
 xi in the vector x. 10: Classical Neural Network Processing:
 The quantum state of the system after encoding can be 11: Input the classical vectors oi into the classical
represented as: model with parameters Wk
 
 n 12: Perform forward propagation, loss calculation,
 |ψ = Ry (2xi )|0i , (5) and backpropagation to update θk and Wk based on Dk
 i=1 13: end for
where denotes the tensor product, and |0i represents the 14: Aggregate updates from all clients to obtain θglobal
 new
 new
initial state of the ith qubit. This state |ψ effectively encodes and Wglobal
the classical data vector x into the quantum system. 15: Distribute θglobal
 new and W new back to each client
 global
 16: end for
B. Quantum Model Structure 17: Finalize θglobal and Wglobal as the trained model parameters
 A Quantum Neural Network (QNN) is utilized for process-
 18: Evaluate the trained model on a separate test dataset to
ing the encoded data. The QNN consists of parameterized
 assess IDS performance
quantum circuits (PQCs) that act as variational models. The
PQCs involve sequences of quantum gates, including rotation
gates (Rx , Ry , Rz ) and entangling gates (CNOT), parameterized
by a set of angles θ . The output of the QNN for a given input measurements, a vector of expectation values, is then fed into
|x can be represented as: the classical neural network for further processing.

 |ψ(θ ) = U(θ )|x, (6) D. QFL-IDS Training Process
where U(θ ) represents the unitary operation of the quantum The training process involves adjusting the parameters θ to
circuit parameterized by θ . minimize a loss function that measures the difference between
 the predicted and actual labels. The loss function for a binary
C. Measurement and Classical Integration classification task can be defined as:
 1 
 The output of the quantum circuit is obtained through M
measurement operations on each qubit, which collapses the L(θ ) = (ym − ψ(θ )|O|ψ(θ ))2 , (7)
 M
quantum state into classical information: m=1
 where M is the number of samples, ym is the actual label of
 
 n
 M(|xi ) = xi σz(j) xi , the m-th sample, and O is an observable whose expectation
 j=1
 value determines the prediction.
 Consider a federated system of N nodes, each possessing a
 (j)
where M represents the measurement operation and σz is quantum dataset Di , where i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N. Each node trains
the Pauli-Z observable for the j-th qubit. The result of these a local QNN model, characterized by quantum parameters θi ,
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7125

Fig. 1. Loss values per client for 5 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 2. Loss values per client for 10 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

 TABLE I
 H YPERPARAMETERS AND S CENARIOS where | · |quantum denotes a norm appropriate for quantum
 parameters, and iteration ceases when θ quantum is less than
 a predetermined threshold quantum .
 Each node’s local quantum model aims to minimize its
 quantum loss function. The global quantum optimization
 objective is defined as:
 
 1  quantum
 N
 quantum
 min Lglobal (θ ) = min Li (θ ) , (10)
 θ θ N
 i=1

 In the quantum setting, the update rule for a local
 model’s quantum parameters at node i during the t-th round,
on its dataset. The aim is to minimize the local quantum loss
 considering a quantum-specific learning rate ηquantum , is:
function Li (θi ), reflective of the quantum dataset Di .
 quantum  t 
 Upon completing T training epochs on local quantum mod- θit+1 = θit − ηquantum ∇Li θi , (11)
els, nodes transmit their model parameters θit to a centralized quantum
server. The server then performs quantum aggregation to where ∇Li (θit ) represents the gradient of the quantum
 quantum
update the global model parameters θglobalt for the t-th round: loss function Li with respect to the quantum parameters
 θit at node i. Algorithm 1 summarizes our QFL-IDS train-
 N ing process. QFL-IDS framework underscores the intricacies
 i=1 |Di |θi
 t
 θglobal
 t
 = N , (8) of integrating quantum computing techniques with classical
 i=1 |Di | machine learning in a federated learning setting, highlighting
 the innovative approach to enhancing IDS capabilities.
where |Di | represents the quantum data’s magnitude or weight
at node i, adjusting the contribution of each node’s parameters
based on its dataset size or importance. IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 The iterative quantum training and aggregation proceed To develop QFL-IDS, we leverage PennyLane [26], a quanuntil the global model’s parameter change between successive tum machine learning library. For the attack traffic, we have
rounds meets a specified quantum convergence criterion: used the NSL-KDD dataset that is derived from the original
 KDD Cup 1999 dataset, addressing various shortcomings
 t−1
 θquantum = |θglobal
 t
 − θglobal |quantum , (9) such as redundancy and bias. The dataset comprises network
7126 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. Loss values per client for 25 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 4. Model accuracy values per clients for 5 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 5. Model accuracy values per clients for 10 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 6. Model accuracy values per clients for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

traffic data collected from a simulated environment, covering duration, protocol type, service, and flags, providing valuable
different types of attacks and normal activities. Each data insights into network behavior. Furthermore, the dataset offers
instance includes a comprehensive set of features such as a diverse range of attack scenarios, including Denial of Service
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FRAMEWORK FOR EFFICIENT NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 7127

Fig. 7. Confusion matrices for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

Fig. 8. ROC Curves for 15 distributed clients over (a) 25 training epochs; (b) 50 training epochs; and (c) 200 training epochs.

 TABLE II
(DoS), User to Root (U2R), Remote to Local (R2L), and P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF O UR P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK AND
Probing attacks, making it suitable for training and evaluating C URRENT AI-BASED M ETHODS U SING NSL − KDDTest+
intrusion detection models. In our simulated environment (see
Table I), we explored a range of configurations by varying the
number of clients from 5 to 15 and adjusting the number of
epochs from 25 to 200. For encoding, we employed the angle
embedding technique with 5 qubits. We also utilized the Adam
optimizer and binary entropy as the loss function for training
the model. The evaluation of our proposed framework involved
an extensive examination using several performance metrics,
including accuracy, F1 score, receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves, and a comprehensive confusion matrix. The
ROC curve is a graphical plot that illustrates the diagnostic
ability of a binary classifier system as its discrimination
threshold is varied. It is created by plotting the true positive
rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR), while the
Area Under the Curve (AUC) is the area under the ROC curve
and provides an aggregate measure of performance across all
classification thresholds. To evaluate QFL-IDS, we used the
following metrics:
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (12)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP
 Precision = (13)
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall (Sensitivity) = (14)
 TP + FN
 Precision × Recall
 F1 Score = 2 ×
 Precision + Recall
 2TP as network attacks, and TN (True Negatives) indicate normal
 = (15)
 2TP + FP + FN samples that are classified as normal ones.
where TP (True Positives) indicate network attacks that are Figs. 1, 2, and 3 show our obtained QFL-IDS loss values
correctly classified as intrusions, FN (False Negatives) indicate per client across varying numbers of training epochs (from
network attacks that are identified as normal samples, FP 25 to 200), with 5, 10, and 15 distributed clients respectively.
(False Positives) indicate normal samples that are classified The loss values for each client consistently decrease over time,
7128 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

reaching a minimum, indicating rapid learning in detecting [4] M. Wazid, A. Kumar Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchainattacks without compromising the data privacy of other clients. enabled security framework against ransomware attacks for smart
 healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28,
Figs. 4, 5, and 6 show QFL-IDS model accuracy value Feb. 2023.
per client across varying numbers of QFL training epochs [5] M. K. Hasan et al., “Federated learning for computational offloading
(from 25 to 200), with 5, 10, and 15 distributed clients and resource management of vehicular edge computing in 6G-V2X
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3827–3847,
respectively. We observe that the accuracy of our proposed Feb. 2024.
QFL-IDS framework increases, reaching a maximum of 98%. [6] J. Huang et al., “Incentive mechanism design of federated learning for
This shows that the federated clients learn from each other recommendation systems in MEC,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2596–2607, Feb. 2024.
while preserving privacy, leading to a high accuracy score in [7] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and
the implemented model. This shows the effectiveness of our K. Ayyakannu, “Blockchain assisted hybrid intrusion detection system in
proposed framework in collaborative learning while preserving autonomous vehicles for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 881–889, Nov. 2023.
privacy. Figs. 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c) show the confusion matrix [8] P. Verma, N. Bharot, J. G. Breslin, D. O’Shea, A. Vidyarthi, and
curves of our framework, which shows its performance across D. Gupta, “Zero-day guardian: A dual model enabled federated
25, 50, and 200 QFL training epochs, respectively. Moreover, learning framework for handling zero-day attacks in 5G enabled
 IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3856–3866,
Figs. 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) show the ROC curves of QFL- Feb. 2024.
IDS over 25, 50, and 200 QFL training epochs, respectively, [9] C. Qiao, M. Li, Y. Liu, and Z. Tian, “Transitioning from federated
providing, while Table II shows the values of the metrics learning to quantum federated learning in Internet of Things: A com-
(i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and training time) prehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., early access, May 10,
 2024, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2024.3399612.
of our proposed QFL-IDS and current AI-based methods, [10] J. Smith and A. Doe, “Leveraging quantum computing for security appliusing the NSL − KDDTest+ dataset. We observe that QFL-IDS cations,” J. Quant. Comput. Cybersecurity, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 234–245,
achieves the highest accuracy of 98% and the highest F1 score 2022.
 [11] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu, “Big data: A survey,” Mobile Netw. Appl.,
of 98% with only 14.21 seconds of training time. This results vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 171–209, 2019.
in a time savings of over 99% compared to the RNN method. [12] Y. Chen, “Quantum dilated convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
Thus, Our proposed QFL-IDS framework demonstrates not Access, vol. 10, pp. 20240–20246, 2022.
 [13] A. Safari and A. A. Ghavifekr, “Quantum neural networks (QNN)
only high accuracy in intrusion detection but also significant application in weather prediction of smart grids,” in Proc. 11th Smart
time efficiency, making it a promising solution for efficient Grid Conf. (SGC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
and secure consumer networks. [14] T. D. Manjunath and B. Bhowmik, “Quantum-enhanced deep Q learning
 with parametrized quantum circuit,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. VLSI
 Syst., Archit., Technol. Appl. (VLSI SATA), 2024, pp. 1–6.
 [15] K. Blekos et al., “A review on quantum approximate optimization
 V. C ONCLUSION algorithm and its variants,” Phys. Rep., vol. 1068, pp. 1–66, Jun. 2024.
 [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2024.03.002
 In this paper, we have introduced a novel framework, called [16] M. S. Salek et al., “A novel hybrid quantum-classical frame-
QFL-IDS, that uses QFL to ensure an efficient, robust, and work for an in-vehicle controller area network intrusion detection,”
 Aug. 2023, Preprint. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.36227/
privacy-preserving approach for detecting network intrusions techrxiv.21907443.v2
in consumer networks. Leveraging the decentralized nature of [17] A. Kukliansky, M. Orescanin, C. Bollmann, and T. Huffmire, “Network
FL, our framework enables multiple devices to collaboratively anomaly detection using quantum neural networks on noisy quantrain a global intrusion detection model while preserving tum computers,” IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng., vol. 5, pp. 1–11,
 2024.
the privacy of individual user data. We demonstrated the [18] M. Kalinin and V. Krundyshev, “Security intrusion detection using
efficacy of our framework through extensive experiments quantum machine learning techniques,” J. Comput. Virol. Hack Tech.,
using the NSL-KDD public dataset, which shows significant vol. 19, pp. 125–136, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
 1007/s11416-022-00435-0
improvements in accuracy by 15.29%, F1 Score by 13.95%, [19] H. Suryotrisongko and Y. Musashi, “Evaluating hybrid quantumand computational efficiency by 99% compared to the cur- classical deep learning for cybersecurity botnet DGA detection,”
rent traditional AI-based approaches. Our results confirm the Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 197, pp. 223–229, Jan. 2022.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
potential of our proposed QFL-IDS as a promising solution for S1877050921023590
efficient and privacy-preserving network intrusion detection in [20] A. Gouveia and M. Correia, “Towards quantum-enhanced machine
consumer networks. learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Symp.
 Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), 2020, pp. 1–8.
 [21] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
 analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput.
 R EFERENCES Intell. Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
 [22] S. Z. Lin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “Character-level intrusion detection based
 [1] “Cybercrime damages $6 trillion by 2021.” 2020. Accessed: Mar. on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.
 31, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.cybersecurityventures.com/ (IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1–8.
 hackerpocalypse-cybercrime-report-2016/ [23] Z. Li, Z. Qin, K. Huang, X. Yang, and S. Ye, “Intrusion detection using
 [2] M. Yamauchi, Y. Ohsita, M. Murata, K. Ueda, and Y. Kato, “Anomaly convolutional neural networks for representation learning,” in Proc.
 detection in smart home operation from user behaviors and home Neural Inf. Process., 2017, pp. 858–866.
 conditions,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 183–192, [24] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for
 May 2020. intrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access,
 [3] S. Mumtaz, A. Alsohaily, Z. Pang, A. Rayes, K. F. Tsang, and vol. 5, pp. 21954–21961, 2017.
 J. Rodriguez, “Massive Internet of Things for industrial applications: [25] M. Al-Qatf, Y. Lasheng, M. Al-Habib, and K. Al-Sabahi, “Deep learning
 Addressing wireless IIoT connectivity challenges and ecosystem frag- approach combining sparse autoencoder with SVM for network intrusion
 mentation,” IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 28–33, detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 52843–52856, 2018.
 Mar. 2017. [26] “PennyLane,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://pennylane.ai/