IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024 1

 A Survey of Graph-Based Deep Learning for
 Anomaly Detection in Distributed Systems
 Armin Danesh Pazho , Student Member, IEEE, Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre , Student Member, IEEE,
 Arnab A Purkayastha , Jagannadh Vempati , Otto Martin , and Hamed Tabkhi , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial task in complex dis- TABLE I
tributed systems. A thorough understanding of the requirements EXAMPLE OF DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS WITH SAMPLE SOURCE OF ANOMALIES
and challenges of anomaly detection is pivotal to the security of
such systems, especially for real-world deployment. While there are
many works and application domains that deal with this problem,
few have attempted to provide an in-depth look at such systems.
In this survey, we explore the potentials of graph-based algorithms
to identify anomalies in distributed systems. These systems can
be heterogeneous or homogeneous, which can result in distinct
requirements. One of our objectives is to provide an in-depth look
at graph-based approaches to conceptually analyze their capability
to handle real-world challenges such as heterogeneity and dynamic
structure. This study gives an overview of the State-of-the-Art
(SotA) research articles in the field and compare and contrast their
characteristics. To facilitate a more comprehensive understanding,
we present three systems with varying abstractions as use cases.
We examine the specific challenges involved in anomaly detection
within such systems. Subsequently, we elucidate the efficacy of
graphs in such systems and explicate their advantages. We then
delve into the SotA methods and highlight their strength and
weaknesses, pointing out the areas for possible improvements and
future works.
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, distributed
systems, dynamic systems, graphs, heterogeneous systems.

 I. INTRODUCTION
 NOMALY detection refers to finding abnormal behavior
A or patterns in the data or a system that does not match the
expected behavior [1]. In other words, a non-benign change in
 word distributed, and they are dissimilar with respect to their
 structure and data production, hence the word heterogeneous.
the known and correct behavior of a system can be detected as Homogeneous systems can be seen as a special case of heteroan anomaly. Anomaly detection is critical in both homogeneous geneous systems where all the components are very similar if
and heterogeneous distributed systems. In heterogeneous dis- not identical.
tributed systems, different components, from small variations Many distributed systems are operational in critical and/or imlike sensors, work all the way up to large components like portant fields (e.g., Power Generation and Distribution systems).
control facilities to achieve the overall goal of the system. All Thus, their security and correctness are critical. Vulnerabilities
these components are spread out in a big network; hence the can be seen in every aspect of these systems and in different
 levels of abstraction; from problematic individual components
 Manuscript received 19 May 2022; revised 16 April 2023; accepted 1 June within a system or a network to seeing abnormalities or irregu-
2023. Date of publication 5 June 2023; date of current version 27 November larities where these components connect with each other to ac-
2023. This work was supported by Siemens Technology. Recommended for complish a more advanced task. Table I shows several distributed
acceptance by B. He. (Armin Danesh Pazho and Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Armin Danesh Pazho.) networks and possible sources of anomalies in them. Anomaly
 Armin Danesh Pazho, Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre, and Hamed Tabkhi are with detection in these systems must meet many requirements, makthe University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223 USA (e-mail: ing the task even more complicated. Anomalies must be detected
adaneshp@uncc.edu; galinezh@uncc.edu; htabkhiv@uncc.edu).
 Arnab A Purkayastha is with the Western New England University, Spring- by processing large quantities of data, considering the nature of
field, MA 01119 USA (e-mail: arnab.purkayastha@wne.edu). anomalies, which makes detecting them a challenging task and
 Jagannadh Vempati and Otto Martin are with the Siemens Technol- the real-world setup limitations.
ogy, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA (e-mail: jagannadh.vempati@siemens.com;
m.otto@siemens.com). In recent years, neural networks have shown great potential
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3282898 and are being explored extensively. They have opened new
 1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

avenues and increased interest in extending deep learning ap- different use cases and analyze them with respect to review
proaches for anomaly detection [2], [3]. Traditional methods are algorithms. Another work [15] provides a general overview of
mostly dependent on handcrafted features defined by domain methods for anomaly detection in data represented as graphs
experts which makes them less generalizable and flexible for and discusses the challenges and use cases of these methods.
different domains. Feature selection can be time-consuming However, this work did not focus on deep learning methods
and error-prone. In contrast, deep learning methods are highly for anomaly detection, as these techniques were not yet widely
adaptable to the specific requirements of each domain. Deep established at the time of the study.
learning models help with automation as they need minimal The major focus of this survey is to provide a comprehensive
effort and supervision for identifying the prominent features overview of the state-of-art graph-based techniques to solve the
without manual feature selection. They are more suitable for problem of anomaly detection. In particular, we look at reallearning complex information, their result is more generalizable time complex distributed systems and qualitatively model those
and less prone to over-fitting, and they are model free. Another to identify and analyze various methods in anomaly detection
advantage of deep learning algorithms in the context of anomaly that utilize the benefits of graphs. In a nutshell, we make the
detection is that they can handle large input data more efficiently following notable contributions to this survey:
and scale up compared to traditional methods. This characteristic r Modeling three conceptual use cases and employing them
makes them ideal for anomaly detection in complex distributed for exploring the requirements, challenges, and benefits of
systems. Deep learning-based algorithms have proved to be more anomaly detection algorithms.
effective and generally show better results. This is due to the r Identifying the logical, algorithmic, and implementation
fact that they are capable of building more enriched features and requirements and challenges of anomaly detection in realdetecting complex patterns compared to traditional methods. world distributed systems.
 Real-world distributed systems are an intertwined network of r Comparing and contrasting the different characteristics
numerous components, each of which representing distinctive of the graph-based anomaly detection algorithms, tools,
properties, changing over time. Graphs prove to be advantageous and techniques in-depth for dealing with anomalies and
in capturing the relational dynamic of these components as qualitatively modeling them over the three conceptual use
well as their individual features. Mapping a system to nodes cases that we introduce.
and edges of a graph, allows for a better comprehension of the r Providing future research direction for graph-based
system. It is noteworthy that not all types of graphs are capable anomaly detection in distributed systems.
of capturing every aspect of a system. While conventional graph The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
representations are adequate for homogeneous systems, hetero- describes three use cases that are the representatives of realgeneous systems require the more complex attributed graphs. world distributed systems. Section III identifies the challenges
Attributed graph is a type of data structure where each node and requirements of anomaly detection in the context of realand edge is associated with a set of attributes or properties. In world distributed systems. Next, Section IV argues the benefits
heterogeneous systems, they allow for a the representation of of moving toward using graphs in distributed systems. Section V
multiple variations of entities and relationships, each with their aptly delve into the graph-based approaches and the means
own unique attributes [4]. On the other hand, to address the of utilizing graphs for anomaly detection. Finally, Section VI
changing nature of distributed systems, dynamic graphs come to discusses and compares these methods and their complexity, the
aid. In dynamic graphs, nodes and edges can appear, disappear, new challenges and requirements that graphs add, and the future
or change over time, rendering them ideal for dynamic systems. directions that this research field can take.
Hence, When surveying graph-based methods, we analyze their
ability to handle attributed and dynamic graphs. II. CONCEPTUAL USE-CASES
 Numerous studies have reviewed techniques and tools for
 In this section, we introduce three conceptual use cases that
general anomaly detection problems [2], [3], [5], [6], [7]. Some
 will be used throughout the paper for better understanding.
of the existing surveys focus on anomaly detection in Big Data
 While these three conceptual use cases are good samples of hetsuch as [8], [9]. In addition, certain studies investigate methods
 erogeneous distributed systems, if necessary, these systems can
utilized for anomaly detection in specific narrow domains such
 be segmented into homogeneous subgroups to fit the anomaly
as fake news detection [10], social media interactions [11],
 detection method’s requirements.
financial transactions [12], etc. Several articles concentrate on
 We have made sure to cover different levels of abstraction
the applications of graphs for identifying anomalies in different
 to help with the development of a richer understanding of the
systems. [13] overviews anomaly detection algorithms in graphs
 concepts. The aim is to clarify that anomalies can occur in all
of dynamic networks; however it mostly mentions the traditional
 levels of a system, whether it is a small component or it is a large
methods and neglects state-of-the-art deep learning methods
 subgroup of the whole system.
without mentioning the challenges and difficulties of anomaly
detection in such systems. A recent study [14] tries to fill this gap
and focuses on deep learning methods for anomaly detection in A. Smart Surveillance System
graphs. [14] also mentions the challenges in this area, but falls Here we use an example from [16]. Real-time Edge Video
short in categorizing the challenges and analyzing the real-world Analytics for Multi-camera Privacy-aware Pedestrian Tracking
requirements and constraints. Both [13], [14] do not provide or REVAMP2 T [16] is designed for tracking pedestrians across
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 3

Fig. 1. REVAMP2 T [16] setup. This setup can be expanded or shrunk to a
new setup. Each edge server only sees the data of its own location and the cloud
server is able to see all the locations connected to it. For privacy purposes, a
supervised amount of information is transmitted from each location to the cloud
server.

multiple cameras. The overview of the model is shown in Fig. 1.
The installed edge nodes at each place of interest consist of a
number of edge cameras empowered for analyzing streaming Fig. 2. Sensor network.
video. These cameras are connected to an edge server that acts
as a database that contains information about seen objects. The
video can be sent to a number of surveillance monitors with the modified to incorporate all the possible components of a hetextracted information if necessary and allowed. Also, the whole erogeneous system. Here, Level 0 (L0) through Level 4 (L4) are
information can be sent to a cloud server for further processing the functional levels that span two broad zones, namely IT and
of less sensitive information. An anomaly can happen through- OT. OT systems can be further classified into two sub-categories
out this whole complex distributed heterogeneous system. For which will be discussed as follows.
example, a camera might get broken, or even there can be a r L0: Physical components that build products. Eg. motors,
hacker trying to steal the extracted information from the edge pumps, sensors, valves, etc
server. r L1: Systems that monitor and send commands to devices
 This distributed system is completely attributed and dynamic, at L0. Eg. PLCs, RTUs, IEDs, etc
leading to a dynamic attributed graph representation. Benign r L2: Overall process controllers. Eg. HMIs, SCADA, etc
changes such as removing or updating the components can involves humans managing and controlling the processes
happen in this system, which should not be counted as anomalies. r L3: Management of production workflows. Eg. batch man-
Other events such as receiving noisy video from a camera, agement, operations management, etc
information mismatch between the edge server and the cloud r L4: ERP software, databases, email servers and other
server, and unwanted access to data at any point of the network systems that manage the logistics of the manufacturing
can be seen as anomalies. operations and provide communications and data storage
 The anomaly tri-junction barrier (shown in red) serves as a
B. Sensor Network demarcation of communication between the various levels and
 possible sources of anomalies.
 We next look at the conceptual use case of a heterogeneous
Sensor Network that illustrates a complex distributed system.
 C. Internal Local Area Network
To accurately depict the security aspects of such a system, we
take inspiration from the Purdue Model for ICS security [17]. An internal Local Area Network (LAN) is also a good sample
The Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture was created by model of a complex distributed heterogeneous system. The
mapping the interconnections and inter-dependencies of the graph representation of the system is attributed, dynamic, and
high-level components of typical industrial control systems directed. It is dynamic because all the components in the network
(ICS) to provide guidance on how to defend IT (Information are subject to change. For example, clients can change their
Technology) and OT (Operations Technology) systems against devices, the hardware of the server can change (e.g., adding more
malicious actors. Fig. 2 shows the model of such a system memory or upgrading the CPU), the mediums for connections
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 CHALLENGES OF ANOMALY DETECTION

can change, a client can get removed, or the framework of each Table II summarizes all the requirements and the challenges
platform can get updated. that follow them. In the rest of this section, we discuss each one
 To emphasize, benign changes to the system must not be of them in more detail.
counted as an anomaly. We are dealing with a dynamic system that does not have a unique normal state. Thus, capturing
anomalies is a more difficult task than when we are dealing with
 A. Data and Evaluation Aspect
static systems.
 1) Big Data: When it comes to anomaly detection with learning approaches, the data becomes an immediate challenge. In
 many applications, the amount of data that has to be processed
 III. CHALLENGES
 is immense, pushing the problem into the Big Data category.
 When it comes to anomaly detection, especially in real-world Big data meaning is best described through the 5Vs of Big Data:
systems, a number of requirements must be met. In this section, Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity, and Value, each exhibiting
we identify the general requirements and challenges of anomaly a series of challenges. For anomaly detection, especially in
detection in real-world distributed systems. We look at these distributed systems, a huge amount of data (Volume) is being
challenges from four aspects, each of which examines anomaly generated and processed at a very high speed (Velocity), condetection from an alternative standpoint: Data, Anomaly Nature, taining multiple data types and formats coming from several
Graph, and Real-world aspects. sources (Variety), with uncertainty about the data and its quality
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 5

(Veracity), all or most of it important, and must be considered from the fact that many machine learning algorithms are based
for extracting a worthy output (Value). on the hypothesis that classes of data have the same distributions
 2) High Dimensionality: This is another challenge that arises which is not realistic in the case of anomaly detection.
from the data. In many applications, the data that should be 6) Unclean Data: Many approaches, such as anomaly detecprocessed has a large number of features (dimensions). Huge tion with autoencoders (discussed in Section V need datasets that
dimensions of the dataset can cause numerous challenges in only contain normal datapoints for training. These approaches
many applications. However, these challenges are exacerbated learn the normal state and decide whether an anomaly has
in the context of anomaly detection. The phrase “curse of dimen- happened or not based on the divergence from features of normal
sionality” generally refers to the problems that arise when the datapoints. However, as discussed, anomalies can be rare and
number of dimensions increases. A dataset is high-dimensional very subtle. There is a very high chance that an anomalous
when we can see the curse of dimensionality. The growth of datapoint slips through the fingers of the responsible individual
dimensions will increase the size of the data accordingly and or team, or it might not even be considered an anomaly until later.
causes sparsity which eventually results in the data points having As a result, often datasets include undesired outliers that make
relatively the same distance from each other. As a result, it would the dataset unclean. This unclean data can confuse the model
be more difficult to detect hidden anomalies in high-dimensional about the features and representation of the normal datapoints
space. This issue is still a controversial topic in scientific society. and deteriorate the accuracy of the model.
 3) Heterogeneity: Distributed systems, specially in real-world 7) Metrics and Benchmarks: On top of all the challenges,
scenarios, normally include various types of entities, each with the most important one seems to be the fact that there is no
their own set of characteristics and behaviors. Consequently the unified metric or benchmark, where models can assess themrelation between these components is also specific based on the selves and compare the results. Various kinds of metrics have
type of the component. The data produced from such systems been introduced and we discuss a number of important ones in
are heterogeneous, and many methods are not able to handle Section VI-A, but almost none of the works assess those metrics
complex variable heterogeneous data. Thus, heterogeneity is on a single unique domain, to make the comparison between
another challenge for the task of anomaly detection. Hetero- models possible.
geneous systems often have large and complex data structures,
with a high degree of interconnectivity and variability.
 4) Labeled Data: In data-driven approaches, the quality of B. Anomaly Nature
the data has a vital role in the outcome of the model. When it 1) Changing Nature: Anomalies have a specific nature and
comes to anomaly detection, the number of labeled datasets is a collection of characteristics that lead to a particular set of
alarmingly low. This fact encourages the use of unsupervised or challenges. The first and most important challenge is the changsemi-supervised approaches. Thanks to new technologies and ing nature of anomalies. Anomalies are not predefined static
advancements in devices, a huge amount of data is available. occurrences. They can transpire in different shapes and formats,
However, in most cases, this data does not incorporate infor- and not all of them can be considered prior to the occurrence
mation regarding anomalous behavior. On the other hand, it is of an anomaly. There can always be novel anomalies that have
both expensive and time-consuming to obtain high-quality labels never been considered. They can adapt to anomaly detection
for available data. In many cases, anomalies must be discov- mechanisms and evolve to pass through the defenses of anomaly
ered and labeled by experts who have field-specific knowledge, detection algorithms. Because of this characteristic, most almaking the task harder and more demanding. Also, we should gorithms tend to skew toward online learning, unsupervised
consider the noises added to the dataset by imprecise labeling. learning, or semi-supervised learning, where there are no pre-
Undetected anomalies can have a huge cost in critical situations defined anomalies, and the algorithm learns based on what it
of real-world applications. Thus, using supervised learning is sees at the moment on its own. In other words, most of the
somewhat problematic in the context of anomaly detection. algorithms make an effort to eliminate external artificial biases
However, several approaches try to overcome this challenge and proceed toward generic solutions. This instigates the use of
by taking advantage of synthetic labeled datasets, but many online learning, where the algorithm is constantly learning about
other approaches have moved toward using semi-supervised, the behavior of the system.
unsupervised, and self-supervised algorithms. 2) Disparate Sources: Distributed systems typically incor-
 5) Unbalanced Data: Another point to be mentioned is that porate multiple layers (resources), resulting in a complex and
anomalies are rare. Supervised learning approaches need to intricate system as a whole. The role of each of these layers,
see enough examples while training to learn and understand disregarding its majority or minority can not be neglected.
anomalies. However, the number of anomalies is usually very Anomalies can penetrate each and every one of those comsubtle, causing the dataset to become unbalanced. Anomalies ponents, making it very difficult to track them. Especially in
are out-of-the-ordinary incidents, and it is not rational to expect large facilities, the number of components grows exponentially,
enough samples of each type of anomaly to be available in and all of them are potential points of anomaly. This disparate
the dataset. This challenge requires the direction of solving the source of anomalies is one of the challenging complications that
problem to adapt to it. The abundance of normal data points is troubling anomaly detection algorithms.
may result in neglecting the detection of anomalous data points 3) Obscured Anomalies: In addition to these challenges, a
which are valuable in anomaly detection. This problem arises considerable number of anomalies, predominantly the ones that
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

came into existence because of a smart entity, do not like to 4) Dynamic Systems: Furthermore, static systems are exbe found. They might be disguised, or hidden. For example, tremely rare in a real-world environment. Real-world distributed
a cyber-attack tries to be as masked as possible. On the other systems are extremely dynamic. Components get removed,
hand, there are anomalies that are not concealed and are just added, changed, or updated. These benign transformations must
the result of a malfunctioning component in the system. Being not be counted as anomalous behavior. The anomaly detection
conscious of both of these aspects and prepared for obscured algorithms might consider these transformations as anomalies.
anomalies is another challenging task on the way to generic If so, the number of false-positive alarms might rise to a point
anomaly detection. that makes the algorithm non-functional and impractical for
 4) Noise Resilience: Systems are subject to experiencing a real-world adoption. On the other hand, the anomaly detection
profuse number of internal or external noises. These noises are model should be flexible enough to learn about the updated
not anomalies until they pass a certain threshold. However, they features and structure of the network to fully incorporate exare still an irregularity in the system. The anomaly detection isting information. Online learning is a tool for overcoming
algorithms must be capable of distinguishing between noises this challenge, however, this is still a very hot topic in research
and anomalies. If not, they might raise too many false positive communities.
alarms, resulting in supererogatory attention and costs. These 5) Interpretability: Another important challenge is the internoises can have a wide variety of origins. Some of them are pretability of the anomalies. Particularly, in real-world deployback-breaking to discover, and it is best to introduce a means of ments, the tendency to see the actual type of anomaly and not
filtering those noises out inside the algorithm itself, instead of just the detection is more desired. One reason behind this is that
putting an effort to find the source of the noise. recognizing the source of the anomaly, realizing the actual type
 of the anomaly (e.g., cyber attacks on sensor 1 A), and informing
 the responsible individuals is very important. Finding the root
C. Real-World Challenges of the anomaly is important for maintaining the availability of
 1) Inference Time: When it comes to using anomaly detection, the system.
time is of the essence, especially in real-world applications. It 6) Domain Shift: Last but not least, anomaly detection apis expected, time-wise, that the detection of the anomaly does proaches become handy, when you are able to generalize over
not sit far from the actual happening of the anomalous behavior. different domains. However, since we are dealing with learning-
Particularly, in a critical environment such as healthcare applica- based approaches, this domain shift comes with a huge cost.
tions, a long latency in detecting a malfunctioning device might Neural Networks learn about the environment and adapt to
lead to catastrophic results, and it is impermissible. Thus, nec- it, making it difficult to switch to another domain. This fact
essary actions must be taken to avoid such a latency. However, discourages the use of supervised learning and also pushes novel
anomaly detection techniques based on deep learning are often a techniques toward online learning. This challenge is shared
heavy task, requiring a colossal amount of computational power. between graph-based anomaly detection and other approaches.
 2) Privacy: Privacy is another important hindrance that must
be considered in a real-world environment. Anomaly detection
algorithms are involved with all the data circulation and the IV. MOTIVATION: WHY GRAPH-BASED?
state of the system to the furthest extent. They know everything The use of graphs for anomaly detection is a very recent topic
about a system, and if that kind of information leaks out of of interest in the machine learning and deep learning community.
the environment, it can lead to cataclysmic undesirable results. In this section, we highlight the benefits of graphs in the context
Hence, an anomaly detection algorithm must be obliged to of anomaly detection.
preserve privacy and be as secure as possible if it desires to Ability to Represent Complex Dependencies: Graphs are
be deployed in a real-world environment. widely used for modeling and analyzing complex systems
 3) Ciphered Data: The fact that anomaly detection algorithms with non-Euclidean data and intricate relationships among sysneed to be aware of everything that is going on related to a system tem components. This characteristic is particularly useful for
brings about another challenge. Many systems such as financial anomaly detection problems since anomalies in nature can arise
systems, social media, or facilities like power generation and from complex interactions between variables that are hard to
distribution networks do not intercommunicate in plain, raw capture using traditional models.
data. They encode the data and then transmit it. This ciphered Flexibility: Complex systems consist of many different comdata usually is not related to the original data in an obvious ponents each with its own set of characteristics. Graph-based
manner and that is the whole purpose of encoding the data. models are highly flexible and can be adapted to a wide range
Hence, algorithms face yet another arduous challenge. For ex- of structures and data types. Graphs suit well for both structured
ample, wireless communication between a sensor and the server (symbols, images, grid-based data) and unstructured (knowledge
contains an encoder at the edge transmitter, ciphering the data for graphs, social network data, distributed systems, citation netprivacy and security reasons, and a decoder at the receptor that works, network traffic) that can be easily represented by regular
deciphers the data for further processing. When an algorithm and/or irregular graph structures.
tries to discover anomalies on the medium (here the wireless Scalibilty: Anomaly detection often deals with highconnector) it cannot access the raw data before the transmission dimensional data with a large number of features. Due to this
stage. fact, it is hard to capture the underlying patterns and distribution
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 7

 TABLE III
 SUMMARY OF REVIEWED APPROACHES AND THEIR CAPABILITIES

of data for finding outliers. Graphs are useful for capturing the the problem of anomaly detection in distributed systems. The
underlying structure of the input data and its relationships in a summary of all reviewed works and their capabilities can be
more compact and interpretable format. This can help with more seen in Table III.
efficient processing of the data and helps with scalability. Many of the surveyed methods are not able to handle hetero-
 Robustness: Graphs are capable of incorporating relationships geneity or dynamic behavior that might be present in the systems.
and the holistic structure of the data which is particularly ben- Approaches that are capable of managing attributed graphs are
eficial in anomaly detection. Graph-based algorithms analyze better suited for heterogeneous systems. It is noteworthy that the
each datapoint by taking into account the context related to them inability of certain methods to handle attributed graphs does not
which improves the robustness and helps reduce the number of mean they can not be adopted in heterogeneous systems. Two vifalse negatives. This is due to the fact that often outliers do not able strategies exist for their utilization. First, large systems can
fit into the global patterns of the system. be subdivided into smaller homogeneous sub-systems. Second,
 Interpretability and Visualization: Graph-based models can a simplified version of data can be employed to accommodate
provide more insights into the relationships between nodes of the the limitations of such methods.
system, making them more interpretable than many traditional
models. This can be particularly useful in understanding the
underlying causes of anomalies and identifying potential areas A. Federated Learning
for improvement and vulnerabilities of the system.
 In the context of anomaly detection in distributed systems
 and when dealing with Big Data, while graphs can offer the
 V. GRAPH-BASED TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES FOR ANOMALY ability to capture complex dependencies and handle scalability
 DETECTION
 and robustness, Federated Learning (FL) can be a solution
 In this section, we aim to introduce and compare techniques for improved privacy, model generalization, and more efficient
that combined with graphs have a great potential for solving learning. The combination of the two seems to be perfectly suited
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Federated learning for anomaly detection applied on two distributed clusters viz. LAN and Sensor. Here N is the number of clusters connected to the
Federated cloud server. Each network has its own testing and training dataset, local storage, and loss function. The server receives individual weights from all the
network’s local models and then aggregates them based on their useable graph attributes while sending back the global weights.

for anomaly detection in distributed systems, and it is a great area was introduced in [104] as a complete methodology to apply
to be explored by scholars and researchers. the Vertical Federated Learning (VFL) algorithm for graph
 Federated Learning is a technology that has recently emerged convolutional networks. The approach, along with Homomoras an alternative to centralized systems. It focuses on collab- phic Encryption (HE), was developed to ensure privacy while
oration while preserving the security aspect of client data in- maintaining accuracy.
formation used for training machine learning algorithms [124], A general structure of a complex distributed system can be
[125], [126], [127], [128]. It also greatly reduces communica- easily depicted using the Federated Learning framework (Fig. 3).
tion overhead [129]. FL employs collaborative and experiential Here we show two different network clusters. In this framework,
learning by training without the need to transfer data over to a the models are trained at the device level or client side, where
centralized location. This feature has recently led to a rise in they are brought over to the data sources or devices for training
the applicability of FL in a variety of applications, ranging from and prediction. The updated values are sent back to the federated
medical to IoT, transportation, defense, and mobile apps. cloud server for aggregation. One consolidated model gets trans-
 Anomaly detection and prediction of static and dynamic time ferred back to the devices to enable tracking and redistribution
series data have been a popular topic, especially for IoT-based of each model to various devices. During the training phase, the
data [130], [131], [132]. These approaches look at multi-sensor input is reconstructed in the output until reconstruction error is
systems as a collection of centralized sensors where abnormal minimized, which calculates the threshold value. This threshold
sensor behavior is detected by a central model that runs on the value decides whether the observed patterns are anomalous or
server. Such systems are prone to failures, require longer access not.
times, and are vulnerable to malicious invasion attacks leading Table III summarizes the strong points and weaknesses of
to a potential data breach from clients to the server [133]. [134] two discussed works DIoT [103] and VFL [104]. Both of these
looks at the data collected by IoT sensors for energy-efficient works are unable to process the additional information provided
applications like HVAC in smart buildings and proposes a feder- by attributed graphs which in real-world scenarios are common.
ated stacked Long Short-time Memory model (LSTM) on time It should be mentioned that for supervised models such as
series data generated by IoT sensors for classification and re- DIot [103] a crucial requirement is available labeled data that
gression tasks. [103], on the other hand, proposes a self-learning is hard to provide. Based on mentioned shortcomings, although
distributed system for security monitoring. FGL addresses data diversity, data security and real-time con-
 While such approaches deal with Autonomy (concerns associ- tinuous learning it is not mature enough yet for real-world
ation and communication requirements) nature of systems, they applications.
fall short of the benefits of graph-based relational learning. Federated Graph Learning is a fairly recent topic. [135] introduces
Federated Graph Learning (FGL) as a seminal paper discussing B. Autoencoders
the definition and challenges of FGL. It further categorizes FGL Anomaly Detection is often considered an open-set problem,
into four distinct learning types. Graph edges and nodes in each where it is very unlikely to have complete knowledge of all types
sub-graph heavily overlap each other and therefore play a pivotal of possible anomalies. As a result, researchers have focused on
role in extracting the features and adding to contextual and developing semi-supervised or unsupervised powerful neural
relational learning benefits. A sub-classification of this work network models such as Autoencoders. The combination of
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 9

autoencoders with graphs has become a popular topic as it nodes. These autoencoders are trained to preserve proximity
helps with overcoming the challenges of anomaly detection, and homophily in the network. The proposed loss function
specifically in the context of distributed systems. is designed to minimize the contribution of outliers, and by
 Autoencoders are typically made of two main modules; en- minimizing the loss equation, the anomaly scores for each node
coders and decoders. The encoder part is responsible for map- are calculated. Finally, the top k nodes are reported as anomalous
ping the input space to a bottleneck latent space, and the decoder points. They also propose AdONE [111] that makes use of
reconstructs the original input based on the latent representation. adversarial learning to be able to construct an outlier-resistant
In order to find the best possible latent representation, they try network embedding.
to minimize the reconstruction error of the original input. Thus, Traditional autoencoder networks and convolutional autoenthe network will learn to preserve the most informative parts of coders are limited to a fixed input length which makes them
the input features in the latent representation. They were tradi- unsuitable for detecting anomalies in dynamic networks. Also,
tionally used for dimension reduction prior to feeding the data to they are limited to Euclidean data; thus, they are unable to
the main network, but nowadays, they have vast applications in model complex relationships that may occur in a dynamic
information retrieval, image processing, and anomaly detection. heterogeneous network. Graph Neural Networks (GNN) can
 In the context of anomaly detection, autoencoders can be overcome these issues and generalize the network. They can
used as a tool for calculating anomaly scores. After training the also incorporate multi-dimensional edge and node attributes.
autoencoder with data that does not contain anomalous points, Convolutional graph autoencoders have been used in [110]
if any outlier data points are fed to the network, it will perform for detecting anomalies. This model uses both node features
poorly. The reconstruction loss of that data point will be larger and edge features. Also, the decoder module has two separate
compared to normal ones since the network is not familiar branches for node reconstruction and edge reconstruction. The
with this type of data. As a result, the reconstruction error can final reconstruction loss is the combination of edge reconstrucbe used as a measure of deviation from normal data points. tion loss and node reconstruction loss and is used as a measure
This approach has been used for detecting anomalies in high- for finding anomalies.
performance computing systems [105] and has shown promising Fig. 4 shows the workflow for detecting anomalies using
results. Convolutional Autoencoders can improve the parameter autoencoder networks in the LAN Cluster example mentioned
efficiency and training time since they have shared parameters. in Section II-C. In the case of anomaly detection in a complex
Works such as [106], [107] have made use of convolutional system, such as the three conceptual models that we introduced
autoencoders for anomaly detection and achieved significant im- earlier, after training the model with normal data, the graph of
provements. DeepSphere [112] proposed a method for detecting the network is fed to the encoder module to be transformed
anomalous snapshots in a dynamic network. This work adopts into the latent space. In this case, since we are dealing with
an LSTM autoencoder with an attention mechanism. In the a heterogeneous network, the encoder and decoder modules
constructed hidden space, DeepSphere [112] learns a spherically should be able to incorporate the edge and node information
shaped boundary around the encoded normal representations. and aggregate them to get the most of the available information.
As a result, the encoded representation of an unseen anomalous Also, at any time, the graph of the network can change. Thus, it is
snapshot of the network will fall outside the hyper-sphere and vital to employ a network architecture that can handle dynamic
is detected as an anomaly. graphs, such as Graph Neural Networks. The decoder will try
 All the aforementioned methods are developed based on the to reconstruct the original graph of the network from the latent
hypothesis that clean data (data that does not contain anomalous representation. Anomalous edges, nodes, or sub-graphs of the
points) is available for training, but in many real-world cases, network will have a high reconstruction error. In the most basic
we do not have enough data points that satisfy these constrain. approach, only a fixed threshold can be used to decide whether
Thus, the reconstruction error for anomalous points will be the edge, node, or sub-graph should be considered anomalous
lower, and the accuracy of finding outliers will degrade. To solve or not.
this issue, Robust Deep Autoencoder (RDA) [108] inspired by For more clear scrutiny, Table III shows the different fea-
Robust Principal Component Analysis [136], [137], [138] uses a tures of reviewed works. As mentioned before, one important
filter layer that separates anomalous data points of input data. By characteristic of the autoencoder structure is that it is trained
removing these noisy and anomalous data points, the network in an unsupervised manner that directly solves the problem of
will be able to better reconstruct the normal data points. On top the availability of labeled data. Also, the changing nature of
of RDA [108], they add an anomaly detection algorithm to test anomalies will not be a problem in these types of models since
the effectiveness of the proposed method. Iterative Training Set they will learn the normal behavior of the system and anything
Refinement (ITSR) [109] adapts adversarial autoencoder net- different from that will be counted as an outlier.
work [139] architecture to add a prior distribution to constructed
latent representation and places anomalies to the regions with
lower likelihood. By this means, the model will be robust against C. Graph Embedding
noises and anomalies in the training data. DONE [111] is another The first obstacle that we face in many tasks like anomaly
network proposed for detecting anomalous nodes in attributed detection in large networks is finding a way to map the data
graphs. DONE makes use of two parallel autoencoders; one hidden in the network graph into a low-dimensional space. To
for encoding link structure and another one for attributes of do so, there are many different approaches. In general, we can
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 4. Graph autoencoder network for anomaly detection in the LAN Cluster example introduced in Section II-C. Two malicious users (equal to anomalous
nodes in the network graph) have connected to the network. The network graph is fed to the autoencoder and the reconstruction loss for nodes and edges will be
calculated. In this simple case, just by comparing the reconstruction loss to a constant threshold, the anomalies can be detected, but these processes can be more
advanced and precise.

separate these methods into two different classes. The first type cannot use them in dynamic networks. NetWalk [117] solves the
of encoder is “Shallow Encoders” which will transform each problem with the changing networks and dynamically updates
node of a graph into exactly one vector in the latent space. On the the representations as the network evolves. This model tries to
other hand, there are methods called “Deep Encoders” which get satisfy two constraints: clique constraints which minimize the
the use of more complicated networks and are able to generate pairwise distances between representations of vertices in each
more complex embedding compared to “Shallow Encoders.” random walk to preserve locality and autoencoder constrain,
In the following, we will see details of each of these methods which serve as a global constraint and minimize the reconstrucand their strengths and weaknesses. After obtaining the latent tion error of input using the output embedding. Still, there are
representations, an anomaly detection algorithm can be used on more issues with these types of graph embedding algorithms;
top of the embedding network in order to detect outliers and another problem is that in complex heterogeneous systems, each
anomalies. node may have its own specific features, but “Shallow Encoders”
 1) Shallow Embedding: Shallow Embedding methods try to are unable to make use of these node-specific features.
find a unique latent representation for each vertex of a graph. 2) Deep Embedding: Most of the methods that we have dis-
The main difference between different approaches to shallow cussed until now are not capable of modeling more complicated
embedding is in the definition of similarity function. The simi- dependencies such as complex inter-sensor relationships, but
larity function basically describes how relationships in the latent “Deep Encoders” have more capacity and are able to build richer
space are mapped to the original input space. DeepWalk [113] latent representations. Graph Deviation Network (GDN) [94] inis a random walk approach for node embedding that tries to troduced a structure learning approach in which the graph edges
find the best embedding that preserves similarity. Each random are initially unknown and have to be learned. GDN [94] is consist
walk is an unbiased sequence of nodes with a fixed length. of four important components. The first component is Sensor
Authors claim that random walks can be treated as sentences of Embedding which captures the characteristics of each node or
a text since the frequency of occurrence of the nodes in random sensor. In the next step, Graph Structure Learning Learns the
walks follows the power law. DeepWalk [113] tries to find the complicated relationships between pairs of sensors and models
feature representation for each node such that it maximizes the them to the edges of the graph. After the construction of the
likelihood of visiting nodes seen in the random walks starting graph, Graph Attention-Based Forecasting predicts the behavior
from that particular node. Another method to be mentioned is of sensors in the future time step. Finally, Graph Deviation
Node2Vec [114]. This algorithm makes it possible to have more Scoring will compare these predictions and the actual values in
flexible random walks in order to obtain richer latent representa- each time step and identify anomaly points that deviate from
tions. It combines breath-first sampling and depth-first sampling expected values. AddGraph [118] is able to aggregate more
together to introduce a flexible biased sampling strategy that information such as structural, temporal, and content features
allows local and global views of the network. to be able to build a more powerful embedding for anomaly
 Similar approaches such as LINE [115], and TADW [116] detection in dynamic graphs. This model makes use of a graph
have been proposed. One might think of these algorithms as convolutional neural network (GCN) for capturing structural and
finding a simple look-up table for assigning each node in the content features. By adding Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) with
original graph to a latent representation. As a result, these kinds attention modules, AddGraph [118] makes it possible to comof methods have limitations when we want to apply them to bine the long-term and short-term states of each node. Finally,
large heterogeneous networks. The first limitation comes from based on the representation that contains structural, temporal,
the fact that each node has to have its own unique embedding and content features, AddGraph [118] computes the anomalous
and there are no shared parameters in these kinds of networks. score for edges using a single-layer network.
As a result, when the number of nodes grows, the number of Smart Video Surveillance Systems (Section II-A), Sensor
parameters will grow respectively, and we will need V × D Network (Section II-B), and LAN Network (Section II-C) all
number of parameters where D is the dimension of latent space. contain many nodes. As a result, Shallow embedding techniques
Also, they are unable to generalize to unseen nodes, and we are not adequate for modeling these kinds of networks. We
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 11

Fig. 5. This figure shows the AddGraph model applied to the LAN Cluster conceptual use case discussed in II-C. In the first step, Graph Convolutional Network
(GCN) takes the graph snapshot at time step t and combines it with the hidden state of the previous time step to construct the node embedding. GRU and attention
module combine the long-term and short-term states to generate the current hidden state. In the last step, the scoring function assigns an anomaly score to edges
based on the nodes connected to them.

should also consider that all of these three conceptual use-cases aims to do one-step prediction instead of recurrent processing
are also dynamic (as an example adding a new camera to the of the data. By this means, the attention mechanism reduces
Smart Video Surveillance System changes the graph of the net- the path length of the computation, which means reducing the
work); thus, methods like DeepWalk [113], and Node2Vec [114] information loss and focusing on the most important features
are not suitable since they are unable to generalize to unseen for predicting the output. Adapting this technique to graphs can
nodes. Another important issue is that nodes and edges can improve the outcome in many applications, such as anomaly
have features with different schemes that are useful for anomaly detection. Graph transformer networks are able to automatically
detection. Consider the Sensor Network; in each time step, a generate meta-paths by learning and solving the aforementioned
huge amount of data is generated by a large number of inter- problem enabling many applications such as anomaly detection
connected sensors. The data from each sensor can be related to to work on complex heterogeneous systems [141]. In [119],
other sensors with a complex non-linear relationship. Shallow the model takes advantage of relational graph transformers for
embedding techniques fail to take advantage of this kind of finding anomalous nodes in a supervised manner. In this work,
information. Thus, Deep Embedding methods that are more first, the heterogeneous graph of the network is extracted, and
complicated such as GDN [94], and AddGraph [118] can be relational graph transformers and a semantic attention network
helpful in this case. Based on what we discussed, let’s use one are used for modeling the complex relationships between the
of the introduced examples discussed in Section II for better nodes and encoding them, and then classifying them for finding
understanding. In the LAN Cluster example, AddGraph seems anomalous nodes.
to be a suitable choice. Supervised learning is not possible in many applications due
 Fig. 5 shows the structure of AddGraph which is applied to to the lack of labeled data. Using an unsupervised setting, the
the LAN Cluster example. Previous hidden states and current transformer-based Anomaly Detection framework for Dynamic
snapshot of the network graph is used for constructing the node graphs (TADDY) [120] detects anomalous edges in dynamic
embedding. Also, an attention module and GRU combine the graphs. TADDY [120] consists of four main modules as shown
long-term and short-term states to generate the current hidden in Fig. 6. Edge-based substructure sampling captures the spatialstate. In the final step, a scoring function is responsible to assign temporal context of each target edge using the graph diffusion
a normality score to the current hidden state. The main points of method [142], [143]. For each edge, this module constructs a
discussed techniques are available in Table III. fixed-length importance-aware set of neighboring nodes. Then,
 TADDY [120] leverages a novel spatial-temporal node encoding
 for generating node embedding. After acquiring the embedding
D. Graph Transformers from the previous step, a transformer network is used as an
 The concept of attention mechanism introduced by [140] encoder to capture spatial and temporal features, followed by
was first used for natural language processing. This mechanism a pooling module for aggregating the embedding of all nodes
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 6. The figure shows the frame work of TADDY [120]. (A) shows the edge-based substructure sampling module which chooses subgraphs based on the target
edge. (B) is the spatial-temporal node encoding module which is responsible for encoding nodes and capturing the global, local, and temporal information hidden
in the subgraphs using diffusion-based spatial encoding, distance-based spatial encoding, and relative temporal encoding respectively. The final node encoding
is built by combining all previously mentioned encoding. (C) shows the dynamic graph transformer module. This module constructs the edge embedding using
a modified multi-headed attention network. Finally, in (D) you can see the discriminative anomaly detector which is trained using samples and pseudo labels
generated by a negative sampling strategy. Given that TADDY is only capable of handling non-attributed graphs, we assume that a simplified version of data is
utilized to accommodate this limitation.

in the same neighboring set. In the final step, the discriminative filtering, frequency response etc., to process data defined on
anomaly detector (which consists of a fully connected layer). both regular and irregular graph networks. [145] presents the
 Graph Learning with Transformer for Anomaly detection recent advances in the currently developing GSP tools. Graph
(GTA) [84], leverages a modified transformer network. This signals can be filtered and sampled to apply low-level processing
model detects anomalies on multivariate time series generated techniques such as denoising and compression. One of the mafrom different sensors. These sensors can be related to each jor differences between GSP and traditional Machine learning
other in complicated unknown connections. GTA [84] first algorithms is that ML typically considers a graph as a discrete
learns the dependencies using Gumbel-Softmax Sampling [144] version of a complex network. However, this assumption falls
strategy. Once this topological structure is established, a graph flat for many real-world applications associated with graphs.
convolution block updates each node representation by aggre- GSP, on the other hand, looks at existing problems from different
gating neighbors’ information and message passing to enrich perspectives. As an example, defining a graph for sensor-based
the representations. Now, dilated convolution [121] is used for networks involves choosing edge weights as a decreasing funcextracting temporal context, but with one novel modification. tion of the distance between nodes represented by sensors.
They have used a hierarchical scheme to make GTA [84] capable Observations from similar nodes can lead to a smooth graph
of capturing temporal patterns with different lengths. On top of function that can detect outliers or abnormal values through
these, a more sophisticated and efficient version of transformers high pass filtering or thresholding [146]. Moreover, a sparse set
is introduced. Multi-branch attention module that is used in of sensor readings can also be used to build signal reconstruc-
GTA [121] extracts long-distance temporal dependencies and tion methods that can be used to save on resources in sensor
neighboring nodes’ information. In the anomaly scoring module, networks [147], [148].
the original input time series are divided into training sequences Anomaly detection with GSP filtering on Wireless Sen-
(for the encoder) and label sequences (for the decoder). The sor Networks (WSNs) has been a topic of interest in several
decoder predicts the behavior of the time series in the target works. [122] captures proximity information such as data besection, and by comparing the predicted output and the actual tween sensors to capture local anomalous behavior. They present
values, outliers can be detected three graph designs and use GSP filtering to find the cut-off
 Capabilities of all mentioned models can be seen in Table III. frequency and Lambda for the filters. This is used to separate
Unfortunately, none of the anomaly detection models using normal and anomalous sub-spaces for unsupervised detection.
graph transformers are compatible with attributed graphs which The anomalous space projections are finally utilized to generate
makes them less practical in real applications. Future research anomaly scores as shown in Fig. 7. The main advantage of
can move in the direction of solving this issue to overcome the such a system is that in addition to raw sensor data, relational
complex nature of heterogeneous distributed systems. characteristics between the nodes, like proximity information
 between sensors and their environment, can be effectively captured. Graph-based filtering is found to be particularly useful
E. Graph Signal Processing for both regular and irregular graph structures for unsupervised
 Graph Signal Processing (GSP) is another technique that anomaly detection. In Table III, specification of the reviewed
utilizes classical signal processing tools like Fourier transform, model is available. The ability to work on dynamic attributed
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 13

Fig. 7. A small part of the Sensor Network introduced in Section II-B is used to show Graph Signal Processing for anomaly detection. A 3-stage process that
begins with Graph construction from 3 adjacency matrices to generate an undirected, weighted, and connected graph G(N, E, W). Filtering and Optimization
methods are next used to get the cut-off frequency of the GSP filter that is further projected as a normal and an anomalous subspace. Both these values in addition
to a thresholding function are used to generate the anomaly scores.

graphs makes [122] aligned with real-world requirements. On have the same labels. Still, homophily is violated in the case
the other hand, leveraging GSP techniques can add deeper of a connection between a normal node and an anomalous one,
perspectives to anomaly detection problems and equip them with and this violation has not been considered in traditional GNN
more relational information helpful for detecting outliers which networks. In the next step, the node embedding is updated using
is essential in real-world applications. message passings by the node update module. Lastly, the graph
 update module updates the global context. The updated global
 context is the weighted aggregation of all the nodes. The authors
F. Graph Contrastive Learning also introduced a self-supervised version of this network named
 In graph contrastive learning techniques, the objective is to GCCAD-pre [123].
construct a representation by contrasting pairs of data points. CoLA [86] focuses on anomaly detection in large-scale at-
The loss function is designed in such a way that by optimizing tributed graphs, which is applicable to real-world problems.
it, the positive pairs (matching pairs) of data points are brought This novel network has three main components: pair sampling,
together, and the negative pairs will be separated. As a result, a GNN-based contrastive learning model, and the score comusing this approach, the model is able to learn higher-level putation module. The instance pair sampling is designed to
representations that are more powerful and distinguishable. In generate the pairs of data for the training phase. In contrast
the context of anomaly detection, contrastive learning can be with GCCAD [123] that contrasts nodes with the global context,
helpful since it is designed to provide a measure of similarity the definition of pairs in CoLA [86] focuses on the relationship
between data pairs. The main idea in GCCAD [123] is to detect between a node and its neighbors. Hence the strategy for defining
anomalies using their distance from average normal points or the pairs is ”target node versus local subgraph”. The GNN-based
global context. The key concept is that the outliers will have contrastive learning module consists of three sub-modules: (1)
different features than most points; thus, by contrasting each GNN model, (2) readout module, and (3) discriminator module.
node with the global context, we can define a measure for After acquiring the pairs, the GNN module will extract embeddetecting anomalies. ding for the target node and the local subgraph. Then the readout
 GCCAD [123] has shown that the node embedding made by module uses the average pooling function to create a vector of
traditional GNN encoders is not able to discern anomalous nodes embedding of all nodes in the embedded subgraph. In the disproperly. However, GCCAD [123] is able to construct a more criminator module, the positive and negative pairs are contrasted,
powerful embedding that highlights the differences between and a score is generated. Finally, the score computation module
anomalous nodes and the global context. This work uses a measures the anomaly score for all nodes, and anomalous nodes
context-aware loss function in a supervised manner. The loss can be picked by choosing the nodes with the highest scores.
function is optimized in the GNN encoder which consists of SL-GAD [64], introduced a novel generative and contrastive
three modules; edge update, node update, and graph update self-supervised model.
module. The edge update module is responsible for calculating SL-GAD [64] is made of three major components similar to
the likelihood of being a suspicious edge (an edge that connects CoLA [86]; graph view sampling, contrastive self-supervised
a normal node to an anomalous one) and removing it, and learning, and graph anomaly scoring. In the graph view samupdating the adjacency matrix. These modules are designed pling, for each target node, two local subgraphs are extracted.
to conserve the homophily assumption between neighboring Next, in the contrastive self-supervised learning module, a GNN
nodes. This assumption suggests that the neighboring nodes constructs the latent representation of the samples. In addition to
14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 8. In this figure we have applied the SL-GAD [64] frame work to the LAN conceptual use-case discussed in Section II-C. (A) shows the Graph view sampling
module which chooses the target node and samples two subgraphs. (B) is the generative and contrastive discrimination modules. First, the target node and the two
subgraphs are fed to the GNN encoder and graph embedding is created. In the next step, two different objectives, the discriminator and regressor try to capture
anomalies in the graph structure and attributes. The generative regression module is designed for capturing anomalies in the attributes of each node, while the
discriminator module is responsible for finding anomalies in the structure of the graph. Finally, in (C) the contrastive scores and the generative scores are combined
to calculate the final anomaly score.

contrastive scores, SL-GAD [64] also leverages a graph autoen- the requirements and challenges that utilizing graphs adds to
coder network for reconstructing the feature vector of the target previously mentioned requirements discussed in Section III, and
node in order to fully utilize the contextual information of target finally, we discuss the future directions that research in this field
nodes. Finally, graph anomaly scoring predicts the final scores can take.
based on both generative scores (from the graph autoencoder)
and contrastive scores (from contrastive learning).
 Fig. 8 shows the work flow of the SL-GAD [64] applied to the A. Metrics and Comparison
LAN Cluster example introduced in Section II-C. The sampled The performance and viability of any anomaly detection
subgraphs are fed to the GNN Encoder and the encoded repre- algorithm, graph-based or non-graph-based, can be evaluated by
sentations are fed to two different branches, the discriminative Precision, Recall, Accuracy, Receiver Operating Characteristic
and the generative modules. at the final step, anomaly scores (ROC) curve, and Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC). While
from these two branches are combined to construct the final Precision, Recall, and Accuracy are a measure of the true posanomaly score. itives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives, AUC,
 Characteristics of all mentioned models can be seen in on the other hand, summarizes the information contained in the
Table III. As discussed, Graph Contrastive Learning approaches ROC curve. Larger AUC values indicate better performance at
show promising results and are extremely adaptable to real- distinguishing between anomalous and normal observations.
world scenarios. The discussed works are all able to overcome A major challenge while reporting the above-mentioned metthe dynamic complex nature of distributed heterogeneous sys- rics is the absence of unified evaluation criteria amongst the
tems and the unsupervised/self-supervised learning adaptability diversity of algorithms, the application type, and the heterogeof these models can alleviate the problem of available labeled neous nature of data and devices involved. As an example, if we
data mentioned in Section III. want to compare the latency of the two algorithms, we have to
 make sure that they are both tested on particular hardware, they
 are getting tested on a specific job, and we have to eliminate
 VI. COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION different variables that have an effect on that metric.
 In this section, first, we discuss the metrics that are available In contrast, Time Complexity is The only metric that can give
for evaluation and then we try to compare the methods discussed us some insight into the algorithm’s performance. Table IV
in Section V from an algorithmic perspective. Then we discuss shows the time complexity of reviewed algorithms. In order
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 15

 TABLE IV
 TIME COMPLEXITY OF REVIEWED ALGORITHMS. FOR SYMBOL DESCRIPTIONS PLEASE REFER TO TABLE V

to assess how well an algorithm performs compared to other for a group of domains. For example, attributed graphs add
algorithms, and also with respect to points in Section III, we more complexity by introducing the features of the connection
can refer to Time Complexity. It gives us a good understanding between the nodes, and the features of the nodes themselves.
of how fast and efficient the method is, a general idea of the Also, a graph representing a system might be dynamic or static,
algorithm’s complexity, and whether it is suitable for specific depending on the nature of the original system. All these subtasks or hardware based on the power it needs. classes of graphs add to the complexity of graph-based learning
 techniques. Subsequently, the introduced models should be able
 to handle these diverse types of network graphs, but as we
B. Graph-Specific Challenges discussed in previous sections, many of the models can just
 Graphs are extremely powerful for catching relational in- work on plain static graphs which is not satisfactory in many
formation, especially in distributed systems. They help with applications. [149], [150], [151], [152], [153], [154]
addressing challenges and meeting the requirements discussed Graph Anomalies: By introducing graphs, we get a better
in Section III, as well as capturing important features of the representation of a system. Graphs and Graph Neural Networks
data like relational features and information. However, there is a make us capable of modeling complicated dependencies in real
cost to all these benefits. While utilizing graphs these challenges networks. But if we look at it from another perspective, this
should be addressed: adaptation of graph representation introduces different places
 Types of Graphs: Each system can be represented by a specific for anomalies to take place. In graphs, outliers can occur in
type of graph. Each type of graph has its features and is suitable nodes, edges, subgraphs, and even the whole graph. But models
16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE V dataset. Generating or preparing a proper dataset can be a sub-
 TABLE IV SYMBOL DESCRIPTION
 stantial contribution to the field of anomaly detection. However,
 in the context of anomaly detection, usually, an expert must
 supervise the process of labeling and collecting data and this
 fact makes the generated dataset prone to human errors. All of
 these are added to the actual cost of creating such a dataset.
 Synthetic datasets are another option, and creating them can be
 explored through a whole line of research.
 Numerous methods of anomaly detection are designed to
 discover whether an anomaly has happened or not. They are
 able to notify a responsible person or group to look for further
 investigation. However, they are not able to identify what sort
 of anomaly has occurred. A major subject for further work and
 research is the interpretability of anomalies. Down the road,
 there is a tendency to distinguish between anomalies using
 the algorithms at hand. For example, in the Sensor Network
 mentioned in II-B we like the model to be able to distinguish
 between a cyber attack and power shortage and raise the correct
 alarm. If we go further than that, the ways that the model can
 restore the system or stop the anomaly can be investigated.

 VII. CONCLUSION
 In this survey, we have discussed several state-of-the-art
are usually only able to detect one kind of foresaid anomalies, graph-based approaches for anomaly detection in details. We
and there is no unique framework to address them all together. introduce three unique conceptual use-cases based on real-time
This means that the approaches must specifically determine what complex distributed systems. Our work builds on the existing
is the objective of their detection, which types they handle, and traditional machine learning and deep learning paradigms used
where they show the best performance. [91], [155], [156] for anomaly detection and goes on to introduce four separate
 categories of graph neural network algorithms. We further apply
C. Future Research Directions our formulated models to each of the methods and provide a
 thorough review and summarization of the categories. At last,
 The most important research direction at the moment seems we comprehensively look at graph specific big-data challenges
to be finding a means of quantifying the results of anomaly and provide a couple of future research directions in this field.
detection algorithms in a unified manner, thereby enabling comparison in various domains and fields. A great share of all the
advancements in technology originates from quantifying and REFERENCES
comparing new findings with already existing works. However, [1] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
considering the variety in this field, comparing algorithms to ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
each other is nearly impossible. First, the best metric for eval- [2] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2,
uating a model must be identified. Alongside that, an evalua- pp. 1–38, 2021.
tion mechanism, general enough to be applicable to disparate [3] G. Pang, L. Cao, and C. Aggarwal, “Deep learning for anomaly detection:
anomaly detection algorithms is also needed. As an example, Challenges, methods, and opportunities,” in Proc. 14th ACM Int. Conf.
 Web Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computin computer vision, COCO [157] provides such an environment ing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1127–1130, doi: 10.1145/3437963.3441659.
for emerging algorithms. A framework of testing can also be [4] Y. Wang, Y. Li, J. Fan, C. Ye, and M. Chai, “A survey of typical attributed
another fruitful tool. In this direction, creating a simulator, or graph queries,” World Wide Web, vol. 24, pp. 297–346, 2021.
 [5] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
a system that can serve as a toy sample of a large distributed survey,” 2019, arXiv: 1901.03407.
system can be beneficial as well. To recapitulate, there is a need [6] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
for a unified evaluation of graph-based and non-graph-based in Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
 [7] G. Fernandes, J. J. Rodrigues, L. F. Carvalho, J. F. Al-Muhtadi, and M.
anomaly detection algorithms and techniques. Following this L. Proença, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly detection,”
path, an extension that this survey can benefit from is to include Telecommunication Syst., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 447–489, 2019.
experimental results, by conducting a unified benchmarking. [8] R. A. A. Habeeb, F. Nasaruddin, A. Gani, I. A. T. Hashem, E. Ahmed,
 and M. Imran, “Real-time Big Data processing for anomaly detection: A
This aspect is particularly promising, as incorporating exper- survey,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., vol. 45, pp. 289–307, 2019.
imental analysis alongside algorithmic and conceptual analysis [9] S. Thudumu, P. Branch, J. Jin, and J. J. Singh, “A comprehensive survey
can yield a more comprehensive and nuanced understanding of of anomaly detection techniques for high dimensional Big Data,” J. Big
 Data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–30, 2020.
the subject matter. [10] S. Ahmed, K. Hinkelmann, and F. Corradini, “Combining machine learn-
 As discussed in the Challenges Section, the second-largest ing with knowledge engineering to detect fake news in social networks-a
issue in the way of anomaly detection is the lack of a suitable survey,” 2022, arXiv:2201.08032.
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 17

 [11] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media [35] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multianomaly detection,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–14, perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021.
 Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1145/2980765.2980767. [36] D. Stiawan, M. Y. Idris, R. F. Malik, S. Nurmaini, and R. Budiarto,
 [12] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and M. R. Islam, “A survey of anomaly “Anomaly detection and monitoring in Internet of Things communidetection techniques in financial domain,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., cation,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Elect. Eng., 2016,
 vol. 55, pp. 278–288, 2016. pp. 1–4.
 [13] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N. F. [37] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous
 Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,” Wiley anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised cross-modal
 Interdiscipl. Reviews: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247, 2015. attention,” 2023, arXiv:2302.06914.
 [14] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with [38] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward supervised
 deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 8, 2021, anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262, 2013.
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815. [39] S. Suthaharan, M. Alzahrani, S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie, and M.
 [15] L. Akoglu, H. Tong, and D. Koutra, “Graph based anomaly detection Palaniswami, “Labelled data collection for anomaly detection in wireless
 and description: A survey,” Data mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, no. 3, sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Intell. Sensors Sensor Netw.
 pp. 626–688, 2015. Inf. Process., 2010, pp. 269–274.
 [16] C. Neff, M. Mendieta, S. Mohan, M. Baharani, S. Rogers, and H. [40] M. Luo, K. Wang, Z. Cai, A. Liu, Y. Li, and C. F. Cheang, “Using imbal-
 Tabkhi, “REVAMP2T: Real-time edge video analytics for multicamera anced triangle synthetic data for machine learning anomaly detection,”
 privacy-aware pedestrian tracking,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 4, Comput. Mater. Continua, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 15–26, 2019.
 pp. 2591–2602, Apr. 2020. [41] W. Lin, J. Gao, Q. Wang, and X. Li, “Learning to detect anomaly
 [17] T. J. Williams, “The purdue enterprise reference architecture,” events in crowd scenes from synthetic data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 436,
 Comput. Ind., vol. 24, no. 2–3, pp. 141–158, Sep. 1994, pp. 248–259, 2021.
 doi: 10.1016/0166–3615(94)90017-5. [42] M. Frasca, A. Bertoni, M. Re, and G. Valentini, “A neural network
 [18] I.-Y. Song and Y. Zhu, “Big data and data science: What should we algorithm for semi-supervised node label learning from unbalanced data,”
 teach?,” Expert Syst., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 364–373, 2016. Neural Netw., vol. 43, pp. 84–98, 2013.
 [19] A. Katal, M. Wazid, and R. H. Goudar, “Big data: Issues, challenges, [43] S. N. Kalid, K.-H. Ng, G.-K. Tong, and K.-C. Khor, “A multiple classitools and good practices,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Contemporary fiers system for anomaly detection in credit card data with unbalanced
 Comput., 2013, pp. 404–409. and overlapped classes,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 28 210–28 221,
 [20] K. Shin, B. Hooi, J. Kim, and C. Faloutsos, “D-cube: Dense-block 2020.
 detection in terabyte-scale tensors,” in Proc. 10th ACM Int. Conf. Web [44] H. H. Pajouh, G. Dastghaibyfard, and S. Hashemi, “Two-tier network
 Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing anomaly detection model: A machine learning approach,” J. Intell. Inf.
 Machinery, 2017, pp. 681–689, doi: 10.1145/3018661.3018676. Syst., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 61–74, 2017.
 [21] E. M. Knorr and R. T. Ng, “Algorithms for mining distance-based outliers [45] S. El Hajjami, J. Malki, M. Berrada, and B. Fourka, “Machine learning for
 in large datasets,” in Proc. 24 rd Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases, anomaly detection. Performance study considering anomaly distribution
 San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1998, in an imbalanced dataset,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput.
 pp. 392–403. Artif. Intell.: Technol. Appl., 2020, pp. 1–8.
 [22] S. Ramaswamy, R. Rastogi, and K. Shim, “Efficient algorithms for mining [46] Z. Kang, H. Pan, S. C. Hoi, and Z. Xu, “Robust graph learning from noisy
 outliers from large data sets,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. data,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1833–1843, May 2020.
 Data, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2000, [47] R. Evans and E. Grefenstette, “Learning explanatory rules from noisy
 pp. 427–438, doi: 10.1145/342009.335437. data,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 1–64, 2018.
 [23] F. Angiulli and F. Fassetti, “Very efficient mining of distance-based [48] Y. Kim, J. Yim, J. Yun, and J. Kim, “NLNL: Negative learning
 outliers,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York, for noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
 NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2007, pp. 791–800, pp. 101–110.
 doi: 10.1145/1321440.1321550. [49] N. Moran, D. Schmidt, Y. Zhong, and P. Coady, “Noisier2Noise: Learning
 [24] A. Arning, R. Agrawal, and P. Raghavan, “A linear method for deviation to denoise from unpaired noisy data,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 detection in large databases,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 12 064–12 072.
 Mining, AAAI Press, 1996, pp. 164–169. [50] J.-X. Zhong, N. Li, W. Kong, S. Liu, T. H. Li, and G. Li, “Graph
 [25] K. W. Pettis, T. A. Bailey, A. K. Jain, and R. C. Dubes, “An intrinsic convolutional label noise cleaner: Train a plug-and-play action classifier
 dimensionality estimator from near-neighbor information,” IEEE Trans. for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. PAMI- 1, no. 1, pp. 25–37, Jan. 1979. Recognit., 2019, pp. 1237–1246.
 [26] N. Tatbul, “Streaming data integration: Challenges and opportunities,” in [51] M. Z. Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, A. Mahmood, and S.-I. Lee, “Cleaning
 Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Data Eng. Workshops, 2010, pp. 155–158. label noise with clusters for minimally supervised anomaly detection,”
 [27] R. Bellman, Dynamic Programming. Chelmsford, MA, USA: Courier 2021, arXiv:2104.14770.
 Corporation, 2013. [52] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised real-
 [28] K. Beyer, J. Goldstein, R. Ramakrishnan, and U. Shaft, “When is “nearest time anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262,
 Neighbor” Meaningful?,” in Database Theory — ICDT’99, C. Beeri and pp. 134–147, 2017.
 P. Buneman Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1999, pp. 217–235. [53] Z. K. Maseer, R. Yusof, N. Bahaman, S. A. Mostafa, and C. F. M.
 [29] P. Hall, J. Marron, and A. Neeman, “Geometric representation of high Foozy, “Benchmarking of machine learning for anomaly based intrusion
 dimension, low sample size data,” J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, vol. 67, detection systems in the CICIDS2017 dataset,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 22
 pp. 427–444, Feb. 2005. 351–22 370, 2021.
 [30] J. Ahn, J. S. Marron, K. M. Muller, and Y.-Y. Chi, “The high-dimension, [54] A. F. Emmott, S. Das, T. Dietterich, A. Fern, and W.-K. Wong, “Syslow-sample-size geometric representation holds under mild conditions,” tematic construction of anomaly detection benchmarks from real data,”
 Biometrika, vol. 94, no. 3, pp. 760–766, 2007. [Online]. Available: http: in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Workshop Outlier Detection Description, 2013,
 //www.jstor.org/stable/20441411 pp. 16–21.
 [31] M. Radovanović, A. Nanopoulos, and M. Ivanović, “Reverse nearest [55] C. R. Banbury et al., “Benchmarking tinyml systems: Challenges and
 neighbors in unsupervised distance-based outlier detection,” IEEE Trans. direction,” 2020, arXiv: 2003.04821.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1369–1382, May 2015. [56] G. A. Noghre, A. D. Pazho, J. Sanchez, N. Hewitt, C. Neff, and H.
 [32] S. Sadik and L. Gruenwald, “Research issues in outlier detection for data Tabkhi, “ADG-Pose: Automated dataset generation for real-world human
 streams,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 33–40, Mar. 2014, pose estimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell., 2022,
 doi: 10.1145/2594473.2594479. pp. 258–270.
 [33] F. Keller, E. Muller, and K. Bohm, “HiCS: High contrast subspaces for [57] G. Yu, Z. Cai, S. Wang, H. Chen, F. Liu, and A. Liu, “Unsupervised online
 density-based outlier ranking,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Int. Conf. Data Eng., anomaly detection with parameter adaptation for KPIs abrupt changes,”
 2012, pp. 1037–1048. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–1308,
 [34] M. Iturbe, I. Garitano, U. Zurutuza, and R. Uribeetxeberria, “Towards Sep. 2020.
 large-scale, heterogeneous anomaly detection systems in industrial net- [58] W. Wang, Q. Chen, T. Liu, X. He, and L. Tang, “A distributed online
 works: A survey of current trends,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2017, learning approach to detect anomalies for virtualized network slicing,”
 2017. in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6.
18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 [59] A. Guezzaz, Y. Asimi, M. Azrour, and A. Asimi, “Mathematical valida- [83] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and H. Tang, “Graph neural networks for anomaly
 tion of proposed machine learning classifier for heterogeneous traffic and detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9,
 anomaly detection,” Big Data Mining Analytics, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 18–24, no. 12, pp. 9214–9231, Jun. 2022.
 2021. [84] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
 [60] S. Li, Y. Cheng, Y. Liu, W. Wang, and T. Chen, “Abnormal client behavior structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detecdetection in federated learning,” 2019, arXiv:1910.09933. tion in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 [61] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: Jun. 2022.
 A multi-perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021. [85] A. Protogerou, S. Papadopoulos, A. Drosou, D. Tzovaras, and I. Refani-
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ dis, “A graph neural network method for distributed anomaly detection
 S1566253520303717 in IoT,” Evolving Syst., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 19–36, 2021.
 [62] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph [86] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
 Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
 [63] S. Bhatia, Y. Wang, B. Hooi, and T. Chakraborty, “Graphanogan: De- Jun. 2022.
 tecting anomalous snapshots from attributed graphs,” in Proc. Joint Eur. [87] R. Zhou, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, L. Niu, and X. Lin, “Anomaly detection
 Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, 2021, pp. 36–51. in dynamic attributed networks,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 6,
 [64] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, pp. 2125–2136, 2021.
 “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly [88] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021, in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425.
 [65] Y. Liu, T. Dillon, W. Yu, W. Rahayu, and F. Mostafa, “Noise removal [89] T. Pourhabibi, K.-L. Ong, B. H. Kam, and Y. L. Boo, “Fraud detecin the presence of significant anomalies for industrial IoT sensor data in tion: A systematic literature review of graph-based anomaly detection
 manufacturing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7084–7096, approaches,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 133, 2020, Art. no. 113303.
 Aug. 2020. [90] M. Salehi and L. Rashidi, “A survey on anomaly detection in evolving
 [66] Y. Tang et al., “Detection of magnetic anomaly signal based on infor- data: [with application to forest fire risk prediction],” ACM SIGKDD
 mation entropy of differential signal,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., Explorations Newslett., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 13–23, 2018.
 vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 512–516, Apr. 2018. [91] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on attributed
 [67] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2019,
 surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., pp. 357–365.
 2018, pp. 6479–6488. [92] G. Xue, M. Zhong, J. Li, J. Chen, C. Zhai, and R. Kong, “Dynamic
 [68] F. Muharemi, D. Logofătu, and F. Leon, “Machine learning approaches network embedding survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 472, pp. 212–223,
 for anomaly detection of water quality on a real-world data set,” J. Inf. 2022.
 Telecommunication, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 294–307, 2019. [93] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
 [69] A. Castellani, S. Schmitt, and S. Squartini, “Real-world anomaly detec- analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
 tion by using digital twin systems and weakly supervised learning,” IEEE Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 4733–4742, Jul. 2021. [94] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 [70] A. Ukil, S. Bandyoapdhyay, C. Puri, and A. Pal, “Iot healthcare analytics: in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 The importance of anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Adv. pp. 4027–4035.
 Inf. Netw. Appl., 2016, pp. 994–997. [95] H. Wang et al., “Groot: An event-graph-based approach for root cause
 [71] S. A. Haque, M. Rahman, and S. M. Aziz, “Sensor anomaly de- analysis in industrial settings,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 36th Int. Conf.
 tection in wireless sensor networks for healthcare,” Sensors, vol. 15, Automated Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 419–429.
 no. 4, pp. 8764–8786, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/ [96] K. Ding, K. Shu, X. Shan, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Cross-domain graph
 1424--8220/15/4/8764 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
 [72] X. Liu et al., “Privacy and security issues in deep learning: A survey,” pp. 2406–2415, Jun. 2022.
 IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 4566–4593, 2020. [97] Y. Ganin and V. Lempitsky, “Unsupervised domain adaptation by back-
 [73] Y. Shen, G. Leus, and G. B. Giannakis, “Online graph-adaptive learning propagation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 1180–1189.
 with scalability and privacy,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 9, [98] J. Hoffman et al., “LSDA: Large scale detection through adaptation,” in
 pp. 2471–2483, May 2019. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 27, 2014.
 [74] B. Wang, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Graph-based security and privacy [99] R. Collobert, J. Weston, L. Bottou, M. Karlen, K. Kavukcuoglu, and P.
 analytics via collective classification with joint weight learning and Kuksa, “Natural language processing (almost) from scratch,” J. Mach.
 propagation,” 2018, arXiv: 1812.01661. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2493–2537, 2011.
 [75] C. Yang, H. Wang, K. Zhang, L. Chen, and L. Sun, “Secure deep graph [100] Q. Li, “Literature survey: Domain adaptation algorithms for natural
 generation with link differential privacy,” 2020, arXiv: 2005.00455. language processing,” 2012.
 [76] V. Duddu, A. Boutet, and V. Shejwalkar, “Quantifying privacy leakage [101] A. Søgaard, “Semi-supervised learning and domain adaptation in natural
 in graph embedding,” in Proc. 17th EAI Int. Conf. Mobile Ubiquitous language processing,” Synth. Lectures Hum. Lang. Technol., vol. 6, no. 2,
 Systems: Comput. Netw. Serv., 2020, pp. 76–85. pp. 1–103, 2013.
 [77] J. Zhou et al., “Vertically federated graph neural network for privacy- [102] Y. Zhang et al., “Collaborative unsupervised domain adaptation for
 preserving node classification,” 2020, arXiv: 2005.11903. medical image diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29,
 [78] S. Sajadmanesh and D. Gatica-Perez, “Locally private graph neural pp. 7834–7844, 2020.
 networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, [103] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan,
 pp. 2130–2145. and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DïoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection
 [79] C. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. James, and S. Yu, “FASTGNN: A topological system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., Dallas,
 information protected federated learning approach for traffic speed fore- TX, USA, 2019, pp. 756–767.
 casting,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 8464–8474, [104] X. Ni, X. Xu, L. Lyu, C. Meng, and W. Wang, “A verti-
 Dec. 2021. cal federated learning framework for graph convolutional network,”
 [80] Q. Li, M. Coutino, G. Leus, and M. G. Christensen, “Privacy-preserving 2021, arXiv:2106.11593.
 distributed graph filtering,” in Proc. IEEE 28th Eur. Signal Process. Conf., [105] A. Borghesi, A. Bartolini, M. Lombardi, M. Milano, and L. Benini,
 2021, pp. 2155–2159. “Anomaly detection using autoencoders in high performance computing
 [81] T. Bakhshi and B. Ghita, “Anomaly detection in encrypted internet traffic systems,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 9428–9433.
 using hybrid deep learning,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–6, [106] Z. Chen, C. K. Yeo, B. S. Lee, and C. T. Lau, “Autoencoder-based network
 2021. anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Telecommun. Symp., 2018,
 [82] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong, pp. 1–5.
 “MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic [107] S. Park, M. Kim, and S. Lee, “Anomaly detection for HTTP using
 using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. convolutional autoencoders,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 70 884–70 901,
 Secur. Appl. Conf., 2021, pp. 1025–1038. 2018.
PAZHO et al.: SURVEY OF GRAPH-BASED DEEP LEARNING FOR ANOMALY DETECTION IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS 19

[108] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep au- [130] R. Chandra and S. Cripps, “Bayesian multi-task learning for dynamic
 toencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data time series prediction,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2018,
 Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1–8.
 2017, pp. 665–674, doi: 10.1145/3097983.3098052. [131] S. Li, Y. Song, and G. Zhou, “Leak detection of water distribution
[109] L. Beggel, M. Pfeiffer, and B. Bischl, “Robust anomaly detection pipeline subject to failure of socket joint based on acoustic emission
 in images using adversarial autoencoders,” in Machine Learning and and pattern recognition,” Measurement, vol. 115, pp. 39–44, 2018.
 Knowledge Discovery in Databases, U. Brefeld, E. Fromont, A. Hotho, [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
 A. Knobbe, M. Maathuis, and C. Robardet Eds., Cham, Switzerland: S0263224117306498
 Springer, 2020, pp. 206–222. [132] L.-J. Chen, Y.-H. Ho, H.-H. Hsieh, S.-T. Huang, H.-C. Lee, and S.
[110] O. Atkinson, A. Bhardwaj, C. Englert, V. S. Ngairangbam, and M. Mahajan, “ADF: An anomaly detection framework for large-scale PM2.5
 Spannowsky, “Anomaly detection with convolutional graph neural net- sensing systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 559–570,
 works,” J. High Energy Phys., vol. 2021, no. 8, 2021, Art. no. 80, Apr. 2018.
 doi: 10.1007/JHEP08(2021)080. [133] D. L. Goodhue and D. W. Straub, “Security concerns of system users: A
[111] S. Bandyopadhyay, S. V. Vivek, and M. Murty, “Outlier resistant unsu- study of perceptions of the adequacy of security,” Inf. Manage., vol. 20,
 pervised deep architectures for attributed network embedding,” in Proc. no. 1, pp. 13–27, Jan. 1991, doi: 10.1016/0378–7206(91)90024-V.
 13th Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2020, pp. 25–33. [134] R. A. Sater and A. B. Hamza, “A federated learning approach to anomaly
[112] X. Teng, M. Yan, A. M. Ertugrul, and Y.-R. Lin, “Deep into hypersphere: detection in smart buildings,” ACM Trans. Internet Things, vol. 2, no. 4,
 Robust and unsupervised anomaly discovery in dynamic networks,” in Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3467981.
 Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018. [135] H. Zhang, T. Shen, F. Wu, M. Yin, H. Yang, and C. Wu, “Federated graph
[113] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of learning–a position paper,”2021, arXiv:2105.11099.
 social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. [136] E. J. Candès, X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright, “Robust princi-
 Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing pal component analysis?,” J. ACM, vol. 58, no. 3, Jun. 2011,
 Machinery, 2014, pp. 701–710, doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623732. doi: 10.1145/1970392.1970395.
[114] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “Node2vec: Scalable feature learning for [137] D. L. Donoho, “For most large underdetermined systems of linear equanetworks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data tions the minimal 1-norm solution is also the sparsest solution,” Commun.
 Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Pure Appl. Math., vol. 59, pp. 797–829, 2006.
 2016, pp. 855–864, doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939754. [138] R. Paffenroth, P. du Toit, R. Nong, L. Scharf, A. P. Jayasumana, and V.
[115] J. Tang, M. Qu, M. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yan, and Q. Mei, “Line: Large- Bandara, “Space-time signal processing for distributed pattern detection
 scale information network embedding,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. World in sensor networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 7, no. 1,
 Wide Web, 2015, pp. 1067–1077, doi: 10.1145/2736277.2741093. pp. 38–49, Feb. 2013.
[116] C. Yang, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, M. Sun, and E. Chang, “Network representation [139] A. Makhzani, J. Shlens, N. Jaitly, and I. Goodfellow, “Adversarial aulearning with rich text information,” in Proc. 24th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. toencoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2016. [Online].
 Intell., 2015, pp. 2111–2117. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05644
[117] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang, [140] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 “NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
 in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. [141] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Graph transformer
 Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, vol. 32.
 Machinery, 2018, pp. 2672–2681, doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220024. [142] J. Klicpera, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves
[118] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detection graph learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019.
 in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc. 28th [143] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view represen-
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4419–4425, doi: 10.24963/ij- tation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
 cai.2019/614. pp. 4116–4126.
[119] S. Feng, Z. Tan, R. Li, and M. Luo, “Heterogeneity-aware twitter bot [144] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
 detection with relational graph transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2109.02927. gumbel-softmax,” 2016, arXiv:1611.01144.
[120] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via trans- [145] A. Ortega, P. Frossard, J. Kovačević, J. M. F. Moura, and P. Vanformer,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Nov. 2, 2021, dergheynst, “Graph signal processing: Overview, challenges, and applidoi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3124061. cations,” in Proc. IEEE, vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 808–828, May 2018.
[121] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convo- [146] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. F. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on
 lutions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122. graphs: Frequency analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 12,
[122] H. E. Egilmez and A. Ortega, “Spectral anomaly detection using graph- pp. 3042–3054, Jun. 2014.
 based filtering for wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. [147] G. Shen and A. Ortega, “Joint routing and 2D transform optimization for
 Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2014, pp. 1085–1089. irregular sensor network grids using wavelet lifting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[123] B. Chen et al., “Gccad: Graph contrastive coding for anomaly detection,” Inf. Process. Sensor Netw., 2008, pp. 183–194.
 2021, arXiv:2108.07516. [148] X. Zhu and M. Rabbat, “Graph spectral compressed sensing for sensor
[124] M. Aledhari, R. Razzak, R. M. Parizi, and F. Saeed, “Federated learning: networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2012,
 A survey on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications,” IEEE pp. 2865–2868.
 Access, vol. 8, pp. 140 699–140 725, 2020. [149] M. Zheng, C. Zhou, J. Wu, S. Pan, J. Shi, and L. Guo, “FraudNE: A joint
[125] K. Bonawitz et al., “Towards federated learning at scale: System design,” embedding approach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural
 Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., vol. 1, pp. 374–388, 2019. Netw., 2018, pp. 1–8.
[126] Y. Chen, Y. Ning, Z. Chai, and H. Rangwala, “Federated multi-task [150] Y. Dou, K. Shu, C. Xia, P. S. Yu, and L. Sun, “User preference-aware
 hierarchical attention model for sensor analytics,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. fake news detection,” in Proc. 44th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop.
 Neural Netw., 2020, pp. 1–8, doi: 10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207508. Inf. Retrieval, 2021, pp. 2051–2055.
[127] J. Konečný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtárik, A. T. Suresh, and [151] N. Liu, X. Huang, and X. Hu, “Accelerated local anomaly detection via
 D. Bacon, “Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication resolving attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017,
 efficiency,” in Proc. NIPS Workshop Private Multi-Party Mach. Learn., pp. 2337–2343.
 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.05492 [152] L. Zhang, J. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Pei, and L. Wang, “A robust embedding
[128] H. Wang, M. Yurochkin, Y. Sun, D. Papailiopoulos, and Y. Khaza- method for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint
 eni, “Federated learning with matched averaging,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
 Learn. Representations, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://openreview. [153] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
 net/forum?id=BkluqlSFDS on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
[129] K. Bonawitz et al., “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving pp. 594–602.
 machine learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. [154] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph
 Secur., New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, neural networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural
 2017, pp. 1175–1191, doi: 10.1145/3133956.3133982. Comput. Appl., vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.
20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[155] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multi-view Jagannadh Vempati received the PhD degree in
 framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. computer science and engineering from the Univer-
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022. sity of North Texas. He is a research scientist with
[156] Y. Li, X. Huang, J. Li, M. Du, and N. Zou, “SpecAE: Spectral autoencoder Siemens Technology in Princeton – NJ performing
 for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. research and development on designing cyber defense
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2019, pp. 2233–2236. solutions that incorporate domain know-how and the
[157] T.-Y. Lin et al., “Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context,” in semantic context of attack detection and response
 Computer Vision–ECCV 2014, D. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and T. solutions. His responsibilities include developing new
 Tuytelaars Eds., Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755. methods and techniques that improve the value of
 security analytics in Cyber Defense by integrating
 industrial domain expertise and semantics/context
 and guiding Siemens Business Units to include research results into products,
 solutions, and services. His research is focused on data-driven cyber security and
 designing resilient networks. His research also focuses on designing, developing,
 and optimizing anomaly detection models using artificial intelligence.
 Armin Danesh Pazho (Student Member, IEEE) is
 currently working toward the PhD degree with the
 University of North Carolina at Charlotte, NC, USA.
 With a focus on Artificial Intelligence, Computer
 Vision, and Deep Learning, his research delves into
 the realm of developing AI for practical, real-world
 applications and addressing the challenges and requirements inherent in these fields. Specifically, his Martin Otto received the PhD degree in computer
 research covers action recognition, anomaly detec- science from Paderborn University, Paderborn, Gertion, person re-identification, human pose estimation, many, in 2005, working on fault attack side chanand path prediction. nels on smart cards. He is a researcher and research
 manager with Siemens Technology, Siemens’ central
 R&D organization, since 2005. He is currently the
 head of the research group “Cybersecurity Service Innovation” at Siemens Corporation, Siemens Technology, in Princeton, NJ, USA. His mission is to provide
 Ghazal Alinezhad Noghre (Student Member, IEEE) Siemens business units with technology solutions and
 is currently working toward the PhD degree in electri- innovations that enable Siemens to provide state of the
 cal and computer engineering with the University of security services to customers. A specific focus is on helping Siemens customers
 North Carolina at Charlotte, NC, USA. Her research that operate energy systems and other parts of national critical infrastructure to
 interests include concentrates on artificial intelli- detect, react to, mitigate, and otherwise defend against cyber attacks. He held
 gence, machine learning, and computer vision. She is positions in the US, Canada, and Germany, among them as global Head of the
 particularly interested in the applications of anomaly Siemens CERT (Computer Emergency Response Team).
 detection, action recognition, and path prediction in
 real-world environments, and the challenges associated with these fields.

 Hamed Tabkhi (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 Arnab A Purkayastha received the PhD degree from degree in computer engineering from Northeastern
 the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, in 2021. University, in 2014. He is the Associate Professor of
 He is an assistant professor with the Electrical and computer engineering with the University of North
 Computer Engineering Department, Western New Carolina Charlotte (UNCC). His research and schol-
 England University, Massachusetts. His research in- arship activities focus on transformative computer
 terests and activities lie in the recent advances in high system solutions to bring recent advances in Artificial
 performance computing and machine learning fields, Intelligence (AI) to address real-world problems. In
 including system level integration both at the cloud particular, he focuses on AI-based solutions to enand at the edge. hance our communities’ safety, health, and overall
 well-being.