10466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

A Survey on Graph Neural Networks for Time Series:
 Forecasting, Classification, Imputation, and
 Anomaly Detection
 Ming Jin , Huan Yee Koh , Qingsong Wen , Daniele Zambon , Cesare Alippi, Fellow, IEEE,
 Geoffrey I. Webb , Fellow, IEEE, Irwin King , Fellow, IEEE, and Shirui Pan , Senior Member, IEEE

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Time series are the primary data type used to record Index Terms—Time series, graph neural networks, deep
dynamic system measurements and generated in great volume by learning, forecasting, classification, imputation, anomaly detection.
both physical sensors and online processes (virtual sensors). Time
series analytics is therefore crucial to unlocking the wealth of information implicit in available data. With the recent advancements I. INTRODUCTION
in graph neural networks (GNNs), there has been a surge in GNN-
 HE advent of advanced sensing and data stream processing
based approaches for time series analysis. These approaches can
explicitly model inter-temporal and inter-variable relationships,
which traditional and other deep neural network-based methods
 T technologies has led to an explosion of time series data [1],
 [2], [3]. The analysis of time series not only provides insights
struggle to do. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review of graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS),
 into past trends but also facilitates a multitude of tasks such
encompassing four fundamental dimensions: forecasting, classifi- as forecasting [4], classification [5], anomaly detection [6],
cation, anomaly detection, and imputation. Our aim is to guide and data imputation [7]. This lays the groundwork for time
designers and practitioners to understand, build applications, and series modeling paradigms that leverage on historical data to
advance research of GNN4TS. At first, we provide a comprehensive understand current and future possibilities. Time series analytics
task-oriented taxonomy of GNN4TS. Then, we present and discuss
representative research works and introduce mainstream applicahave become increasingly crucial in various fields, including but
tions of GNN4TS. A comprehensive discussion of potential future not limited to cloud computing, transportation, energy, finance,
research directions completes the survey. This survey, for the first social networks, and the Internet-of-Things [8], [9], [10].
time, brings together a vast array of knowledge on GNN-based time Many time series involve complex interactions across time
series research, highlighting foundations, practical applications, (such as lags in propagation of effects) and variables (such as
and opportunities of graph neural networks for time series analysis.
 the relationship among the variables representing neighboring
 traffic sensors). By treating time points or variables as nodes and
 Manuscript received 17 December 2023; revised 8 July 2024; accepted their relationships as edges, a model structured in the manner
8 August 2024. Date of publication 14 August 2024; date of current version
5 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the CSIRO– National Sci- of a network or graph can effectively solve the task at hand by
ence Foundation (US) AI Research Collaboration Program and Swiss National exploiting both data and relational information. Indeed, much
Science Foundation under Grant 204061. The work of Shirui Pan was supported time series data is spatial-temporal in nature, with different
in part by the Australian Research Council (ARC) under Grant FT210100097
and Grant DP240101547. Recommended for acceptance by W. Liu. (Ming Jin variables in the series capturing information about different
and Huan Yee Koh contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: locations – space – too, meaning it encapsulates not only time in-
Shirui Pan.) formation but also spatial relationships [11]. This is particularly
 Ming Jin and Shirui Pan are with the School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University, Nathan, QLD 4111, Australia (e-mail: evident in scenarios such as urban traffic networks, population
mingjinedu@gmail.com; s.pan@griffith.edu.au). migration, and global weather forecasting. In these instances, a
 Huan Yee Koh and Geoffrey I. Webb are with the Department of Data localized change, such as a traffic accident at an intersection, an
Science and AI, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail:
huan.koh@monash.edu; geoff.webb@monash.edu). epidemic outbreak in a suburb, or extreme weather in a specific
 Qingsong Wen is with Squirrel AI Learning, Bellevue, WA 98004 USA (e- area, can propagate and influence neighboring regions. This
mail: qingsongedu@gmail.com). spatial-temporal characteristic is a common feature of many
 Daniele Zambon is with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera
Italiana, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland (e-mail: daniele.zambon@usi.ch). dynamic systems, including the wind farm in Fig. 1, where
 Cesare Alippi is with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università della Svizzera the underlying time series displays a range of correlations and
Italiana, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland, and also with Politecnico di Milano, 20133 heterogeneities [15], [18]. Traditional analytic tools, such as
Milano, Italy (e-mail: cesare.alippi@usi.ch).
 Irwin King is with the Department of Computer Science & Engineer- support vector regression (SVR) [19], gradient boosting decision
ing, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Ma Liu Shui, Hong Kong (e-mail: tree (GBDT) [20], vector autoregressive (VAR) [21], and auking@cse.cuhk.edu.hk). toregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) [22], struggle
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3443141, provided by the authors. to handle complex time series relations (e.g., nonlinearities and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3443141 inter-variable relationships), resulting in less accurate prediction
 0162-8828 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10467

 overview of GNNs for predictive learning in urban computing,
 but neither extends its coverage to other application domains nor
 thoroughly discusses other tasks related to time series analysis.
 Finally, we mention the work by Rahmani et al. [17], which
 expands the survey of GNNs to many intelligent transportation
 systems, but tasks other than forecasting remain overlooked. A
 detailed comparison between our survey and others is presented
 in Table I.
 To fill the gap, this survey offers a comprehensive and up-todate review of graph neural networks for time series analysis,
 encompassing the majority of tasks ranging from time series
 forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation.
 Specifically, we first provide two broad views to classify and
 discuss existing works from the task- and methodology-oriented
 perspectives. Then, we delve into six popular application sectors
 within the existing research of GNN4TS, and propose several
 potential future research directions. The key contributions of our
Fig. 1. Graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS). In this
 survey are summarized as follows:
example of a wind farm, different analytical tasks can be categorized into time
series forecasting, classification, anomaly detection, and imputation.
 r First Comprehensive Survey: To the best of our knowledge,
 this is the first comprehensive survey that reviews the recent
 advances in mainstream time series analysis tasks with
results [23]. The advent of deep learning technologies has led graph neural networks. It covers a wide range of recent
to the development of different neural networks based on con- research and provides a broad view of the development of
volutional neural networks (CNN) [24], [25], recurrent neural GNN4TS without restricting to specific tasks or domains.
networks (RNN) [26], and transformers [27], which have shown r Unified and Structured Taxonomy: We present a unified
significant advantages in modeling real-world time series data. framework to structurally categorize existing works from
However, one of the biggest limitations of the above methods task- and methodology-oriented perspectives. In the first
is that they do not explicitly model the spatial relations existing classification, we offer an overview of tasks in time series
between time series in non-euclidean space [15], which limits analysis, covering different problem settings prevalent in
their expressiveness [28]. GNN-based research; and in the second classification, we
 In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have emerged dissect GNN4TS in terms of spatial and temporal depenas a powerful tool for learning non-euclidean data represen- dencies modeling and the overall model architecture.
tations [29], [30], [31], [32], paving the way for modeling r Detailed and Current Overview: We conduct a comprereal-world time series data. This enables the capture of diverse hensive review that not only covers the breadth of the
and intricate relationships, both inter-variable (connections be- field but also delves into the depth of individual studies
tween different variables within a multivariate series) and inter- with fine-grained classification and detailed discussion,
temporal (dependencies between different points in time). Con- providing readers with an up-to-date understanding of the
sidering the complex spatial-temporal dependencies inherent in state-of-the-art in GNN4TS.
real-world scenarios, a line of studies has integrated GNNs with r Broadening Applications: We discuss the expanding applivarious temporal modeling frameworks to capture both spatial cations of GNN4TS across various sectors, highlighting its
and temporal dynamics and demonstrate promising results [12], versatility and potential for future growth in diverse fields.
[13], [14], [15], [16]. While early research efforts were primarily r Future Research Directions: We shed light on potential fuconcentrated on various forecasting scenarios [13], [14], [15], ture research directions, offering insights and suggestions
recent advancements in time series analysis utilizing GNNs have that could guide and inspire future research in the field of
demonstrated promising outcomes in other mainstream tasks. GNN4TS.
These include classification [33], [34], anomaly detection [35], The remainder of this survey is organized as follows:
[36], and imputation [37], [38]. In Fig. 1, we provide an overview Section II provides notations used throughout the paper.
of graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS). Section III presents the taxonomy of GNN4TS from different
 Related Surveys. Despite the growing body of research per- perspectives. Sections IV, V, VI, and VII review the four major
forming various time series analytic tasks with GNNs, existing tasks in the GNN4TS literature. Section VIII surveys popular
surveys tend to focus on specific perspectives within a restricted applications of GNN4TS across various fields, while Section IX
scope. For instance, the survey by Wang et al. [11] offers a review examines open questions and potential future directions.
of deep learning techniques for spatial-temporal data mining, but
it does not specifically concentrate on GNN-based methods. The
 II. DEFINITION AND NOTATION
survey by Ye et al. [12] zeroes in on graph-based deep learning
architectures in the traffic domain, primarily considering fore- Time series data comprises a sequence of observations gathcasting scenarios. A recent survey by Jin et al. [15] offers an ered or recorded over a period of time. This data can be either
10468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SURVEY AND OTHER RELATED SURVEYS

regularly or irregularly sampled, with the latter also referred to
as time series data with missing values. Within each of these
cases, the data can be further classified into two primary types:
univariate and multivariate time series. In the sequel, we employ
bold uppercase letters (e.g., X), bold lowercase letters (e.g., x),
and calligraphic letters (e.g., V) to denote matrices, vectors, and
sets, respectively.
 Definition 1 (Univariate Time Series): A univariate time series is a sequence of scalar observations collected over time,
which can be regularly or irregularly sampled. A regularly sampled univariate time series is defined as X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xT } ∈
RT , where xt ∈ R. For an irregularly sampled univariate
time series, observations are collected at non-uniform time
intervals, such as X = {(t1 , x1 ), (t2 , x2 ), . . ., (tT , xT )} ∈ RT , Fig. 2. Examples of spatial-temporal graphs, where node colors represent
 distinct features. The top and bottom panels demonstrate spatio-temporal graphs
where time points are non-uniformly spaced. with fixed and dynamic graph structures over time, respectively.
 Definition 2 (Multivariate Time Series): A multivariate time
series is a sequence of N -dimensional vector observations colcharacterized by V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vN }, the set of N nodes, and
lected over time, i.e., X ∈ RN ×T . A regularly sampled mul-
 E = {eij := (vi , vj ) ∈ V × V | Aij = 0}, the set of edges; Aij
tivariate time series has vector observations collected at uniis the (i, j)-th entry in the adjacency matrix A. The feature maform time intervals, i.e., xt ∈ RN . In an irregularly sampled
 trix X contains the node attributes, where the i-th row xi ∈ RD
multivariate time series, there are possibly N unaligned time
 represents the D-dimensional feature vector of node vi .
series with respect to time steps, which implies only 0 ≤ n ≤ N
 In attributed graphs, multi-dimensional edge features can be
observations available at each time step.
 considered too, however, this paper assumes only scalar weights
 The majority of research based on GNNs focuses on modeling
 encoded in the adjacency matrix to avoid overwhelming notamultivariate time series, as they can be naturally abstracted into
 tions.
spatial-temporal graphs. This abstraction allows for an accurate
 In light of this, a spatial-temporal graph can be described as
characterization of dynamic inter-temporal and inter-variable
 a series of attributed graphs, which effectively represent (multidependencies. The former describes the relations between difvariate) time series data in conjunction with either evolving or
ferent time steps within each time series (e.g., the temporal
 fixed structural information over time.
dynamics of red nodes between t1 and t3 in Fig. 2), while the
 Definition 4 (Spatial-Temporal Graph): A spatial-temporal
latter captures dependencies between time series (e.g., the spatial
 graph can be interpreted as a discrete-time dynamic graph [31],
relations between four nodes at each time step in Fig. 2), such as
 [39], i.e., G = {G1 , G2 , . . . , GT }, where Gt = (At , Xt ) denotes
the geographical information of the sensors generating the data
 an attributed graph at time t. At ∈ RN ×N and Xt ∈ RN ×D are
for each variable. To illustrate this, we first define attributed
 corresponding adjacency and feature matrices. At may either
graphs.
 evolve over time or remain fixed, depending on specific settings.
 Definition 3 (Attributed Graph): An attributed graph is a
 When abstracting time series data, we let Xt := xt ∈ RN .
static graph that associates each node with a set of attributes,
 We introduce graph neural networks as modern deep learning
representing node features. Formally, an attributed graph is demodels to process graph-structured data. The core operation in
fined as G = (A, X), which consists of a (weighted) adjacency
 typical GNNs, often referred to as graph convolution, involves
matrix A ∈ RN ×N and a node-feature matrix X ∈ RN ×D . The
 exchanging information across neighboring nodes. In the context
adjacency matrix represents the graph topology, which can be
 of time series analysis, this operation enables us to explicitly
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10469

rely on the inter-variable dependencies represented by the graph graph can be undirected or directed, resulting in symmetric
edges. Aware of the different nuances, we define GNNs in the and asymmetric adjacency matrices.
spatial domain, which involves transforming the input signal r Pairwise Similarity: This method constructs the graph by
with learnable functions along the dimension of N . connecting nodes with similar attributes. A simple example
 Definition 5 (Graph Neural Network): Given an attributed is the construction of adjacency matrix A based on the
graph G = (A, X), we define xi = X[i, :] ∈ RD as the D- cosine similarity between time series:
dimensional feature vector of node vi . A GNN learns node representations through two primary functions [40]: AGGREGATE(·) xi xj
 Ai,j = , (4)
and COMBINE(·). The AGGREGATE(·) function computes and xi xj 
aggregates messages from neighboring nodes, while the where  ·  denotes the euclidean norm. There are also
COMBINE(·) function merges the aggregated and previous states several variants for creating similarity-based graphs, such
to transform node embeddings. Formally, the k-th layer in a as Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) [43] and dynamic
GNN is defined by the extended time warping (DTW) [44].
   r Functional Dependence: This approach defines the graph
 (k) (k−1)
 ai = AGGREGATE(k) hj : vj ∈ N (vi ) ,
 structure based on known functional dependencies be-
  
 (k) (k−1) (k) tween pairs of nodes, such as direct causal relationships
 hi = COMBINE(k) hi , ai , (1)
 or dependence from common hidden factors. For instance,
or, more generally, aggregating messages computed from both adjacency matrix A can be constructed based on Granger
 (k) causality [45] as
sending and receiving nodes vj and vi , respectively. Here, ai
 (k) ⎧
and hi represent the aggregated message from neighbors and ⎨1, if node j Granger-causes
the transformed node embedding of node vi in the k-th layer, Ai,j = node i at a significance level α, (5)
 (0) ⎩
respectively. The input and output of a GNN are hi := xi and 0, otherwise.
 (K)
hi := hi . Other examples involve transfer entropy (TE) [46] and
 The above formulation in (1) is referred to as spatial GNNs, directed phase lag index (DPLI) [47]. While overlap with
as opposed to spectral GNNs which defines convolution from previous heuristics exists, functional relations typically
the lens of spectral graph theory. We refer the reader to recent represent or estimate actual node dependencies in the datapublication [28] for a deeper analysis of spectral versus spatial generating process.
GNNs, and [29] for a comprehensive review of GNNs. Learning-Based Graphs: In contrast to heuristic-based meth-
 To employ GNNs for time series analysis, it is implied that a ods, learning-based approaches aim to learn the graph structure
graph structure must be provided. However, not all time series directly from the data and end-to-end with the downstream task.
data have readily available graph structures and, in practice, two Accordingly, graph A can be defined as a function ρ( · ) of some
types of strategies are utilized to generate the missing graph trainable model parameters Θ and, possibly, also of the time
structures from the data: heuristics or learned from data. series observations X, i.e., A = ρ(Θ, X). Embedding-based
 Heuristic-Based Graphs: This group of methods extracts approaches (e.g., [48], [49]) define the presence of each edge by
graph structures from data based on heuristics, such as: comparing learned embedding vectors of the associated nodes;
 r Spatial Proximity: This approach defines the graph strucas an example, consider Ai,j = ReLU(Θ i Θj ) with Θi , Θj
 ture by considering the proximity between pairs of nodes node embedding of nodes i, j, respectively. Another common
 based on, e.g., their geographical location. A typical exam- example involves defining A through attention scores computed
 ple is the construction of the adjacency matrix A based on between node signals [50]. Sparsification methods – such as the
 the shortest travel distance between nodes when the time ReLU activation above or top-k selection – are often applied
 series data have geospatial properties: to discard edges with null or low weights, thereby reducing the
  1
 , if dij = 0, computational load requested by dense GNN operations [51]. An
 Ai,j = dij (2) alternative strategy is modeling A as a discrete random variable
 0, otherwise,
 whose parametric distribution, say pΘ (A | X), is learned alongwhere dij denotes the shortest travel distance between side the other model parameters [52], [53]. Learning-based apnode i and node j. Some common kernel functions, e.g., proaches enable the data-driven discovery of less obvious graph
 Gaussian radial basis, can also be applied [15]. structures that are tailored to solve the given task, potentially
 r Pairwise Connectivity: In this approach, the graph structure
 providing more effective relations than heuristic-based graphs.
 is determined by the connectivity between pairs of nodes,
 like that determined by transportation networks. The adja-
 III. FRAMEWORK AND CATEGORIZATION
 cency matrix A is defined as:
  In this section, we present a comprehensive task-oriented
 1, if vi and vj are directly linked,
 Ai,j = (3) taxonomy for GNNs within the context of time series analysis
 0, otherwise.
 (Section III-A). Subsequently, we investigate how to encode time
 Typical scenarios include edges representing roads, rail- series across various tasks by introducing a unified methodologiways, or adjacent regions [41], [42]. In such cases, the cal framework for GNN architectures (Section III-B). According
10470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. Task-oriented taxonomy of graph neural networks for time series analysis in the existing literature.

to the framework, all architectures are composed of a similar predictive cases can be derived by optimizing
graph-based processing module fθ and a second module pφ
specialized in downstream tasks. θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LF (pφ (fθ (Xt−T :t , At−T :t )) , Y) , (6)
 θ,φ

 where fθ (·) and pφ (·) represent a spatial-temporal GNN and the
 predictor, respectively. Details regarding the fθ (·) architecture
A. Task-Oriented Taxonomy
 are given in Section III-B while the predictor is, normally, a
 In Fig. 3, we illustrate a task-oriented taxonomy of GNNs multi-layer perceptron. In the sequel, we denote by Xt−T :t and
encompassing the primary tasks and mainstream modeling for At−T :t a spatial-temporal graph G = {Gt−T , Gt−T +1 , . . . , Gt }
time series analysis, and showcasing the potential of GNN4TS. with length T . If the underlying graph structure is fixed, then
This survey focuses on four categories: time series forecasting, At := A. LF (·) denotes the forecasting loss, which is typianomaly detection, imputation, and classification. These tasks cally a squared or absolute loss function, e.g., STGCN [54]
are performed on top of the time series representations learned and MTGNN [51]. Most existing works minimize the error
by spatial-temporal graph neural networks (STGNNs), which between the forecasting and the ground truth Y through (6);
serve as the foundation for encoding time series data in existing this process is known as deterministic time series forecasting.
literature across various tasks. We detail this in Section III-B. Besides, we have probabilistic time series forecasting methods,
 Time Series Forecasting: This task is centered around pre- such as DiffSTG [55], that share the same objective (6) function
dicting future values of the time series based on historical though it is not directly optimized. Based on the size of the foreobservations, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). Depending on application casting horizon H, we end up in either short-term or long-term
needs, we categorize this task into two types: single-step-ahead forecasting.
forecasting and multi-step-ahead forecasting. The former is Time Series Anomaly Detection: This task focuses on demeant to predict single future observations of the time series tecting irregularities and unexpected events in time series data
once at a time, i.e., the target at time t is Y := Xt+H for some (Fig. 4(b)). Detecting anomalies requires determining when
H ∈ N steps ahead, while the latter makes predictions for a time the anomalous event occurred, while diagnosing them requests
interval, e.g., Y := Xt+1:t+H . Parameterized solutions to both gaining insights about how and why the anomaly occurred. Due
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10471

Fig. 4. Four categories of graph neural networks for time series analysis. For the sake of simplicity and illustrative purposes, we assume the graph structures are
fixed in all subplots.

to the general difficulty of acquiring anomaly events, current discrepancies for each channel node and consolidating these
research commonly treats anomaly detection as an unsuper- into a single anomaly score [59]. This approach allows for
vised problem that involves the design of a model describing the identification of the channel variables responsible for the
normal, non-anomalous data. The learned model is then used anomaly events by calculating their respective contributions to
to detect anomalies by generating a high score whenever an the final score.
anomaly event occurs. This model learning process mirrors the Time Series Imputation: This task is centered around estimatforecasting optimization, (6), with fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote the ing and filling in missing or incomplete data points within a time
spatial-temporal GNN and the predictor, respectively. In general, series (Fig. 4(c)). Current research in this domain can be broadly
the spatial-temporal GNN and the predictor are trained on nor- classified into two main approaches: in-sample imputation and
mal, non-anomalous data using either forecasting [36], [56] or out-of-sample imputation. In-sample imputation involves filling
reconstruction [35], [57] optimization approaches, with the aim missing values in a given time series, while out-of-sample imof minimizing the discrepancy between the normal input and the putation pertains to inferring missing data not present in the
forecast (or reconstructed) series. Nonetheless, when these mod- training dataset. We formulate the learning objective as follows:
els are put to use for detecting anomalies, they are expected to fail
    
in minimizing this discrepancy upon receiving anomalous input.
 θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LI pφ fθ (X̃t−T :t , At−T :t ) , Xt−T :t ,
This inability to conform to the expected low-discrepancy model θ,φ
behavior during anomaly periods creates a detectable difference, (7)
facilitating the detection of anomalies. The threshold separating where fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote the spatial-temporal GNN and
normal and anomalous data is a sensitive hyperparameter that imputation module to be learned, respectively. The imputation
should be set considering the rarity of anomalies and aligned module can e.g., be a multi-layer perceptron. In this task, X̃t−T :t
with a desired false alarm rate [58]. Lastly, to diagnose the represents input time series data with missing values (reference
causes of anomalies, a common strategy involves calculating time series), while Xt−T :t denotes the same time series without
10472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

missing values. As it is impossible to access the reference
time series during training, a surrogate optimization objective is
considered, such as generating synthetic missing values [37]. In
(7), LI (·) refers to the imputation loss, which can be, for instance,
an absolute or a squared error, similar to forecasting tasks. For insample imputation, the model is trained and evaluated on X̃t−T :t
and Xt−T :t . Instead, for out-of-sample imputation, the model
is trained and evaluated on disjoint sequences, e.g., trained on
X̃t−T :t but evaluated on Xt:t+H , where the missing values in
X̃t:t+H will be estimated. Similar to time series forecasting
and anomaly detection, the imputation process can be either
deterministic or probabilistic. The former predicts the missing
values directly (e.g., GRIN [37]), while the latter estimates the
missing values from data distributions (e.g., PriSTI [38]).
 Time Series Classification: This task aims to assign a categorical label to a given time series based on its underlying
patterns or characteristics. Rather than capturing patterns within
a time series data sample, the essence of time series classification
resides in discerning differentiating patterns that help separate
samples based on their class labels. The optimization problem
can be expressed as: Fig. 5. Methodology-oriented taxonomy of graph neural networks for time
 series analysis.
 θ∗ , φ∗ = arg min LC (pφ (fθ (X, A)) , Y) , (8)
 θ,φ
 evolution of node attributes over time. Similar to [15], we syswhere fθ (·) and pφ (·) denote, e.g., a GNN and a classifier to tematically categorize STGNNs from three perspectives: spatial
be learned, respectively. Using univariate time series classifi- module, temporal module, and overall model architecture.
cation as an example Fig. 4(d), the task can be formulated as Spatial Module: To model dependencies between time series
either a graph or node classification task. In the case of graph over time, STGNNs employ the design principles of GNNs on
classification (Series-as-Graph) [96], each series is transformed static graphs. These can be further categorized into three types:
into a graph, and the graph will be the input of a GNN to spectral GNNs, spatial GNNs, and a combination of both (i.e.,
generate a classification output. This can be achieved by dividing hybrid) [29]. Spectral GNNs are based on spectral graph theory
a series into multiple subsequences with a window size, W , and use the graph shift operator (like the graph Laplacian) to
serving as graph nodes, X ∈ RN ×W , and an adjacency matrix, capture node relationships in the graph frequency domain [28],
A, describing the relationships between subsequences. A simple [98], [99]. Differently, spatial GNNs simplify spectral GNNs
GNN, fθ (·), then employs graph convolution and pooling to by directly designing filters that are localized to each node’s
obtain a condensed graph feature to be exploited by a classifier neighborhood. The approaches in this category can be broadly
pφ (·) which assigns a class label to the graph. Alternatively, classified into two types: graph diffusion-based and message
the node classification formulation (Series-as-Node), treats each passing-based. Notably, graph transformers [100] represent a
series as a node in a dataset graph. Series-as-Node constructs an specialized extension of message passing neural networks [101],
adjacency matrix representing the relationships between mul- further expanding the capabilities of this paradigm. Hybrid
tiple distinct series in a given dataset [63]. With several series approaches combine both spectral and spatial methodologies
of length T stacked into a matrix X ∈ RN ×T as node features to capitalize on the strengths of each method.
and A representing pairwise relationships, the GNN operation, Temporal Module: To account for temporal dependencies
fθ (·) , aims at leveraging the relationships across different series in time series, STGNNs incorporate temporal modules that
for accurate node series classification [97]. In all cases, Y is work in tandem with spatial modules to model intricate spatialtypically a one-hot encoded vector representing the categorical temporal patterns. Temporal dependencies can be represented
label of a univariate or multivariate time series. in either the time or frequency domains. The approaches in the
 first category encompass recurrence-based (e.g., RNNs [26]),
 convolution-based (e.g., TCNs [102]), attention-based (e.g.,
B. Unified Methodological Framework
 transformers [27]), and a combination of these (i.e., hybrid).
 In Fig. 5, we present a unified methodological framework For the second category, analogous techniques are employed,
of STGNNs mentioned in Section III-A for time series analysis. followed by orthogonal space projections [28], such as the
Specifically, our framework serves as the basis for encoding time Fourier transform.
series data in the existing literature across various downstream Model Architecture: To integrate the two modules, existing
tasks (Fig. 3). As an extension, STGNNs incorporate spatial STGNNs are either discrete or continuous in terms of their
information by considering the relationships between nodes in overall neural architectures. Both types can be further subdivided
the graph and temporal information by taking into account the into two subcategories: factorized and coupled. With typical
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10473

 A. Modeling Inter-Variable Dependencies
 Spatial dependencies, or inter-variable relationships, play a
 pivotal role in affecting a model’s forecasting capability [28].
 When presented with time series data and corresponding graph
 structures that delineate the strength of interconnections between time series, current studies typically employ (1) spectral
 GNNs, (2) spatial GNNs, or (3) a hybrid of both to model
 these spatial dependencies. At a high level, these methods all
 draw upon the principles of graph signal processing (as detailed
Fig. 6. General pipeline for time series analysis using graph neural networks. in Definition 5 and subsequent discussion). Considering input
 variables Xt and At at a given time t, the goal here is to devise
factorized STGNN model architectures, the temporal processing an effective GNN-based model SPATIAL(·) to adeptly capture
is performed either before or after the spatial processing, whether salient patterns from different time series. This can be expressed
in a discrete (e.g., STGCN [54]) or continuous manner (e.g., as X̂t = SPATIAL(Xt , At ), where X̂t collects all time series
STGODE [74]). Conversely, the coupled model architecture representations at time t with spatial dependencies embedded.
refers to instances where spatial and temporal modules are Spectral GNN-Based Approaches: Early GNN-based foreinterleaved, such as DCRNN [68] (discrete) and MTGODE [23] casting models predominantly utilized ChebConv [113] to ap-
(continuous). Other authors refer to very related categories as proximate graph convolution with Chebyshev polynomials,
time-then-space and time-and-space [103]. thereby modeling inter-variable dependencies. For instance,
 General Pipeline: In Fig. 6, we showcase a general pipeline STGCN [54] intersects temporal convolution [114] and Chebthat shows how STGNNs can be integrated into time series Conv layers to capture both spatial and temporal patterns.
analysis. Given a time series dataset, we first process it using the StemGNN [50] further proposes spectral-temporal graph neudata processing module, which performs essential data cleaning ral networks to extract rich time series patterns by leveraging
and normalization tasks, including the extraction of time series ChebConv and frequency-domain convolution neural networks.
topology (i.e., graph structures). Subsequently, STGNNs are Other relevant research has largely followed suit, employing
utilized to obtain time series representations, which can then ChebConv to model spatial time series dependencies, while
be passed to different handlers (i.e., downstream task prediction introducing novel modifications. These include attention mechmodule) to execute various analytical tasks, such as forecasting anisms [86], [105], multi-graph construction [41], [72], and
and anomaly detection. combinations of the two [88].
 Spatial GNN-Based Approaches: Inspired by the recent success of spatial GNNs [29], another line of research has been mod-
 IV. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING
 eling inter-variable dependencies using message passing [115]
 Time series forecasting aims to predict future time series or graph diffusion [116]. From the graph perspective, these
values based on historical observations. While deep learning methods are certain simplifications compared to those based
models have demonstrated considerable success in forecasting on spectral GNNs, where strong local homophilies are emtime series by capturing nonlinear temporal and spatial patterns phasised [28], [117]. Early methods such as DCRNN [68]
more effectively than the linear counterpart [23], many of these and Graph WaveNet [48] incorporated graph diffusion layapproaches, such as LSTNet [111] and TPA-LSTM [112], over- ers into GRU [118] or temporal convolution to model time
look and implicitly model the rich underlying dynamic spatial series data. In contrast, STGCN(1st ) (a second version of
correlations between time series. Recently, graph neural network STGCN [54]) and ST-MetaNet [76] modeled spatial dependen-
(GNN)-based methods have shown great potential in explicitly cies with GCN [119] and GAT [120] to aggregate information
and effectively modeling spatial and temporal dependencies in from adjacent time series. To enhance learning capabilities,
multivariate time series data, leading to enhanced forecasting several improvements have been proposed. For example, STSperformance. GCN [92] proposed spatial-temporal synchronous graph convo-
 GNN-based forecasting models can be categorized and ex- lution, extending GCN to model spatial and temporal dependenamined from multiple perspectives. In terms of forecasting cies on localized spatial-temporal graphs. MTGODE [23] and
tasks, while many models focus on multi-step forecasting (i.e., TPGNN [60] proposed continuous graph propagation and graph
predicting multiple consecutive steps ahead based on historical propagation based on temporal polynomial coefficients. Addiobservations), a minority also discuss single-step forecasting tionally, recent approaches based on graph transformer [100]
(i.e., predicting the next or one arbitrary step ahead). From or hypergraphs [121], such as [122] and [110], can capture
a methodological standpoint, these models can be dissected longer-range spatial dependencies due to their global receptive
from three aspects: (1) modeling spatial (i.e., inter-variable) field, making them a separate branch of enhanced methods.
dependencies, (2) modeling inter-temporal dependencies, and Hybrid Approaches: Some hybrid models also exist, integrat-
(3) the fusion of spatial and temporal modules for time series ing both spectral and spatial GNNs. For instance, SLCNN [95]
forecasting. A summary of representative works is given in employs ChebConv and localized message passing as global
Table II. and local convolutions to capture spatial relations at multiple
10474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE II
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING

 TABLE III
 SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10475

 TABLE IV
 SUMMARY OF GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION

granularities. Conversely, Auto-STGNN [123] integrates neural methodologies, including StemGNN [50] and TGC [28], focuses
architecture search to identify high-performance GNN-based on modeling temporal clues in the frequency domain.
forecasting models. Attention Models: Recently, a growing number of method-
 More details about modeling inter-variable dependencies in ologies is turning towards attention mechanisms, e.g., the self-
GNNs for time series forecasting are in Appendix A.1, available attention in transformer [124], to embed temporal correlations.
online. For instance, GMAN [70] attentively aggregates historical information by considering both spatial and temporal features.
B. Modeling Inter-Temporal Dependencies ST-GRAT [125] mirrors the transformer’s architecture to embed
 historical observations in conjunction with its proposed spatial
 The modeling of temporal dependencies within time series
 attention mechanism. Recent strides such as STEP [61] similarly
represents another important element in various GNN-based
 employ transformer layers to model the temporal dependencies
forecasting methods. These dependencies (i.e., temporal patwithin each univariate time series.
terns) are capable of being modeled in the time or/and frequency
 Hybrid Models: Hybrid models also find application in
domains. A summary of representative methods, along with
 modeling inter-temporal dependencies. For example, ASTtheir temporal module classifications, is presented in Table II.
 GCN [86] and DSTAGNN [88] concurrently employ temporal
Given a univariate time series Xn with length T , the primary
 attention and convolution in learning temporal correlations.
goal here is to learn an effective temporal model, referred to
 STGNN* [87] amalgamates both GRU and transformer to capas TEMPORAL(·). This model is expected to accurately capture
 ture local and global temporal dependencies. In the frequency
the dependencies between data points within Xn , such that
 domain, the nonlinear variant of TGC [28] captures temporal
X̂n = TEMPORAL(Xn ), where X̂n symbolizes the representarelations through the combination of spectral attention and contion of time series Xn . In the construction of TEMPORAL(·),
 volution models.
both the time and frequency domains can be exploited within
 Complete discussion of modeling inter-temporal dependenconvolutional and attentive mechanisms. Recurrent models can
 cies is in Appendix A.2, available online.
also be employed for modeling in the time domain specifically.
Additionally, hybrid models exist in both domains, integrating
different methodologies such as attention and convolution neural
networks. C. Forecasting Architectural Fusion
 Recurrent Models: Several early methodologies rely on re- Given the spatial and temporal modules discussed, denoted
current models for understanding inter-temporal dependencies as SPATIAL(·) and TEMPORAL(·), four categories of neural arin the time domain. For instance, DCRNN [68] integrates graph chitectural fusion have been identified as effective means to
diffusion with gated recurrent units (GRU) [118] to model the capture spatial-temporal dependencies within time series data:
spatial-temporal dependencies in traffic data. On a different (1) discrete factorized, (2) discrete coupled, (3) continuous
note, AGCRN [49] merges GRU with a factorized variant of factorized, and (4) continuous coupled. In discrete factorized
GCN [119] and a graph structure learning module. More recent models, spatial and temporal dependencies are usually learned
studies, such as GTS [52] and RGSL [72], share similar de- and processed independently. Discrete coupled models, on the
signs but primarily emphasize different graph structure learning other hand, explicitly or implicitly incorporate spatial and temmechanisms. poral modules into a singular process when modeling spatial-
 Convolution Models: Convolutional neural networks (CNNs), temporal dependencies. Different from discrete models, some
on the other hand, provide a more efficient perspective for methods abstract the underlying modeling processes with neural
modeling inter-temporal dependencies, with the bulk of existing differential equations, which we categorize as continuous modstudies in the time domain. An instance of this is STGCN [54], els. Specifically, continuous factorized models involve distinct
which introduces temporal gated convolution that integrates processes, either partially or entirely continuous (e.g., [74]), to
1-D convolution with gated linear units (GLU) to facilitate model spatial and temporal dependencies. In contrast, contintractable model training. Other representative examples include uous coupled models employ a single continuous process to
MTGNN [51] and MTGODE [23]. An alternative strand of accomplish this task, such as [23] and [75].
10476 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 Discrete Architectures: Numerous existing GNN-based time Recently, GNNs have shown promise in capturing temporal and
series forecasting methods are models processing discrete data. spatial dependencies among variables, addressing this gap [36],
For instance, factorized approaches like STGCN [54] employ [56].
a sandwich structure of graph and temporal gated convolution
layers as its fundamental building block. Subsequent works, A. General Approach to Anomaly Detection
such as DGCNN [126] and HGCN [127], retain this model
architecture while introducing enhancements such as dynamic Treating anomaly detection as an unsupervised task relies on
graph structure estimation and hierarchical graph generation. models to learn a general concept of what normality is for a
In the realm of discrete coupled models, early works such as given dataset [143], [144]. To achieve this, deep learning ar-
DCRNN [68] and Cirstea et al. [94] straightforwardly incor- chitectures deploy a bifurcated modular framework, constituted
porate graph diffusion or attention models into recurrent units. by a backbone module and a scoring module [145]. First, a
Subsequent works, such as MRA-BGCN [69] and RGSL [72], backbone model, BACKBONE(·), is trained to fit given training
are based on similar concepts but with varying implementations. data, assumed to be nominal, or to contain very few anomalies.
There are also some studies integrating spatial and temporal Then, a scoring module, SCORER(X, X̂), produces a score used
convolution or attention operations into a single module. An to identify the presence of anomalies by comparing the output
example is GMAN [70], which proposes a building block that X̂ = BACKBONE(X) of the backbone module with the observed
integrates the spatial and temporal attention mechanisms in a time series data X. The score is intended as a measure of
gated manner. the discrepancy between the expected signals under normal
 Continuous Architectures: To date, only a handful of methods and anomalous circumstances. Furthermore, it is also important
fall into this category. For factorized methods, STGODE [74] for a model to diagnose anomaly events by pinpointing the
proposes to depict the graph propagation as a continuous process responsible variables. Consequently, a scoring function typically
with a neural ordinary differential equation (NODE) [128]. computes the discrepancy for each individual channel first,
This approach allows for the effective characterization of long- before consolidating these discrepancies across all channels into
range spatial-temporal dependencies in conjunction with dilated a single anomaly value.
convolutions along the time axis. For coupled methods, MT- To provide a simple illustration of the entire process, the
GODE [23] generalizes both spatial and temporal modeling backbone can be a GNN forecaster that makes a one-step-ahead
processes found in most related works into a single unified forecast for the scorer. The scorer then computes the anomaly
process that integrates two NODEs. STG-NCDE [75] shares score as the sum of the absolute forecast error for each channel
a similar idea but operates under the framework of neural con- variable, represented as N i |xt − x̂t | across N channel varii i

trolled differential equations (NCDEs) [129]. ables. Since the final score is computed based on the summation
 Refer to Appendix A.3, available online, for more details about of channel errors, an operator can determine the root cause
the architecture fusion in GNNs for time series forecasting. variables by computing the contribution of each variable to the
 summed error.
 V. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION Advancements in the anomaly detection and diagnosis field
 have led to the proposal of more comprehensive backbone and
 Time series anomaly detection identifies data observations
 scoring modules [136], [145], primarily driven by the adoption
that deviate from the nominal data-generating process [134].
 of GNN methodologies [35], [36], [56].
Anomalies, defined as such deviations, contrast with normal
data. Terms like novelty and outlier are often used interchangeably with anomaly [135]. Deviations can be single observa- B. Discrepancy Frameworks for Anomaly Detection
tions (points) or a series of observations (subsequences) [136]. Most of anomaly detection models follow the same backbone-
However, unlike normal time series data, anomalies are hard scorer architecture. However, the way the backbone module is
to characterize because they are rare, making them difficult to trained to learn data structure from nominal data and the imcollect and label, and it is usually impossible to establish all plementation of the scoring module differentiate these methods
potential anomalies, limiting supervised learning. Therefore, un- into three categories: (1) reconstruction, (2) forecast, and (3) resupervised detection techniques are widely explored as practical lational discrepancy frameworks. A summary of representative
solutions. works is provided in Table III.
 Traditionally, distance-based [137] and distributional tech- Reconstruction Discrepancy: Reconstruction discrepancy
niques [138] have been widely used for detecting irregular- frameworks operate on the assumption that reconstruction erities in time series data. Recently, deep learning has driven ror is low during normal periods and high during anomalies.
significant advancements, particularly with recurrent models They are designed to replicate their inputs as outputs, simemploying reconstruction [139] and forecasting [140] strategies. ilar to autoencoders [146]. The backbone is expected to ef-
These models use forecast and reconstruction errors to measure fectively model and reconstruct the training data distribution
discrepancies between expected and actual signals, as a model but not out-of-sample data. To achieve this, these frameworks
trained on normal data is more likely to fail with anomalous often include constraints and regularization, such as enforcing
data. However, recurrent models [141] often lack explicit mod- a low-dimensional embedded code [147] or using variational
eling of pairwise interdependence among variables, limiting objectives [148]. Once the data structure is learned, the model
their effectiveness in detecting complex anomalies [35], [142]. should approximate the input well during normal periods but
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10477

struggle during anomalies. The SCORER(·) then computes a its capability to learn graph structures for both anomaly detection
discrepancy score from the reconstructed outputs to identify and diagnosis. In this context, the backbone serves as a graph
anomalous events. Although deep reconstruction models gen- learning module that constructs the hidden evolving relationship
erally follow these principles for detecting anomalies, a key dis- between variables. The scorer, on the other hand, is a functinction between GNNs and other architectural types rests in the tion that evaluates changes in these relationships and assigns
backbone reconstructor, BACKBONE(·), which is characterized an anomaly or discrepancy score accordingly. GReLeN [90]
by its STGNN implementation. For example, MTAD-GAT [35] pioneered the use of learned dynamic graphs to detect anomalies
and LSTM-VAE [139] both use a variational objective [148], through relational discrepancies. Its reconstruction module dybut MTAD-GAT employs a graph attention network as a spatial- namically constructs graph structures based on input time series
temporal encoder to learn inter-variable and inter-temporal de- data at each time point. These structures are then used by a scorer
pendencies. Other similar works include VGCRN [79] and to compute changes in the in-degree and out-degree values of
FuSAGNet [56]. Another research direction in this category channel nodes. In contrast, DyGraphAD employs a forecasting
of methods focused on graph-level embeddings to represent approach [82]. It divides a multivariate series into subsequences,
the input graph data as vectors to enable the application of converts these into dynamically evolving graphs, and trains the
well-established and sophisticated detection methods designed network to predict one-step-ahead graph structures. The scorer
for multivariate time series [58], [149]. in DyGraphAD computes the forecast error in the graph structure
 Forecast Discrepancy: Forecast discrepancy frameworks rely as the relational discrepancy for anomaly detection.
on the assumption that forecast error should be low during Hybrid and Other Discrepancies: Different discrepancynormal periods, but high during anomalous periods. Here, the based frameworks offer unique advantages for detecting varbackbone module is substituted with a GNN forecaster that is ious types of anomalies. As demonstrated in GDN [36], the
trained to predict a one-step-ahead forecast. During deployment, relational discrepancy framework can uncover spatial anomathe forecaster makes a one-step-ahead prediction, and the fore- lies that are concealed within the relational patterns between
casts are given to the scorer. The scorer compares the forecasts different channels. In contrast, forecast discrepancy frameagainst the real observed signals to compute discrepancies such works excel at identifying temporal anomalies like sudden
as absolute error [36] or mean-squared error [89]. Importantly, it spikes or seasonal inconsistencies. A comprehensive solution
is generally assumed that a forecasting-based model will exhibit would leverage the strengths of STGNNs by combining mulerratic behavior during anomaly periods when the input data tiple discrepancy measures for anomaly detection. For examdeviates from the normal patterns, resulting in a significant ple, MTAD-GAT [35] uses both reconstruction and forecast
forecasting discrepancy. GDN [36] is a representative work, discrepancies, while DyGraphAD [82] combines forecast
consisting of a graph structure module that learns the underlying and relational discrepancies. Additionally, incorporating prior
topology and a graph attention network that encodes input series knowledge about anomalous behaviors can enhance detection.
representations for one-step-ahead forecasts. Then, its scorer For instance, GraphSAD [133] creates pseudo labels for six discomputes the forecast discrepancy as the maximum absolute tinct anomaly types on training data, transforming unsupervised
forecast error among the channel variables to indicate whether an anomaly detection into a standard classification task, with class
anomaly event has occurred. Other similar approaches include discrepancy as the anomaly indicator.
GTA [89] and CST-GL [62]. Our detailed discussion about the GNNs for time series
 While forecast discrepancy frameworks can be similar to anomaly detection can be found in Appendix B, available online.
reconstruction discrepancy frameworks, they rely on fundamentally different principles and implementation strategies.
 VI. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION
Reconstruction discrepancy frameworks project current input
onto a latent space, attempting to reconstruct it and identifying Time series classification seeks to assign a categorical label
anomalies when reconstruction fails. This method uses current to a given time series based on its underlying patterns or charinput data during both training and inference, focusing on the acteristics. As outlined in a recent survey [154], early literature
model’s ability to reconstruct training data but not out-of-sample primarily focused on distance-based approaches [155], [156]
data. Conversely, forecast discrepancy frameworks use histor- and ensembling methods [157], [158]. However, despite their
ical data to predict current values and identify anomalies by strong performance, both strategies struggle with scalability for
comparing predictions with actual observations. Reconstruction high-dimensional or large datasets [159], [160]. To address these
focuses on replicating current inputs, while forecasting em- limitations, researchers are exploring deep learning techniques
phasizes predicting future data points and detecting anomalies to enhance the performance and scalability of time series classithrough prediction errors. Advanced forecast discrepancy-based fication. A comprehensive discussion can be found in the latest
methods, such as GST-Pro [150], can even predict anomalies survey by Foumani et al. [154], though it does not cover the
without using actual observations, allowing anomaly prediction application of GNNs in this field. By transforming time series
at future timestamps. data into graph representations, one can leverage the powerful
 Relational Discrepancy: Relational discrepancy frameworks capabilities of GNNs to capture both local and global patterns.
rely on the assumption that the relationship between variables Furthermore, GNNs are capable of mapping the intricate reshould exhibit significant shifts from normal to anomalous peri- lationships among different time series data samples within a
ods. The logical evolution of using STGNN involves leveraging particular dataset. In the following discussion, we provide a fresh
10478 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

GNN perspective on the univariate and multivariate time series B. Multivariate Time Series Classification
classification problem. A compilation of representative works is
 In essence, multivariate time series classification mainpresented in Table IV tains fundamental similarities with its univariate counterpart.
 However, it introduces an additional layer of complexity: the
A. Univariate Time Series Classification necessity to capture intricate inter-variable dependencies. For
 example, given the interconnectedness of brain regions, analyz-
 Time series classification inherently differs from other time ing a single node in isolation may not fully capture the comseries analyses by focusing on discerning patterns that dis- prehensive neural dynamics [164]. By modeling inter-variable
tinguish samples based on class labels, rather than capturing dependencies, we can understand the relationships between
patterns within the data. Unlike forecasting future points or de- different nodes, thereby offering a more holistic view of brain
tecting real-time anomalies, it aims to identify divergent patterns activity. This facilitates the differentiation of intricate patterns
across series. We explore two novel graph-based approaches that can classify patients with and without specific neurological
for univariate time series classification: Series-as-Graph and conditions. Since the relationships between the variables, or
Series-as-Node. inter-variable dependencies, can be naturally thought of as a
 Series-as-Graph: This approach transforms a univariate time network graph, GNNs are ideally suitable as illustrated before
series into a graph to identify unique patterns that enable accurate in Section IV. The primary aim here is to effectively distill the
classification using a GNN. First, each series is broken down into complexity of high-dimensional series data into a more compresubsequences as nodes, and the nodes are connected with edges hensible, yet equally expressive, representation that enables difillustrating their relationships. Following this, a GNN is applied ferentiation of time series into their representative classes [33],
to make graph classification. This procedure is represented in [64], [151]. More discussion is in Appendix C.2, available online.
the upper block of Fig. 4(d). Series-as-Graph was first presented in Time2Graph [161], which was later developed further
with the incorporation of GNN, as Time2Graph+ [96]. The VII. GNNS FOR TIME SERIES IMPUTATION
Time2Graph+ modeling process can be described as a two-step Time series imputation, a crucial task in numerous real-world
process: first, a time series is transformed into a shapelet graph, applications, involves estimating missing values within one or
and second, a GNN is utilized to model the relations between more data point sequences. Traditional time series imputation
shapelets along with a graph pooling operation to derive the approaches have relied on statistical methodologies, such as
global representation of the time series. This representation is mean imputation, spline interpolation [171], and regression
then fed into a classifier to assign class labels to the time series. models [172]. However, these methods often struggle to capture
Similarly, EC-GCN [152] constructs graphs from encrypted complex temporal dependencies and non-linear relationships
traffic for classification. The Series-as-Graph approach can also within the data. While some deep neural network-based works,
be extended to multivariate time-series classification task [153]. such as [173] and [174], have mitigated these limitations, they do
While we use Series-as-Graph to describe the formulation of a not explicitly consider inter-variable dependencies. The recent
time series classification task as a graph classification task, this emergence of GNNs offers new possibilities for time series
should not be confused with Series2Graph [162], which is for imputation by better capturing intricate spatial and temporal
anomaly detection tasks. dependencies. From a task perspective, GNN-based time series
 Series-as-Node: As capturing differentiating class patterns imputation can be broadly categorized into two types: in-sample
across different series data samples is important, leveraging imputation and out-of-sample imputation. The former involves
relationships across the different series data samples in a given filling in missing values within the given time series data, while
dataset can be beneficial for classifying a time series. To achieve the latter predicts missing values in disjoint sequences [37].
this, one can take the Series-as-Node approach, where each From a methodological perspective, GNNs for time series imseries sample is seen as a separate node. These series nodes are putation can be categorized into deterministic and probabilistic
connected with edges that represent the relationships between approaches. Deterministic imputation provides a single best estithem, creating a large graph that provides a complete view mate for missing values, while probabilistic imputation accounts
of the entire dataset. This procedure is depicted in the lower for uncertainty by offering a distribution of possible values. In
block of Fig. 4(d), which essentially formulates a time series Table V, we summarize most of the related works on GNN
classification task as a node classification task. Series-as-Node for time series imputation to date, offering a comprehensive
was originally presented in SimTSC [63]. In this work, series overview of the field and its current state of development.
nodes are connected using edges, which are defined by their
pairwise DTW distance, to construct a graph. LB-SimTSC [97]
further extends on SimTSC to improve the DTW preprocess- A. In-Sample Imputation
ing efficiency by employing the widely-used lower bound for The majority of existing GNN-based methods primarily fo-
DTW [163]. This allows for a time complexity of O(L) rather cus on in-sample time series data imputation. For instance,
than O(L2 ), dramatically reducing computation time. GACN [65] proposes to model spatial-temporal dependencies
 More details about GNN-based univariate time series classi- in time series data by interleaving GAT [120] and temporal
fication are in Appendix C.1, available online. convolution layers in its encoder. It then imputes the missing
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10479

 TABLE V
 SUMMARY OF GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES IMPUTATION

data by combining GAT and temporal deconvolution layers that fraud detection. Three prominent areas in this section are dismap latent states back to original feature spaces. GRIN [37] cussed. A detailed expansion can be found in Appendix E, availintroduces the graph recurrent imputation network, where each able online. In addition, we summarize the common benchmark
unidirectional module consists of one spatial-temporal encoder datasets and the open-sourced implementation of representative
and two different imputation executors. The spatial-temporal models in Appendix F, available online.
encoder adopted in this work combines MPNN [115] and Smart Transportation: The domain of transportation has been
GRU [118]. After generating the latent time series represen- significantly transformed with the advent of GNNs, with typical
tations, the first-stage imputation fills missing values with one- applications spanning from traffic prediction to flight delay
step-ahead predicted values, which are then refined by a final prediction. For example, by leveraging advanced algorithms
one-layer MPNN before passing to the second-stage imputa- and data analytics related to spatial-temporal GNNs, traffic
tion for further processing. Similar works using bidirectional conditions can be accurately predicted [175], [176], thereby
recurrent architectures include AGRN [166], DGCRIN [167], facilitating efficient route planning and congestion management.
GARNN [168], and MDGCN [81], where the main differences Another important application is traffic data imputation, which
lie in intermediate processes. Recently, a few research studies is crucial for maintaining the integrity of traffic databases and
have explored probabilistic in-sample time series imputation, ensuring the accuracy of traffic analysis and prediction modsuch as PriSTI [38] and [170], where the imputation has been els [85], [167]. There is also related research on autonomous
regarded as a generation task. Refer to Appendix D.1 for more driving [177] and flight delay prediction [178], [179]. The
details, available online. use of advanced technologies like GNNs in these applications
 underscores their transformative impact on smart transportation, emphasizing its critical role in evolving transportation
B. Out-of-Sample Imputation systems.
 To date, only a few GNN-based methods fall into this category. Environment & Sustainable Energy: In this sector, GNNs have
Among these works, IGNNK [73] proposes an inductive GNN been instrumental in wind speed and power prediction, capturing
kriging model to recover signals for unobserved time series, the complex spatial-temporal dynamics of wind patterns to
such as a new variable in a multivariate time series. In IGNNK, provide accurate predictions that aid in the efficient management
the training process involves masked subgraph sampling and of wind energy resources [180], [181]. Similarly, in solar energy,
signal reconstruction with the diffusion graph convolution net- GNNs have been used for solar irradiance and photovoltaic (PV)
work presented in [68]. Another similar work is SATCN [66], power prediction, modeling the intricate relationships between
and the primary difference between these two works lies in various factors influencing solar energy generation to provide
the underlying GNN architectures. INCREASE [169], on the accurate predictions [182], [183]. Furthermore, GNNs have been
other hand, further considers heterogeneous spatial and diverse employed for air pollution prediction [184] and weather foretemporal relations among the locations, lifting the performance casting [185] that are crucial for various services in agriculture,
of inductive spatio-temporal kriging. Notably, GRIN [37] can energy, and transportation.
handle both in-sample and out-of-sample imputations, as well Physical Systems: Systems of interacting objects are found
as [165]. More discussion is in Appendix D.2, available online. in numerous scientific fields, including the simulation of nbody systems [186], particle physics [187], modeling of human
 motion dynamics [188], and prediction of molecular dynam-
 VIII. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS AND RESOURCES ics [189]. In graph-based deep learning, the objects are repre-
 Graph neural networks have been applied to a broad range sented as nodes of a graph and GNNs have proven effective
of disciplines related to time series analysis. We categorize the in modeling their complex interactions. Despite the challenges
mainstream applications of GNN4TS into seven areas: smart posed by physical constraints, promising performance has been
transportation, on-demand services, environment & sustainable achieved thanks to the incorporation of inductive biases from
energy, internet-of-things, physical systems, healthcare, and known physical laws [190], [191] and architectures that maintain
10480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

the symmetries of the underlying system, such as equivariance computations. Traditional GNNs use sampling strategies such
to rotations and translations [189], [192], [193]. as node-wise [206], layer-wise [207], and graph-wise [208] to
 Other Applications: The application of GNNs for time se- mitigate these issues, but preserving temporal dependencies is
ries analysis has also been extended to various other fields, complex. Enhancing scalability for real-time GNN applications,
such as finance [194], [195], on-demand services [41], fraud especially on edge devices with limited computing power, is
detection [196], manufacturing [197], and recommender sys- crucial. This intersection of scalability and efficient inference is a
tems [198]. As research in this area continues to evolve, it is significant research area with potential for major advancements.
anticipated that the application of GNN4TS will continue to
expand, opening up new possibilities for data-driven decision X. CONCLUSION
making and system optimization.
 This comprehensive survey bridges the knowledge gap in
 graph neural networks for time series analysis (GNN4TS) by
 IX. FUTURE DIRECTIONS reviewing recent advancements and offering a unified taxonomy to categorize existing works. It covers a wide range of
 The future of GNNs for time series analysis holds immense
 analytical tasks, including forecasting, classification, anomaly
promise, driven by several key directions and challenges that
 detection, and imputation, providing a detailed understanding
need to be addressed to unlock their full potential. More detailed
 of current progress. We also delve into the intricacies of spadiscussion is in Appendix G, available online.
 tial and temporal dependencies modeling and overall model
 Pre-Training, Transfer Learning, and Large Models: Prearchitecture, offering a fine-grained classification of individual
training, transfer learning, and large models are emerging as
 studies. Highlighting the expanding applications of GNN4TS,
potent strategies to bolster the performance of GNNs in time
 we demonstrate its versatility and potential for future growth.
series analysis [61], [199], especially when data is sparse or
 This survey serves as a valuable resource for practitioners and
diverse. These techniques hinge on utilizing learned representaexperts, proposing future research directions to guide and inspire
tions from one or more domains to enhance performance in other
 further work in GNN4TS.
related domains [3]. Notable examples include Panagopoulos et
al.’s meta-learning for COVID-19 prediction in data-limited settings [200], and Shao et al.’s pre-training framework for spatial- REFERENCES
temporal GNNs [61]. The exploration of GNN pre-training [1] Q. Wen, L. Yang, T. Zhou, and L. Sun, “Robust time series analysis and
and transferability for time series tasks is growing, especially applications: An industrial perspective,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf.
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 4836–4837.
with the advent of generative AI and large models capable of [2] P. Esling and C. Agon, “Time-series data mining,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
addressing diverse tasks [201]. Challenges include limited time vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1–34, 2012.
series data for large-scale pre-training, ensuring wide coverage [3] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” 2023, arXiv:2306.10125.
and transferability, and designing strategies to capture complex [4] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning:
spatial-temporal dependencies [202]. A survey,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 379, no. 2194, 2021,
 Robustness: Robustness of GNNs refers to their ability to Art. no. 20200209.
 [5] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller,
handle data perturbations and distribution shifts, especially those “Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining
engineered by adversaries [203]. This is crucial for time series Knowl. Discov., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 917–963, 2019.
from dynamic systems, as operational failures can compromise [6] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
 on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
the entire system’s integrity [204]. For example, inadequate vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
handling of noise or data corruption in smart city applications [7] C. Fang and C. Wang, “Time series data imputation: A survey on deep
can disrupt traffic management, and in healthcare, it can cause learning approaches,” 2020, arXiv: 2011.11347.
 [8] J. Zhang, F.-Y. Wang, K. Wang, W.-H. Lin, X. Xu, and C. Chen, “Datamissed critical treatment periods. While GNNs perform well in driven intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
many applications, enhancing their robustness and developing Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1624–1639, Dec. 2011.
effective failure management strategies are essential. [9] Y. Zhou, Z. Ding, Q. Wen, and Y. Wang, “Robust load forecasting towards
 adversarial attacks via Bayesian learning,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst.,
 Privacy Enhancing: As GNNs become integral to various vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1445–1459, Mar. 2023.
sectors, privacy protection is increasingly important. GNNs’ [10] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT
capability to learn and reconstruct relationships within complex time-series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7,
 pp. 6481–6494, Jul. 2020.
systems necessitates safeguarding the privacy of both individual [11] S. Wang, J. Cao, and S. Y. Philip, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal
entities (nodes) and their relationships (edges) in time series data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8,
data. The interpretability of GNNs, while useful for identifying pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022.
 [12] J. Ye, J. Zhao, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “How to build a graph-based deep
vulnerabilities, can also expose sensitive information [205]. learning architecture in traffic domain: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Therefore, maintaining robust privacy defenses while capitaliz- Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 3904–3924, May 2022.
ing on the benefits of GNNs for time series analysis requires [13] W. Jiang and J. Luo, “Graph neural network for traffic forecasting: A
 survey,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 207, 2022, Art. no. 117921.
a delicate balance, one that calls for constant vigilance and [14] K.-H. N. Bui, J. Cho, and H. Yi, “Spatial-temporal graph neural network
continual innovation. for traffic forecasting: An overview and open research issues,” Appl.
 Scalability: While GNNs are effective in analyzing complex Intell., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 2763–2774, 2022.
 [15] G. Jin, Y. Liang, Y. Fang, J. Huang, J. Zhang, and Y. Zheng, “Spatiotime series data, their adaptation to vast time-dependent data temporal graph neural networks for predictive learning in urban computvolumes presents challenges like memory constraints during ing: A survey,” 2023, arXiv:2303.14483.
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10481

 [16] Z. A. Sahili and M. Awad, “Spatio-temporal graph neural networks: A [41] X. Geng et al., “Spatiotemporal multi-graph convolution network for
 survey,” 2023, arXiv:2301.10569. ride-hailing demand forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019,
 [17] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural pp. 3656–3663.
 networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. [42] S. He and K. G. Shin, “Towards fine-grained flow forecasting: A graph
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8846–8885, Aug. 2023. attention approach for bike sharing systems,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020,
 [18] A. Cini, I. Marisca, D. Zambon, and C. Alippi, “Taming local effects in pp. 88–98.
 graph-based spatiotemporal forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [43] X. Zhang, R. Cao, Z. Zhang, and Y. Xia, “Crowd flow forecasting with
 Process. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 2417. multi-graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
 [19] L.-J. Cao and F. E. H. Tay, “Support vector machine with adaptive 2020, pp. 1–7.
 parameters in financial time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. [44] M. Li and Z. Zhu, “Spatial-temporal fusion graph neural networks
 Learn. Syst., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1506–1518, Nov. 2003. for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 [20] Y. Xia and J. Chen, “Traffic flow forecasting method based on gradi- pp. 4189–4196.
 ent boosting decision tree,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Front. Manuf. Sci. [45] S. Yi and V. Pavlovic, “Sparse Granger causality graphs for human
 Measuring Technol., Atlantis Press, 2017, pp. 413–416. action classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2012,
 [21] B. Biller and B. L. Nelson, “Modeling and generating multivariate time- pp. 3374–3377.
 series input processes using a vector autoregressive technique,” ACM [46] Y. Wang, Z. Duan, Y. Huang, H. Xu, J. Feng, and A. Ren, “MTHetGNN: A
 Trans. Model. Comput. Simul., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 211–237, 2003. heterogeneous graph embedding framework for multivariate time series
 [22] G. E. Box and D. A. Pierce, “Distribution of residual autocorrela- forecasting,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 153, pp. 151–158, 2022.
 tions in autoregressive-integrated moving average time series mod- [47] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Change detection
 els,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 65, no. 332, pp. 1509–1526, in graph streams by learning graph embeddings on constant-curvature
 1970. manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6,
 [23] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, S. Chen, B. Yang, and S. Pan, “Multivariate pp. 1856–1869, Jun. 2020.
 time series forecasting with dynamic graph neural ODEs,” IEEE Trans. [48] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph WaveNet for deep
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9168–9180, Sep. 2023. spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 [24] B. Zhao, H. Lu, S. Chen, J. Liu, and D. Wu, “Convolutional neural 2019, pp. 1907–1913.
 networks for time series classification,” J. Syst. Eng. Electron., vol. 28, [49] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convoluno. 1, pp. 162–169, 2017. tional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 [25] A. Borovykh, S. Bohte, and C. W. Oosterlee, “Conditional time se- Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Art. no. 1494.
 ries forecasting with convolutional neural networks,” 2017, arXiv: [50] D. Cao et al., “Spectral temporal graph neural network for multivariate
 1703.04691. time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 [26] J. T. Connor, R. D. Martin, and L. E. Atlas, “Recurrent neural networks 2020, Art. no. 1491.
 and robust time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., [51] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting
 vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 240–254, Mar. 1994. the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural net-
 [27] Q. Wen et al., “Transformers in time series: A survey,” in Proc. Int. Joint works,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 6778–6786. pp. 753–763.
 [28] M. Jin et al., “How expressive are spectral-temporal graph neural net- [52] C. Shang, J. Chen, and J. Bi, “Discrete graph structure learning for foreworks for time series forecasting?,” 2023, arXiv:2305.06587. casting multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 [29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A 2021.
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural [53] A. Cini, D. Zambon, and C. Alippi, “Sparse graph learning from spa-
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021. tiotemporal time series,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 24, no. 242, pp. 1–36,
 [30] M. Yang, M. Zhou, M. Kalander, Z. Huang, and I. King, “Discrete-time 2023.
 temporal network embedding via implicit hierarchical learning in hyper- [54] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional netbolic space,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, works: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int.
 2021, pp. 1975–1985. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640.
 [31] M. Yang, M. Zhou, H. Xiong, and I. King, “Hyperbolic temporal net- [55] H. Wen et al., “DiffSTG: Probabilistic spatio-temporal graph forecasting
 work embedding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 11, with denoising diffusion models,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Adv.
 pp. 11489–11502, Nov. 2023. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 60.
 [32] H. Y. Koh, A. T. N. Nguyen, S. Pan, L. T. May, and G. I. Webb, [56] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for
 “Physicochemical graph neural network for learning protein–ligand in- anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
 teraction fingerprints from sequence data,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 6, Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
 pp. 673–687, 2024. [57] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 [33] X. Zhang, M. Zeman, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Graph-guided detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representanetwork for irregularly sampled multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. tions, 2022.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. [58] D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Concept drift and anomaly detection
 [34] Z. Wang, T. Jiang, Z. Xu, J. Gao, and J. Zhang, “Irregularly sampled in graph streams,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 11,
 multivariate time series classification: A graph learning approach,” IEEE pp. 5592–5605, Nov. 2018.
 Intell. Syst., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 3–11, May/Jun. 2023. [59] D. Zambon and C. Alippi, “Where and how to improve graph-based
 [35] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph spatio-temporal predictors,” 2023, arXiv:2302.01701.
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, [60] Y. Liu et al., “Multivariate time-series forecasting with temporal polypp. 841–850. nomial graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 [36] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection Syst., 2022, Art. no. 1411.
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, [61] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatialpp. 4027–4035. temporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecast-
 [37] A. Cini, I. Marisca, and C. Alippi, “Filling the G_ap_s: Multivariate time ing,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
 series imputation by graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. pp. 1567–1577.
 Representations, 2022. [62] Y. Zheng et al., “Correlation-aware spatial-temporal graph learning
 [38] M. Liu, H. Huang, H. Feng, L. Sun, B. Du, and Y. Fu, “PriSTI: A for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 conditional diffusion framework for spatiotemporal imputation,” in Proc. Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 14, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1927–1939. 2023.3325667.
 [39] M. Jin, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Neural temporal walks: Motif-aware [63] D. Zha, K.-H. Lai, K. Zhou, and X. Hu, “Towards similarity-aware
 representation learning on continuous-time dynamic graphs,” in Proc. time-series classification,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2022,
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, Art. no. 1445. pp. 199–207.
 [40] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. [64] H. Liu et al., “TodyNet: Temporal dynamic graph neural network for
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023. multivariate time series classification,” 2023, arXiv:2304.05078.
10482 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 [65] Y. Ye, S. Zhang, and J. J. Yu, “Spatial-temporal traffic data imputation via [90] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 graph attention convolutional network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
 Netw., 2021, pp. 241–252. Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
 [66] Y. Wu, D. Zhuang, M. Lei, A. Labbe, and L. Sun, “Spatial ag- [91] Y. Xia et al., “Deciphering spatio-temporal graph forecasting: A causal
 gregation and temporal convolution networks for real-time Kriging,” lens and treatment,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
 2021, arXiv:2109.12144. Art. no. 1611.
 [67] I. Marisca, A. Cini, and C. Alippi, “Learning to reconstruct missing data [92] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous
 from spatiotemporal graphs with sparse observations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, Art. no. 2324. network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
 [68] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent pp. 914–921.
 neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [93] Y. Cui et al., “METRO: A generic graph neural network framework for
 Representations, 2018. multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
 [69] W. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Xie, W. Cao, Y. Gao, and X. Feng, “Multi-range at- no. 2, pp. 224–236, 2021.
 tentive bicomponent graph convolutional network for traffic forecasting,” [94] R.-G. Cirstea, B. Yang, and C. Guo, “Graph attention recurrent neural
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3529–3536. networks for correlated time series forecasting,” in Proc. 5th SIGKDD
 [70] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi-attention Workshop Mining Learn. Time Ser., 2019, pp. 1–6.
 network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, [95] Q. Zhang, J. Chang, G. Meng, S. Xiang, and C. Pan, “Spatio-temporal
 pp. 1234–1241. graph structure learning for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 [71] Y. Chen, I. Segovia-Dominguez, and Y. R. Gel, “Z-GCNETs: Time Intell., 2020, pp. 1177–1185.
 zigzags at graph convolutional networks for time series forecasting,” in [96] Z. Cheng et al., “Time2Graph+: Bridging time series and graph represen-
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 1684–1694. tation learning via multiple attentions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 [72] H. Yu et al., “Regularized graph structure learning with semantic knowl- vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2078–2090, Feb. 2023.
 edge for multi-variates time-series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. [97] W. Xi, A. Jain, L. Zhang, and J. Lin, “LB-SimTSC: An efficient
 Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2362–2368. similarity-aware graph neural network for semi-supervised time series
 [73] Y. Wu, D. Zhuang, A. Labbe, and L. Sun, “Inductive graph neural classification,” 2023, arXiv:2301.04838.
 networks for spatiotemporal Kriging,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., [98] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and P. Vandergheynst,
 2021, pp. 4478–4485. “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending high-
 [74] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular domains,” IEEE
 networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98, May 2013.
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 364–373. [99] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on graphs,”
 [75] J. Choi, H. Choi, J. Hwang, and N. Park, “Graph neural controlled IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1644–1656, Apr.
 differential equations for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. 2013.
 Intell., 2022, pp. 6367–6374. [100] C. Ying et al., “Do transformers really perform badly for graph repre-
 [76] Z. Pan, Y. Liang, W. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Zheng, and J. Zhang, “Urban traffic sentation?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 28
 prediction from spatio-temporal data using deep meta learning,” in Proc. 877–28 888.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1720–1730. [101] C. Cai, T. S. Hy, R. Yu, and Y. Wang, “On the connection between
 [77] A. Cini, I. Marisca, F. Bianchi, and C. Alippi, “Scalable spatiotempo- MPNN and graph transformer,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023,
 ral graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 3408–3430.
 pp. 7218–7226. [102] R. Wan, S. Mei, J. Wang, M. Liu, and F. Yang, “Multivariate temporal
 [78] W. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Cheng, C. Yang, and X. Ren, “Time-series event convolutional network: A deep neural networks approach for multivariate
 prediction with evolutionary state graph,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web time series forecasting,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 8, 2019, Art. no. 876.
 Search Data Mining, 2021, pp. 580–588. [103] J. Gao and B. Ribeiro, “On the equivalence between temporal and static
 [79] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep equivariant graph representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time 2022, pp. 7052–7076.
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, [104] D. Zambon, D. Grattarola, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Autoregressive models
 pp. 3621–3633. for sequences of graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019,
 [80] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead pp. 1–8.
 dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE [105] R. Huang, C. Huang, Y. Liu, G. Dai, and W. Kong, “LSGCN: Long
 Access, vol. 10, pp. 40 967–40 978, 2022. short-term traffic prediction with graph convolutional networks,” in Proc.
 [81] Y. Liang, Z. Zhao, and L. Sun, “Memory-augmented dynamic graph Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 2355–2361.
 convolution networks for traffic data imputation with diverse missing [106] B. Paassen, D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and B. E. Hammer,
 patterns,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg., vol. 143, 2022, Art. no. 103826. “Graph edit networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
 [82] K. Chen, M. Feng, and T. S. Wirjanto, “Multivariate time series anomaly [107] J. Chauhan, A. Raghuveer, R. Saket, J. Nandy, and B. Ravindran,
 detection via dynamic graph forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2302.02051. “Multi-variate time series forecasting on variable subsets,” in Proc. ACM
 [83] C. Yu, X. Ma, J. Ren, H. Zhao, and S. Yi, “Spatio-temporal graph SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 76–86.
 transformer networks for pedestrian trajectory prediction,” in Proc. Eur. [108] X. Rao, H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Li, S. Shang, and P. Han, “FOGS:
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Springer, 2020, pp. 507–523. First-order gradient supervision with learning-based graph for traffic flow
 [84] Y. Wu, M. Gu, L. Wang, Y. Lin, F. Wang, and H. Yang, “Event2Graph: forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 3926–3932.
 Event-driven bipartite graph for multivariate time-series anomaly detec- [109] A. Cini, D. Mandic, and C. Alippi, “Graph-based time series clustering
 tion,” 2021, arXiv:2108.06783. for end-to-end hierarchical forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2305.19183.
 [85] X. Wu, M. Xu, J. Fang, and X. Wu, “A multi-attention tensor completion [110] Z. Li, L. Xia, Y. Xu, and C. Huang, “GPT-ST: Generative pre-training of
 network for spatiotemporal traffic data imputation,” IEEE Internet Things spatio-temporal graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 J., vol. 9, no. 20, pp. 20 203–20 213, Oct. 2022. Process. Syst., 2024, Art. no. 3077.
 [86] S. Guo, Y. Lin, N. Feng, C. Song, and H. Wan, “Attention based spatial- [111] G. Lai, W. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long- and short-term
 temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int. ACM
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 922–929. SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2018, pp. 95–104.
 [87] X. Wang et al., “Traffic flow prediction via spatial temporal graph neural [112] S.-Y. Shih, F.-K. Sun, and H.-Y. Lee, “Temporal pattern attention
 network,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 1082–1092. for multivariate time series forecasting,” Mach. Learn., vol. 108,
 [88] S. Lan, Y. Ma, W. Huang, W. Wang, H. Yang, and P. Li, “DSTAGNN: pp. 1421–1441, 2019.
 Dynamic spatial-temporal aware graph neural network for traffic flow [113] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional neural
 forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 11 906–11 917. networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,” in Proc. Int.
 [89] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 3837–3845.
 structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detec- [114] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
 tion in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in Proc.
 Jun. 2022. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1003–1012.
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10483

[115] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, [141] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. Int. Conf. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1263–1272. network,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
[116] J. Klicpera, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 graph learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 13 [142] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 333–13 345. series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[117] Y. Zheng, H. Zhang, V. Lee, Y. Zheng, X. Wang, and S. Pan, “Finding Learn. Representations, 2022.
 the missing-half: Graph complementary learning for homophily-prone [143] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
 and heterophily-prone graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
 Art. no. 1788. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
[118] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of [144] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative
 gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” in Proc. NeurIPS and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
 Workshop Deep Learn., 2014. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
[119] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph Dec. 2023.
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [145] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval-
 2017. uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
[120] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
 Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repre- Jun. 2022.
 sentations, 2018. [146] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
[121] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph neural MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
 networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 3558–3565. [147] M. Ranzato, Y. Boureau, and Y. LeCun, “Sparse feature learning for deep
[122] A. Feng and L. Tassiulas, “Adaptive graph spatial-temporal transformer belief networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2007,
 network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. pp. 1185–1192.
 Manage., 2022, pp. 3933–3937. [148] D. P. Kingma et al., “An introduction to variational autoencoders,” Found.
[123] C. Wang, K. Zhang, H. Wang, and B. Chen, “Auto-STGCN: Au- Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 307–392, 2019.
 tonomous spatial-temporal graph convolutional network search,” ACM [149] D. Zambon, C. Alippi, and L. Livi, “Change-point methods on a sequence
 Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–21, 2023. of graphs,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 24, pp. 6327–6341,
[124] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Dec. 2019.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [150] Y. Zheng et al., “Graph spatiotemporal process for multivariate time series
[125] C. Park et al., “ST-GRAT: A novel spatio-temporal graph attention anomaly detection with missing values,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 106, 2024,
 networks for accurately forecasting dynamically changing road speed,” Art. no. 102255.
 in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1215–1224. [151] Z. Duan et al., “Multivariate time-series classification with hierarchical
[126] Z. Diao, X. Wang, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. Xie, and S. He, “Dynamic spatial- variational graph pooling,” Neural Netw., vol. 154, pp. 481–490, 2022.
 temporal graph convolutional neural networks for traffic forecasting,” in [152] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification frame-
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 890–897. work based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
[127] K. Guo, Y. Hu, Y. Sun, S. Qian, J. Gao, and B. Yin, “Hierarchical graph vol. 224, 2023, Art. no. 109614.
 convolution network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. [153] R. Younis, A. Hakmeh, and Z. Ahmadi, “MTS2Graph: Interpretable
 Intell., 2021, pp. 151–159. multivariate time series classification with temporal evolving graphs,”
[128] T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural Pattern Recognit., vol. 152, 2024, Art. no. 110486.
 ordinary differential equations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. [154] N. M. Foumani, L. Miller, C. W. Tan, G. I. Webb, G. Forestier, and
 Syst., 2018, pp. 6572–6583. M. Salehi, “Deep learning for time series classification and extrinsic
[129] P. Kidger, J. Morrill, J. Foster, and T. J. Lyons, “Neural controlled regression: A current survey,” 2023, arXiv:2302.02515.
 differential equations for irregular time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural [155] J. Lines and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with ensembles
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, Art. no. 562. of elastic distance measures,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29,
[130] S. Guan, B. Zhao, Z. Dong, M. Gao, and Z. He, “GTAD: Graph and pp. 565–592, 2015.
 temporal neural network for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” [156] M. Herrmann and G. I. Webb, “Amercing: An intuitive, elegant and
 Entropy, vol. 24, no. 6, 2022, Art. no. 759. effective constraint for dynamic time warping,” 2021, arXiv:2111.13314.
[131] S. S. Srinivas, R. K. Sarkar, and V. Runkana, “Hypergraph learning based [157] J. Lines, S. Taylor, and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with
 recommender system for anomaly detection, control and optimization,” HIVE-COTE: The hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2022, pp. 1922–1929. ensembles,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 12, no. 5, 2018,
[132] D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Graph iForest: Isolation of anomalous Art. no. 52.
 and outlier graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2022, pp. 1–8. [158] M. Middlehurst, J. Large, M. Flynn, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, and A. Bagnall,
[133] W. Chen, Z. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “Time series subsequence “HIVE-COTE 2.0: A new meta ensemble for time series classification,”
 anomaly detection via graph neural networks,” 2023. [Online]. Available: Mach. Learn., vol. 110, no. 11/12, pp. 3211–3243, 2021.
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=73U_NlKaNx [159] A. Dempster, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “ROCKET: Exceptionally
[134] D. M. Hawkins, Identification of Outliers, vol. 11. Berlin, Germany: fast and accurate time series classification using random convolutional
 Springer, 1980. kernels,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1454–1495,
[135] M. A. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, “A review 2020.
 of novelty detection,” Signal Process., vol. 99, pp. 215–249, 2014. [160] C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, C. Bergmeir, and G. I. Webb, “MultiRocket:
[136] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M. Multiple pooling operators and transformations for fast and effective
 Salehi, “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” time series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, no. 5,
 2022, arXiv:2211.05244. pp. 1623–1646, 2022.
[137] E. Keogh, J. Lin, and A. Fu, “HOT SAX: Efficiently finding the most [161] Z. Cheng, Y. Yang, W. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Zhuang, and G. Song,
 unusual time series subsequence,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Data “Time2Graph: Revisiting time series modeling with dynamic shapelets,”
 Mining, 2005, Art. no. 8. in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 3617–3624.
[138] K. M. Ting, B.-C. Xu, T. Washio, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation distributional [162] P. Boniol and T. Palpanas, “Series2Graph: Graph-based subsequence
 kernel a new tool for point & group anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. anomaly detection for time series,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13,
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2697–2710, Mar. 2023. no. 12, pp. 1821–1834, 2022.
[139] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for [163] E. Keogh and C. A. Ratanamahatana, “Exact indexing of dynamic time
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” warping,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 7, pp. 358–386, 2005.
 IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. [164] S. Tang et al., “Self-supervised graph neural networks for improved
[140] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström, electroencephalographic seizure analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dy- Representations, 2022.
 namic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data [165] A. Roth and T. Liebig, “Forecasting unobserved node states with spatio-
 Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. temporal graph neural networks,” 2022, arXiv:2211.11596.
10484 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 46, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[166] Y. Chen, Z. Li, C. Yang, X. Wang, G. Long, and G. Xu, “Adaptive graph [190] A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Bapst, K. Cranmer, and P. Battaglia, “Hamiltorecurrent network for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. Int. nian graph networks with ODE integrators,” 2019, arXiv: 1909.12790.
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process., 2023, pp. 64–73. [191] Y. Liu et al., “SEGNO: Generalizing equivariant graph neural networks
[167] X. Kong, W. Zhou, G. Shen, W. Zhang, N. Liu, and Y. Yang, “Dynamic with physical inductive biases,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representagraph convolutional recurrent imputation network for spatiotemporal tions, 2023.
 traffic missing data,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 261, 2023, Art. no. 110188. [192] V. G. Satorras, E. Hoogeboom, and M. Welling, “E(n) equivariant graph
[168] G. Shen, W. Zhou, W. Zhang, N. Liu, Z. Liu, and X. Kong, “Bidirectional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 9323–9332.
 spatial-temporal traffic data imputation via graph attention recurrent [193] J. Brandstetter, R. Hesselink, E. van der Pol, E. J. Bekkers, and M.
 neural network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 531, pp. 151–162, 2023. Welling, “Geometric and physical quantities improve E(3) equivariant
[169] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, J. Qi, C. Chen, and L. Chen, “INCREASE: message passing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
 Inductive graph representation learning for spatio-temporal Kriging,” in [194] J. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Xiao, and R. Song, “A review on graph neural
 Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 673–683. network methods in financial applications,” J. Data Sci., vol. 20, no. 2,
[170] T. Yun, H. Jung, and J. Son, “Imputation as inpainting: Diffusion models pp. 111–134, 2022.
 for spatiotemporal data imputation,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https: [195] Z. Song, Y. Zhang, and I. King, “Towards fair financial services for all: A
 //openreview.net/forum?id=QUANtQnx30l temporal GNN approach for individual fairness on transaction networks,”
[171] S. Moritz and T. Bartz-Beielstein, “imputeTS: Time series missing value in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 2331–2341.
 imputation in R,” R J., vol. 9, no. 1, 2017, Art. no. 207. [196] N. Noorshams, S. Verma, and A. Hofleitner, “TIES: Temporal inter-
[172] M. Saad, M. Chaudhary, F. Karray, and V. Gaudet, “Machine learning action embeddings for enhancing social media integrity at Facebook,”
 based approaches for imputation in time series data and their impact in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 on forecasting,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man Cybern., 2020, pp. 3128–3135.
 pp. 2621–2627. [197] X.-Y. Yao, G. Chen, M. Pecht, and B. Chen, “A novel graph-based
[173] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent framework for state of health prediction of lithium-ion battery,” J. Energy
 neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values,” Sci. Storage, vol. 58, 2023, Art. no. 106437.
 Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, 2018, Art. no. 6085. [198] S. Wu, Y. Tang, Y. Zhu, L. Wang, X. Xie, and T. Tan, “Session-based
[174] X. Miao, Y. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Mao, and J. Yin, “Generative semi- recommendation with graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 supervised learning for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. Intell., 2019, pp. 346–353.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8983–8991. [199] X. Wang, D. Wang, L. Chen, and Y. Lin, “Building transportation founda-
[175] Y. Tang, A. Qu, A. H. Chow, W. H. Lam, S. Wong, and W. Ma, “Domain tion model via generative graph transformer,” 2023, arXiv:2305.14826.
 adversarial spatial-temporal network: A transferable framework for short- [200] G. Panagopoulos, G. Nikolentzos, and M. Vazirgiannis, “Transfer graph
 term traffic forecasting across cities,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. neural networks for pandemic forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Manage., 2022, pp. 1905–1915. Intell., 2021, pp. 4838–4845.
[176] H. Li et al., “Traffic flow forecasting in the COVID-19: A deep spatial- [201] M. Jin et al., “Large models for time series and spatio-temporal data: A
 temporal model based on discrete wavelet transformation,” ACM Trans. survey and outlook,” 2023, arXiv:2310.10196.
 Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–28, 2023. [202] W. X. Zhao et al., “A survey of large language models,”
[177] L. Tang, F. Yan, B. Zou, W. Li, C. Lv, and K. Wang, “Trajectory prediction 2023, arXiv:2303.18223.
 for autonomous driving based on multiscale spatial-temporal graph,” IET [203] H. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Pan, H. Tong, and J. Pei, “Trustworthy
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 386–399, 2023. graph neural networks: Aspects, methods and trends,” in Proc. IEEE,
[178] K. Cai, Y. Li, Y.-P. Fang, and Y. Zhu, “A deep learning approach for vol. 112, no. 2, pp. 97–139, Feb. 2024.
 flight delay prediction through time-evolving graphs,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [204] G. Dong et al., “Graph neural networks in IoT: A survey,” ACM Trans.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 11 397–11 407, Aug. 2022. Sensor Netw., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1–50, 2023.
[179] Z. Guo et al., “SGDAN—A spatio-temporal graph dual-attention neural [205] J. Xu, M. Xue, and S. Picek, “Explainability-based backdoor attacks
 network for quantified flight delay prediction,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22, against graph neural networks,” in Proc. 3rd ACM Workshop Wireless
 2020, Art. no. 6433. Secur. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 31–36.
[180] Q. Wu, H. Zheng, X. Guo, and G. Liu, “Promoting wind energy for [206] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 sustainable development by precise wind speed prediction based on graph learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 neural networks,” Renewable Energy, vol. 199, pp. 977–992, 2022. 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[181] Y. He, S. Chai, J. Zhao, Y. Sun, and X. Zhang, “A robust spatio-temporal [207] J. Chen, T. Ma, and C. Xiao, “FastGCN: Fast learning with graph
 prediction approach for wind power generation based on spectral tempo- convolutional networks via importance sampling,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 ral graph neural network,” IET Renewable Power Gener., vol. 16, no. 12, Learn. Representations, 2018.
 pp. 2556–2565, 2022. [208] W. Chiang, X. Liu, S. Si, Y. Li, S. Bengio, and C. Hsieh, “Cluster-GCN:
[182] X. Jiao, X. Li, D. Lin, and W. Xiao, “A graph neural network based deep An efficient algorithm for training deep and large graph convolutional
 learning predictor for spatio-temporal group solar irradiance forecasting,” networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6142–6149, Sep. 2022. Mining, 2019, pp. 257–266.
[183] M. Zhang et al., “Optimal graph structure based short-term solar
 PV power forecasting method considering surrounding spatio-temporal
 correlations,” IEEE Trans. Ind Appl., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 345–357,
 Jan./Feb. 2023.
[184] V. O. Santos, P. A. C. Rocha, J. Scott, J. Van Griensven Thé, and B.
 Gharabaghi, “Spatiotemporal air pollution forecasting in Houston-TX:
 A case study for ozone using deep graph neural networks,” Atmosphere,
 vol. 14, no. 2, 2023, Art. no. 308.
[185] R. Keisler, “Forecasting global weather with graph neural networks,” Ming Jin received the PhD degree from Monash
 2022, arXiv:2202.07575. University, Australia, in 2024. He is currently an
[186] P. Battaglia, R. Pascanu, M. Lai, D. J. Rezende, and K. Kavukcuoglu, assistant professor with the School of Information and
 “Interaction networks for learning about objects, relations and physics,” Communication Technology, Griffith University. He
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 4502–4510. has published more than twenty peer-reviewed papers
[187] G. Shi, D. Zhang, M. Jin, and S. Pan, “Towards complex dynamic physics in top-ranked journals and conferences, including
 system simulation with graph neural ODEs,” 2023, arXiv:2305.12334. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
[188] Y. Liu, S. Magliacane, M. Kofinas, and E. Gavves, “Graph switch- Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
 ing dynamical systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, Data Engineering, NeurIPS, ICLR, ICML, etc. He
 pp. 21867–21883. serves as an associate editor of the Journal of Neuro-
[189] L. Wu, Z. Hou, J. Yuan, Y. Rong, and W. Huang, “Equivariant spatio- computing and regularly contributes as area chair/PC
 temporal attentive graph networks to simulate physical dynamics,” in member for major AI conferences. His research interests include time series
 Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, Art. no. 1965. analysis, graph neural networks, and multi-modal learning.
JIN et al.: SURVEY ON GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR TIME SERIES: FORECASTING, CLASSIFICATION, 10485

 Huan Yee Koh received the master of data science Geoffrey I. Webb (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor with
 and bachelors of commerce degrees from Monash the Monash University Department of Data Science
 University, Melbourne, Australia, in 2021 and 2018, and AI, Australia. He was editor in chief of the
 respectively. He is currently working toward the PhD Leading Data Mining Journal, Data Mining and
 degree in machine learning with Monash University. Knowledge Discovery, from 2005 to 2014. He has
 His research focuses on graph neural networks, time been program committee chair of both the leading
 series analysis, drug discovery, data mining, and ma- data mining conferences, ACM SIGKDD and IEEE
 chine learning. ICDM, as well as general chair of ICDM. He is
 a technical advisor to the startups BigML Inc and
 FROOMLE. He developed many of the key mechanisms of support-confidence association discovery in
 the 1980s. He pioneered multiple research areas as diverse as black-box user
 modelling, interactive data analytics, and statistically-sound pattern discovery.
 His many awards include IEEE ICDM Ten-Year Impact Award (2023) and the
 inaugural Eureka Prize for Excellence in Data Science.
 Qingsong Wen received the PhD degree in electrical
 and computer engineering from the Georgia Institute
 of Technology. He is the head of AI Research &
 Chief Scientist, Squirrel Ai Learning. He has published more than 100 top-ranked AI conference and
 journal papers, had multiple Oral/Spotlight Papers
 at NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR, had multiple Most
 Influential Papers at IJCAI, received multiple IAAI Irwin King (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS degree in
 Deployed Application Awards at AAAI, and won computer science from Caltech, and the PhD degree
 First Place of SP Grand Challenge at ICASSP. He in computer science from the University of Southern
 organizes workshops on AI for Time Series and AI California. He is professor with the Department of
for education and serves as an associate editor of the Neurocomputing and IEEE Computer Science & Engineering, Chinese Univer-
Signal Processing Letters, and guest editor of the Applied Energy and IEEE sity of Hong Kong. His research interests include
Internet of Things Journal. His research focuses on AI for time series, AI for machine learning, social computing, AI, web inteleducation, and general machine learning. ligence, data mining, and multimedia information
 processing, with more than 300 technical publications in these areas. He is an associate editor of the
 Journal of Neural Networks, an ACM distinguished
 member, and a fellow of the International Neural Network Society (INNS),
 and Hong Kong Institute of Engineers (HKIE). He has served as president of
 the International Neural Network Society (INNS) and as general co-chair of
 several major conferences. Currently, he is the vice-chair of ACM SIGWEB and
 Daniele Zambon received the PhD degree from the WebConf Steering Committee. He has received the ACM CIKM 2019 Test of
 Università della Svizzera italiana. He is a postdoctoral Time Award, the ACM SIGIR 2020 Test of Time Award, and the 2020 APNNS
 researcher with the Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, Università Outstanding Achievement Award for contributions to social computing with
 della Svizzera Italiana (Switzerland). He has been machine learning.
 a visiting researcher/intern with the University of
 Florida (US), the University of Exeter (U.K.), and
 STMicroelectronics (Italy). He is a member of the
 IEEE CIS Task Force on Learning for Graphs and
 has co-organized special sessions and tutorials on
 deep learning and graph data. His main research
 interests include graph representation learning, time
series analysis, and learning in non-stationary environments. Shirui Pan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree in computer science from the University of
 Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW, Australia.
 He is a professor with the School of Information
 and Communication Technology, Griffith University,
 Australia. Prior to this, he was a senior lecturer with
 the Faculty of IT, Monash University. His research
 interests include data mining and machine learning.
 Cesare Alippi (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor with To date, he has published more than 100 research
 the Università della Svizzera italiana and Politec- papers in top-tier journals and conferences, including
 nico di Milano, a visiting professor with the Uni- IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
 versity of Guangzhou, and an advisory profes- Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE
 sor with Northwestern Polytechnic, Xi’an. He has Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, ICML, NeurIPS, and
 authored/coauthored one monograph, seven edited KDD. His research received the 2024 CIS IEEE TNNLS Oustanding Paper
 books, and around 200 papers, and holds eight Award and the 2020 IEEE ICDM Best Student Paper Award. He is recognized
 patents. His research focuses on adaptation and learn- as one of the AI 2000 AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia. He is
 ing in non-stationary environments, graph learning, an ARC future fellow and a fellow of Queensland Academy of Arts and Sciences
 intelligence for embedded systems, IoT, and cyber- (FQA).
 physical systems. He is a fellow of the European
Laboratory for Learning and Intelligent Systems, serves on the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society (CIS) Administrative Committee, and is a board
of governors member of the International Neural Network Society. He has
held various roles within IEEE CIS, including vice-president for education
and awards committee chair, and has received several awards, including the
International Neural Networks Society Gabor Award.