7536 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 A Survey on Time-Series Pre-Trained Models
 Qianli Ma , Member, IEEE, Zhen Liu , Zhenjing Zheng, Ziyang Huang, Siying Zhu, Zhongzhong Yu,
 and James T. Kwok , Fellow, IEEE

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Time-Series Mining (TSM) is an important research The fundamental problem of TSM is how to represent the timearea since it shows great potential in practical applications. Deep series data [6]. Then, various mining tasks can be performed
learning models that rely on massive labeled data have been uti- based on the given representations. Traditional time-series reprelized for TSM successfully. However, constructing a large-scale
well-labeled dataset is difficult due to data annotation costs. Re- sentations (e.g., shapelets [7]) are time-consuming due to heavy
cently, pre-trained models have gradually attracted attention in reliance on domain or expert knowledge. Therefore, it remains
the time series domain due to their remarkable performance in challenging to learn the appropriate time series representations
computer vision and natural language processing. In this survey, automatically.
we provide a comprehensive review of Time-Series Pre-Trained
 In recent years, deep learning models [8], [9], [10], [11]
Models (TS-PTMs), aiming to guide the understanding, applying,
and studying TS-PTMs. Specifically, we first briefly introduce the have achieved great success in a variety of TSM tasks. Unlike
typical deep learning models employed in TSM. Then, we give an traditional machine learning methods, deep learning models
overview of TS-PTMs according to the pre-training techniques. The do not require time-consuming feature engineering. Instead,
main categories we explore include supervised, unsupervised, and they automatically learn time-series representations through a
self-supervised TS-PTMs. Further, extensive experiments involving
 data-driven approach. However, the success of deep learning
27 methods, 434 datasets, and 679 transfer learning scenarios are
conducted to analyze the advantages and disadvantages of transfer models relies on the availability of massive labeled data. In
learning strategies, Transformer-based models, and representative many real-world situations, it can be difficult to construct a large
TS-PTMs. Finally, we point out some potential directions of TS- well-labeled dataset due to data acquisition and annotation costs.
PTMs for future work. To alleviate the reliance of deep learning models on large
 Index Terms—Time-series mining, pre-trained models, deep datasets, approaches based on data augmentation [12], [13] and
learning, transfer learning, transformer. semi-supervised learning [14], [15] have been commonly used.
 Data augmentation can enhance the size and quality of the
 I. INTRODUCTION training data, and has been used as an important component
 in many computer vision tasks [16]. However, different from
 S AN important research direction in the field of data min-
A ing, Time-Series Mining (TSM) has been widely utilized
in real-world applications, such as finance [1], speech analyimage data augmentation, time-series data augmentation also
 needs to consider properties such as temporal dependencies and
 multi-scale dependencies in the time series. Moreover, design of
sis [2], action recognition [3], and traffic flow forecasting [4], [5]. the time-series data augmentation techniques generally relies on
 expert knowledge. On the other hand, semi-supervised methods
 Received 29 April 2023; revised 18 August 2024; accepted 2 October 2024. employ a large amount of unlabeled data to improve model per-
Date of publication 7 October 2024; date of current version 13 November
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science formance. However, in many cases, even unlabeled time-series
Foundation of China under Grant 62272173, in part by the Natural Science samples can be difficult to collect (e.g., electrocardiogram time
Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant 2024A1515010089 and under series data in healthcare [17]).
Grant 2022A1515010179, in part by the Science and Technology Planning
Project of Guangdong Province under Grant 2023A0505050106, and in part Another effective solution to alleviate the problem of insuffiby the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant cient training data is transfer learning [18], [19], which relaxes
2024ZYGXZR104. Recommended for acceptance by Y. Shen. (Qianli Ma and the assumption that the training and test data must be indepen-
Zhen Liu are co-first authors.) (Corresponding author: Qianli Ma.)
 Qianli Ma, Zhen Liu, Zhenjing Zheng, Ziyang Huang, Siying Zhu, and dently and identically distributed. Transfer learning usually has
Zhongzhong Yu are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, two stages: pre-training and fine-tuning. During pre-training, the
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: model is pre-trained on some source domains that contain a large
qianlima@scut.edu.cn; cszhenliu@mail.scut.edu.cn; 982360227@qq.com;
stevenhuang12@outlook.com; 489531037@qq.com; yuzzhong2020@foxmail. amount of data, and are separate but relevant to the target domain.
com). On fine-tuning, the pre-trained model (PTM) is fine-tuned on the
 James T. Kwok is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, often limited data from the target domain.
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, SAR
999077, China (e-mail: jamesk@cse.ust.hk). Recently, PTMs, particularly Transformer-based PTMs, have
 The source code is available at https://github.com/qianlima-lab/time-series- achieved remarkable performance in various Computer Vision
ptms (CV) [20], [21] and Natural Language Processing (NLP) [22] ap-
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2024.3475809, provided by the authors. plications. Inspired by these, recent studies consider the design
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3475809 of Time-Series Pre-Trained Models (TS-PTMs) for time-series

 1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7537

 transfer learning. The related experimental code and datasets
 have been open-sourced.1 For a detailed comparison with existing surveys, please refer to Appendix A, available online.
 The main contributions of our survey can be summarized as
 follows:
 r We provide a taxonomy and a systematic review of existing
 TS-PTMs, ranging from early transfer learning methods
 to recent Transformer-based and consistency-based TS-
 PTMs. Specifically, we categorize TS-PTMs according to
 supervised, unsupervised, and self-supervised pre-training
 techniques, providing a detailed summary of each to guide
 future research.
 r We perform extensive experiments to analyze the pros
Fig. 1. Pre-training techniques for time series. and cons of TS-PTMs. For time series classification,
 we find that transfer learning-based TS-PTMs perform
 poorly on the UCR time series datasets (containing many
data. First, a time-series model is pre-trained by supervised small datasets), but achieve excellent performance on other
learning [23], [24], unsupervised learning [25], [26], or self- publicly-available large time series datasets. For time series
supervised learning [27], [28], [29] so as to obtain appropriate forecasting and anomaly detection, we find that patchrepresentations. The TS-PTM is then fine-tuned on the target based pre-training technique should be the focus of future
domain for improved performance on the downstream TSM research on TS-PTMs.
tasks (e.g., time-series classification and anomaly detection). r We present potential future directions with a detailed and
 Supervised TS-PTMs [23], [30] are typically pre-trained by thorough discussion. In particular, we analyze the limitaclassification or forecasting tasks. However, the difficulty to tions of current TS-PTMs and suggest future directions
obtain massive labeled time-series datasets for pre-training often under (i) datasets, (ii) deep learning models, (iii) inherent
limits the performance of supervised TS-PTMs. In addition, properties, (iv) adversarial attacks, (v) noisy labels, and
unsupervised TS-PTMs utilize unlabeled data for pre-training, (vi) pre-trained large language models.
which further tackle the limitation of insufficient labeled data. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
For example, the reconstruction-based TS-PTMs [25] employ provides background on the TS-PTM. A comprehensive review
auto-encoders and a reconstruction loss to pre-train time-series of the TS-PTMs is then given in Section III. Section IV presents
models. Recently, self-supervised PTMs based on contrastive experiments on the various TS-PTMs. Section V suggests
learning [31], [32] have shown great potential in CV. There- some future directions. Finally, we summarize our findings in
fore, some scholars [26], [33] have started exploring the design Section VI.
of consistency-based tasks and pseudo-labeling techniques for
mining the inherent properties of time series. Nonetheless, the II. BACKGROUND
study of TS-PTMs remains a challenge. In this section, we first describe the TSM tasks in Section II-A.
 In this survey, we provide a comprehensive review of TS- Section II-B then introduces various deep learning models used
PTMs. Specifically, we first introduce various TSM tasks and in TSM. Finally, Section II-C discusses why we need to employ
deep learning models used in TSM. We then propose a taxonomy the PTMs.
of TS-PTMs based on the pre-training techniques (Fig. 1).
These include supervised pre-training techniques (leading to A. Time-Series Mining Tasks
classification-based and forecasting-based PTMs), unsupervised pre-training techniques (reconstruction-based PTMs) and A time series can be represented as a T -dimensional vector
self-supervised pre-training techniques (consistency-based and X = [x1 , . . . , xt , . . . , xT ], where T is the length of the time
pseudo-labeling-based PTMs). Note that some TS-PTMs may series, xt ∈ RM is the value at tth time step, and M is the
use multiple tasks (e.g., forecasting and reconstruction in [34]) number of variables.
for pre-training. To simplify the review, we classify the TS-PTM 1) Time-Series Classification: In time-series classificabased on its core pre-training task. tion [41], a labeled time series dataset is used to train a clas-
 While existing surveys have analyzed time series pre- sifier, which can then be used to classify unseen samples. A
training [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], our work was made labeled time-series dataset with N samples can be denoted as
available online before the majority of these surveys. Our work D = {(X 1 , y 1 ), . . . , (X t , y t ), . . . , (X N , y N )}, where X t can
specifically focuses on pre-training, whereas the majority of be either a univariate or multivariate time series, and y t is the
the aforementioned surveys primarily address representation corresponding one-hot label vector.
learning. In addition, the key difference is that our work conducts 2) Time-Series Forecasting: Time-Series Forecasting (TSF)
extensive experiments to analyze the performance of various [42] aims to analyze the dynamics and correlations among histor-
TS-PTMs in a uniform experimental setting (e.g., consistent ical temporal data to predict future behavior. TSF models usually
dataset preprocessing and Python version). Specifically, our
experiments involve 27 methods, 434 datasets, and 679 sets of 1 https://github.com/qianlima-lab/time-series-ptms
7538 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

need to consider the trend and seasonal variations in the time
series, and also correlations between historical observed values.
Let X = [x1 , . . . , xt , . . . , xT ] be the historical observations,
and H be the desired forecasting horizon, the problem is to
predict the future values [xT +1 , xT +2 , . . . , xT +H ].
 3) Time-Series Clustering: Time-series clustering [43] aims
to partition the time-series dataset D into a partition K clusters
{c1 , . . . , cK }, such that both the similarities among samples
from the same cluster and the dissimilarities between samples
of different clusters are maximized. While clustering has been
successfully used on static data, the clustering of time-series
data is more difficult because of the presence of temporal and
multi-scale dependencies. Time-series clustering helps to discover interesting patterns and enables the extraction of valuable
information from massive time series datasets. Fig. 2. Deep learning models used for time-series mining.
 4) Time-Series Anomaly Detection: Time-series anomaly
detection [44] aims to identify observations that significantly
deviate from the other observations in the time series. It have achieved remarkable success in TSM. For example, Muhas to learn informative representations from the time se- ralidhar et al. [55] combined dynamic attention and a RNNries X = [x1 , . . . , xt , . . . , xT ], and then derive an anomaly based sequence-to-sequence model for time-series forecasting.
score to determine whether a point xt or a subsequence S = Ma et al. [56] employed a multi-layer dilated RNN to extract
[xp , . . . , xp+n−1 ] (where n ≤ |T |) is anomalous [45]. multi-scale temporal dependencies for time-series clustering.
 5) Time Series Imputation: Time-Series Imputation 2) Convolutional Neural Networks: Convolutional Neural
(TSI) [46] aims to replace missing values in a time series Networks (CNNs) [57] are originally designed for computer
with realistic values so as to facilitate TSM tasks. Given vision tasks. A typical CNN is shown in Fig. 2(b). To use CNNs
a time series X = [x1 , . . . , xt , . . . , xT ] and a binary for TSM, the data need to be first encoded in an image-like
M = [m1 , . . . , mt , . . . , mT ], xt is missing if mt = 0, and is format. The CNN receives embedding of the value at each time
observed otherwise. TSI imputes the missing values as step and then aggregates local information from nearby time
 steps using convolution. CNNs have been shown to be very
 X imputed = X  M + X̂  (1 − M ), effective for TSM [58]. For example, the multi-scale convolutional neural network [59] can automatically extract features at
 different scales by a multi-branch layer and convolutional layers.
where X̂ is the predicted values generated by the TSI technique. Kashiparekh et al. [60] incorporated filters of multiple lengths in
As a conditional generation model, TSI techniques have been all convolutional layers to capture multi-scale temporal features
studied and applied to areas such as gene expression [47] and for time-series classification.
healthcare [48]. Unlike vanilla CNNs, Temporal Convolutional Net-
 6) Time Series Extrinsic Regression: Time-Series Extrinsic works (TCNs) [61] use a fully convolutional network [62]
Regression (TSER) is a task designed to learn the relationship so that all the layers are of the same length, and employ causal
between time series data and a continuous scalar variable [49]. convolutions with no information “leakage” from future to past.
The TSER model, represented as a function T → R, is trained A typical TCNs is shown in Fig. 2(c). Compared to recurrent
on a dataset D comprising pairs of time series X t and cor- networks, TCNs have recently shown to be more accurate,
responding scalar values r t . Unlike time series classification, simpler, and more efficient across a diverse range of sequence
which predicts categorical labels, TSER produces numerical modeling tasks [63]. For example, Sen et al. [10] combined a
outputs [50]. TSER contrasts with traditional TSF tasks by local temporal network and a global matrix factorization model
focusing on the association between time series and an external regularized by a TCN for time-series forecasting.
variable sequence [51]. For instance, in smart city applications, 3) Transformers: Transformers [64], [65] integrate informa-
TSER can integrate various sensor readings (e.g., temperature, tion from data points in the time series by dynamically computhumidity, rain, voltage) to predict a continuous value such as ing the associations between representations with self-attention.
power consumption [52]. A typical Transformer is shown in Fig. 2(d). Transformers have
 shown great power in TSM due to their powerful capacity to
 model long-range dependencies. For example, Zhou et al. [11]
B. Deep Learning Models for Time Series combined a self-attention mechanism (with O(L log L) time
 1) Recurrent Neural Networks: Recurrent Neural Net- and space complexities) and a generative decoder for long
works (RNNs) [53] usually consist of an input layer, one or time-series forecasting.
more recurrent hidden layers, and an output layer (Fig. 2(a)). 4) Graph Neural Networks: Graph Neural Networks
In the past decade, RNNs and their variants (such as the long (GNNs) are highly effective at processing graph data consisting
short-term memory network [54] and gated recurrent units [53]) of nodes and edges [66]. Recently, some scholars have converted
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7539

Fig. 3. The taxonomy of Pre-Trained Models for time-series mining.

time series data into graphs by examining both intra-sample Fig. 3, and please refer to Appendix B-A for a literature summary
and inter-sample relationships and applying GNNs to of TS-PTMs, available online.
TSM (Fig. 2(e)). Intra-sample relationship approaches construct
graphs by analyzing relationships between subsequences within A. Supervised PTMs
a sequence [67] or between different variables [68]. For The early TS-PTMs are inspired by transfer learning appliinter-sample relationships, graphs are constructed based on cations in CV. Many vision-based PTMs are trained on large
sample similarities or category information [69]. labeled datasets such as the ImageNet [70]. The corresponding
 weights are then fine-tuned on the target dataset, which is usually
C. Why Pre-Trained Models? small. This strategy has been shown to improve the gener-
 With the rapid development of deep learning, deep learning- alization performance of deep learning models on many CV
based TSM has received more and more attention. In recent tasks. Naturally, some also investigated whether this strategy is
years, deep learning models have been widely used in TSM and effective in the time-series domain [23], [71]. Their experiments
have achieved great success. However, as data acquisition and on the UCR time series datasets [72] show that transfer learning
annotation can be expensive, the limited labeled time-series data may improve or degrade downstream task performance, dependoften hinders sufficient training of deep learning models. For ing on whether the source and target datasets are similar [23].
example, in bioinformatics, time series classification involves 1) Classification-Based PTMs: Time-series classification is
assigning each sample to a specific category, such as clinical the most common supervised learning task in TSM. The loss
diagnosis results. Nonetheless, obtaining accurate labels for all function is usually the cross-entropy, which is defined as
samples is a challenge as it requires expert knowledge to classify
 1 
 N C
the samples. Therefore, pre-training strategies have been pro- Lclassif ication = − yij log(pij ).
posed to alleviate this data sparseness problem. The advantages N i=1 j=1
of Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) for TSM can be summarized as
 Here, y i = [yij ] and pi = [pij ] are the ground-truth label vector
follows:
 r PTMs provide better model initialization for the down- and predicted label vector of the ith input time series, respectively, N is the number of samples and C is the number of
 stream TSM tasks, which generally results in better genercategories. Recently, the CNN has also been used for time-series
 alization performance.
 r PTMs can automatically obtain appropriate time series classification [73], [74], [75], and achieved better performance
 than traditional machine learning methods (such as the nearrepresentations by pre-training on source datasets, thus
 est neighbor classifier with dynamic time warping distance).
 avoiding over-reliance on expert knowledge.
 However, deep learning models are prone to over-fitting on
 small-scale time-series datasets.
 III. OVERVIEW OF TS-PTMS To prevent the over-fitting problem when training a new model
 In this section, we propose a new taxonomy of TS-PTMs, from scratch on the target dataset, there have been attempts to
which systematically classifies existing TS-PTMs based on pre- employ classification-based PTMs that pre-train a classification
training techniques. The taxonomy of TS-PTMs is shown in base model on some labeled source datasets [23], [24], [76].
7540 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 4. Universal encoder aims to learn general time-series representations
through pre-training on various source datasets. The universal encoder is then
fine-tuned on the target dataset for downstream TSM tasks. Fig. 5. Aligned encoder aims to learn domain-invariant representations.

Existing classification-based PTMs can be divided into three can further improve classification performance. For example,
categories: (i) universal encoder, (ii) model reprogramming, and Kashiparekh et al. [60] proposed a novel pre-training deep
(iii) aligned encoder. CNN, in which 1-D convolutional filters of multiple lengths
 Universal Encoder: For TS-PTMs, a key issue is how to are used to capture features at different time scales. Mutegeki
learn universal time-series representations [77] that can benefit et al. [80] used CNN-LSTM as the base network to explore how
a variety of downstream TSM tasks. A common approach is to transfer learning can improve the performance of time-series
design a universal encoder which can be quickly adapted to new classification with few labeled time series samples.
tasks with or without fine-tuning. Serrà et al. [71] proposed a uni- Aligned Encoder: A universal encoder first pre-trains the
versal encoder that combines CNN with attention mechanism, model with the source dataset, and then fine-tunes the model
and pre-trained the encoder using the supervised classification using the target dataset. However, the difference between the
task. The encoder is jointly pre-trained on multiple time series source and target data distributions is often not considered. To
datasets. Using multi-head outputs, each dataset has an extra address this issue, some recent works [81], [82] first map the
fully-connected layer for classification. In this way, the encoder source and target datasets to a shared feature representation
acts as a carrier to transfer knowledge from multiple related space, and then prompt the model to learn domain-invariant
source domains to enhance learning in the target domain. Fig. 4 representations during pre-training. The pre-training strategy of
shows the schematic diagram of the universal encoder. the aligned encoder is at the core of domain adaptation, and
 Fawaz et al. [23] considered transfer learning on time-series has been extensively validated studied on image data [83]. For
data from the shapelet perspective. Shapelets [78] are discrimi- time series data, extraction of domain-invariant representations
native subsequences in the time series and can be used as an effi- is difficult due to distribution shifts among timestamps and the
cient time-series representation. Fawaz et al. [23] hypothesized associative structure among variables. To this end, existing prethat the learned shapelets can generalize to unseen datasets via training techniques for time series aligned encoder are based on
transfer learning. For each dataset in the UCR archive [72], they either Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [84] or adversarial
trained a fully-convolutional network [73] and then fine-tuned learning [85].
it on all the other datasets. They found that pre-training can MMD [86] is a standard metric on distributions, and has been
degrade (negative transfer) or improve (positive transfer) the employed to measure the dissimilarity of two distributions in doencoder’s performance on the target dataset, and the likelihood main adaptation [87]. Given a representation f (·) on source data
of positive transfer is greater when the source dataset is similar X s ∈ Ds and target data X t ∈ Dt , the empirical approximation
to the target dataset. Due to privacy and annotation issues, it of MMD is
may be difficult to obtain source datasets that are very similar to  
  1  1  
the target dataset. To alleviate this problem, Meiseles et al. [79]  
 MMD(Ds , Dt ) =  f (X s ) − f (X t ) .
utilized the clustering property between latent encoding space  |Ds | |Dt | 
 X s ∈Ds X t ∈Dt
categories as an indicator to select the best source dataset. The
above studies mainly focus on univariate time series. Li et al. [76] MMD-based methods [88], [89], [90] learn domain-invariant
proposed a general architecture that can be used for transfer representations by minimizing the MMD between the source
learning on multivariate time series. and target domains in classification training (Fig. 5(a)). Khan
 The aforementioned works employ CNN as backbone for time et al. [91] used a CNN to extract features from the source and
series transfer learning. However, vanilla CNNs have difficulty target domain data separately. The divergence of the source and
in capturing multi-scale information and long-term dependen- target domains is reduced by minimizing the Kullback–Leibler
cies in the time series. Studies [59], [75] have shown that divergence in each layer of the network. Wang et al. [88] prousing different time scales or using LSTM with vanilla CNNs posed stratified transfer learning to improve the accuracy for
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7541

 transformation of a time-series sample X is defined as
 X  = Pad(X) + M  θ,
 where Pad(·) is a zero-padding function, M is a binary mask,
 and θ are reprogramming parameters for aligning the data distributions of the source and target domains. A random (but nonoverlapping) many-to-one mapping between source and target
Fig. 6. Model reprogramming can adapt PTMs to a new task by reprogram- labels is used as the output label mapping. Transformer-based
ming the time-series from the target domain and label mapping. attention mechanism [98] is used as the acoustic model. Note
 that model reprogramming not only uses more labeled training
 samples during pre-training, but also considers adapts the PTMs
cross-domain activity recognition. Moreover, considering that to the target tasks by constructing relationships between the
time lags or offsets can influence the extraction of domain- source and target domain data.
invariant features, Cai et al. [81] designed a sparse associative Summary. The universal encoder first pre-trains a base netstructure alignment model which assumes that the causal struc- work on the labeled source datasets, and then the base network
tures are stable across domains. Li et al. [89] considered the is transferred to the target domain. This usually requires a
compact causal mechanisms among variables and the variant large amout of labeled source samples for pre-training, and
strength of association, and used the Granger causality align- can be difficult to obtain in the time-series domain. Positive
ment model [92] to discover the data’s causal structure. Ragab (resp. negative) transfer often occurs when the source and
et al. [93] proposed an autoregressive domain discriminator target datasets are similar (resp. dissimilar). Previous studies
to explicitly address the temporal dependencies during both have explored how to select the source based on inter-dataset
representation learning and domain alignment. Despite all these similarity or time series representations in the latent represenadvances, the use of MMD-based methods on time series data tation space. In addition, the aligned encoder based on domain
is still challenging due to the underlying complex dynamics. adaption considers the differences between source and target
 Another common approach is to learn a domain-invariant data distributions. Voice2Serie [24] provides a new approach for
representation between the source and target domains through classification-based PTMs. Some domain-specific time series
adversarial learning [94], [95]. For example, Wilson et al. [82] data (e.g., voice data) is used to pre-train a base network,
proposed the Convolutional deep Domain Adaptation model which is then applied to general time series through model
for Time Series data (CoDATS), which consists of a feature reprogramming. Similarly, building on the success of pre-trained
extractor, Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL), task classifier, and Large Language Models (LLMs) in time series modeling [99],
domain classifier (Fig. 5(b)). The adversarial step is performed [100], Time-LLM [101] converts time series data into text-like
by the GRL placed between the feature extractor and domain formats with patching strategy and use model reprogramming
classifier in the network. CoDATS first updates the feature ex- to transfer LLM knowledge to time series tasks. Nevertheless,
tractor and task classifier to classify the labeled source data. The how to construct a large-scale well-labeled time series dataset
domain classifier is then updated to distinguish which domain suitable for TS-PTMs remains an open challenge.
each sample comes from. At the same time, the feature extractor 2) Forecasting-Based PTMs: Time Series Forecasting (TSF)
is adversarially updated to make it more difficult for the domain aims to estimate the values at the future timesteps using observed
classifier to distinguish which domain each sample comes from. values from the current and past timesteps. The problem of one-
Li et al. [96] argued that temporal causal mechanisms should step-ahead forecasting is defined as
be considered and proposed a time-series causal mechanism
 ŷi,t+1 = f (yi,t−k:t , xi,t−k:t ),
transfer network to obtain a domain-invariant representation.
However, the exploitation of inherent properties in the time where ŷi,t+1 is the model’s predicted value of the ith samseries (such as multi-scale and frequency properties) still need ple at time t + 1, yi,t−k:t = {yi,t−k , . . . , yi,t } and xi,t−k:t =
to be explored in adversarial training. {xi,t−k , . . . , xi,t } are the observed values and exogenous in-
 Model Reprogramming: The great success of PTMs in puts, respectively, over a look-back window of length k, and
CV [31] and NLP [22] shows that using a large-scale labeled f (·) is the prediction function learnt by the model [42]. Unlike
dataset can significantly benefit the downstream tasks. However, the classification task that employs manual labels as supervisory
most time-series datasets are not large. Recently, a novel TS- information, TSF utilizes the observed value in the future as
PTM called Voice2Series [24] was proposed for time-series clas- supervisory information. In addition, the mean absolute error or
sification. Voice2Series is based on model reprogramming [97] mean squared error is often adopted as the loss function for the
(Fig. 6). It uses a large acoustic model pre-trained on massive TSF task.
human voice datasets (e.g., spoken-term recognition). The voice A unique property of time-series data is the presence of tempodata can be considered as univariate time series, and therefore ral dependencies. Forecasting can utilize a time series of past and
enormous voice data can be employed to pre-train an acoustic present values to estimate future values, and it is naturally emmodel. To make the acoustic model suitable for general time- ployed as a time series pre-training task. An intuitive approach
series data, Voice2Series reprogrammed the model through input to produce forecast values is the recursive strategy, which can be
transformation learning and output label mapping. The input achieved by autoregression. In general, a PTM first pre-trains a
7542 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 7. The RNN-based forecasting architecture.
 Fig. 8. Adaptive encoder aims to obtain a better initialization model parameters θ so that the model can quickly generalize to new tasks using only a
 small number of samples (e.g., θ ∗1 ), where θ ∗i (i ∈ 1, 2, 3) denote task adaptive
forecasting-based model on the source dataset. The weights of parameters obtained using gradient descent on θ (e.g., ∇L1 ) based on the task
the base model are then fine-tuned on the target dataset. adaptive data.
 AutoRegression. Deep learning models, including RNNs [55],
TCNs [102] and the more recent Transformers [65], have
been used for TSF. The RNN-based forecasting architecture is classic task-adaptive pre-training algorithm called model agshown in Fig. 7. In this example, given the historical observa- nostic meta-learning [112], [113], [114]. Recently, task-adaptive
tions [x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 ], TSF tries to predict the future values pre-training strategies have been receiving increasing attention
[x6 , x7 , x8 ]. Thus, TSF does not require manual labels, but uses in the field of time series. Existing studies focus on how to
the values at future timesteps for supervision. perform cross-task learning using properties such as temporal
 The dynamic nature and inherent temporal dependencies of and multivariate dependencies in the time series.
the time series enable forecasting to assist TS-PTMs in obtaining A task-adaptive pre-training paradigm based on time-series
robust representations [103], [104], [105]. For instance, Mallick forecasting has been applied to TS-PTMs [115], [116]. For
et al. [106] developed a GNN-based model for pre-training example, Oreshkin et al. [116] proposed a meta-learning frameshort-term highway network forecasting models, employing a work based on deep stacking of fully-connected networks for
transfer learning strategy operation within a RNN. In addition, zero-shot time-series forecasting. The meta-learning procedure
Du et al. [107] proposed Adaptive RNNs (AdaRNN) to solve the consists of a meta-initialization function, an update function,
temporal covariate shift problem. The AdaRNN model consists and a meta-learner. The meta-initialization function defines the
of Temporal Distribution Characterization (TDC) and Temporal initial predictor parameters for a given task. The update function
Distribution Matching (TDM) modules. The TDC divides the then iteratively updates the predictor parameters based on the
training time series into least-similar K different subsequences, previous value of the predictor parameters and the given task.
which fully characterize the distribution information of the time The final predictor parameters are obtained by performing a
series in each period. The K different subsequences are then Bayesian ensemble (or weighted sum) on the whole sequence
used as source data to pre-train a generalized RNN model of parameters. The meta-learner learns shared knowledge across
using the forecasting task. The TDM module can also be used tasks by training on different tasks, thus providing suitable initial
with the Transformer architecture, further improving the TSF predictor parameters for new tasks. Brinkmeyer and Rego [117]
performance. developed a few-shot multivariate time series forecasting model
 Some recent studies [108], [109], [110] combines the au- working across tasks with heterogeneous channels. Experimentoregressive forecasting strategy of TSF with contrastive learn- tal results showed that it provides a good generalization for the
ing [32] to obtain time series representations favorable for down- target datasets. Also, Autoformer [64] and FEDformer [65] show
stream tasks. For example, Oord et al. [108] proposed contrastive that frequency domain information and Transformer architecpredictive coding by employing model-predicted timesteps as ture can improve time-series forecasting performance. Hence,
positive samples and randomly-sampled timesteps as negative it would be an interesting direction to explore task adaptive
samples. Eldele et al. [110] used the autoregressive model’s Transformer-based models for TS-PTMs.
predicted values as positive sample pairs for contrastive learning, Summary: TSF-based PTMs can exploit the complex dynamthus enabling the model to capture temporal dependencies of the ics in the time series and use that to guide the model in capturing
time series. In particular, they fed both strong and weak augmen- temporal dependencies. Autoregression-based models use the
tation samples to the encoder, therefore using a cross-view TSF dependencies between subseries and the consistency of future
task as the PTM objective. predicted values of the same time series, thus pre-training the
 Adaptive Encoder: Unlike transfer learning which focuses on time series data using TSF. Unlike classification-based PTMs
the current learning ability of the model, meta-learning [102], that use manual labels for pre-training, avoiding sampling bias
[111] focuses on the future learning potential of the model among subseries (e.g., outliers) [77] for pre-training based on the
to obtain an adaptive encoder via task-adaptive pre-training TSF task remain challenging. Meanwhile, the adaptive encoder
paradigm (as shown in Fig. 8). Especially, transfer learning- based on meta-learning allows for scenarios with small time
based PTMs are prone to overfitting on downstream tasks when series samples in the target dataset. In addition, regression-based
the number of samples in the target dataset is small. Inspired by one-step forecasting models (e.g., RNNs) potentially lead to
the fact that humans are good at learning a priori knowledge from bad performance due to accumulated error [8]. Instead, some
a few new samples, task-adaptive pre-training, or meta-learning, studies [11], [64] employ Transformer-based models to generate
has also been used. Fig. 8 shows an adaptive encoder via a all predictions in one forward operation. Therefore, designing
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7543

Fig. 9. The RNN-based encoder-decoder architecture. Fig. 10. The RNN-based denoising encoder-decoder architecture.

efficient TSF encoders would be a basis for studying TSF-based A pioneering work that uses DAE in TS-PTM is the Au-
PTMs. dio Word2Vec [126]. Given variable-length audio segments,
 Audio Word2Vec obtains fixed-dimensional vectors, which are
 then used in applications such as query-by-example Spoken
B. Unsupervised PTMs Term Detection (STD). To learn robust representations, Audio
 This section introduces unsupervised TS-PTMs, which are Word2Vec consists of two stages: offline and online [120]. In the
often pre-trained by reconstruction techniques. Compared with offline phase, a pre-trained model is obtained using all the audio
supervised TS-PTMs, unsupervised TS-PTMs are more widely segments. This is then used to encode online language sequences
applicable since they do not require labeled samples. to fixed-dimensional vectors. Inspired by Audio Word2Vec, Hu
 1) Reconstruction-Based PTMs: Reconstruction is a com- et al. [127] employed a DAE to pre-train the model for short-term
mon unsupervised task, and is usually implemented by an wind speed time-series forecasting. Also, Shao et al. [128] inencoder-decoder architecture [56]. The encoder maps the origi- tegrated Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with an unsupervised
nal time series to a latent space of representations, which is then masked auto-encoder strategy for pre-training multivariate time
used by the decoder to reconstruct the input time series. The series forecasting models. Specifically, they employed a series
mean square error is often used as the reconstruction loss. For of Transformer blocks as the encoder-decoder architecture and
example, Castellani et al. [118] used reconstruction to learn ro- used GNNs to capture the spatio-temporal relationships between
bust representations for detecting noisy labels in the time series. different variables.
Naturally, reconstruction is also utilized for TS-PTMs. In the DAE’s “mask and predict” mechanism has been successfully
following, we introduce TS-PTMs based on the (i) autoencoder, used in pre-training NLP [129] and CV models [21]. In the
(ii) denoising autoencoder, and (iii) transformer encoder. time-series domain, Ma et al. [122] proposed a joint imputation
 AutoEncoder: For variable-length NLP sequences such as and clustering DAE-based model for incomplete time-series
sentences, paragraphs, and documents, it has been very useful representation learning. They showed that the joint learning
to first convert them to fixed-dimensional vectors [22]. Inspired strategy enables the imputation task to be optimized in the
by this, Malhotra et al. [25] proposed the time-series model direction favoring the downstream clustering task, resulting in
Timenet, which encodes a univariate time series to a fixed- better downstream clustering performance. Furthermore, Nie
dimensional vector via the Sequence-to-Sequence (Seq2Seq) et al. [123] segment time series into patches and successfully
framework [119]. This consists of an encoder and a decoder. An apply the “mask and predict” mechanism for time series preexample RNN-based encoder-decoder is shown in Fig. 9. The training. Additionally, studies [130], [131], [132], [133] indicate
encoder converts the input sequence to a fixed-dimensional vec- that this mechanism can be effectively used for TS-PTMs.
tor representation, and the decoder reconstructs it to another se- Transformer Encoder: Transformers based on “mask and
quence as output. This process can be written as: H = fenc (X) predict” training paradigms can be regarded as reconstructionand X̂ = fdec (H), where H is the representation, X is the based models, which have been wildly applied in NLP for
input, X̂ is the reconstructed input, fenc (·) and fdec (·) are studying PTMs [129]. Transformers have received much attenthe encoder and decoder functions, respectively. By combining tion because of their ability to capture input data’s contextual
the pre-trained encoder with a classifier, Timenet has shown (future-past) dependencies, making them a good choice for modgood performance on time-series classification. However, using eling sequence data [134], [135]. Inspired by Transformer-based
autoencoder-based PTMs for other TSM tasks, such as forecast- PTMs in NLP [136], Zerveas et al. [26] proposed a multivariate
ing and anomaly detection, has been less explored. time-series unsupervised representation learning model called
 Denoising AutoEncoder: To learn more robust represen- Time-Series Transformer (TST). Specifically, TST employs the
tations for the downstream tasks, the Denoising AutoEn- original transformer encoder [137] to learn multivariate time
coder (DAE) [120] has been used [121]. As shown in Fig. 10, series representations through a designed masking strategy.
the input time series X is corrupted to X̃ by adding noise or Further, Shi et al. [138] proposed an unsupervised pre-training
random masking. The DAE is then trained to reconstruct the method based on the self-attention mechanism of Transformers.
original X. Compared to the vanilla AutoEncoder, the DAE In particular, the authors [138] utilize a denoising pretext task
makes learning more difficult, thus enhancing robustness of the that captures the local dependencies and changing trends in
time-series representations. Since the DAE has achieved good the time series by reconstructing corrupted time series. Unlike
performance on representation learning [120], [122], it is also the above studies, Zhang et al. [29] proposed a cross reconused in the TS-PTMs [123], [124], [125]. struction transformer pre-trained by a cross-domain dropping
7544 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

reconstruction task, thereby modeling temporal-spectral relations of time series.
 In addition, Transformer-based PTMs have been applied to
traffic flow time series, tabular time series, and speech series
data. For example, Hou et al. [139] proposed a token-based
PTM for traffic flow time series. Concretely, the authors [139]
designed a random mask tokens strategy, and then the transformer encoder was pre-trained to predict these tokens. Further,
Zhao et al. [140] designed a bidirectional Transformer encoder Fig. 11. Positive pair selection strategies in contrastive learning.
to learn relationships between two-time intervals across different scales. For tabular time-series data, Padhi et al. [141] consistency-based strategies [108], [145], [146], [147] have
proposed hierarchical tabular BERT [129] as the backbone to recently attracted attention in the time series field. Specifically,
pre-train by predicting masked tokens. Also, Shankaranarayana consistency-based PTMs keep the distances of different view
et al. [142] utilized a 1-D convolution model combined with the representations from the same sample (positive pairs) close to
transformer as the backbone, which was pre-trained using the each other, while keeping the distances of view representations
“mask and predict” mechanism. In terms of speech series data, (negative pairs) from different samples far from each other.
Liu et al. [143] proposed an unsupervised speech representation The above learning strategy motivates the model to learn
learning method based on a multilayer transformer encoder, representations beneficial for downstream tasks. Based on
pre-trained by recovering the random 15% zero-masked input the above idea, contrastive learning [31], [32] is commonly
frames. Unlike the PTMs mentioned above, Liu et al. [135] pro- employed as a training loss for PTMs, which is defined as
posed a novel PTM called Transformer Encoder Representations
 1 
 N
from Alteration (TERA) for speech series data. Specifically,
TERA utilized three self-supervised training schemes (time LCL = − log
 N i=1
alteration, frequency alteration, and magnitude alteration) based
on a transformer encoder through reconstructing altered coun- exp(f (X i )T f (X pi ))
terpart speech data for pre-training.  , (1)
 exp(f (X i )T f (X pi )) + B−1 j
 j=1 exp(f (X i ) f (X i ))
 T
 Summary: DAE-based TS-PTMs add noise or masks to the
original time series for pre-training, and have recently been where N denotes the number of training sample pairs and each
gaining attention compared to autoencoder-based PTMs. Using anchor sample (X i ) has 1 positive sample (X pi ) and B − 1
DAE to study PTMs [21] demonstrates the potential of denois- negative samples. X ji denotes the jth negative sample of the
ing strategies in pre-training. However, designing DAE-based ith anchor sample.
PTMs applicable to time series is still in the exploratory stage. Consistency-based PTMs need to consider how to construct
Meanwhile, Transformer-based PTMs inherit the advantages positive and negative samples so that the model can effectively
of unsupervised training from the denoising strategy and have exploit the complex dynamic properties of time series data. It
achieved good pre-training results in NLP in recent years [136]. is worth noting that there is no uniform large-scale well-labeled
Nevertheless, existing Transformer-based TS-PTMs mainly fo- time series dataset for pre-training. Most existing consistencycus on the time series classification and forecasting tasks, and based PTMs first pre-train the encoder using the target dataset
their performance on other downstream tasks warrants further via self-supervised representation learning, and then fine-tune
exploration. At the same time, the time series of different do- the pre-trained encoder using the supervised information from
mains may vary widely, resulting in poor model transferabil- the target dataset or directly utilize the representations for
ity across different domain datasets. Therefore, how to design downstream tasks. Using contrastive learning for time-series
reconstruction-based unsupervised learning mechanisms (i.e, consistency-based PTMs can be roughly divided into four catemask and predict) applicable to different domains is a challenge gories [77]: subseries consistency, temporal consistency, transfor studying TS-PTMs. formation consistency, and contextual consistency.
 Subseries Consistency: Two subseries belonging to an inclusion relationship sampled from the same time series sample are
C. Self-Supervised PTMs
 utilized as positive pair, which is called subseries consistency,
 This section presents self-supervised TS-PTMs based on con- as shown in Fig. 11(a). Utilizing Word2Vec [148] as an analogy,
sistency and pseudo-labeling training strategies which are com- Franceschi et al. first [149] employed a sufficiently long and
monly utilized in self-supervised learning. Compared with unsu- non-stationary subseries in a time series sample as the context.
pervised learning (e.g., reconstruction), self-supervised learning Then, a subseries selected from the context corresponds to a
employs self-provided supervisory information (e.g., pseudo- word (positive subseries), while a subseries collected from a
labels) during the training process. different context in another time series sample represents a
 1) Consistency-Based PTMs: Self-supervised learning random word (negative subseries). Further, the authors [149]
strategies based on the consistency of different augmented employed the Triplet Loss (T-Loss) to keep the context and pos-
(transformed) views from the same sample have been itive subsequences close, while making the context and negative
studied for PTMs in CV [144] with great success. Naturally, subsequences far away for representation learning of time series.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7545

Experimental results on UCR and UEA archives indicated that regression estimation model to learn the dependencies of time
the representations obtained by T-Loss can be beneficial for the dimensions by distinguishing the differences between subseries
downstream classification task. of the original time series and those randomly transformed time
 Moreover, Fan et al. [150] proposed a self-supervised repre- points. Lately, Zhang et al. [28] utilized a time-based augmentasentation learning framework named SelfTime, by exploring the tion bank (jittering, scaling, time-shifts, and neighborhood seginter-sample and intra-temporal relations of time series. In terms ments) and frequency-based augmentation methods (adding or
of the inter-sample relationships, unlike SimCLR [32], the au- removing frequency components) for time series self-supervised
thors employed the cross-entropy loss to guide the reasoning of contrastive pre-training via time-frequency consistency.
different levels of entity relationships. As for the intra-temporal Contextual Consistency: Two augmented contexts with the
relationships, the authors attempted to capture the temporal same timestamp inside the same time series are selected as a
pattern by reasoning the multi-level relation among subseries positive pair, which is called contextual consistency, as shown
sampled from the same sample, thus obtaining representations in Fig. 11(d). By designing a timestamp masking and random
for the downstream classification task. cropping strategy to obtain augmented contexts, Yue et al. [77]
 Temporal Consistency: Two adjacent subseries from the same proposed a universal framework for learning time series reptime series sample are selected as a positive pair, which is called resentations named TS2Vec. Specifically, TS2Vec distinguishes
temporal consistency, as shown in Fig. 11(b). Based on the positive and negative samples from the temporal dimensions and
assumption of temporal consistency, Tonekaboni et al. [151] instance level hierarchically. In terms of temporal consistency,
proposed a representation learning framework named Temporal the augmented contexts with the same timestamp within the
Neighborhood Coding (TNC). TNC learns time series repre- same time series are treated as positive pairs, while the augsentations by ensuring that the distribution of adjacent signals mented contexts in different timestamps are treated as negative
in the coding space is distinguishable from the distribution pairs. Unlike temporal consistency, instance level consistency
of non-neighboring signals. Experimental results on multiple treats the augmented contexts of other instances within a batch
time series datasets demonstrate that TNC performs better on as negative pairs. Experiments on various time series datasets
downstream classification and clustering tasks compared with indicate that TS2Vec achieves excellent performance on downthe T-Loss [149]. stream classification, forecasting, and anomaly detection tasks.
 Further, Woo et al. [152] proposed a contrastive learning pre- Recently, Yang et al. [157] proposed a novel representation
training method for long sequence time series forecasting, called learning framework for time series, namely Bilinear Temporal-
CoST. Specifically, CoST utilizes temporal consistencies in the Spectral Fusion (BTSF). Unlike TS2Vec [77], BTSF utilizes
time domain to learn the discriminative trend of a sequence, instance-level augmentation by simply applying a dropout stratwhile transforming the data to the frequency domain to discover egy to obtain positive/negative samples for unsupervised conthe seasonal representation. Deldari et al. [153] proposed a self- trastive learning, thus preserving the global context and captursupervised time series change point detection method based on ing long-term dependencies of time series. Further, an iterative
contrast predictive coding. Particularly, the authors exploit local bilinear temporal-spectral fusion module is designed in BTSF to
correlations in the time series to drive the maximization of shared iteratively refine the representation of time series by encoding
information across consecutive time intervals while minimizing the affinities of abundant time-frequency pairs. Extensive exshared information across time intervals. Luo et al. [154] applied periments on classification, forecasting, and anomaly detection
the objective of contrastive learning to both the local subseries tasks demonstrate the superiority of BTSF.
and global instance levels, thus obtaining feature representations Summary: The aforementioned studies demonstrate that
favorable to downstream time series forecasting and classifica- consistency-based PTMs can obtain robust representations bention tasks. eficial for TSM tasks. Although subseries and temporal consis-
 Transformation Consistency: Two augmented sequences of tency strategies have achieved good performance on the classithe same time series by different transformations are selected fication task, sampling biases between subseries (e.g., outliers
as positive pair, which is called transformation consistency, as and pattern shifts) [77] tend to introduce false positive pairs.
shown in Fig. 11(c). Inspired by the successful application of Meanwhile, the transformation consistency strategy relies on
transformation consistency in CV, Eldele et al. [110] proposed effective instance-level data augmentation techniques. However,
a Time-Series representation learning framework via Temporal designing uniform data augmentation techniques for time series
and Contextual Contrasting (TS-TCC). TS-TCC first transforms from different domains remains a challenge [13], [158]. One
the original time series data in two different ways to obtain alternative is to utilize expert features of time series [159]
weak augmentation (jitter-and-scaling) and strong augmentation instead of the commonly used data transformation for contrastive
(permutation-and-jitter) variants, respectively. Then, the tempo- learning. The contextual consistency strategy utilizes a mask (or
ral and contextual contrastive learning modules are designed in dropout) mechanism [77], [157] to obtain contrastive pairs by
TS-TCC for learning discriminative representations. capturing temporal dependencies, which can alleviate the prob-
 In addition, Hyvärinen et al. [155] analyzed the non- lem of sampling bias among subsequences and achieve excellent
stationarity of time series by performing a nonlinear mixture performance on forecasting, classification, and anomaly detectransformation of subseries from different time windows to en- tion tasks. Nevertheless, designing consistency-based strategies
sure that the same subseries are consistent. Unlike [155], Hyvari- using the multi-scale property [75] of time series has not been
nen and Morioka [156] developed a method based on a logistic fully explored.
7546 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 2) Pseudo-Labeling PTMs: In addition to consistency-based 1) Comparison of Transfer Learning PTMs Based on Super-
PTMs mentioned above, some other self-supervised TS-PTMs vised Classification and Unsupervised Reconstruction: Due to
have been explored to improve the performance of TSM. We space constraints, we report the transfer learning classification
briefly review these methods in this section. results in Table I. The P-value is calculated for the trans-
 Predict Pseudo Labels: A large amount of correctly labeled fer classification results between the supervised classification
information is the basis for the success of deep neural network and unsupervised reconstruction transfer strategy. As shown
models. However, labeling time series data generally requires in Table I, the supervised classification transfer (SUP CLS)
manual expert knowledge assistance, resulting in high annota- strategy has the best average Acc and the number of positive
tion costs. Meanwhile, representation learning using pseudo- transfer results on the minimum, medium and maximum target
label-guided models has yielded rich results in CV [160]. In datasets. The above results indicate that the SUP CLS strategy is
addition, some studies [161], [162] employed self-supervised more suitable for time series pre-training than the unsupervised
learning as an auxiliary task to help the primary task learn transfer strategy. On the smallest target datasets, the overall
better by training the auxiliary task alongside the primary task. performance of the SUP CLS strategy and the unsupervised
In the auxiliary task, when given the transformed sample, the reconstruction strategy utilizing the symmetric FCN decoder is
model predicts which transformation is applied to the input (i.e., insignificant (P-value greater than 0.05). Also, the unsupervised
predicts pseudo labels). This idea has been applied in a few TS- reconstruction strategy utilizing the symmetric FCN decoder
PTMs [150]. For example, Fan et al. [150] randomly selected two is better than the supervised classification transfer strategy.
length-L subsequences from the same time series and assigned The above results indicate that a symmetric FCN decoder is
a pseudo-label based on their temporal distance, and then the more suitable for transfer learning in the time-series classiproposed model is pre-trained by predicting the pseudo-label of fication task than the asymmetric RNN decoder. Overall, the
subsequence pairs. Also, Zhang et al. [33] incorporated expert number of positive transfer classification results obtained on
features to create pseudo-labels for time series self-supervised the target datasets is unsatisfactory, which may be related to
contrastive representation learning. Despite these progresses, the small number of samples in the UCR source datasets (the
predicting pseudo labels inevitably contain incorrect labels. How number of samples in most source datasets is less than 8000,
to mitigate the negative impact of incorrect labels will be the and please refer to Table VI in the Appendix), available
focus of studying TS-PTMs. online.
 Further, we select four independent time series datasets for
 IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS transfer learning PTMs analysis. The number of samples in
 each source dataset is large, and the test classification results
 In this section, following [77], [157], we evaluate TS-PTMs
 are shown in Table II. Compared with the supervised approach
on three TSM tasks, including classification, forecasting, and
 (FCN) without pre-training, the transfer learning strategy based
anomaly detection. Like [77], we select a range of time-series
 on supervised classification (Sup CLS) achieves significant
benchmark datasets employed in the corresponding TSM tasks
 positive transfer performance in the neural stage detection and
for evaluation. We first analyze the performance of TS-PTMs
 mechanical device diagnosis scenarios. In addition, the transon the classification task using UCR [163] and UEA [164]
 fer learning strategy based on unsupervised RNN Decoders
archives time series datasets. Also, following [28], we select
 achieves obvious positive transfer performance in the activity
four time series scenarios datasets for transfer learning analysis.
 recognition scenario. However, in the physical status monitor-
Second, the performance of TS-PTMs and related baselines
 ing scenario, the three transfer learning strategies all result in
on the forecasting task are compared using nine benchmark
 negative transfer, which may be related to the small number of
datasets [11], [165]. Finally, we analyze the performance of
 EMG samples. Compared with using UCR time series datasets,
TS-PTMs on the anomaly detection by using the univariate
 transfer learning has a better pre-training effect on independent
Yahoo [166], KPI [167], UCR anomaly detection archive [168],
 time series datasets with large source datasets.
and seven multivariate datasets [145]. For information about
 2) Comparison of TS-PTMs for Classification: We select
datasets, baselines, and implementation details, please refer to
 one general time series model and seven TS-PTMs for per-
Appendix B, available online.
 formance comparison of the downstream classification task.
 TimesNet [165] is a general model based on CNNs for time
A. Performance of PTMs on Time-Series Classification series analysis. TST [26] is a transformer-based PTM. T-loss
 The datasets in the UCR and UEA archives do not specify a [149], Selftime [150], TS-TCC [110], and TS2Vec [77] are
validation set for hyperparameter selection, while some datasets consistency-based PTMs. PatchTST [123] utilizes patches based
have a much higher number of test set samples than the training on the transformer for time series modeling, employing a
set. As suggested by [163], we merge the training and test sets reconstruction strategy for pre-training. GPT4TS [99] adopts
for each dataset in UCR and UEA archives. Then, we adopt the same patch strategy in PatchTST to fine-tune pre-trained
the five-fold cross-validation strategy to divide the training, LLMs for time series analysis. Related work in CV [32] and
validation, and test sets in the ratio of 60%-20%-20%. For the NLP [129] generally utilizes a selected backbone combined
four independent time series scenarios datasets, we utilize the with a linear classifier as a supervised method to analyze the
datasets processed by [28] for experimental analysis. Finally, we classification performance compared with PTMs. Therefore,
use the average accuracy on the test set as the evaluation metric. the FCN combined with a linear classifier is selected as a
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7547

 TABLE I
 TEST CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF TRANSFER LEARNING ON 675 SETS (15 SOURCE DATASETS MULTIPLIED BY 45 TARGET DATASETS) UCR
 TIME SERIES DATASETS

 TABLE II
 TEST CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF TRANSFER LEARNING ON FOUR INDEPENDENT TIME SERIES SCENARIOS

 TABLE III
 COMPARISONS OF CLASSIFICATION TEST ACCURACY ON DIFFERENT TS-PTMS (STANDARD DEVIATIONS ARE IN PARENTHESES)

baseline without pre-training. The averaged results on UCR Additionally, GPT4TS shows faster training times on the UEA
and UEA archives are reported in Table III. Detailed results datasets compared to most other methods, such as PatchTST, due
are in Appendix C-B, available online. Also, we provide the to its ability to converge quickly with fewer training epochs. In
visualization analysis in Appendix C-B, available online. Since contrast, TimesNet requires significantly more training time on
the training of Selftime on the multivariate time series UEA both the UCR and UEA datasets. In summary, consistency-based
datasets is too time-consuming, we only report its performance strategies, patch-based strategies, and LLM-based fine-tuning
on the univariate UCR datasets. Also, we spend about a month on demonstrate significant potential for pre-training in time series
four 1080Ti GPUs to obtain the classification results of SelfTime classification tasks.
on the UCR archive.
 As shown in Table III, the classification performance of
TS2Vec and GPT4TS achieve the best and second-best on the B. Performance of PTMs on Time-Series Forecasting
128 UCR datasets. Also, the P-value is calculated to compare We further evaluate the performance of PTMs including
the classification results between GPT4TS and other methods. TS2Vec [77], CoST [152], GPT4TS [99], and TEMPO [100]
In terms of the P-value for significance tests, TS2Vec is in- on time-series forecasting. Experiments on state-of-the-art disignificant compared to GPT4TS (P-value greater than 0.05). rect forecasting methods are also conducted for comparison.
However, GPT4TS requires more training time for fine-tuning These approaches include five Transformer based models, Log-
LLMs compared to TS2Vec. The above results show that both Trans [171], Informer [11], Autoformer [64], PatchTST [123],
consistency-based TS2Vec and LLM-based GPT4TS can ef- iTransformer [172], one simple liner layer-based model named
fectively learn robust representations beneficial for the time- DLinear [173], Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) [61],
series classification task on the UCR time series classification and TimesNet [165]. We employ the Mean Square Error (MSE)
archive. On the 30 UEA datasets, GPT4TS achieves the best and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) as evaluation metrics followperformance. The model using FCN for direct classification is ing [152]. Also, we follow [77], [165] to preprocess the datasets.
the second-best, while TS2Vec is inferior in terms of average Table IV presents the average test results with different predicaccuracy and rank. Also, PatchTST outperforms TS2Vec, high- tion lengths on nine public datasets for multivariate time-series
lighting the effectiveness of the patch strategy combined with forecasting. For detailed results of Table IV, please refer to
a vanilla Transformer for multivariate time series classification. Appendix C-C, available online.
7548 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE IV
 COMPARISON OF AVERAGE TEST RESULTS FOR TIME-SERIES FORECASTING WITH PREDICTION LENGTHS OF S ∈ {24, 48, 168, 336, 720} FOR ETTH1, ETTH2,
 AND ELECTRICITY DATASETS; S ∈ {24, 48, 96, 288, 672} FOR ETTM1 DATASET; S ∈ {24, 36, 48, 60} FOR ILI DATASET; AND S ∈ {96, 192, 336, 720}
 FOR OTHER DATASETS

 TABLE V
 COMPARISIONS TEST RESULTS OF TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION

 As can be seen in Table IV, iTransformer and GPT4TS gen- As shown in Table V, on the traditional F1, P, and R metrics,
erally outperform other methods. Also, CoST, Autoformer, and TS2Vec and AT achieve the best performance compared to
DLinear demonstrate notable improvements, with better long- other baselines. However, on the other six metrics, the overall
term robustness on two, one, and one datasets, respectively. The performance of DOUNT is better than TS2Vec. The above
performance of GPT4TS suggests that fine-tuning pre-trained results suggest that there are still challenges in designing suitable
LLMs with patching process data for time series forecasting PTMs over traditional methods for the latest evaluation metrics
is a promising strategy. Furthermore, iTransformer and Auto- on Yahoo and KPI datasets. The test results on the UCR anomaly
former demonstrate the potential of Transformer frameworks detection archive in Table VI indicate that TS2Vec outperforms
for time series pre-training. Note that CoST achieves the best DOUNT on the F1, P, F1-PA-10, F1-PA-50, and F1-PA-90
performance on the Weather and ILI datasets. We credit it to the metrics, while DOUNT excels in the other six metrics. Overall,
modeling of trend and seasonal features with self-supervised the consistency-based DCdetector achieves the best average perpre-training, which is also verified to be effective in the decom- formance across all twelve metrics. Due to space constraints, the
position architecture of Autoformer. The above empirical results detailed test results of Table VI and results for seven multivariate
demonstrate that designing an efficient TS-PTM is a promising datasets are provided in Appendix C-D, available online. For
paradigm for time series forecasting. the seven multivariate datasets, DCdetector performs best on
 five datasets, while TS2Vec and GPT4TS each lead in one
C. Performance of PTMs on Time-Series Anomaly Detection dataset. Notably, DCdetector uses a patch strategy similar to
 PatchTST to preprocess raw time series data before inputting it
 For time-series anomaly detection, we follow the settings
 into the Transformer for pre-training. In short, the patch-based
of [77], [167] to determine whether the last time point xt of
 strategy and Transformer framework present promising avenues
a sequence fragment [x1 , x2 , . . . , xt ] is an anomaly. Also, we
 for further exploration in pre-training for time series anomaly
select various evaluation metrics for a comprehensive compardetection tasks.
ison, including the commonly-used F1-Score (F1), Precision
(P), and Recall (R) metrics [77], as well as recently proposed
evaluation measures: f1-score Point Adjustment (PA)%K [174], V. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
affiliation precision/recall pair [169], and volume under the
surface [170]. The TS2Vec [77], TimesNet [165], GPT4TS [99], A. Large-Scale Time Series Datasets
DCdetector [145], and the benchmark methods SPOT [175], Large-scale benchmark datasets are critical to the success of
DSPOT [175], LSTM-VAE [176], DONUT [177], Spectral PTMs in CV and NLP. Most existing TS-PTMs are pre-trained
Residual (SR) [167], and Anomaly Transformer (AT) [178] are on datasets from archives such as UCR [163] and UEA [164],
employed as comparison methods. The test results on Yahoo most of which have small sample sizes (only a few thousand or
and KPI datasets are shown in Table V. The authors of SR do even hundreds of samples). Although these time-series benchnot provide open-source code, so we use the anomaly detection mark datasets have contributed significantly to the development
results (F1, P, and R) reported in the original SR article [167] for of the time-series community, it is challenging to utilize them
comparison. Also, the “-” in the AT method indicates that the to pre-train deep learning models due to limitations of sample
metric could not be obtained due to excessive computation time. sizes and generality.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7549

 TABLE VI
 COMPARISON OF OPTIMAL DATASET COUNT FOR TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION IN THE UCR ANOMALY DETECTION ARCHIVE WITH 250 DATASETS

 Recently, Yang et al. [24] proposed a TS-PTM called to mine transferable segments in time series data is a challenge
Voice2Series that pre-trains deep learning models using a large- for future research on TS-PTMs.
scale sequence dataset from the speech domain. Then, the pretraining models are transferred to the general time-series datasets
 C. Deep Learning Models in Time Series
(UCR time-series archive) through model reprogramming and
label mapping. Experimental results indicate that pre-training Recently, deep learning models such as CNNs and Transwith large-scale sequence datasets in the speech domain can formers [165], [179] have garnered significant attention in time
achieve state-of-the-art on the time-series classification task. series mining. In particular, Transformer-based models have
Further, several studies [103], [104], [133] have constructed achieved excellent pre-training performance in fields like NLP
large-scale time series datasets by integrating sequences from and CV, prompting their exploration in time series studies [103].
various existing time series datasets across multiple domains. Leveraging multi-head attention mechanisms to capture long-
These synthesized datasets have been effectively employed term dependencies, Transformers have been successfully emfor the purpose of time series pre-training. However, the con- ployed to design large foundational pre-training models for
struction of large-scale generic time-series datasets like Ima- time series forecasting tasks [104], [105]. However, there are
geNet [70] is a crucial focus, which will significantly facilitate relatively few Transformer models with competitive advantages
further research on TS-PTMs. for time series classification, possibly because this task focuses
 more on capturing discriminative subseries (e.g., shapelets)
 or multiscale features [75]. For classification tasks, the supe-
B. Inherent Properties of Time Series
 rior performance of consistency-based PTMs with TCNs and
 Time-series representation learning has attracted much atten- patching-based strategies on UCR and UEA archives validates
tion in recent years. Existing studies have explored the inherent their advantages. Furthermore, our experimental results across
properties of time series for representation learning, such as various downstream tasks suggest that the patch strategy [123]
using CNNs to capture multi-scale dependencies, RNNs to and the iTransformer architecture [172] offer promising research
model temporal dependencies, and Transformers to model long- avenues.
term temporal dependencies. Also, the context-dependencies Although significant work has applied transformers to time
and frequency domain (or seasonal-trend [152]) information of series pre-training [104], [123], [133], some CNN-based modtime series have been explored in recent contrastive learning els also deserve attention [180]. Notably, Eldele et al. [131]
studies. Although mining the inherent properties of time series demonstrated that their CNN-based model outperforms existing
can learn representations beneficial for downstream TSM tasks, Transformer-based approaches on various time series downthe transferability of time series from different domains remains stream tasks. Additionally, the Mamba model, based on state
weakly interpretable. space models, shows strong sequence learning capabilities for
 Due to the inherent properties (i.e., frequency domain in- pre-training [181], outperforming Transformers in many CV
formation) of time series, the pre-training techniques applied domain tasks [182]. Consequently, researchers in time series
to image data are difficult to transfer directly to time series. analysis are increasingly exploring Mamba for time series min-
Compared to NLP, TS-PTMs are challenging to learn universal ing [183], [184]. Compared to these deep learning models,
time-series representations due to the absence of a large-scale GNNs offer the ability to learn spatio-temporal dependencies in
unified semantic sequence dataset. For example, each word in time series pre-training, especially when combined with models
a text sequence dataset has similar semantics in different sen- like Transformers [128]. In summary, selecting the appropriate
tences with high probability. Therefore, the word embeddings deep learning architectures will be crucial for future designs of
learned by the model can transfer knowledge across different time series pre-training models.
text sequence data scenarios. However, time series datasets are
challenging to obtain subsequences (corresponding to words in
 D. Adversarial Attacks on Time Series
text sequences) that have consistent semantics across scenarios,
making it difficult to transfer the knowledge learned by the Adversarial example attacks have recently received extenmodel. Hence, exploiting the inherent properties of time series sive attention in various fields because they have significant
7550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

security risks. Naturally, scholars in the time-series domain will remain the dominant research approach [103], [104]. This
have also begun to consider the impact of adversarial sample paradigm aligns with human learning processes and has been
attacks on time-series models [185], [186]. For example, Karim validated in CV and NLP fields. However, the potential of
et al. [187] utilized a distilled model as a surrogate that simulated LLMs in time series mining should not be overlooked. To better
the behavior of the attacked time-series classification model. leverage LLMs for time series analysis, converting time series
Then, an adversarial transformation network is applied to the into textual descriptions for fine-tuning might more effectively
distilled model to generate time-series adversarial examples. transfer the knowledge acquired during LLM pre-training to
Experiments on 42 UCR datasets show they are vulnerable to time series tasks [194]. Also, integrating textual descriptions
adversarial examples. with the time series data for multi-modal pre-training [195],
 Adversarial examples are generated by adding perturbations [196] is a promising direction worth exploring.
to the original examples to cross the classification boundaries of
the classifier. In general, adding random perturbations is difficult VI. CONCLUSION
to generate adversarial examples. Also, adversarial examples are
 In this survey, we provide a systematic review and analnot easy to generate when each cluster is far from the classifiysis of the development of TS-PTMs. In the early research
cation boundary. Recently, Hendrycks et al. [188] found that
 on TS-PTMs, related studies were mainly based on CNN and
self-supervised learning could effectively improve the robust-
 RNN models for transfer learning on PTMs. In recent years,
ness of deep learning models to adversarial examples. Therefore,
 Transformer-based, consistency-based models and patchingimproving the robustness of time series models to adversarial
 based strategies have achieved remarkable performance in timeexamples by utilizing TS-PTMs is a direction worth exploring.
 series downstream tasks, and have been utilized for time series
 pre-training. Hence, we conducted a large-scale experimen-
E. Pre-Training Models for Time-Series Noisy Labels
 tal analysis of existing TS-PTMs, transfer learning strategies,
 The acquisition cost of large-scale labeled datasets is very Transformer-based time series methods, and related representaexpensive. Therefore, various low-cost surrogate strategies are tive methods on the three main tasks of time-series classification,
provided to collect labels automatically. For example, many forecasting, and anomaly detection. The experimental results
weakly labeled images can be collected with the help of search suggest that LLM-based fine-tuning PTMs, when combined with
engines and crawling algorithms. In the time-series domain, patching strategies and Transformer-based models, hold signifi-
Castellani et al. [118] employed sensor readings to generate cant potential for time-series classification and forecasting tasks.
labels for time series. Although these strategies enable obtaining Additionally, consistency-based PTMs using patching strategies
large-scale labeled data, they also inevitably lead to label noise. demonstrate promising results for time-series anomaly detec-
Training deep learning models efficiently with noisy labels is tion. Meanwhile, the pre-training strategy involving the selection
challenging since deep learning models have a high capacity for of an appropriate deep learning model, such as CNNs or Mamba,
fitting noisy labels [189]. To this end, many studies on learning represents a promising direction for the future development of
with label noise [190] have emerged. As an effective representa- TS-PTMs.
tion learning method, PTMs can be effectively employed to solve
the problem of noisy labels [191], which has been studied in CV. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
However, only a few studies are investigating the time-series
noisy label [192], and PTMs for time-series noisy labels have The author wants to thank Professor Eamonn Keogh from
not been studied. UCR and all the people who have contributed to the UCR&UEA
 time series archives and other time series datasets. The authors
 would like to thank Professor Garrison W. Cottrell from UCSD,
F. Pre-Trained LLMs for Time-Series Mining
 and Chuxin Chen, Xidi Cai, Yu Chen, and Peitian Ma from
 Pre-trained LLMs have achieved significant success in SCUT for the helpful suggestions.
NLP [136], particularly with GPT-based models like ChatGPT,
which are widely used in real life. Scholars [38], [40], [101] have REFERENCES
demonstrated that LLMs can be effectively applied to time series
 [1] Y. Wu, J. M. Hernández-Lobato, and G. Zoubin, “Dynamic covariance
analysis, with GPT4TS [99] showing for the first time that com- models for multivariate financial time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
bining the patching mechanism and fine-tuning some parameters Learn., PMLR, 2013, pp. 558–566.
of the GPT2 model can yield strong performance across various [2] N. Moritz, T. Hori, and J. Le, “Streaming automatic speech recognition
 with the transformer model,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
time series tasks. However, the reasons behind the effectiveness Signal Process., 2020, pp. 6074–6078.
of fine-tuning LLMs directly on time series data require further [3] J. Martinez, M. J. Black, and J. Romero, “On human motion prediction
investigation. Notably, Tan et al. [193] found that pre-trained using recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 2891–2900.
LLMs do not outperform models trained from scratch in time [4] S. Wang, J. Cao, and P. S. Yu, “Deep learning for spatio-temporal
series forecasting tasks, and a simple model with patching and data mining: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 8,
attention as an encoder can achieve comparable results. pp. 3681–3700, Aug. 2022.
 [5] D. A. Tedjopurnomo, Z. Bao, B. Zheng, F. Choudhury, and A. K. Qin,
 Unlike approaches that directly fine-tune LLMs on time series “A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic prediction: Trends,
tasks, we tend to think that the pre-training and fine-tuning methods and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 04,
paradigm using time series datasets for designing TS-PTMs pp. 1544–1561, Apr. 2022.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7551

 [6] T.-C. Fu, “A review on time series data mining,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., [33] H. Zhang, J. Wang, Q. Xiao, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “SleepPriorCL: Convol. 24, no. 1, pp. 164–181, 2011. trastive representation learning with prior knowledge-based positive min-
 [7] G. Li, B. K. K. Choi, J. Xu, S. S. Bhowmick, K.-P. Chun, and G. L. Wong, ing and adaptive temperature for sleep staging,” 2021, arXiv 2110.09966.
 “Efficient shapelet discovery for time series classification,” IEEE Trans. [34] N. Laptev, J. Yu, and R. Rajagopal, “Reconstruction and regression loss
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 03, pp. 1149–1163, Mar. 2022. for time-series transfer learning,” in Proc. Special Int. Group Knowl.
 [8] Z. Che, S. Purushotham, K. Cho, D. Sontag, and Y. Liu, “Recurrent Discov. Data Mining 4th Workshop Mining Learn. Time Ser., 2018,
 neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values,” Sci. pp. 1–8.
 Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2018. [35] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li, “Label-
 [9] M. H. Tahan, M. Ghasemzadeh, and S. Asadi, “Development of fully efficient time series representation learning: A review,” IEEE Trans. Artif.
 convolutional neural networks based on discretization in time series clas- Intell., early access, Jul. 17, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TAI.2024.3430236.
 sification,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 6827–6838, [36] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: Taxon-
 Jul. 2023. omy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 [10] R. Sen, H.-F. Yu, and I. S. Dhillon, “Think globally, act locally: A deep vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024.
 neural network approach to high-dimensional time series forecasting,” in [37] Q. Meng, H. Qian, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, Z. Shen, and L. Cui, “Unsupervised rep-
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–10. resentation learning for time series: A review,” 2023, arXiv 2308.01578.
 [11] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long se- [38] M. Jin et al., “Large models for time series and spatio-temporal data: A
 quence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, survey and outlook,” 2023, arXiv 2310.10196.
 pp. 11106–11115. [39] M. Jin et al., “Position paper: What can large language models tell us
 [12] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A about time series analysis,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024,
 survey,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4653–4660. pp. 1–17.
 [13] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data augmentation [40] Y. Liang et al., “Foundation models for time series analysis: A tutorial
 for time series classification with neural networks,” PLoS One, vol. 16, and survey,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 no. 7, 2021, Art. no. e0254841. Mining, 2024, pp. 6555–6565.
 [14] J. E. Van Engelen and H. H. Hoos, “A survey on semi-supervised [41] H. Ismail Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller,
 learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 109, no. 2, pp. 373–440, 2020. “Deep learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining
 [15] Z. Liu, Q. Ma, P. Ma, and L. Wang, “Temporal-frequency co-training for Knowl. Discov., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 917–963, 2019.
 time series semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., [42] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning:
 2023, pp. 8923–8931. A survey,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 379, no. 2194, 2021,
 [16] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on image data aug- Art. no. 20200209.
 mentation for deep learning,” J. Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–48, [43] B. Lafabregue, J. Weber, P. Gançarski, and G. Forestier, “End-to-end
 2019. deep representation learning for time series clustering: A comparative
 [17] L. Yang, S. Hong, and L. Zhang, “Spectral propagation graph network study,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, pp. 29–81, 2022.
 for few-shot time series classification,” 2022, arXiv 2202.04769. [44] F. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in quasi-periodic time series based on
 [18] S. J. Pan and Q. Yang, “A survey on transfer learning,” IEEE Trans. automatic data segmentation and attentional LSTM-CNN,” IEEE Trans.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1345–1359, Oct. 2010. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 06, pp. 2626–2640, Jun. 2022.
 [19] F. Zhuang et al., “A comprehensive survey on transfer learning,” Proc. [45] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
 IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 43–76, Jan. 2021. on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 [20] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
 with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. [46] W. Cao, D. Wang, J. Li, H. Zhou, L. Li, and Y. Li, “BRITS: Bidirectional
 Process. Syst., 2012, pp. 1097–1105. recurrent imputation for time series,” 2018, arXiv 1805.10572.
 [21] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked [47] M. C. De Souto, I. G. Costa, D. S. De Araujo, T. B. Ludermir, and A.
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” 2021, arXiv 2111.06377. Schliep, “Clustering cancer gene expression data: A comparative study,”
 [22] X. Qiu, T. Sun, Y. Xu, Y. Shao, N. Dai, and X. Huang, “Pre-trained BMC Bioinf., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2008.
 models for natural language processing: A survey,” Sci. China Technol. [48] J. de Jong et al., “Deep learning for clustering of multivariate clinical
 Sci., vol. 63, pp. 1872–1897, 2020. patient trajectories with missing values,” GigaScience, vol. 8, no. 11,
 [23] H. I. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller, 2019, Art. no. giz134.
 “Transfer learning for time series classification,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. [49] C. W. Tan, C. Bergmeir, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “Time series
 Conf. Big Data, 2018, pp. 1367–1376. extrinsic regression: Predicting numeric values from time series data,”
 [24] C.-H. H. Yang, Y.-Y. Tsai, and P.-Y. Chen, “Voice2Series: Reprogram- Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 1032–1060, 2021.
 ming acoustic models for time series classification,” in Proc. 38th Int. [50] Q. Xu, K. Wu, M. Wu, K. Mao, X. Li, and Z. Chen, “Reinforced
 Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2021, pp. 11808–11819. knowledge distillation for time series regression,” IEEE Trans. Artif.
 [25] P. Malhotra, V. Tv, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G. Shroff, “TimeNet: Pre- Intell., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 3184–3194, Jun. 2024.
 trained deep recurrent neural network for time series classification,” 2017, [51] B. Li et al., “DifFormer: Multi-resolutional differencing transformer with
 arXiv 1706.08838. dynamic ranging for time series analysis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 [26] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 13586–13598, Nov. 2023.
 transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation [52] C. W. Tan, C. Bergmeir, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “Monash Unilearning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data versity, UEA, UCR time series extrinsic regression archive,” 2020,
 Mining, 2021, pp. 2114–2124. arXiv 2006.10996.
 [27] S. Deldari, H. Xue, A. Saeed, J. He, D. V. Smith, and F. D. Salim, [53] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evalua-
 “Beyond just vision: A review on self-supervised representation learning tion of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
 on multimodal and temporal data,” 2022, arXiv 2206.02353. arXiv 1412.3555.
 [28] X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, T. Tsiligkaridis, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised [54] K. Greff, R. K. Srivastava, J. Koutník, B. R. Steunebrink, and J. Schmidcontrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,” huber, “LSTM: A search space odyssey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–16. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 2222–2232, Oct. 2017.
 [29] W. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Geng, and S. Hong, “Cross reconstruction trans- [55] N. Muralidhar, S. Muthiah, and N. Ramakrishnan, “DyAt nets: Dynamic
 former for self-supervised time series representation learning,” 2022, attention networks for state forecasting in cyber-physical systems,” in
 arXiv 2205.09928. Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 3180–3186.
 [30] R. Ye and Q. Dai, “A novel transfer learning framework for time series [56] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations
 forecasting,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 156, pp. 74–99, 2018. for time series clustering,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 [31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for pp. 3781–3791.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [57] J. Gu et al., “Recent advances in convolutional neural networks,” Pattern
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738. Recognit., vol. 77, pp. 354–377, 2018.
 [32] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework [58] M. Liu et al., “SCINet: Time series modeling and forecasting with sample
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. convolution and interaction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2020, pp. 1597–1607. 2022, pp. 5816–5828.
7552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 [59] Z. Cui, W. Chen, and Y. Chen, “Multi-scale convolutional neural networks [85] S. Xie, Z. Zheng, L. Chen, and C. Chen, “Learning semantic represenfor time series classification,” 2016, arXiv 1603.06995. tations for unsupervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 [60] K. Kashiparekh, J. Narwariya, P. Malhotra, L. Vig, and G. Shroff, Learn., PMLR, 2018, pp. 5423–5432.
 “ConvTimeNet: A pre-trained deep convolutional neural network for time [86] H. Yan, Y. Ding, P. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Xu, and W. Zuo, “Mind the class
 series classification,” in Proc. 2019 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, weight bias: Weighted maximum mean discrepancy for unsupervised
 pp. 1–8. domain adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 [61] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic 2017, pp. 2272–2281.
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, [87] K. You, M. Long, Z. Cao, J. Wang, and M. I. Jordan, “Universal domain
 arXiv 1803.01271. adaptation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 [62] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks 2019, pp. 2720–2729.
 for semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [88] J. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Hu, X. Peng, and S. Y. Philip, “Stratified transfer
 Recognit., 2015, pp. 3431–3440. learning for cross-domain activity recognition,” in Proc. 2018 IEEE Int.
 [63] Y. Chen, Y. Kang, Y. Chen, and Z. Wang, “Probabilistic forecasting Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 1–10.
 with temporal convolutional neural network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 399, [89] Z. Li, R. Cai, T. Z. Fu, and K. Zhang, “Transferable time-series forecasting
 pp. 491–501, 2020. under causal conditional shift,” 2021, arXiv 2111.03422.
 [64] J. Xu et al., “Autoformer: Decomposition transformers with auto- [90] Q. Liu and H. Xue, “Adversarial spectral kernel matching for unsupercorrelation for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. vised time series domain adaptation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 1–12. 2021, pp. 2744–2750.
 [65] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FEDformer: [91] M. A. A. H. Khan, N. Roy, and A. Misra, “Scaling human activity
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series fore- recognition via deep learning-based domain adaptation,” in Proc. 2018
 casting,” 2022, arXiv 2201.12740. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 1–9.
 [66] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A [92] A. Tank, I. Covert, N. Foti, A. Shojaie, and E. B. Fox, “Neural granger
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural causality,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8,
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021. pp. 4267–4279, Aug. 2022.
 [67] Z. Cheng et al., “Time2Graph: Bridging time series and graph represen- [93] M. Ragab, E. Eldele, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and X. Li, “Selftation learning via multiple attentions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., supervised autoregressive domain adaptation for time series data,” 2021,
 vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2078–2090, Feb. 2023. arXiv 2111.14834.
 [68] Y. Wang et al., “Graph-aware contrasting for multivariate time-series [94] P. R. d. O. da Costa, A. Akçay, Y. Zhang, and U. Kaymak, “Remaining
 classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 15725–15734. useful lifetime prediction via deep domain adaptation,” Rel. Eng. Syst.
 [69] D. Zha, K.-H. Lai, K. Zhou, and X. Hu, “Towards similarity-aware time- Saf., vol. 195, 2020, Art. no. 106682.
 series classification,” in Proc. 2022 SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, SIAM, [95] W. Garrett, R. D. Janardhan, and J. C. Diane, “CALDA: Improving
 2022, pp. 199–207. multi-source time series domain adaptation with contrastive adversarial
 [70] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet: learning,” 2021, arXiv 2109.14778.
 A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. [96] Z. Li et al., “Causal mechanism transfer network for time series domain
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255. adaptation in mechanical systems,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol.,
 [71] J. Serrà, S. Pascual, and A. Karatzoglou, “Towards a universal neural vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1–21, 2021.
 network encoder for time series,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Res. Develop., [97] G. F. Elsayed, I. Goodfellow, and J. Sohl-Dickstein, “Adversarial repro-
 2018, pp. 120–129. gramming of neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representa-
 [72] Y. Chen et al., “The UCR time series classification archive,” Jul. 2015. tions, 2019, pp. 1–14.
 [Online]. Available: www.cs.ucr.edu/eamonn/time_series_data/ [98] C.-H. H. Yang et al., “Decentralizing feature extraction with quan-
 [73] Z. Wang, W. Yan, and T. Oates, “Time series classification from scratch tum convolutional neural network for automatic speech recognition,”
 with deep neural networks: A strong baseline,” in Proc. 2017 Int. Joint in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2021,
 Conf. Neural Netw., 2017, pp. 1578–1585. pp. 6523–6527.
 [74] H. Ismail Fawaz et al., “InceptionTime: Finding alexnet for time [99] T. Zhou et al., “One fits all: Power general time series analysis
 series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 6, by pretrained LM,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
 pp. 1936–1962, 2020. pp. 43322–43355.
 [75] W. Tang, G. Long, L. Liu, T. Zhou, M. Blumenstein, and J. Jiang, “Omni- [100] D. Cao et al., “TEMPO: Prompt-based generative pre-trained transformer
 scale CNNs: A simple and effective kernel size configuration for time for time series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representaseries classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, tions, 2024, pp. 1–33.
 pp. 1–17. [101] M. Jin et al., “Time-LLM: Time series forecasting by reprogramming
 [76] F. Li, K. Shirahama, M. A. Nisar, X. Huang, and M. Grzegorzek, large language models,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 “Deep transfer learning for time series data based on sensor modality 2024, pp. 1–24.
 classification,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 4271–4296, 2020. [102] X. Jiang, R. Missel, Z. Li, and L. Wang, “Sequential latent variable models
 [77] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” for few-shot high-dimensional time-series forecasting,” in Proc. 11th Int.
 in Proc. Advance. Artif. Intell. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 8980–8987. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–21.
 [78] L. Ye and E. Keogh, “Time series shapelets: A new primitive for data [103] Y. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Li, X. Huang, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Timer:
 mining,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Generative pre-trained transformers are large time series models,” in
 2009, pp. 947–956. Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–31.
 [79] A. Meiseles and L. Rokach, “Source model selection for deep learning [104] G. Woo, C. Liu, A. Kumar, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, and D. Sahoo, “Unified
 in the time series domain,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 6190–6200, 2020. training of universal time series forecasting transformers,” in Proc. 41st
 [80] R. Mutegeki and D. S. Han, “Feature-representation transfer learning Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–25.
 for human activity recognition,” in Proc. 2019 Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. [105] A. Das, W. Kong, R. Sen, and Y. Zhou, “A decoder-only foundation model
 Technol. Convergence, 2019, pp. 18–20. for time-series forecasting,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024,
 [81] R. Cai et al., “Time series domain adaptation via sparse associative struc- pp. 1–21.
 ture alignment,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 6859–6867. [106] T. Mallick, P. Balaprakash, E. Rask, and J. Macfarlane, “Transfer learning
 [82] G. Wilson, J. R. Doppa, and D. J. Cook, “Multi-source deep domain with graph neural networks for short-term highway traffic forecasting,”
 adaptation with weak supervision for time-series sensor data,” in Proc. in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 10367–10374.
 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, [107] Y. Du et al., “AdaRNN: Adaptive learning and forecasting of time series,”
 pp. 1768–1778. in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 402–411.
 [83] G. Csurka, “Domain adaptation for visual applications: A comprehensive [108] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 survey,” 2017, arXiv 1702.05374. contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv 1807.03748.
 [84] C. Chen et al., “HoMM: Higher-order moment matching for unsu- [109] S. Schneider, A. Baevski, R. Collobert, and M. Auli, “wav2vec: Unsupervised domain adaptation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, pervised pre-training for speech recognition,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Int.
 pp. 3422–3429. Speech Commun. Assoc., 2019, pp. 3465–3469.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7553

[110] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and [134] R. R. Chowdhury, X. Zhang, J. Shang, R. K. Gupta, and D. Hong, “TARcontextual contrasting,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, Net: Task-aware reconstruction for time-series transformer,” in Proc. 28th
 pp. 2352–2359. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Washington, DC,
[111] O. Vinyals et al., “Matching networks for one shot learning,” in Proc. USA, 2022, pp. 14–18.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 1–9. [135] A. T. Liu, S.-W. Li, and H.-Y. Lee, “TERA: Self-supervised learning of
[112] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast transformer encoder representation for speech,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio,
 adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 29, pp. 2351–2366, 2021.
 2017, pp. 1126–1135. [136] K. S. Kalyan, A. Rajasekharan, and S. Sangeetha, “AMMUS: A survey
[113] B. Lu, X. Gan, W. Zhang, H. Yao, L. Fu, and X. Wang, “Spatio-temporal of transformer-based pretrained models in natural language processing,”
 graph few-shot learning with cross-city knowledge transfer,” in Proc. 28th 2021, arXiv 2108.05542.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1162–1172. [137] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[114] R. Wang, R. Walters, and R. Yu, “Meta-learning dynamics forecasting Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
 using task inference,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, [138] P. Shi, W. Ye, and Z. Qin, “Self-supervised pre-training for time series
 pp. 21640–21653. classification,” in Proc. 2021 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
[115] T. Iwata and A. Kumagai, “Few-shot learning for time-series forecasting,” [139] L. Hou, Y. Geng, L. Han, H. Yang, K. Zheng, and X. Wang, “Masked
 2020, arXiv 2009.14379. token enabled pre-training: A task-agnostic approach for understand-
[116] B. N. Oreshkin, D. Carpov, N. Chapados, and Y. Bengio, “Meta-learning ing complex traffic flow,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., early access,
 framework with applications to zero-shot time-series forecasting,” in Apr. 18, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2024.3390941.
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 9242–9250. [140] L. Zhao, M. Gao, and Z. Wang, “ST-GSP: Spatial-temporal global se-
[117] L. Brinkmeyer, R. R. Drumond, J. Burchert, and L. Schmidt-Thieme, mantic representation learning for urban flow prediction,” in Proc. 15th
 “Few-shot forecasting of time-series with heterogeneous channels,” ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1443–1451.
 2022, arXiv 2204.03456. [141] I. Padhi et al., “Tabular transformers for modeling multivariate time
[118] A. Castellani, S. Schmitt, and B. Hammer, “Estimating the electrical series,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2021,
 power output of industrial devices with end-to-end time-series classifi- pp. 3565–3569.
 cation in the presence of label noise,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn., [142] S. M. Shankaranarayana and D. Runje, “Attention augmented convolu-
 2021, pp. 1–32. tional transformer for tabular time-series,” in Proc. 2021 Int. Conf. Data
[119] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning Mining Workshops, 2021, pp. 537–541.
 with neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, [143] A. T. Liu, S.-W. Yang, P.-H. Chi, P.-C. Hsu, and H.-Y. Lee, “Mockingjay:
 pp. 1–9. Unsupervised speech representation learning with deep bidirectional
[120] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, P.-A. Manzagol, and L. transformer encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal
 Bottou, “Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representa- Process., 2020, pp. 6419–6423.
 tions in a deep network with a local denoising criterion,” J. Mach. Learn. [144] X. Wang, R. Zhang, C. Shen, T. Kong, and L. Li, “Dense contrastive
 Res., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 3371–3408, 2010. learning for self-supervised visual pre-training,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
[121] A. Baevski, S. Schneider, and M. Auli, “vq-wav2vec: Self-supervised Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 3024–3033.
 learning of discrete speech representations,” 2019, arXiv 1910.05453. [145] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
[122] Q. Ma, C. Chen, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representations for attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 incomplete time series clustering,” in Proc. Advance. Artif. Intell. Conf. detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8837–8846. Mining, 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[123] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is [146] M. Hu et al., “Self-supervised pre-training for robust and generic spatialworth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. 11th temporal representations,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining,
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–24. 2023, pp. 150–159.
[124] J. Dong, H. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, and M. Long, “SimMTM: [147] J. Liu and S. Chen, “TimesURL: Self-supervised contrastive learning for
 A simple pre-training framework for masked time-series modeling,” in universal time series representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 29996–30025. Intell., 2024, pp. 13918–13926.
[125] K. Zhang, C. Li, and Q. Yang, “TriD-MAE: A generic pre-trained model [148] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Disfor multivariate time series with missing values,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,”
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3164–3173. in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 1–9.
[126] Y.-A. Chung, C.-C. Wu, C.-H. Shen, H.-Y. Lee, and L.-S. Lee, “Audio [149] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
 Word2Vec: Unsupervised learning of audio segment representations us- representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 ing sequence-to-sequence autoencoder,” 2016, arXiv 1603.00982. Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–12.
[127] Q. Hu, R. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “Transfer learning for short-term wind [150] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Y. Gao, “Self-supervised time series representation
 speed prediction with deep neural networks,” Renewable Energy, vol. 85, learning by inter-intra relational reasoning,” 2020, arXiv 2011.13548.
 pp. 83–95, 2016. [151] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised represen-
[128] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatial- tation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in
 temporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasting,” Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–17.
 in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, [152] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “CoST: Contrastive
 pp. 1567–1577. learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for time series
[129] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–18.
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. [153] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change
 2019 Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics: Hum. Lang. point detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in
 Technol., 2019, pp. 4171–4186. Proc. Web Conf., 2021, pp. 3124–3135.
[130] J. Dong et al., “TimeSiam: A pre-training framework for siamese [154] D. Luo et al., “Information-aware time series meta-contrastive learning,”
 time-series modeling,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–23.
 pp. 1–25. [155] A. Hyvarinen and H. Morioka, “Unsupervised feature extraction by
[131] E. Eldele, M. Ragab, Z. Chen, M. Wu, and X. Li, “TSLANet: Rethinking time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ICA,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 transformers for time series representation learning,” in Proc. 41st Int. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 1–9.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–20. [156] H. M. Aapo Hyvarinen, “Nonlinear ICA of temporally dependent sta-
[132] Y. Zhang, M. Liu, S. Zhou, and J. Yan, “UP2ME: Univariate pre-training tionary sources,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., PMLR, 2017,
 to multivariate fine-tuning as a general-purpose framework for multivari- pp. 460–469.
 ate time series analysis,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, [157] L. Yang, S. Hong, and L. Zhang, “Unsupervised time-series represenpp. 1–24. tation learning with iterative bilinear temporal-spectral fusion,” 2022,
[133] M. Goswami, K. Szafer, A. Choudhry, Y. Cai, S. Li, and A. Dubrawski, arXiv 2202.04770.
 “Moment: A family of open time-series foundation models,” in Proc. 41st [158] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–38. survey,” 2020, arXiv 2002.12478.
7554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

[159] M. T. Nonnenmacher, L. Oldenburg, I. Steinwart, and D. Reeb, “Utilizing [185] T. Wu, X. Wang, S. Qiao, X. Xian, Y. Liu, and L. Zhang, “Small
 expert features for contrastive learning of time-series representations,” in perturbations are enough: Adversarial attacks on time series prediction,”
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022, pp. 16969–16989. Inf. Sci., vol. 587, pp. 794–812, 2022.
[160] Y. Asano, C. Rupprecht, and A. Vedaldi, “Self-labelling via simultane- [186] L. Liu, Y. Park, T. N. Hoang, H. Hasson, and L. Huan, “Robust multious clustering and representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. variate time-series forecasting: Adversarial attacks and defense mecha-
 Representations, 2020, pp. 1–22. nisms,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–18.
[161] S. Gidaris, P. Singh, and N. Komodakis, “Unsupervised representation [187] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, and H. Darabi, “Adversarial attacks on time
 learning by predicting image rotations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Rep- series,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 10,
 resentations, 2018, pp. 1–17. pp. 3309–3320, Oct. 2021.
[162] Y.-A. Chung and J. Glass, “Speech2Vec: A sequence-to-sequence [188] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, S. Kadavath, and D. Song, “Using selfframework for learning word embeddings from speech,” 2018, supervised learning can improve model robustness and uncertainty,” in
 arXiv 1803.08976. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–12.
[163] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica [189] H. Song, M. Kim, D. Park, Y. Shin, and J.-G. Lee, “Learning from noisy
 Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019. labels with deep neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
[164] A. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification archive Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8135–8153, Nov. 2023.
 2018,” 2018, arXiv 1811.00075. [190] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with
[165] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
 Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in pp. 1–11.
 Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–23. [191] J. Li, R. Socher, and S. C. Hoi, “DivideMix: Learning with noisy labels
[166] Y. B. Nikolay Laptev and S. Amizadeh, “A benchmark dataset as semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 for time series anomaly detection,” 2015. [Online]. Available: 2020, pp. 1–14.
 https://yahooresearch.tumblr.com/post/114590420346/a-benchmark- [192] Z. Liu, P. Ma, D. Chen, W. Pei, and Q. Ma, “Scale-teaching: Robust
 dataset-for-time-series-anomaly multi-scale training for time series classification with noisy labels,” in
[167] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 33726–33757.
 Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019, [193] M. Tan, M. A. Merrill, V. Gupta, T. Althoff, and T. Hartvigsen, “Are
 pp. 3009–3017. language models actually useful for time series forecasting?,” 2024,
[168] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection bench- arXiv 2406.16964.
 marks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. [194] H. Xue and F. D. Salim, “PromptCast: A new prompt-based learning
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023. paradigm for time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
[169] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time se- vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 6851–6864, Nov. 2024.
 ries anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. [195] Z. Liu, W. Pei, D. Lan, and Q. Ma, “Diffusion language-shapelets for
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 635–645. semi-supervised time-series classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
[170] J. Paparrizos, P. Boniol, T. Palpanas, R. S. Tsay, A. Elmore, and M. J. Intell., 2024, pp. 14079–14087.
 Franklin, “Volume under the surface: A new accuracy evaluation measure [196] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
 for time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2021,
 no. 11, pp. 2774–2787, 2022. pp. 8748–8763.
[171] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
 of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–11. Qianli Ma (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
[172] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time in computer science from the South China University
 series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024, of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2008. He is a
 pp. 1–25. professor with the School of Computer Science and
[173] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective Engineering, South China University of Technology.
 for time series forecasting?,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, From 2016 to 2017, he was a visiting scholar with the
 pp. 11121–11128. University of California, San Diego. His current re-
[174] S. Kim, K. Choi, H.-S. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous search interests include machine learning algorithms,
 evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. data-mining methodologies, and their applications.
 Intell., 2022, pp. 7194–7201. He is an associate editor of IEEE/ACM Transactions
[175] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing. He has
 in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. been recognized among the World’s Top 2% Scientists for 2023 and 2024.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[176] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. Zhen Liu received the bachelor’s degree in software
[177] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- engineering from South-Central Minzu University,
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. 2018 World Wuhan, China, in 2018. He is currently working
 Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196. toward the PhD degree with the School of Computer
[178] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time Science and Engineering, South China University of
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Technology, Guangzhou, China. His current research
 Learn. Representations, 2022, pp. 1–20. interests include machine learning, deep learning, and
[179] Y. Chen, K. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, W. Sun, and D. Li, “ContiFormer: time-series analysis.
 Continuous-time transformer for irregular time series modeling,” in Proc.
 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 47143–47175.
[180] D. Luo and X. Wang, “ModernTCN: A modern pure convolution structure for general time series analysis,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn.
 Representations, 2024, pp. 1–43.
[181] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selec- Zhenjing Zheng received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in computer science from the South
 tive state spaces,” 2023, arXiv 2312.00752.
 China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China,
[182] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision
 in 2019 and 2022, respectively. His current research
 mamba: Efficient visual representation learning with bidirectional state
 space model,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 1–11. interests include machine learning, deep learning, and
 time-series analysis.
[183] B. N. Patro and V. S. Agneeswaran, “SiMBA: Simplified mambabased architecture for vision and multivariate time series,” 2024,
 arXiv 2403.15360.
[184] Z. Wang et al., “Is mamba effective for time series forecasting?,” 2024,
 arXiv 2403.11144.
MA et al.: SURVEY ON TIME-SERIES PRE-TRAINED MODELS 7555

 Ziyang Huang received the bachelor’s degree from Zhongzhong Yu received the bachelor’s and masthe School of Computer Science and Engineering, ter’s degrees in computer science from the South
 South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China,
 China, in 2023. His current research interests in- in 2019 and 2022, respectively. His current research
 clude machine learning, deep learning, and time- interests include machine learning, deep learning, and
 series analysis. time-series anomaly detection.

 James T. Kwok (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree in computer science from The Hong Kong
 University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong,
 in 1996. He is currently a professor with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong
 Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong
 Siying Zhu received the bachelor’s degree in com- Kong. His research interests include machine learnputer science from Southwest University, Chongqing, ing, deep learning, and artificial intelligence. He is
 China, in 2020, and the master’s degree from the serving/served as an associate editor for the IEEE
 School of Computer Science and Engineering, South Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Sys-
 China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, tems, Neural Networks, Neurocomputing. He is also
 in 2023. Her current research interests include ma- serving/served as senior area chairs/area chairs of major conferences including
 chine learning, deep learning, and time-series fore- NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, IJCAI, and AAAI. He is on the IJCAI Board of Trustees.
 casting. He is recognized as the Most Influential Scholar Award Honorable Mention for
 “outstanding and vibrant contributions to the field of AAAI/IJCAI between 2009
 and 2019”. He is the IJCAI-2025 program chair.