10624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 Abnormal Logical Representation Learning for
Intrusion Detection in Industrial Control Systems
 Xinyu Xu , Yingxu Lai , Member, IEEE, Xiao Zhang , and Xinrui Dong

 Abstract—As security threats to industrial control sys- nation’s stable development [1]. However, ICSs have transitems become more prevalent, it is imperative to deploy tioned from their previous isolated to interconnected owing to
effective intrusion-detection systems. However, the existthe rapid development of networks, leading to a growing number
ing methods are insufficient for addressing contemporary
attacks. Rule-based methods are heavily dependent on of security threats. For example, in January 2022, Oiltanking, a
manual settings, and the covertness of attacks poses chal- major fuel distribution company in Germany, suffered a cyberlenges to rule effectiveness. Machine and deep learning attack, which resulted in the disruption of supply to nearly 200
methods exhibit low interpretability owing to their complex fuel stations [2]. This incident highlighted the significant threat
designs, and the semantic gap between the model and the
 posed by cybersecurity attacks on ICSs, underscoring the crucial
actual operational interpretation limits their applicability.
To mitigate these shortcomings, we propose an abnormal role of practical and effective intrusion-detection systems (IDSs)
logical representation learning (ALRL) intrusion detection in safeguarding ICSs.
method for industrial control systems. ALRL contains a
specific lightweight neural network and employs knowledge distillation to achieve high classification ability. More B. Limitations of Prior Methods
importantly, it can generate effective and concise intrusion detection rules directly from the learned knowledge Currently, most ICSs employ rule-based methods for IDSs,
of the model. The hierarchical model structure and resid- which are recognized for their reliability and human-readable
ual connections ensure high interpretability of the rules. representation of attack behaviors [3], [4], [5]. The advan-
Experiments conducted on two publicly available industrial
control datasets demonstrate that ALRL can classify at- tage of rule-based methods is that ICSs can execute actions
tacks with an excellent performance. In addition, the logical consistently and deterministically because rules define the
rules generated by ALRL can effectively detect all types of system’s behavior and decision logic. Unfortunately, existing
attacks and exhibit good interpretability. rule-based methods fail to satisfy the requirements for de-
 Index Terms—Control logic, industrial control system tecting critical attacks in ICSs, primarily for two key rea-
(ICS), intrusion detection, model interpretability, rule gen- sons. First, the creation of detection rules necessitates the ineration. volvement of domain experts throughout the process, making
 it time-consuming and labor-intensive to replicate the procedure for each distinct ICS. Second, attackers often em-
 I. INTRODUCTION
 ploy diverse strategies to conceal their activities, making it
A. Background and Motivation challenging for rules solely rooted in expert knowledge to com-
 NDUSTRIAL control systems (ICSs) are widely used to prehensively encompass the essential elements of these attacks.
I control and monitor physical processes closely related to
critical infrastructure, playing a crucial role in maintaining a
 Therefore, rule-based methods can have high false-positive
 rates and suffer from low detection rates in realistic attack
 scenarios, which can lead to significant damage to physical
 processes.
 Manuscript received 7 November 2023; revised 13 March 2024 and In contrast, machine learning (ML)- and deep learning (DL)-
8 April 2024; accepted 17 April 2024. Date of publication 15 May 2024; based intrusion detection methods exhibit outstanding detection
date of current version 5 August 2024. This work was supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 63272017. performance [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. However, deploying
Paper no. TII-23-4401. (Corresponding author: Yingxu Lai.) these methods directly in an ICS is challenging. Owing to the
 Xinyu Xu, Xiao Zhang, and Xinrui Dong are with the Faculty of In- extensive volume of network traffic, misclassification generated
formation Technology, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124,
China (e-mail: xuxy22@emails.bjut.edu.cn; xiao_coraline@emails.bjut. by ML and DL methods requires security analysts to spend a
edu.cn; xinruidong@emails.bjut.edu.cn). substantial amount of time and effort manually reviewing false
 Yingxu Lai is with the Faculty of Information Technology, Beijing Uni- system alarms, resulting in high error costs. This drawback is
versity of Technology, Beijing 100124, China, and also with the Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Perception and Autonomous rooted in the sophisticated design of the models intended to
Control, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: laiyingxu capture complex feature interactions, which suffer from low
@bjut.edu.cn). interpretability and transparency. A semantic gap exists between
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3396348. the model and the actual operational interpretation of adminis-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3396348 trators, making it challenging to translate detection results into

 1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10625

actionable reports, such as deterministic rules [12]. Although II. RELATED WORK
some feature-based methods have been developed to explain
 A. Rule-Based IDSs
detection results [13], [14], imprecise feature extraction and the
complexity of intrusion alert descriptions may enable adver- Currently, rule-based IDSs are practical and prevalent within
saries to hide malicious content, rendering administrators unable ICSs owing to their deployment flexibility and human-readable
to grasp the underlying reasons behind attacks. Furthermore, nature. These rules enable administrators to monitor the realfeature-level explanations cannot reflect how and why detec- time status of the system conveniently. Adepu et al. [4] introtion models generate certain results because the corresponding duced a distributed method in form of rules for attack detecmodels themselves are unexplainable. tion, which relies on expert knowledge of process dynamics
 and the entanglement of states among physical components.
 However, the intricate operational logic of contemporary ICSs
C. Proposed Approach and Key Contributions
 increases the risk of overlooking the crucial details of ab-
 In this article, we propose an abnormal logical represen- normal behavior when relying solely on expert knowledge.
tation learning (ALRL) intrusion detection method for ICSs. Das et al. [5] conducted logical data analysis and designed a
Our method addresses two limitations of existing mainstream specific Boolean function for supervising attack classification.
IDSs, including the limited quality of rule-based methods and This approach learns the detection rules from historical sensor
the high training cost and low interpretability of DL meth- data and demonstrates excellent localization capabilities. Nevods. Specifically, we designed a lightweight neural network ertheless, it overlooks the relationship between the actuators and
to capture the logical relationships between industrial devices sensors, thereby affecting its detection performance, especially
and employed knowledge distillation to transfer knowledge in highly concealed attack scenarios. Ahmim et al. [6] proposed
from other models, enhancing the performance of attack clas- a hierarchical IDS based on decision trees and rule-based consification. To ensure high interpretability, we represented the cepts, which exhibited high true-negative and detection rates.
learned knowledge in the form of abnormal control logic Although decision trees are highly interpretable models capable
rules based on logical neural-symbolic representation. For an of directly extracting decision rules, balancing the precision
intuitive understanding of the rules, we partitioned the model and complexity of tree structures is challenging. The pursuit of
structure into distinct learning layers, showcasing the relation- high accuracy can result in overly complex models that generate
ships among devices within and across physical stages. Through excessive rule conditions.
residual connections, we enable the model to adjust the complexity of rules based on different attack scenarios. The key
contributions of this study are summarized as follows. B. ML- and DL-Based IDSs
 1) We propose ALRL, an intrusion detection method capable Many existing approaches have incorporated ML techniques
 of accurately detecting attacks and generating determin- with intrusion detection and have exhibited outstanding detecistic and interpretable rules. These rules contain clear tion performance. Zhang et al. [7] leveraged methods such as
 and precise attack information, bridging the gap between k-nearest neighbors and random forests to propose a multilayer
 effective but opaque models and transparent but low- IDS tailored for ICSs. This approach considers multiple data
 quality rules. Our method can help alleviate the workload sources and effectively differentiates between normal and attack
 of industrial maintainers in analyzing attack patterns and samples. Le et al. [8] proposed extreme gradient boosting (XGenhance the security of ICSs. Boost) model to improve the detection of imbalanced distribu-
 2) We designed a specific neural network to achieve pre- tion attack types in the industrial internet. Fang et al. [9] proposed
 cise identification of various attack behaviors in limited an ICS feature selection method based on genetic algorithms,
 computational scenarios. A significant contribution of which involves feature ranking to eliminate redundant features
 our work is the ability to directly generate effective and and utilizes tree-growing clustering to enhance optimization
 concise intrusion detection rules tailored for ICSs by speed.
 utilizing model knowledge learned from the classifica- DL methods are becoming increasingly prevalent, leading
 tion process. The hierarchical structure design based on to improved detection accuracy. This is attributed to the comphysical stages and residual connections empowers the plex model structures designed to capture feature relationships.
 rules with explanatory capabilities. Kravchikd et al. [10] introduced a one-dimensional convolu-
 3) We conducted extensive experiments on two publicly tional neural network with autoencoders to detect anomalies
 available industrial control datasets. The results demon- in IDSs. This approach considers both the time and frequency
 strate the effectiveness of ALRL in attack classifica- domains of the data and demonstrates the effectiveness of princition. Compared to other rule-based methods, ALRL pal component analysis for data preprocessing. Huong et al. [11]
 successfully reduces the average length of extracted proposed a lightweight and robust distributed anomaly detection
 abnormal control logic rules by approximately 44.05% architecture, with the hybrid design of autoencoder, transformer,
 and 16.42% on the two datasets while maintain- and fourier mixing sublayer.
 ing similar attack detection performance. These rules However, DL methods often struggle to provide concrete
 exhibit outstanding attack discrimination and good evidence for model behavioral decisions, introducing uncerinterpretability. tainty into predictive outcomes. To explain the decisions made
10626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 1. Overview of the structure of ALRL.

 TABLE I conditions composing these rules are often overly complex,
 COMPARISON OF EXISTING IDSS IN ICSS WITH ALRL†
 making their results uninterpretable. Conversely, our generated
 rules are sufficiently concise, enabling precise identification of
 attacks with a small number of rules and conditions, which can
 guide administrators to address anomalies promptly.

 III. ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING
 A. Overview of the ALRL
 An ALRL is a hierarchical IDS, as shown in Fig. 1. It comprises of four modules.
by the model, Sun et al. [13] utilized class-activation mapping 1) The binarization module is capable of binary encoding all
to extract highly correlated attack feature points from a DL sensors and actuators at each time step and stage.
model. These points are employed to formulate rules based 2) The logical learning module employs a neural network to
on historical information. However, the multitude of extracted learn the logical relationships that exist within and across
features hinders administrators from gaining a comprehensive stages among the sensors and actuators.
understanding of the state of the system. Bahadoripour et al. [14] 3) The prediction module is responsible for performing
employed Shapley additive explanations (SHAP) to identify how attack classification tasks by utilizing the new features
features contribute to attacks predicted by the model. Although acquired from the preceding modules.
the features reflect the attack characteristics to a certain extent, 4) The explanation module is designed to extract knowledge
the model decision process remains opaque. from a trained network in the form of deterministic rules.
 The following sections provide a detailed description of each
C. Comparison to Existing Research system module.

 We summarize the existing IDSs of ICSs in Table I. In terms
 B. Binarization Module
of effectiveness, it denotes the model’s capability to accurately
identify attacks. In terms of lightweight, it signifies the number The binarization module is primarily responsible for conof trainable parameters in the model, assessing the required verting the original feature values into one-dimensional tencomputational resources. ALRL combines the advantages of sors consisting of multiple zeros and ones. The outputs of the
the two existing mainstream methods, achieving enhanced per- binarization layer correspond to the fundamental conditions that
formance associated with the ML and DL methods while pro- form the rules. To enhance the alignment of conditions within
viding highly interpretable rules similar to rule-based methods. the ICS rules, we formulate specific criteria for different value
Although some methods are capable of generating rules, the categories.
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10627

 Fig. 3. Illustration of a logical representation.

 is set as f (·) = 1. Otherwise, f (·) = 0. Let the binary state
 encoding for all devices within the kth stage be denoted as
 h0,k = ak ⊕ sk (k ∈ K), where ak and sk denote the concatenated binary encodings of all actuators and sensors at stage k,
Fig. 2. Structure of the binarization module.
 respectively. K represents the total number of physical processing stages in a specific ICS.

 As illustrated in Fig. 2, we utilized a continuous binarization C. Logical Learning Module
layer to process sensor values, which refer to continuous data displayed by factory instruments highly relevant to various physical The logical learning module automatically utilizes logical
production processes, such as level indication transmitter (LIT), neural-symbolic representations to learn feature relationships
flow indication transmitter (FIT), and differential pressure indi- based on binary encoding. The impacts stemming from attacks
cator transmitter (DPIT). Simultaneously, a discrete binarization commonly manifest within a specific stage before propagating to
layer was employed to handle the actuator values. Actuator other stages. Based on this observation of industrial processes,
values typically involve discrete control signals or commands the module was partitioned into two parts. The initial logical
sent to actuators to execute actions, such as opening and closing layer is a single-stage logical layer that primarily concentrates
pump commands. Let sk,i and ak,i denote the values of the on capturing interdevice relationships within the same stage. The
ith sensor and actuator, respectively, within the kth stage. After subsequent logical layers are multistage logical layers designed
inputting a sensor value sk,i , the continuous binarization layer to capture operational logic spanning diverse stages, which
checks whether sk,i satisfies the defined boundary conditions augments the single-stage logic. This serves as an interpretable
and constructs the corresponding one-dimensional binary tensor, constraint on the structure, making the learned logic rules
denoted as sk,i intuitively responsive to control processes. In the following, we
 discuss the logical neural-symbolic representations used by each
sk,i = [f (sk,i < LL), f (sk,i > HH), f (HH ≥ sk,i ≥ LL), . . .]. logical neuron.
 (1) 1) Logical Neural-Symbolic Representation: Each logical
 layer consists of two distinct parts, namely a conjunction part
LL and HH represent the lower and upper limits of the sensor
 and disjunction part, which correspond to the logical operators
used to monitor the state of the production materials within the
 “AND” and “OR,” respectively. Let ul and vl represent the concontainer, respectively, and are determined by the operational
 junction and disjunction of the lth logical layer hl . Specifically,
requirements. For example, an LIT sensor monitors the liquid
 we define uli as the ith node in ul and vil as the ith node in vl .
level in a raw water tank, and its values indicate the current level
 The definitions of these two types of nodes are as follows:
of the liquid. In addition to the range specified by the sensor,
  
the boundary conditions can be determined based on the range uli = hl−1 , vil = hl−1 . (3)
of numerical fluctuations during a certain period of a known l,n l,n
 Wi,j =1 Wi,j =1
attack (e.g., values that frequently exceed or fall below a specific
threshold). This method is grounded in real-world domain prior l,n
 Here, Wi,j represents the weight parameters between the logical
knowledge and diverges from random sampling. layers, which are assigned discrete values of either zero or
 After inputting the actuator value ak,i , the discrete binariza- one, and n represents the number of times the weights are
tion layer assesses whether ak,i corresponds to the ON or OFF l,n
 calculated. Fig. 3 illustrates this procedure. Wi,j = 1 indicates
two distinct control states and outputs the corresponding binary the existence of a logical connection between the current layer’s
encoding, denoted as ak,i node hli and the previous layer’s node hl−1
 j .
 ak,i = [f (ak,i = ON), f (ak,i = OFF)]. (2) Considering the attack of intercepting PLC data packets and
 maliciously modifying pressure sensor values as an example, the
When the input feature value satisfies the designated boundaries conjunction part can detect inconsistencies between the actual
or states outlined in the conditions, the corresponding output production state and system operation. For instance, when the
10628 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE II purpose of the weights is to select node hl−1
 j from among all the
 TRUTH TABLE OF LOGICAL ACTIVATE FUNCTION
 nodes within the preceding layer that exhibit the highest activation probabilities toward node hli . The weights were calculated
 as follows:
  
  
 l,n l,n
 Wi,j = onehot argmax πi,j . (6)
 j

 Given that the argmax function is nondifferentiable, we use the
 Gumbel–Softmax estimator [18] as a differentiable approximation
pipeline pressure increases, the system closes the valve intended l,n l,n
 Wi,j = onehot(softmax(πi,j + gj )/τ ). (7)
for releasing gas, and this abnormal behavior can be identified. Meanwhile, the disjunction part captures various abnormal Here, gj is sampled from a Gumbel distribution (0,1), and τ
conditions. Whenever any sensor detects that the pipeline gas represents temperature. To ensure diversity in feature selection,
pressure exceeds the normal range, it triggers an alert. Therefore, we started at a high temperature (τ = 1) and annealed to a
a wide range of potential attacks can be effectively addressed by small temperature (τ = 0.0001) for training. Subsequently, we
employing both conjunction and disjunction neural units. concatenated all logical units stemming from different stages as
 2) Single-Stage Logical Learning Layer: This layer is pri- the output of the current layer (i.e., h1 = h1,1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ h1,K ).
marily designed to acquire an understanding of the logic of a 3) Multistage Logical Learning Layers: Building upon
device within a particular physical processing stage. Conse- device logic, the objective of the layers is to acquire operational
quently, this layer is partitioned into K submodules, and the logic spanning stages with the goal of encompassing the impacts
input of each submodule, hl,k , is derived from the binary en- of attacks across different processing stages comprehensively.
coding of the devices in the corresponding stage. Although a Instead of distinguishing logical features belonging to different
logical neural-symbolic representation can articulate the deci- stages, the input of the multistage logical learning layers insion process of a model in the form of rules, the binarization corporates all the logical features from the previous layer for
of its weight parameters renders the structure nondifferentiable, computation
posing obstacles to the application of gradient-based optimiza- m  
  l,n
tion techniques [15], [16], [17]. Therefore, logical activation uli = Fc hl−1 , Wi,j
functions have been employed as an alternative approach n=1
 m
    2m 
   
 ul,k
 i =
 l,n
 Fc h0,k , Wi,j vil = 1 − l,n
 1 − Fs hl−1 , Wi,j . (l > 1). (8)
 n=1 n=m+1
 2m 
    The computational procedures for Fc and Fs were the same
 vil,k = 1 − l,n
 1 − Fs h0,k , Wi,j . (l = 1). (4)
 as those described in (5). Furthermore, to handle instances
 n=m+1
 of comparatively straightforward abnormal logic arising from
We allocated m conjunction and disjunction logic units for each attacks effectively, we incorporated residual connections. This
device in the physical stage to extract the potential relationships enables the model to adaptively modulate the overall complexity
among devices within the same stage. Parameter m defines the of the rules for different types of attacks.
number of connections between each logical neuron and the
units within the preceding layer (i.e., m = 2), which enables D. Prediction Module
administrators to adjust the complexity of the rules according
to the real scenario. Fc and Fs are Boolean functions, and h From the logical-learning module, we obtained NL new fearepresents an element in the logical layer vector h tures, each corresponding to a distinct logical rule. By leveraging
 these features, we established an attack multiclassifier using a
 Fc (h, W ) = (1 − W · (1 − h)) , Fs (h, W ) = W · h. (5) fully connected layer. To enhance the human comprehension of
 rules, we applied the softplus function to map the parameter
Table II presents the truth tables corresponding to different weights into a nonnegative interval
weights and inputs. W can be interpreted as a logical feature
selector. This ensures that, except for the node corresponding to ỹi = log(1 + exp(wi )) · hl . (9)
W = 1, the remaining nodes exert no influence on the overall
logic. Therefore, both activation functions satisfied the previ- Here, wi represents the importance of different logical features
ously defined requirements for conjunctions and disjunctions. for identifying the ith attack class. ỹi denotes the predictive
 To integrate logical layer weights into the aforementioned probability that a sample belongs to the ith class. To make the
Boolean functions, it is imperative to map the continuous weight final classification decision, we select the class with the highest
parameters π to discrete binary values of zero or one. The probability as the predicted attack category.
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10629

E. Training Objective the disjunctive rules into multiple logically independent conditions based on the distributive laws of Boolean algebra [20], to
 In ALRL, better model performance implies that more accuidentify the satisfied condition for a given attack. Subsequently,
rate rules can be extracted from the model. To further improve the
 we randomly selected n attack samples and represented each
classification performance of the proposed model, knowledge
 sample as xn , where xn included various device values. We
distillation [19] was employed to transfer knowledge between
 then calculated the degree of matching for each independent
heterogeneous models.
 condition as follows:
 The loss function of the model consists of two components:
classification loss Lhard and distillation loss Ldist . Lhard measures mcond∗ = f (cond∗ ; xn )/n. (13)
the discrepancy between the model predictions ỹi and ground- n
truth labels ci . Ldist quantifies the differences between the model
 Function f checks whether the values of input xn satisfy the
predictions ỹi and the classification probabilities zi of the teacher
 specific cond∗ . If the condition is satisfied, the output is set as
model, which are defined as follows:
 f (·) = 1. We select the independent conditions with the highest
 N attack matching rates (i.e., mcond∗ > 0.9) to construct the attack
 Lhard = − ci log(softmax(ỹi )) condition set {cond∗1 , cond∗2 , . . . , cond∗p }, which is then linked
 i utilizing the logical AND operator. Consequently, deterministic
 N rules Rc can be generated for this attack as follows:
 Ldist = − softmax(zi /T )log(softmax(ỹi /T )). (10) Rc = {cond∗1 ∧ cond∗2 ∧ · · · ∧ cond∗p }. (14)
 i
 As an example, consider a malicious attack to open the main
The final objective function is defined as follows:
 water valve MV101 when the water tank LIT101 is full. The
 Lloss = T ∗ T ∗ αLdist + (1 − α)Lhard . (11) explanation module will output a series of candidate rules with
 high weights, involving conjunctions (e.g., r1 = c1 : 871.254 ≥
Considering the gradient scaling of 1/T 2 in Ldist , it is necessary LIT101 ≥ 814.377 ∧ c2 : 925.032 ≥ LIT101 ≥ 575.032) and
to multiply the distillation loss by T 2 to maintain a balance be- disjunctions (e.g., r2 = c3 : MV101 = ON ∨ c4 : LIT101 =
tween the classification and distillation losses during the update 700). To generate the determined rule, redundant rules were
process. α is a hyperparameter used to adjust the ratio between removed. r1 = c1 ∧ c2 can be simplified as r1 = c1 , for c1 is a
the two losses. subset of c2 in conjunction. Rules that were irrelevant to this
 type of attack were eliminated. r2 = c3 ∨ c4 can be simplified
F. Explanation Module as r2 = c3 , for the attack samples do not satisfy c4 but c3 in disjunction. Through these processes, we simplified the description
 The interpretation of ALRL is a progressive process that can
 of the abnormal rules. Finally, by connecting the remaining rules
be simplified by considering the binary and logical learning
 through conjunctions, we obtain a streamlined and effective set
modules as feature learners. In both modules, each layer conof deterministic rules c1 ∧ c3 .
structs new features based on information from the preceding
layer and is guided by logical rules. Consequently, the final layer
 IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATIONS
contains all the knowledge acquired by the model.
 1) Constructing a Candidate Rule Set for Attacks: To extract This section initially clarifies the datasets and experimental
the attack rules pertaining to a specific attack category c, we setup and then presents the comprehensive experimental results,
extract the fully connected weights of the cth row of the pre- aiming at answering the following questions.
diction module. By sorting the weight values in descending Q1. Does the knowledge distillation of ALRL contribute
order and analyzing the corresponding features, we can define a positively to detection performance?
threshold (th = 10) to filter and understand the most important Q2. Can the rule-based interpretable ALRL model achieve
rules. These rules and their corresponding weights w constitute detection accuracy comparable to that of well-performing intruthe candidate rule set RSc sion detection models?
 Q3. How are the decisions made by ALRL explained?
 RSc = {rule1 : w1 , rule2 : w2 , . . . , ruleth : wth }. (12) Q4. What are the characteristics of the detection rules learned
 by ALRL?
Each rule in the candidate rule set consists of multiple conditions
and logical operators (∧ and ∨). These conditions describe the
 A. Datasets Description
devices and their decision boundaries based on the output of the
binarization module. We took two public industrial control datasets to conduct our
 2) Generating the Detection Rules Based on the Candidate experiment.
Rule Set: To enhance readability, we simplify each rule in RSc 1) Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [21]: This is a publicly
while preserving its original logical meaning. For example, if available dataset from a water treatment test bed, which is a
multiple conditions in a conjunction rule describe the same downscaled industrial replica of a water treatment plant. It has
sensor, we maintain these conditions with a smaller decision six stages and can produce five gallons of filtered water per
boundary. To generate the required deterministic rules, we split minute. We selected 35 practical impact attacks to evaluate the
10630 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

performance of the proposed model. Real-time data related to input samples. These complex ML methods generally achieve
gthe production of the 25 sensors and 26 actuators were col- better detection performance than interpretable rule-based methlected. This dataset includes various attacks targeting complex ods but compromise interpretability to a great extent.
physical processes that are advantageous for evaluating IDSs. DL methods: The self-attention and intersample atten-
 2) Water Distribution Testbed (WADI) [22]: This is a publicly tion transformer (SAINT) [26] proposed a novel enhanced
available dataset from a water resource distribution simulation embedding method based on a deep transformer network that
system and is an extension of the SWaT dataset. There are three demonstrated strong performance in processing data samples
stages related to water distribution. The attacks encompassed with a mixture of continuous, categorical, and ordinal values.
13 categories of cyberattacks, and real-time data were collected 1-D convolutional neural networks (1D-CNN) [10] are effective
from 69 sensors and 54 actuators. cyberattack detection mechanisms in ICS. They achieve optimal
 In both datasets, we used four attack scenarios to test ALRL’s performance while maintaining generality, simplicity, and a
performance. small footprint. Logic understanding IDS (LU-IDS) [13] is a
 1) Single-stage single-point (SSSP): An SSSP attack focuses recently proposed intrusion detection method. A specific DL
 on exactly one point in the ICS. module for the ICS was designed based on a residual network.
 2) Single-stage multipoint (SSMP): An SSMP attack fo- Owing to its capability of capturing rich feature representations
 cuses on two or more attack points in an ICS but only from data during training, it can serve as a powerful performance
 on one industrial process stage. benchmark. Therefore, we utilized this particular residual net-
 3) Multistage single-point (MSSP): An MSSP attack is sim- work as a teacher model to transfer its learned representation to
 ilar to an SSMP attack, except that the SSMP attack is our model, which can potentially enhance the learning process
 performed in multiple stages. and improve performance.
 4) Multistage multipoint (MSMP): An MSMP attack is an 3) Parameter Settings: Within the logical-learning module,
 SSMP attack that is performed in two or more stages of we set L = 2. For the single-stage logic learning layer, we
 the ICS. configure the number of logic units based on the number of
 sensors and actuators at each distinct physical stage of the
 dataset. In the SWaT dataset, in which the number of devices
B. Experimental Methodology and Settings designed for each physical stage was approximately equal, we
 1) Data Preprocessing: The SWaT dataset contains set the number of disjunctive and conjunctive logic units to 24.
4 499 919 raw data samples, while the WADI dataset contains In the WADI dataset, as the secondary grid stage encompasses
172 801 raw data samples. Abnormal samples are labeled multiple water tanks, requiring a larger set of physical devices
with attack types based on publicly available attack manuals. for monitoring than the other two stages, we set the number
Considering the nature of the target data sequences, we retained of logic units to {24, 72, 24} to accommodate the differences.
all attack samples and selected a set of samples occurring 1000 s For the multistage logic learning layers, considering the model
before each attack type as normal samples to address imbalances complexity and computational efficiency, we uniformly set the
in sample quantities. After downsampling, the SWaT dataset number of conjunction and disjunction units to 64. We utilized
contains 47 044 samples, including 26 877 normal samples. Adam for the training process with a mini-batch size of 32, which
The WADI dataset contains 20 947 samples, including 11 087 was selected for its efficient handling of sparse gradients [27].
normal samples. We adopted a learning rate decay strategy in which the initial
 2) Baselines for Attack Classification: To demonstrate the learning rate started at 0.01 and linearly decreased to 0.001. It
validity of our method, we compared it with seven existing well- provides a smoother transition in the optimization landscape,
performed methods. Rule-based methods: The classification and with fast convergence in the early stage and an optimal solution
regression tree (CART) [23] is known for its interpretability, in the late stage. The training was conducted over 50 epochs.
making it suitable for understanding decision-making processes. We used the scikit-learn default parameters for CART and
However, the generated decision trees, particularly those with XGBoost. Ten estimators were used for the ensemble models.
numerous continuous features, can become overly complex. For RLL and PLNN, we set the optimizer selection, learning
Therefore, we employed cost-complexity pruning with pruning rate, decay rate, batch size, model depth, and width to be the
values of 0.003, 0.001, and 0.0, assessing the impact of dif- same as those for ALRL. For the 1D-CNN, we constructed a
ferent pruning thresholds on interpretability and performance. model comprising five convolutional and three linear layers.
Higher values indicated simpler trees. A rule-based represen- These convolutional layers conduct one-dimensional convolutation learner (RRL) [17] can automatically learn interpretable tions with kernel sizes decreasing from five to one and a stride
nonfuzzy rules for data representation and classification, which of one. To perform attack classification, we replaced the final
represents a state-of-the-art rule-based classification model. fully connected layer based on the number of attack categories.
 ML methods: XGBoost [24] is a powerful gradient boosting For SAINT, we set the number of stages to 1, the number of
tree algorithm that integrates multiple weak classifiers into a attention heads in each attention layer to 4, the embedding size
strong classifier. A piecewise linear neural network (PLNN) [25] to 32, and the dropout rate to 0.8. In the data preprocessing of the
represents an MLP in a mathematically equivalent linear form 1D-CNN and SAINT, the features were normalized to the (0,1)
that adopts piecewise linear activation functions, such as recti- scale. For the LU-IDS, we encoded the features using IEEE754
fied linear unit (ReLU), which can offer explanatory insights into and input them into a residual network composed of four residual
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10631

 TABLE III
 ATTACK CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE ON THE SWAT DATASET

Fig. 4. Attack classification performances using different values of α
and T . The black dashed line shows the performance when α = 0.

blocks. Each residual block consists of two convolutional layers
with a kernel size of 3 × 1.
 4) Evaluation Metrics: The experiments were conducted on
a Linux server equipped with a GeForce RTX 3070 GPU. We TABLE IV
adopted accuracy, precision, recall, and F 1 (macro) as attack ATTACK CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE ON THE WADI DATASET
classification performance metrics because the datasets were
imbalanced. We adopted a five-fold cross-validation to evaluate
the classification performance more fairly, with 80% of the
data used for model training and the remaining 20% used for
validation. The calculation details are as follows:
 TP + TN TP
 Accuracy = , Precision =
 TP + FP + TN + FN TP+FP
 TP 2 ∗ Precision × Recall
 Recall = ,F1 = . (15)
 TP + FN Precision + Recall
TP is a normal sample classified as a normal sample, and TN is
an attack sample classified as an attack sample. FP indicates an
attack sample classified as normal, and FN indicates a normal
sample classified as an attack.
 In addition, we calculated the false alarm rates (FAR) for D. Model Performances for Attack Classification (Q2)
evaluating the performance of intrusion detection with the rules Tables III and IV present the average performance measures
on the two public datasets as follows: of ALRL for attack classification, following a five-fold cross-
 FN validation of the SWaT and WADI datasets. The results indicate
 FAR = . (16) that, compared to other interpretable rule-based methods, ALRL
 FN + TP
In both datasets, each sample encompassed all the device values achieves outstanding attack classification performance across
per second. Therefore, for a more comprehensive evaluation both datasets. Although complex ML/DL approaches exhibit a
of the FAR, we selected all normal samples from the above- performance comparable to that of ALRL in the domain of attack
mentioned datasets and calculated the ratio of normal samples classification, their limitations in terms of model interpretabilmislabeled as attacks to the total number of normal samples. ity impede a deeper understanding of the underlying attack
 behaviors.
C. Distillation Temperature Study (Q1) Another advantage of ALRL is its low training cost. In the
 same training environment, we use the number of learnable
 We presented performance comparisons for ALRL with dif- parameters and training time per epoch as metrics to show the
ferent distillation temperatures T and distillation loss propor- model complexity. Since CART and XGBoost employ heuristic
tions α. The results are shown in Fig. 4. The black dashed line learning methods, they do not have learnable parameters and
serves as a baseline, representing the performance of ALRL were, thus, excluded from the comparison. The results show
when it does not utilize knowledge from the teacher model that ALRL requires fewer model parameters and less training
during the training process. The results demonstrated that the time to achieve an excellent detection performance, making it
performance of ALRL with distillation loss surpassed that of a promising choice for real-world use in settings with limited
the baseline, highlighting the contribution of knowledge from computational resources.
the teacher model. Although the neural network alone has
already achieved a good performance, further enhancements
can be achieved by choosing different temperatures and ratios. E. Explaining the Decisions of ALRL (Q3)
Therefore, we employed the set of parameters yielding the Before obtaining specific detection rules, we can gain intuitive
highest model performance for subsequent experiments on both insights into attacks from a global perspective by analyzing the
datasets, namely α = 0.2 and T = 10. weights and semantic information associated with the features
10632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 5. Explaining a sample of Attack 1 on the SWaT dataset. (a) A summary plot of top important features in predicting attack class 1.
(b) A pie chart shows the predict probability based on the top 5 important features, label marked with asterisks denote the decision outcomes.
(c) A contribution table illustrates how the important features of the sample effect the prediction of attack class 1.

 TABLE V
 GENERATED RULE ATTACK DETECTION PERFORMANCE FOR ALRL ON THE
 SWAT DATASET†

Fig. 6. Performance degradation curve of the rules at different
thresholds.

in the explanation module. This can significantly aid administrators in quickly comprehending anomalies within an ICS.
Fig. 5 presents an example of the detailed explanatory information provided by the ALRL in a specific attack scenario on the
SWaT dataset. Fig. 5(a), we observe that both actuator MV101
and sensor LIT101 play crucial roles in the model determination.
Fig. 5(b) and 5(c) showcases the top five important features,
allowing us to roughly classify the attack samples. When the
sample’s feature values satisfy the conditions expressed by the
semantic information, the prediction is positively influenced by
11.34%, with Attack 1 having the highest probability. This is
consistent with realistic results.
 TABLE VI
F. Rule Performances for Intrusion Detection (Q4) GENERATED RULE ATTACK DETECTION PERFORMANCE FOR ALRL ON THE
 WADI DATASET
 We analyzed the effectiveness and simplicity of the deterministic intrusion detection rules generated by ALRL as follows.
 1) Parameter Sensitivity: We studied the importance of the
model parameters by varying the thresholds to show how the
attack matching rates affect the quality of the generated detection
rules. Fig. 6 presents the performance degradation curves of
the rules under different thresholds. We observe that the rules
achieved optimal performance at a threshold of 0.9. This is
attributed to the fact that excessively low thresholds result in
underfitting, failing to adequately capture the characteristics of
attacks, whereas excessively high thresholds lead to overfitting,
in which the generated rules make overly stringent assumptions
about attacks and fail to effectively identify all attack samples.
These findings inspired us to achieve better results by selecting the generalization of rules while maintaining basic detection
an appropriate threshold based on the scenario, thereby ensuring accuracy.
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10633

 TABLE VII 44.95% compared with that of LU-IDS. Similarly, on the WADI
 PERFORMANCES OF GENERATED RULES IN INTRUSION DETECTION TASKS
 ON TWO DATASETS
 dataset, the average rule length decreased by 16.42% compared
 with that of the unpruned CART. In addition, the ALRL consistently demonstrated remarkably low entropy values across both
 datasets, signifying the distinct importance of each condition
 within the rules. Overall, our generated rules contain highly
 effective information that surpasses that of domain experts alone.
 The combination of rule effectiveness and simplicity in ALRL
 makes it an effective tool for industrial maintainers to identify
 and respond to attacks on ICSs.
 4) Case Study: Based on the interrelationships between logical conditions, we can roughly classify the rules into three types.
 2) Individual Rules Detection Performance: Tables V and We provided a detailed description of the characteristics of each
VI present the rules generated from the ALRL and the cor- type.
responding detection performance. On the SWaT dataset, our a) Directly associated anomalous logic: RULE1 :
rules successfully detected all 35 attack types with an accuracy 871.254 ≥ LIT101 ≥ 814.377 ∧ MV101 = ON ∧ 2.671 ≥
exceeding 90%, and the attack points were identified early within FIT101 ≥ 0 ∧ 189.519 ≥ PIT503 ≥ 188.525 ∧ 1.732 ≥
the rules. For the WADI dataset, the rules achieved a detection FIT501 ≥ 1.722 ∧ 265.188 ≥ AIT201 ≥ 262.144. The condiaccuracy of at least 95% for each of the 13 attack categories tion LIT101 ≥ 814.377 indicates that the original water tank
tested. This indicates that the ALRL-extracted rules effectively storage value exceeded the maximum boundary HH (where HH
captured the core abnormal logic for each attack type. = 800 in SWaT). In this scenario, the attacker maliciously opens
 3) Comparison of Rule Ensemble Effects: Table VII the valve controlling the inflow of raw water MV101 = ON,
presents the rule ensemble performance for intrusion detection resulting in a water tank overflow. Consequently, the state of
using the rules generated by ALRL on the SWaT and WADI the actuator directly affects the sensor value.
datasets. We evaluated our rules against the four attack scenarios RULE34 : FIT401 = 0 ∧ UV401 = OFF ∧ P201 = ON
provided in the abovementioned two datasets and calculated ∧ 834.363 ≥ LIT301 ≥ 580.363 ∧ FIT601 = 0.0 ∧ 919.072
the F1-score and FAR for each attack scenario, where samples ≥ LIT401 ≥ 775.109. The conditions FIT401 = 0 and
corresponding to specific attacks were marked as anomalies UV401 = OFF indicate that, under certain circumstances,
and all others were considered normal. Our rules consistently the attacker maliciously sets the value of FIT401 to zero,
exhibited high F 1-scores across various attack scenarios. In which triggers the closure of UV401. Consequently, the water
addition, our rules resulted in only a small number of false flow to the reverse osmosis system decreases significantly,
positives: 0.0637% on the SWaT dataset and 0.0949% on the ultimately causing damage to subsequent components of the
WADI dataset. This result proves that despite the abundance of water treatment system. Therefore, the sensor values can
samples, these rules do not lead to an excessively high FAR. influence the switching states of the actuators.
 To further emphasize the strong interpretability of the rules, Overall, this rule demonstrates that the ALRL is capable
we compared ALRL with two state-of-the-art rule-based meth- of learning and extracting direct and effective relationships
ods: CART [23] and LU-IDS [13]. We adopted the rule set between sensors and actuators.
size, min and max rule lengths, average rule length, information b) Abnormal logic influence among devices within the
entropy Hs , and F 1-score as the metrics to evaluate the rules. same stage: RULE5 : P203 = OFF ∧ 263.522 ≥ AIT201 ≥
Hs represents the amount of useful information contained in 263.298 ∧ AIT202 = 6 ∧ P204 = OFF ∧ 523.632 ≥ LIT101
each rule condition and is calculated as follows: ≥ 498.629 ∧ P101 = ON ∧ 946.552 ≥ LIT301 ≥ 854.509.
 n n
 The majority of Rule 5 consists of devices within the same stage,
 Hs = pi I e = − pi log2 si (17) including the chemical composition measurement instruments
 i=1 i=1
 AIT201 and AIT202, as well as the control valves P203 and
where pi = 1/n, and n denotes the number of conditions in the P204 for introducing chemical additives. The attacker forcibly
rule. Accuracy was adopted as a measure of self-information si set AIT202, which is used to measure chemical additives, to
in this study. Under extreme conditions, when a certain condition six. This action led to an erroneous assessment of the current
within a rule does not assist in distinguishing between attacks, water quality by the system, resulting in the improper closure
the accuracy of the rule becomes zero, leading to infinite entropy. of control valve P203 for chemical additive input. Ultimately,
 Table VIII presents the comparison results with rule-based this negatively affected the water quality following sewage
methods. We observed that ALRL had the minimum number treatment. This indicates that ALRL can successfully learn and
of rules in the rule set, and the rules had shorter lengths than analyze the underlying logical relationships between chemical
those generated by other rule-based methods for both complex reagent measurement instruments and control devices within
and simple attack scenarios within both datasets. Notably, while the same process stage.
maintaining the same level of detection accuracy, ALRL’s aver- c) Cross-stage abnormal operational logic: RULE21 :
age rule length on the SWaT dataset was significantly reduced by P102 = ON ∧ LIT301 = 801. Despite consisting of only two
10634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE VIII
 COMPARISON RESULTS WITH RULE-BASED METHODS ON TWO DATASETS†

conditions, this clearly reflects the existing operational logic capable of generating effective and concise rules. Compared to
between different stages. The attacker opened P102 while P101 DL methods, ALRL exhibits high interpretability owing to its
was open, leading to increased water flow in the subsequent structural transparency and low complexity, while maintaining
stage. Because the second stage was intended solely for the comparable performance. In summary, ALRL emerges as a
addition of chemical additives, excess water flowed into the promising solution for enhancing the security of ICSs.
storage tank of the third stage. Consequently, the water in storage
tank LIT301 overflowed, surpassing the upper boundary HH REFERENCES
(where HH = 800 in SWaT). Such multistage abnormal logic
 [1] D. Bhamare, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, K. Khan, and N. Meskin,
rules are valuable for administrators because they facilitate the “Cybersecurity for industrial control systems: A survey,” in Comput.
rapid comprehension of attack points and their corresponding Secur., vol. 89, 2020, Art. no. 101677.
interconnected responses, even when administrators lack knowl- [2] J. Tidy, “European oil facilities hit by cyber-attacks,” Feb., 2022. [Online].
 Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-60250956
edge of the internal operational logic within a facility. [3] A. Jones, Z. Kong, and C. Belta, “Anomaly detection in cyber-physical
 systems: A formal methods approach,” in Proc. IEEE 53rd Conf. Decis.
G. Discussion on the Challenges of Security Monitoring Control, 2014, pp. 848–853.
 [4] S. Adepu and A. Mathur, “Distributed attack detection in a water treatment
 Although the concise and effective rules generated by ALRL plant: Method and case study,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 86–99, Jan./Feb., 2021.
strengthen the security of ICSs, some challenges remain in their [5] T. K. Das, S. Adepu, and J. Zhou, “Anomaly detection in industrial control
deployment in practical security monitoring. systems using logical analysis of data,” Comput. Secur., vol. 96, 2020,
 1) Online learning: ALRL’s training methodology involves Art. no. 101935.
 [6] A. Ahmim, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, and H. Janicke, “A
 the offline training of static data. However, real-world novel hierarchical intrusion detection system based on decision tree and
 systems operate in dynamic environments where new rules-based models,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Sensor
 threats continuously emerge. Syst., 2019, pp. 228–233.
 [7] F. Zhang, H. A. D. E. Kodituwakku, J. W. Hines, and J. Coble, “Multilayer
 2) Rule updates: In response to emerging threats, the timely data-driven cyber-attack detection system for industrial control systems
 incorporation of new rules or modifications to existing based on network, system, and process data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform.,
 rules is necessary. However, the updating process may vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 4362–4369, Jul. 2019.
 [8] T.-T.-H. Le, Y. E. Oktian, and H. Kim, “Xgboost for imbalanced multidisrupt the performance of the existing rules. class classification-based industrial Internet of Things intrusion detection
 Therefore, in future work, we will consider adopting in- systems,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 14, 2022, Art. no. 8707.
cremental learning during the training process to endow the [9] Y. Fang, Y. Yao, X. Lin, J. Wang, and H. Zhai, “A feature selection based
 on genetic algorithm for intrusion detection of industrial control systems,”
model with the ability of dynamic learning, which will augment Comput. Secur., vol. 139, 2024, Art. no. 03675.
the knowledge of the existing model using new data samples. [10] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in industrial
Moreover, integrating security analyst feedback into the rule control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,” IEEE Trans.
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197, Apr. 2021.
update loop can ensure the real-time efficacy of the rule set. [11] H. T. Truong et al., “Light-weight federated learning-based anomaly
 detection for time-series data in industrial control systems,” Comput. Ind.,
 V. CONCLUSION vol. 140, 2022, Art. no. 103692.
 [12] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 This article presents a novel intrusion detection method for learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
ICSs called ALRL, which can accurately identify multiple Privacy, 2010, pp. 305–316.
 [13] M. Sun, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, J. Liu, B. Mao, and H. Gu, “Intrusion detection
types of attacks and generate the corresponding effective and system based on in-depth understandings of industrial control logic,” IEEE
human-readable detection rules. This is achieved by designing Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2295–2306, Mar. 2022.
specific neural networks and knowledge distillation for attack [14] S. Bahadoripoura, H. Karimipoura, A. N. Jahromia, and A. Islama,
 “An explainable multi-modal model for advanced cyber-attack detecclassification, coupled with the extraction of anomalous con- tion in industrial control systems,” Internet Things, vol. 25, 2024,
trol logic rules using logical neural-symbolic representation. Art. no. 101092.
The hierarchical logical learning model structure and resid- [15] H. Qin, R. Gong, X. Liu, X. Bai, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Binary neural
 networks: A survey,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 105, 2020, Art. no. 107281.
ual connections resulted in the formation of simpler rules. [16] P. Sen, B. W. de Carvalho, R. Riegel, and A. Gray, “Neuro-symbolic
Extensive experiments on two public datasets demonstrate that, inductive logic programming with logical neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI
compared to rule-learning methods, ALRL can automatically Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 8, 2022, pp. 8212–8219.
 [17] Z. Wang, W. Zhang, N. Liu, and J. Wang, “Learning interpretable rules for
learn complex relationships between industrial control data scalable data representation and classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
features, exhibit outstanding classification performance, and be Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 1121–1133, 2024.
XU et al.: ABNORMAL LOGICAL REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN ICSS 10635

[18] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with gumbel- Yingxu Lai (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 softmax,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, pp. 1–12. degree in computer science and technology
 [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkE3y85ee from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
[19] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural China, in 2003.
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531. She joined the College of Computer Science,
[20] P. Halmos and S. Givant, Introduction to Boolean Algebras. Berlin, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China,
 Germany: Springer, 2009. in 2003, and is currently a Full Professor. She
[21] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWAT: A water treatment testbed was a Visiting Scholar with Arizona State Unifor research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop versity, Tempe, AZ, USA, from 2013 to 2014.
 Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36. She has had more than 70 papers published in
[22] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution various international journals and conferences.
 testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” Her research interest covers cloud computing, network security, edge
 in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017, computing, and trusted computing.
 pp. 25–28.
[23] L. Breiman, Classification and Regression Trees. London, U.K.:
 Routledge, 2017.
 Xiao Zhang received the B.E. degree in infor-
[24] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in
 Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, mation security in 2022 from the Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China, where she
 pp. 785–794.
 is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
[25] L. Chu, X. Hu, J. Hu, L. Wang, and J. Pei, “Exact and consistent interprecomputer science and technology with the Institation for piecewise linear neural networks: A closed form solution,” in
 tute of Information Security.
 Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018,
 Her research focuses on knowledge graph
 pp. 1244–1253.
 and industrial control system security.
[26] G. Somepalli, A. Schwarzschild, M. Goldblum, C. B. Bruss, and T. Goldstein, “SAINT: Improved neural networks for tabular data via row attention
 and contrastive pre-training,” in Proc. NeurIPS 1st Table Representation
 Workshop, 2022, pp. 1–18. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 forum?id=FiyUTAy4sB8
[27] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” Xinrui Dong received the B.E. degree in inforin Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, pp. 1–15, 2015. [Online]. mation security in 2022 from the Beijing Uni-
 Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980 versity of Technology, Beijing, China, where she
 is currently working toward the M.S. degree in
 information security.
 Her research interests include industrial con-
 Xinyu Xu received the B.E. degree in computer trol systems security and intrusion detection.
 science and technology in 2022 from the Beijing She also explored the field of deep learning and
 University of Technology, Beijing, China, where few-show incremental learning.
 he is currently working toward the M.S. degree
 in information security.
 His research interests include intrusion detection, deep learning, and model interpretation.