IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024 12103

 Adaptive Working Condition Recognition With
 Clustering-Based Contrastive Learning for
 Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
 Qifa Xu , Tianming Xie , Cuixia Jiang , Qiliang Cheng , and Xiangxiang Wang

 Abstract—In real industrial processes, machines usu- of promptly capturing abnormal behaviors during machine opally run under variable working conditions, which impose erations. This lays a crucial foundation for subsequent machine
challenges for anomaly detection. To complete anomaly fault diagnosis and repair processes. To date, there have been
detection for machines under variable working conditions,
we develop a reconstruction-based autoencoder called numerous studies on anomaly detection using various types of
clustering-based contrastive learning autoencoder (CBCL- data, including images [3], videos [4], multivariate time series
AE). It integrates clustering-based contrastive learning (MTS) [5], and so on. In general, MTS can retain more informa-
(CBCL) to perform clustering in the feature space and en- tion in the temporal dimension than in images and videos with
hance the differentiation of features from different working
 the same storage capacity. As a result, MTS anomaly detection
conditions, thereby achieving adaptive working condition
recognition. Considering the crucial role of the cluster- has been increasingly applied in various industrial production
ing of CBCL, we theoretically and experimentally demon- environments as a cost-effective solution to reduce storage costs.
strate its convergence property during the training process, In real industrial processes, the existing anomaly detection
which directly determines the effectiveness of CBCL-AE. methods can be primarily grouped into three types: model-based,
CBCL-AE’s superiority has been validated on three public
 signal-based, and knowledge-based methods. First, model-based
datasets and two private datasets collected from an actual industrial process. These validations highlight its su- methods [6], [7], [8] leverage prior information from indusperiority over five state-of-the-art models in unsupervised trial processes or practical system models, enabling accurate
anomaly detection. anomaly detection even with limited data. However, it is diffi-
 Index Terms—Adaptive working condition recognition, cult to acquire accurate, comprehensive, and reliable models in
anomaly detection, clustering-based contrastive learning complicated industrial production environments. Moreover, the
(CBCL), multivariate time series (MTS), reconstruction- system’s outputs are instability and may be influenced by varibased autoencoder, variable working conditions. ous factors, such as environmental noise, machine lubrication,
 and temperature, which reduce the efficiency of model-based
 methods. Second, signal-based methods [9] extract features
 I. INTRODUCTION
 from measured signals, then analyze symptoms and make di-
 N THE era of Industry 4.0, the significance of anomaly
I detection is growing exponentially across various industries, encompassing wind power, transportation, oil, natural
 agnostic decisions based on prior knowledge of the system.
 Owing to the rich information contained in time-domain and
 frequency-domain signals, the performance of fault diagnosis
gas, aerospace, vehicles, etc. [1], [2]. As the earliest stage of in motors [10] and rotary machines [11] can be improved.
Prognostics Health Management, anomaly detection is capable For this reason, signal-based anomaly detection requires high
 storage capacity to preserve more detailed information. Third,
 Manuscript received 4 November 2023; revised 14 April 2024 and 19
 the characteristic of knowledge-based methods is to extract
May 2024; accepted 2 June 2024. Date of publication 24 June 2024; underlying knowledge from a large volume of historical data
date of current version 7 October 2024. This work was supported by using artificial intelligence techniques. The knowledge-based
the National Natural Science Foundation of PR China under Grant
72171070. Paper no. TII-23-4355. (Corresponding author: Tianming
 method [12], [13], [14] is also referred to as a data-driven
Xie.) method for its reliance on historical data for decision-making.
 Qifa Xu and Cuixia Jiang are with the School of Manage- With the rapid progress in big data and computing capability,
ment, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei 230009, China (e-mail:
xuqifa@hfut.edu.cn; jiangcuixia@hfut.edu.cn).
 knowledge-based methods that rely on artificial intelligence
 Tianming Xie is with the School of Management, Hefei University of models have gained significant attention as a popular research
Technology, Hefei 230009, China, and also with the Faculty of Engineer- area in recent years.
ing and Environment, Northumbria University, NE1 8ST Newcastle upon
Tyne, U.K. (e-mail: xietianming@mail.hfut.edu.cn).
 In industrial production environments, a machine anomaly is
 Qiliang Cheng and Xiangxiang Wang are with RONDS Science and a typical low-probability event and presents some characteris-
Technology Incorporated Company, Hefei 230000, China (e-mail: qil- tics, such as unpredictability, unknown patterns, and diversity.
iang.cheng@ronds.com.cn; xiangxiang.wang@ronds.com.cn).
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
 Therefore, unsupervised data-driven methods are more suitable
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3413952. for anomaly detection. In these methods, autoencoders [15]
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3413952 are usually employed to construct reconstruction-based models,
 1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
12104 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

which aim at differentiating between abnormal and normal the differentiation of features from different working conditions,
behaviors by learning patterns or features from normal behav- thereby achieving adaptive working condition recognition. The
iors. Wulsin et al. [16] applied deep belief networks to construct contributions of this study can be summarized as follows.
an encoding–decoding model, which utilizes reconstruction er- 1) We integrate CBCL into a specific autoencoder built with
ror to detect anomalies in clinical electroencephalography data. GRU and realize end-to-end training. It can adaptively
However, without considering temporal dependencies, such group similar working condition data into the same catencoding–decoding models [17] and [18] are limited signifi- egory with the clustering method. By leveraging concantly in terms of accuracy in unsupervised anomaly detection. trastive learning, the CBCL-AE model can effectively
To take temporal dependencies into account, many studies use improve the proximity of features from identical workrecurrent neural networks (RNNs) [5], [19], [20], including ing conditions. It can also enhance the differentiation of
traditional RNNs, long short-term memory (LSTM), and gate features from different working conditions by designing
recurrent unit (GRU), to construct autoencoder. These studies a specific constraint to ensure a sufficient distance among
have demonstrated that such models excel in reconstructing these features.
MTS data. Indeed, in real-world data, it is common to encounter 2) We conclude that the clustering process in the feature
various noises that can potentially decrease the robustness of space can converge by theoretically proving the model’s
the model during the training process, even in normal data. To convergence during the training process, as the clustering
address this issue, the authors in [5], [20], and [21] incorporated process relies on model optimization. The proof of convariational inference [22] into the autoencoder. By introducing vergence of this clustering process provides theoretical
variational inference, the autoencoder can represent features support for the effectiveness of the integrated CBCL modin the form of distributions, reducing the impact of noises ule in CBCL-AE. By experimentally visualizing the trace
at the tails of the distribution on the model significantly. In of cluster center iteration during the training process, we
recent years, the transformer has also been gradually introduced further confirm the convergence of the clustering process.
into MTS anomaly detection since its powerful text processing 3) We conduct experiments on three public datasets and two
capability. Based on the characteristics of the transformer, Xu private datasets. The comparison results on three public
et al. [23] constructed two types of associations: the association datasets demonstrate that the CBCL-AE model achieves
between the current point and local context, as well as the acceptable results in general MTS anomaly when comassociation between the current point and the global sequence. pared to five state-of-the-art models (SOTAs). The main
As a result, the distinguishability between normal data and results on our private datasets show that our model is
anomalies has been successfully increased. The self-attention superior to the five SOTAs in monitoring machines under
mechanism in the transformer calculates temporal dependencies variable working conditions. In addition, the ablation
with parallel matrix multiplication operations, which enables study proves the efficacy of integrating CBCL into our
the transformer to run much faster than RNNs with the same model.
number of parameters. However, this computational advantage The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
in terms of time is accompanied by an increased storage burden. introduces relevant theories and definitions. Section III details
In addition to the methods mentioned previously, there are the proposed CBCL-AE model. Section IV considers real-world
also autoencoders built by integrating generative adversarial applications on three public datasets and two private datasets.
networks [24] or combined with graph neural networks [25], Finally, Section V concludes this article.
[26]. The former aims at enhancing the model’s generation or
data reconstruction capabilities, while the latter focuses on estab- II. PRELIMINARIES
lishing better correlations among variables in high-dimensional
data. Current research on anomaly detection is primarily focused A. Reconstruction-Based Anomaly Detection
on steady-state or single-machine scenarios. However, due to Due to the unpredictability, unknown patterns, and diversity
the complex industrial processes, some machines often work of anomalies in MTS, supervised methods are in general not
under variable conditions. In fact, for machines under variable suitable for MTS anomaly detection. To this end, we develop
working conditions, having a large amount of data with such a reconstruction-based model using an autoencoder to realdifferent working conditions in the training set might enhance ize unsupervised anomaly detection. Let us consider an MTS
the model’s ability to reconstruct genuine anomalies. Variable X = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xt , . . . , xT ] with a length of T , where each
working conditions lead to the characteristic of concept drift element xt ∈ Rm is an m-dimensional vector. Our goal is to
in multisensor time series data, where the distribution, such as build a reconstruction-based model, denoted as f (.), which takes
mean and/or variance, of the MTS changes abruptly over time. X as inputs and produces X̂ as outputs. The model aims to
This makes it more difficult to identify true anomalies. Research maximize the similarity between X and X̂. Consequently, the
on anomaly detection specifically for machines under variable residuals e = X − X̂ can be used to identify anomalies.
working conditions is scarce, which remains a significant challenge within the industrial sector.
 To this end, we develop a reconstruction-based autoen- B. Contrastive Learning
coder called clustering-based contrastive learning autoencoder The core idea of contrastive learning is to bring observations
(CBCL-AE). It integrates clustering-based contrastive learning from the same category closer together in the feature space, while
(CBCL) to perform clustering in the feature space and enhance simultaneously increasing the separation between observations
XU et al.: ADAPTIVE WORKING CONDITION RECOGNITION WITH CBCL FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 12105

 to LSTM, GRU is capable of alleviating the issue of gradient
 vanishing and has a simpler architecture. Therefore, we employ
 GRU to construct the autoencoder. In Fig. 2, EU and DU denote
 the encoder unit and the decoder unit that consist of GRU, which
 are defined as

 r t = σ(W rx xt + W rh ht−1 + br )
 z t = σ(W zx xt + W zh ht−1 + bz )

Fig. 1. Overall architecture of unsupervised anomaly detection based h̃t = φ(W x xt + W rh (r t  ht ) + bh )
on CBCL-AE.
 ht = (1 − z t )  ht−1 + z t  ht (2)

from different categories. This can be achieved by minimizing where r t and z t are the reset gate vector and update gate vector in
the distance between observations within the same category and GRU, respectively; h̃t represents the candidate activation vector;
maximizing the distance between observations from different ht refers to the output vector of a GRU; xt is the input at time step
categories. This nature of contrastive learning can help improve t, while W represents the weight vectors in GRU. In addition,
the quality of feature representations. σ(.) denotes the sigmoid activation function and φ(.) is the tanh
 Following Hadsell et al.’s [27] work, we introduce a tradi- activation function.
tional contrastive learning method with the objective function To construct the GRU autoencoder (GRU-AE), we adopt four
 layers of GRU, with two layers employed for the encoder and
 N      2 two layers for the decoder. The reconstruction process of the
 1  (n) (n)
 LC (θ) = yD fθ X 1 , fθ X 2 GRU-AE can be presented as follows:
 N n=1 ⎧  
  
     2  ⎨EUl h(l−1)t , h
 (l)
 t−1 , l ⩽ 2
 L
 (l)
 (n) (n) ht =   (3)
 +(1−y)max λ−D fθ X 1 , fθ X 2 ,0 ⎩DUl h(l−1) , h(l) , L < l ⩽ L
 t t−1 2
 (1)
 (l)
where N is the batch size, y indicates whether X 1 and X 2 where ht represents the hidden state of the lth layer; EUl (.)
belong to the same category, D(.) represents the distance calcu- denotes the encoder layer corresponding to the lth layer in
lation function, θ is the parameter set of the network fθ (.), and GRU-AE, and DUl (.) follows the same representation; Spe-
λ is a tunable parameter to control the minimum distance that cific expression of EUl (.) and DUl (.) can be referred to the
should be maintained between different categories. In addition, calculation of ht in (2); L is the total number of layers in the
we will present the integration of CBCL into the model in GRU-AE (L = 4 for the proposed model). In particular, when
 (l−1)
Section III-B. L = 1, the input ht in EUl (.) is actually the model’s input
 xt ; when L = 4, the output hidden state ht is the reconstruction
 III. CLUSTERING-BASED CONTRASTIVE LEARNING x̂t . However, GRU-AE only possesses the ability to reconstruct
 AUTOENCODER MTS and is unable to achieve adaptive condition recognition.
 Therefore, we further introduce CBCL in GRU-AE.
A. Overall Architecture
 1) Scheme: Fig. 1 presents the overall architecture of un- B. Clustering-Based Contrastive Learning
supervised anomaly detection based on CBCL-AE. First, data
 Denote the hidden states of the pair of inputs X and X  ,
from sensors installed on different components of a pump under (2) 
 (2)
 obtained by the encoder at time t, as ht , ht , which can also
variable working conditions are collected using edge computing
 be considered as the extracted features in the feature space. Actechniques. Second, the data are transmitted to both the clients
 cording to (1), the objective function of the contrastive learning
and servers of the diagnostic center, allowing access to historical
 can be written as
data for offline training of CBCL-AE. Third, thresholds for
 N   2
different working conditions are selected. Finally, based on these 1  (2) 
 (2)
chosen thresholds and the trained model, anomalies in real-time LC (θ) = yD htn , htn
 N n=1
data can be effectively detected and the results are promptly
communicated back to the clients.   
  2 
 (2) (2)
 2) Architecture: Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the proposed + (1 − y) max λ − D htn , htn ,0 .
CBCL-AE model. It integrates the contrastive learning method (4)
and requires that model’s inputs are a pair of observations. This
pair of observations is randomly sampled from the training set, Since it is unknown whether X and X  belong to the same
which means they could either come from the same working working condition, i.e., y is unknown, we obtain y through a
condition or different working conditions. This pair of inputs, X k-means clustering algorithm of ht in a batch during the training
and X  , will be fed to an autoencoder built with RNN. Similar process.
12106 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2. Architecture of CBCL-AE.

 Algorithm 1: Iteration of CBCL. C. Loss Function
 The loss function of CBCL-AE can be defined as
 L(θ) = (1 − α)Lmse (θ) + α(LC (θ) + L (θ)) (6)
 where α serves as a tunable parameter that balances the tradeoff
 between the two terms. The first term Lmse (θ) is an average
 reconstruction loss of a pair of inputs with the form
 N
 1  (X − fθ (X))2 + (X  − fθ (X  ))
 2
 Lmse (θ) = .
 N n=1 2
 (7)
 The primary purpose of Lmse (θ) is to constrain the difference
 between the input and the model’s reconstruction.
 The second term contains two parts. The loss of contrastive
 learning LC (θ) tends to improve the ability of feature extraction
 by improving the proximity of features from identical working
 Assuming there are K working conditions in the data, dur- conditions and enhancing the differentiation of features from
ing the ith batch iteration, we denote the converged clus- different working conditions. The constraint part L (θ) is used
ter centers of this batch as Ci = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cK }. Let H = to constrain the distance between cluster centers, ensuring that
   
 (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) there is sufficient differentiation in the feature space among
{ht1 , ht1 , . . . , htn , htn , . . . , htN , htN } represent the set of
hidden states obtained after encoding in a batch. To make the different working conditions. In this study, we define L (θ) as
distribution of a batch closer to the overall distribution, we try ⎛ ⎞2
 K K
 1
to make N as large as possible. This allows for more stable L (θ) = max⎝γ − D(ck1 , ck2 ), 0⎠
cluster centers during the iteration. The distance between htn
 (2) K(K − 1)
 k1 =1 k2 =1,k1 =k2
 (2)
and the kth cluster center can be defined as dk = D(htn , ck ). (8)
 
 (2)
Similarly, we can calculate the distance dk between htn and
 where γ is a tunable parameter that limits a minimum average
ck . As a result, the distance sets can be represented as D =
 (2) and can
 distance  be determined with a random search algorithm,
{d1 , d2 , . . . , dK } and D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dK }. Clusters that htn K K
 k2 =1,k1 =k2 D(ck1 , ck2 ) represents the average
 1
 
 (2) K(K−1) k1 =1
and htn belong to can be determined as k ∗ = arg min(D) and distance between all cluster centers, excluding the distance from
 
 ∗
k = arg min(D ), respectively. Finally, y in (4) can be defined a cluster center to itself.
as
  D. Convergence of Clustering Process
 1, if k ∗ = k ∗
 y= (5) The convergence of the clustering process in the feature space
 0, else.
 under different working conditions is very important for the
 We present the pseudocode for the iteration of CBCL during model’s performance. In general, the clustering process can
the training process in Algorithm 1. always reach convergence thanks to the nature of clustering
XU et al.: ADAPTIVE WORKING CONDITION RECOGNITION WITH CBCL FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 12107

algorithms. However, according to (4) and Algorithm 1, it can training process, we have
be inferred that the cluster center iteration depends on the features obtained from the CBCL-AE model. For this reason, once θ i+1 = θ i − ηi g i
the features obtained from the model are unstable, it becomes ⇒ θ i+1 − θ ∗ = θ i − θ ∗ − ηi g i
difficult for the clustering process to converge. Therefore, if the
convergence of the model during the training process does exist, ⇒ θ i+1 − θ ∗ 22 = θ i − θ ∗ − ηi g i 22
we infer that the CBCL-AE model can extract stable features.
 ⇒ θ i+1 −θ ∗ 22 = θ i − θ ∗ 22 −2ηi g i , θ i − θ ∗ + ηi2 g i 22
Consequently, the iteration of cluster centers based on these
features will also converge. 1   η
 i
 ⇒ g i , θ i −θ ∗ = θ i −θ ∗ 22 −θ i+1 −θ ∗ 22 + g i 22 .
 For the theoretical proof of convergence, we need two assump- 2ηi 2
tions. For two sets of parameters from the CBCL-AE model, (14)
∀θ 1 , θ 2 , obtained from any two iterations during the training
process, they satisfy the following condition: Therefore, (13) can be further expressed as

 1   
 A1 : θ 1 − θ 2 2 ⩽ d (9) N N
 ηi
 C(N ) ⩽ θ i −θ ∗ 22 −θ i+1 −θ ∗ 22 + g i 22 .
where d represents the distance boundary between θ 1 and θ 2 . i=1
 2η i i=1
 2
Since θ 1 and θ 2 are obtained through the stochastic gradient (15)
descent (SGD) algorithm, A1 holds for any differentiable function. Another assumption is the boundedness of gradients for any According to the assumption (A2) on the boundedness of
iteration, ∀i, during the training process. For the ith iteration, gradients, the second term in (15) can be transformed into the
the gradient g i satisfies following inequality:
 N
  N
  N
 A2 : g i 2 ⩽ dg . (10) ηi ηi d2g d2g 
 g i 22 ⩽ = ηi . (16)
 In fact, for any trainable deep learning model, once a local i=1
 2 i=1
 2 2 i=1
optimum exists during the training process, this local region
can satisfy the above-mentioned first assumptions. In addition, For the first term in (15), we expand it and obtain
we employ the gradient clipping, Xavier initialization, and batch
 1  
 N
normalization methods during the training to ensure that the sec- θ i − θ ∗ 22 − θ i+1 − θ ∗ 22
ond assumption regarding the boundedness of gradients is sat- i=1
 2ηi
isfied. Intuitively, this local optimum region can also guarantee 1 1
the convexity of the loss function. We measure the convergence = θ 1 − θ ∗ 22 − θ 2 − θ ∗ 22
 2η1 2η1
by introducing the regret conception in Zinkevich’s [28] work
with the form 1 1
 + θ 2 − θ ∗ 22 − θ 3 − θ ∗ 22 + . . .
 N
  2η1 2η1
 C(N ) = (Li (θ i ) − L(θ ∗ )) (11) 1 1
 i=1 + θ N − θ ∗ 22 − θ N +1 − θ ∗ 22
 2ηN 2ηN
where θ i denotes the parameters of the CBCL-AE model from N  
 
the ith iteration during the training process, θ ∗ represents the pa- =
 1 ∗ 2
 θ 1 − θ 2 +
 1
 −
 1
 θ i − θ ∗ 22
rameters that optimizes the loss function L(.). When N → ∞, if 2η1 i=2
 2η i 2η i−1
there exists C(N )/N → 0, it implies that Li (θ i ) is approaching
 1
Li (θ ∗ ), indicating that the loss function L(.) converges during − θ N +1 − θ ∗ 22 . (17)
 2ηN
the training process. Therefore, limN →∞ C(N N
 )
 = 0 serves as the
criterion for determining the convergence of the loss function Based on the assumption (A1) on the boundedness of param-
L(.). eters and the monotonically nonincreasing nature of the learning
 For L(.), in the local optimum region that can guarantee the rate η during the training process, we obtain the following three
convexity, there exists inequalities:
 Li (θ i ) − Li (θ ∗ ) ⩽ g i , θ i − θ ∗ . (12) 1 1 2
 θ 1 − θ ∗ 22 ⩽ d (18)
 According to (11) and (12), we derive the following inequal- 2η1 2η1
ity: N   N  
 1 1 ∗ 2 1 1
 N
 − θ i − θ 2 ⩽ d 2
 −
  i=2
 2ηi 2ηi−1 i=2
 2ηi 2ηi−1
 C(N ) ⩽ gi , θi − θ∗ . (13)
 (19)
 i=1
 1
 Therefore,
  our objective shifts to providing the boundedness − θ N +1 − θ ∗ 22 ⩽ 0. (20)
of N ∗
 i=1 g i , θ i − θ . Based on the stochastic SGD used in the
 2ηN
12108 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Algorithm 2: Training procedure of CBCL-AE. datasets. The five SOTAs are Anomaly-Transformer [23], OmniAnomaly [20], long short-term memory variational autoencoder (LSTM-VAE) [21], encoder–decoder anomaly detection
 (EncDec-AD) [19], and unsupervised anomaly detection model
 (USAD) [29], respectively.
 Among the above-mentioned SOTAs, Xu et al. [23] utilized
 the encoder component from the transformer architecture to
 build the Anomaly Transformer model, which utilizes a specific
 association discrepancy constraint to enhance the model’s ability
 to handle MTS. Su et al. [20] extended the GRU-VAE model by
 incorporating temporal dependencies into the latent variables,
 resulting in the creation of OmniAnomaly. Park et al. [21]
 expanded upon the LSTM autoencoder with variational inference techniques to improve the robustness. EncDec-AD [19] is
 an LSTM-based autoencoder, while USAD [29] integrates the
 generative adversarial strategy into a traditional autoencoder.
 2) Threshold Selection: After obtaining the reconstruction
 results based on the CBCL-AE model, it is necessary to calculate the residuals, e = X − X̂, using the input data and the
 reconstruction results. The calculated residuals can thus be used
 Taken (17)–(20) together, we have to identify anomalies with a given threshold.
 To ensure fairness, we employ the same threshold selection
 1  
 N
 strategy for all models. First of all, we generate a sufficient
 θ i − θ ∗ 22 − θ i+1 − θ ∗ 22 number of thresholds within the range of residuals. Then, we
 i=1
 2ηi
 select a threshold that yields the optimal result for anomaly
 N   detection. Considering the capability of CBCL-AE to adaptively
 1 2 1 1 d2
 ⩽ d + d2 − +0= . (21) recognize working conditions, we select different thresholds
 2η1 i=2
 2ηi 2ηi−1 2ηN
 for different working conditions. In other words, the threshold
 Finally, we derive selection process will be repeated for each working condition.
 In addition, we adopt the same anomaly detection rule for all
 N
 d2 d2g  models. The rule is relatively simple: an anomaly is identified if
 C(N ) ⩽ + ηi . (22)
 2ηN 2 i=1 the residual value is greater than the threshold.
 3) Evaluation Metrics: Due to the significant imbalance be-
 Since both d and ηi are constant, and ηi is monotonically tween normal data and anomalies, accuracy is not suitable for
nonincreasing, we can conclude that regret C(N ) is bound. evaluating the model performance. Therefore, we employ the
Therefore, as limN →∞ C(N N
 )
 = 0, L(.) converges during the evaluation metrics, such as precision, recall, and F1-score, which
training process. In this case, the convergence of L(.) implies the are defined as follows:
features obtained from CBCL-AE tend to be stable. Therefore,
we can conclude that the feature clustering process also con- TP
 precision =
verges. This convergence can also be empirically confirmed by TP+FP
visualizing the trace of cluster center iteration in Section IV-C. TP
 recall =
 TP+FN
E. Optimization Procedure 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1-score = (24)
 Once the final loss function is determined, the SGD algorithm Precision + Recall
is used to train the model by optimizing
 where TP represents true positives, FP represents false positives,
 θ ∗ = arg min((1 − α)Lmse (θ) + α(LC (θ) + L (θ))). (23) and FN represents false negatives. Since the F1-score is the
 θ
 harmonic mean of precision and recall, we concentrate on and
 We present the detailed optimization procedure in Algorithm use it as the main evaluation metric.
2.
 B. Experimental Results
 IV. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS
 1) Data: We consider three public datasets: Server machine
A. Experimental Design datasets (SMD) by Su et al. [20], Soil Moisture Active Pas-
 1) Baseline Models: To validate the effectiveness of our sive (SMAP) satellite, and Curiosity Rover on Mars (MSL)
model, we compare the proposed CBCL-AE model with by citeRN22, as well as our two private datasets: Dataset of
five other SOTAs on three public datasets and two private multisensor on pump (MSPD) and dataset of multisensor on fan
XU et al.: ADAPTIVE WORKING CONDITION RECOGNITION WITH CBCL FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 12109

 TABLE I
 DETAILED INFORMATION ON DATASETS

 Fig. 4. Data visualization of private datasets. (a) MSPD. (b) MSFD.

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON RESULTS ON THREE PUBLIC DATASETS

 several abrupt changes in mean and variance values. This implies
 that working conditions are not fixed but may change from one
 to another, also called variable working conditions.
 Since we have prior knowledge of the working condition
 labels for machines on these two private datasets, this study has
Fig. 3. Installation of sensors. (a) Sensors on a pump. (b) Sensors on
an induced draft fan. three working conditions. Therefore, we fix this hyperparameter,
 the number of clustering centers K, to three in the CBCL module for subsequent experiments. However, in general scenarios
(MSFD). These datasets detailed in Table I are used to demon- where the number of working conditions is unknown, we should
strate the superiority of CBCL-AE in unsupervised anomaly treat K as a hyperparameter and select it through sensitivity
detection. The three public datasets do not exhibit the nature of analysis.
variable working conditions and are considered as general MTS The main difference between the three public datasets and
in this study. They are used to demonstrate that CBCL-AE can the two private datasets (e.g., the MSPD and MSFD) is that the
achieve satisfactory anomaly detection performance on general public datasets do not have the nature of variable conditions,
MTS. namely their distribution, including mean and variance, remains
 The MSPD and MSFD are both 3-D MTS data. The former relatively stable over time.
is collected from multiple sensors on a pump, and the latter 2) Comparison Results: To demonstrate that CBCL-AE has
is from an induced draft fan. The three dimensions represent satisfactory anomaly detection performance for general MTS,
the root-mean-square of velocity, the energy at the fundamental we conduct experiments on three public datasets: SMD, MSL,
frequency, and the energy at twice the fundamental frequency, and SMAP. We compare it with the five SOTAs and report the
respectively. These three metrics are primarily used to detect comparison results in Table II, with the average value across ten
rotation anomalies in bearings, such as imbalance and misalign- repeated experiments.
ment. Here, the fundamental frequency indicates the rotational Table II shows that although the CBCL-AE model does not
frequency. The installation of multiple sensors on a machine perform best among the five SOTAs on the three public datasets,
(e.g., pump, induced draft fan) is illustrated in Fig. 3. The it still achieves the average level. As for the F1-score, we
MSPD consists of a training set and a test set. The training can observe that the CBCL-AE model exhibits the fourth-best
set comprises normal data from 40 pumps, while the test set performance on both SMD (F1-score=0.8445) and MSL (F1-
contains 1251 anomalies collected from 35 pumps. Similarly, the score=0.8255) while achieving only the fifth-best on SMAP
training set of MSFD comprises normal data from ten induced (F1-score=0.7295). Specifically, although the CBCL-AE model
draft fans, while the test set contains 420 anomalies collected ranks fourth in the F1-score on SMD and MSL, its performance
from seven induced draft fans. In these two datasets, the time does not differ significantly from the models that are suboptimal
interval between two consecutive data points is two hours in both or third best. Therefore, we believe that the CBCL-AE model
the training and test sets. The working condition is measured achieves acceptable anomaly detection performance on the three
by the three metrics mentioned previously. We visualize the public datasets. We also find that the model GRU-AE, without
data collected from a specific pump and an induced draft fan the CBCL module, maintains acceptable anomaly detection
in Fig. 4, where three different working conditions are marked results on those public datasets with the F1-scores of 0.8436,
with different colors. Obviously, the MTS evolves and presents 0.7431, and 0.8276, respectively.
12110 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 5. Comparison results on the MSPD. Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis of α and λ. (a) Precision. (b) Recall.
 (c) F1-score.
 TABLE III
 PAIRED T-TEST RESULTS ON TWO PRIVATE DATASETS
 C. Model Discussion
 Since the MSPD provides a more extensive amount of data
 and shows more typical natures of variable working conditions
 than the MSFD, we further discuss the model performance of
 the MSPD by conducting sensitivity analysis, model complexity,
 reconstruction evaluation, verification of the convergence of
 the clustering process, and evaluation of the model’s ability to
 recognize working conditions.
 1) Sensitivity Analysis of Hyperparameters: In the loss function of CBCL-AE, we introduce the tunable hyperparameter
 that balances the trade-off between two different losses, see (6).
 Since the three public datasets do not exhibit the typical nature In addition, hyperparameter λ in the contrastive learning loss
of variable working conditions, we further conduct experiments limits the minimum feature distance between the observations
on our private datasets: the MSPD and MSFD, to demonstrate from different working conditions, see (4). To demonstrate the
the advantages of CBCL-AE in handling data under variable impact of these two hyperparameters on the CBCL-AE model,
working conditions. We compare the CBCL-AE model with the we conduct a sensitivity analysis and visualize the results in
five SOTAs on these two private datasets and report the average Fig. 6. We find that the CBCL-AE model achieves optimal
values with standard deviations across ten repeated experiments performance on all three metrics (precision, recall, F1-score)
in Fig. 5. when the hyperparameters are selected around α = 0.2 and
 It is evident from Fig. 5 that the CBCL-AE model exhibits λ = 2. In particular, the model’s performance significantly deremarkable superiority on the two private datasets over the teriorates when α = 0 or α = 1. This is because the model does
other SOTAs in terms of three key metrics: precision (0.951 not integrate the CBCL module when α = 0. In this case, the
and 0.8931), recall (0.9302 and 0.8425), and Fl-score (0.9407 model is unable to recognize working conditions adaptively. In
and 0.8671). Moreover, the CBCL-AE model also exhibits stable addition, when α = 1„ the model essentially removes the MSE
performance, as evidenced by its low standard deviations in these loss function, which affects its crucial reconstruction capability
two datasets. In addition, the GRU-AE model without the CBCL and weakens its anomaly detection ability. According to the
module is far inferior to the CBCL-AE model. These comparison sensitivity analysis, we adopt the hyperparameter combination
and ablation study results strongly demonstrate the capability of α = 0.2 and λ = 2 in our experiment.
CBCL-AE in handling data under variable working conditions, 2) Model Complexity: Since the CBCL-AE model integrates
primarily attributed to the utilization of the CBCL module. the CBCL module; the increase in computational burden is
 We further use the paired t-test to test whether the superiority unavoidable. However, this module is just introduced during
of the CBCL-AE model to the others is statistically significant. the training to enlarge the difference between features across
The alternative hypothesis (H1) is that the CBCL-AE model is different working conditions. Therefore, the additional compusuperior to another in terms of greater F1-score, i.e., μ1 > μj tational burden of CBCL-AE mainly occurs during the training
for j = 2, 3, . . . , 7. In this case, μi denotes the average F1-score phase. Once the model completes training, no extra computation
of model i(i = 1, 2, . . . , 7) across ten repetitions. We present is required during the online anomaly detection. To show the
the test results in Table III and find that all tests are statisti- model complexity of CBCL-AE, we compare the memory usage,
cally significant at the 1% level. Thus, we conclude that the training time for each batch, and testing time for each batch
CBCL-AE model significantly outperforms the other models in on the MSPD against all comparison models. According to
unsupervised anomaly detection on two private datasets. Table IV, although the CBCL-AE model takes longer to train, it
 In summary, although the CBCL-AE model is not optimal ranks second in testing time among all models. This suggests that
on the three public datasets, it delivers a satisfactory perfor- the CBCL-AE model is well-suited for online real-time anomaly
mance, indicating its acceptable anomaly detection capability detection.
for general MTS. More important experiments on the MSPD and 3) Evaluation of Reconstruction: In the reconstruction-based
MSFD illustrate the superiority of CBCL-AE and demonstrate anomaly detection model, the quality of normal data reconstrucits unique capability to detect anomalies in MTS under variable tion indicates their capability for learning the normal behavior of
working conditions. the data. In other words, when a model effectively reconstructs
XU et al.: ADAPTIVE WORKING CONDITION RECOGNITION WITH CBCL FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 12111

 TABLE IV
 COMPARISON OF MODEL COMPLEXITY

 batch batch

 Fig. 9. t-SNE visualization of the feature space.

 feature space. Specifically, Fig. 8(a) illustrates the trace of cluster
 center iteration of CBCL-AE. We observe that the three clusters
 with three different colors, representing three working conditions, gradually converge. Moreover, the final cluster centers
 maintain sufficient distance from each other, indicating that the
 clusters can be effectively distinguished. In Fig. 8(b), although
 the iteration of final cluster centers also maintains convergence,
 the absence of distance constraint, L (θ), leads to a lack of
Fig. 7. Visualizations of data reconstruction. (a) Pump 1. (b) Pump 2.
(c) Pump 3. (d) Pump 4.
 differentiation among the converged centers. This is reflected in
 the fact that the converged cluster centers are close to each other.
 In addition, once removing the CBCL constraints in (6), Fig. 8(c)
 shows that the clustering process is no longer converged. This
 means that the model loses the capability to adaptively recognize
 different working conditions.
 5) Evaluation of Working Conditions Recognition: To evaluate the effect in adaptively recognizing variable working condi-
Fig. 8. Iterations of cluster centers. (a) Iterations of cluster centers of tions, we present the t-SNE visualization in the feature space of
CBCL-AE. (b) Iterations of cluster centers without L (θ). (c) Iterations of CBCL-AE in Fig. 9. The three colors represent three different
cluster centers without CBCL.
 working condition features in the feature space. The cluster
 centers of the three different working conditions are marked with
normal data while having poor reconstruction quality for anoma- crosses. The visualization results show that the three working
lies, it enables the differentiation between the reconstructions conditions are well separated in the feature space and features
and actual anomalies. This helps to improve anomaly detection under the same working condition tend to cluster together.
by leveraging such differentiation. To evaluate the reconstruc- This indicates that our proposed CBCL-AE model is indeed
tion capability, we visualize the reconstruction results from the capable of recognizing variable working conditions adaptively.
CBCL-AE model in Fig. 7, where the highlighted red areas In addition, we also mark the features of some anomalies in the
represent anomalies. The reconstruction results indicate that the feature space with red dots. It is obvious that the features of
CBCL-AE model has effectively learned the normal behavior these anomalies are mostly distributed in the feature space of
of the data. This is evident in Fig. 7, where normal data can normal data. This means that the CBCL-AE model can capture
be effectively reconstructed, while anomalies are difficult to the characteristics of normal behavior effectively. This ability
reconstruct. This results in larger reconstruction residuals for is good for the model to reconstruct abnormal inputs as normal
abnormal instances, enabling accurate anomaly detection. ones, thereby amplifying the residual results of anomalies and
 4) Visualization of the Clustering Process: Since the CBCL making them easier to detect.
module is introduced into the CBCL-AE model, it is necessary to 6) Strengths and Weaknesses: The CBCL-AE model has
verify the convergence of the clustering process during the train- at least three strengths. First, it leverages the CBCL module to
ing process. In addition to the theoretical proof in Section III-D, adaptively cluster different working conditions and enlarge the
we further confirm the convergence of the clustering process difference between features across these working conditions.
by visualizing the trace of the cluster center iteration in Fig. 8, Second, it not only achieves satisfactory performance in general
where the X and Y coordinates represent two dimensions of the MTS but, more importantly, performs excellently on MTS data
12112 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

with the typical nature of working conditions. Third, it can be [7] Z. Gao, X. Liu, and M. Z. Q. Chen, “Unknown input observer-based
deployed in online anomaly detection without excessive compu- robust fault estimation for systems corrupted by partially decoupled disturbances,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 2537–2547,
tational resources. In addition, the CBCL-AE model also has two Apr. 2016.
weaknesses. Although it achieves satisfactory performance on [8] Z. Gao, X. Shi, and S. X. Ding, “Fuzzy state/disturbance observer design
general MTS without the nature of variable working conditions, for T-s fuzzy systems with application to sensor fault estimation,” IEEE
 Trans. Syst. Man Cybern., Part B, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 875–880, Jun. 2008.
such performance still has room for improvement compared to [9] E. Cabal-Yepez, A. G. Garcia-Ramirez, R. J. Romero-Troncoso, A. Garciathe best SOTA. In addition, its training process requires more Perez, and R. A. Osornio-Rios, “Reconfigurable monitoring system for
computational resources compared to other models. time-frequency analysis on industrial equipment through STFT and DWT,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 760–771, May 2013.
 [10] C. Wu, C. Guo, Z. Xie, F. Ni, and H. Liu, “A signal-based fault detection
 V. CONCLUSION and tolerance control method of current sensor for PMSM drive,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9646–9657, Dec. 2018.
 To achieve unsupervised anomaly detection for machines un- [11] Y. Zhu, G. Li, S. Tang, R. Wang, H. Su, and C. Wang, “Acoustic
 signal-based fault detection of hydraulic piston pump using a particle
der variable working conditions, we propose a novel CBCL-AE. swarm optimization enhancement CNN,” Appl. Acoust., vol. 192, 2022,
This model integrates CBCL to cluster data in the feature space Art. no. 108718.
and can effectively improve the proximity of features from [12] Z. Fan, Q. Xu, C. Jiang, and S. X. Ding, “Deep mixed domain generalization network for intelligent fault diagnosis under unseen conditions,”
identical working conditions while enhancing the differentiation IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 965–974, Jan. 2024.
of features from different working conditions. By leveraging [13] S. Lu, Z. Gao, Q. Xu, C. Jiang, A. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Class-imbalance
the CBCL, our proposed model can achieve adaptive working privacy-preserving federated learning for decentralized fault diagnosis
 with biometric authentication,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 12,
condition recognition. Furthermore, a specific loss function is pp. 9101–9111, Dec. 2022.
designed for CBCL-AE to ensure its effectiveness. We theoret- [14] T. Xie, Q. Xu, C. Jiang, S. Lu, and X. Wang, “The fault frequency
ically prove the convergence property of the clustering process priors fusion deep learning framework with application to fault diagnosis of offshore wind turbines,” Renew. Energy, vol. 202, pp. 143–153,
of CBCL during the training process, which directly determines 2023.
the effectiveness of CBCL-AE. [15] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality
 Due to the absence of variable working conditions in the three of data with neural networks,” Sci., vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
 2006.
public datasets (SMD, SMAP, and MSL), our CBCL-AE model [16] D. F. Wulsin, J. R. Gupta, R. Mani, J. A. Blanco, and B. Litt, “Modeling
achieves acceptable anomaly detection performance on general electroencephalography waveforms with semi-supervised deep belief nets:
MTS compared to the five SOTAs. Moreover, the experimental Fast classification and anomaly measurement,” J. Neural Eng., vol. 8, no. 3,
 2011, Art. no. 36015.
results on the two private datasets, namely the MSPD and MSFD, [17] G. Jiang, P. Xie, H. He, and J. Yan, “Wind turbine fault detection using
show that the CBCL-AE model performs best and even achieves a denoising autoencoder with temporal information,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
an impressive F1-score of up to 0.9407 on MSPD and 0.8671 on Mechatron., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 89–100, Feb. 2018.
 [18] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsuper-
MSFD, respectively. The ablation study strongly validates the vised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, 2018.
role of CBCL in improving the performance of the CBCL-AE [19] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
model. Visualizing the trace of cluster center iteration during Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
the training process further confirms the convergence of the [20] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
clustering process and demonstrates the effectiveness of CBCL detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
as well as the role of the loss L (θ). In addition, the t-SNE network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
visualization demonstrates that the CBCL-AE model has an [21] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
excellent capability of adaptive working conditions recognition for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
and learning normal behavior. IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 [22] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2013.
 REFERENCES [23] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time series
 anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 [1] X. Dai and Z. Gao, “From model, signal to knowledge: A data-driven Representation, 2022.
 perspective of fault detection and diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., [24] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “GAN-based anomaly
 vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2226–2238, Nov. 2013. detection for multivariate time series using polluted training set,” IEEE
 [2] Z. Gao, C. Cecati, and S. X. Ding, “A survey of fault diagnosis and Trans. Knowl. Data. Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12208–12219, Dec. 2023.
 fault-tolerant techniques–part I: Fault diagnosis with model-based and [25] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
 signal-based approaches,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 62, no. 6, structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
 pp. 3757–3767, Jun. 2015. in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
 [3] B. Su, Z. Zhou, and H. Chen, “PVEL-AD: A large-scale open-world dataset [26] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial-temporal
 for photovoltaic cell anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,” Inf. Fusion,
 vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 404–413, Jan. 2023. vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023.
 [4] X. Wang et al., “Robust unsupervised video anomaly detection by mul- [27] R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun, “Dimensionality reduction by
 tipath frame prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, learning an invariant mapping,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 no. 6, pp. 2301–2312, Jun. 2022. Recognit., 2006, pp. 1735–1742.
 [5] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced [28] M. Zinkevich, “Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal
 anomaly detection for industrial Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., gradient ascent,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2003, pp. 928–936.
 vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021. [29] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 [6] Z. Gao, “Fault estimation and fault-tolerant control for discrete-time dy- “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 namic systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3874–3884, Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 Jun. 2015. pp. 3395–3404.
XU et al.: ADAPTIVE WORKING CONDITION RECOGNITION WITH CBCL FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 12113

 Qifa Xu received the B.E. degree in mathe- Qiliang Cheng received the B.S. and M.S. dematics education from the Department of Math- grees in business management from Hefei Uniematics, Fuyang Normal University, Fuyang, versity of Technology, Hefei, China, in 2018 and
 China, in 1997, the M.S. degree in quantitative 2022, respectively.
 economics from the Dongbei University of Fi- He is currently with the Intelligent Algorithm
 nance and Economics, Dalian, China, in 2000, Department, Anhui RONDS Science and Techand the Ph.D. degree in technical economics nology Incorporated Company, a company that
 and management from the School of Manage- provides monitoring and maintenance solutions
 ment, Tianjin University, China, in 2006. and services for various industries. His research
 He is currently a Professor with the School focuses on bearing fault diagnosis.
 of Management, Hefei University of Technology,
Hefei, China. His research interests include financial big data analysis,
statistical learning, and smart manufacturing.

 Tianming Xie received the B.S. degree in
 business management from the Hefei Univer- Xiangxiang Wang is currently working toward
 sity of Technology, Hefei, China, in 2019. He the Ph.D. degree in management science and
 is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree engineering with the School of Management,
 in management science and engineering with Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China.
 the School of Management, Hefei University of She is the Deputy Minister of Anhui
 Technology. RONDS Science and Technology Incorporated
 His research interests include anomaly detec- Company. She has extensive experience in
 tion and fault diagnosis, and their applications in diagnosing components, such as bearings
 industrial equipment, and renewable energy. and gearboxes. Her research interests include
 data-driven fault diagnosis and prognosis,
 reliability engineering, and edge computing.

 Cuixia Jiang received the B.E. degree in
 mathematics education from the Department
 of Mathematics, Fuyang Normal University,
 Fuyang, China, in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree
 in technical economics and management from
 the School of Management, Tianjin University,
 Tianjin, China, in 2008.
 She is currently an Associated Professor with
 the School of Management, Hefei University of
 Technology, Hefei, China. Her research interests include financial big data analysis, financial
time series analysis, and statistical learning.