IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024 6909

 Advancing Security and Trust in WSNs:
 A Federated Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement
 Learning Approach
 Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE, Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE,
 and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) show significant I. I NTRODUCTION
potential through their ability to collect and analyze real-time
 IRELESS Sensor Networks (WSNs) play a crucial
data, notably enhancing various sectors. The new emerging
security threats present a severe risk to the security and
reliability of WSNs. Data-driven Artificial Intelligence (AI)
 W role in enhancing various aspects of e-commerce
 operations. These networks consist of spatially distributed
leverages WSNs data to deal with new emerging threats like autonomous sensors/nodes that monitor physical or environzero-day attacks. However, AI-based models suffer from poor mental conditions and transmit data wirelessly [1], [2], [3].
adoption due to the lack of realistic/up-to-date attack data.
Recently, Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MARL) These nodes collaborate to monitor and collect data from
has gained significant attention for enhancing Intrusion Detection their surrounding environments and transmit these data to a
Systems (IDS) capabilities. MARL offers improved flexibility, central location or a sink node for further processing. WSNs
efficiency, and robustness. However, this requires data shar- have demonstrated versatility in various applications, including
ing, leading to network bandwidth consumption and slower
training. Additionally, the curse of dimensionality hampers its resource management and e-commerce [4]. However, they face
benefits, given the exponential expansion of the state-action challenges related to resource limitations and security [5], [6].
space. Privacy-aware collaborative methods such as Federated Context-aware WSNs offer a promising solution by tai-
Learning (FL) emerge as a new approach, enabling decentralized loring feedback and recommendations to user needs, thereby
model training across a network of devices while preserving
 streamlining daily activities. In this context, the integration of
the privacy of each participant. In this context, we introduce
a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages FL and MARL complex object networks holds the potential to enrich user
to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks. MAF-DRL enables experiences by adapting to dynamic contexts and preferences.
distributed learning across multiple agents with adaptive, flexible, Despite these advances, the overarching challenge of resource
and robust attack detection. We also introduce a trust-based consumption persists, impacting operational efficiency and
scheduling mechanism that dynamically allocates resources based
on agent reliability. This trust-aware approach allows FL systems scalability. As e-commerce systems evolve, security becomes a
to adapt to changing network conditions and device behaviors. paramount concern. Beyond usability and manageability chal-
By prioritizing reliable devices, our method improves the energy lenges, ensuring robust security measures becomes critical to
efficiency of WSNs and enhances the resilience and effectiveness safeguarding sensitive user data and maintaining trust in online
of the distributed FL paradigm. Finally, we assess the robusttransactions. In this context, several Artificial Intelligence (AI)
ness of our framework by testing it against real-world WSN
attacks. This evaluation demonstrates its efficiency for secure and based solutions have been proposed to detect and predict
communication-efficient federated edge learning across various attacks on these systems [7], [8]. Using the power of AI
agents. algorithms, e-commerce platforms can proactively identify
 Index Terms—Wireless sensor networks (WSNs), E-commerce, anomalous behavior and mitigate potential threats.
multi-agent federated learning, trust evaluation, energy Recently, Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning
efficiency. (MARL) aims at enhancing Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)
 capabilities by offering unparalleled flexibility, efficiency,
 robustness, adaptability, and scalability. Its ability to train
 Manuscript received 31 January 2024; revised 24 March 2024 and 18 June
 multiple agents to collaborate or compete in complex envi-
2024; accepted 1 August 2024. Date of publication 7 August 2024; date of ronments enables rapid adaptation to evolving threats. By
current version 31 December 2024. (Corresponding author: Hajar Moudoud.) learning directly from raw data, MARL-based IDS systems
 Hajar Moudoud is with the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Université du Quebec en Outaouis, Gatineau, QC J8X 3X7,
 automate feature extraction, enhancing detection accuracy
Canada (e-mail: hajar.moudoud@uqo.ca). while demonstrating resilience against adversarial attacks.
 Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux The decentralized nature of MARL ensures fault tolerance
Télécommunications, Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique
(INRS-EMT), UMR INRS-UQO, Gatineau, QC J8X 3X7, Canada
 and redundancy, guaranteeing uninterrupted operation even in
(e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca). dynamic network environments. Furthermore, MARL enables
 Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of continuous learning, allowing IDS to stay ahead of emerging
Computing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae). threats. Its scalability makes it suitable for large-scale network
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3440178 environments, ensuring consistent performance as networks
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

grow. Despite its advantages, MARL encounters challenges proposed framework involves clustering sensors based on their
that include data-sharing requirements leading to increased behavior, which allows for more focused monitoring and
network bandwidth consumption and slower training speeds. analysis. This method expedites the detection of suspicious
Moreover, the curse of dimensionality poses a significant activities or deviations from normal behavior. Additionally, we
obstacle, as the exponential growth of the state-action space propose a trust-based scheduling mechanism, to dynamically
limits the effectiveness of MARL-based approaches. allocate resources based on agent reliability. This incorpo-
 Privacy-aware collaborative methods such as Federated ration of trust-awareness enables FL systems to adapt to
Learning (FL) emerge as a new approach, enabling decen- evolving network conditions and device behaviors. By priortralized model training across a network of devices while itizing devices with proven reliability, our approach not only
preserving the privacy of each participant. The FL allows enhances the energy efficiency of WSNs but also strengthens
for model training across a network of decentralized devices, the resilience and effectiveness of distributed FL paradigms.
exemplified by drones operating at the network edge. Within Finally, we evaluate the robustness of our framework using
FL, each device autonomously refines its model using locally real-world WSN attacks. This evaluation demonstrates its
collected data, focusing on features relevant to its distinct efficiency for secure and communication-efficient federated
operational context. Significantly, FL ensures data privacy by edge learning across various agents.
transmitting only aggregated model updates. This approach The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
not only safeguards sensitive information, but also protects follows:
the autonomy of individual devices/sensors [3], [9], [10], [11], • We propose a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that lever-
[12]. WSNs, characterized by their distributed nature and ages FL and MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based
resource constraints, require FL models that account for the attacks. MAF-DRL leverages MARL and FL for intrusion
reliability of the device to ensure the integrity and efficiency detection within WSNs, empowering autonomous identiof the learning process [13]. Thus, it is important to consider fication and response to potential security threats.
the trustworthiness of the sensors and to be context-aware to • We design a novel strategy of clustering sensors based on
address the unique challenges posed by WSNs. By incorpo- behavior, enabling focused monitoring and analysis for
rating trustworthiness metrics into FL frameworks, we can expedited detection of suspicious activities.
mitigate the impact of unreliable devices on model accuracy • We design a scheduling algorithm that meticulously
and overall system performance. This proactive approach not allocates necessary bandwidth to reliable sensors, emphaonly enhances the security and privacy of WSNs but also pro- sizing the reduction of communication expenses during
motes energy efficiency and resource optimization. Therefore, the learning process and prioritizing participants demonby prioritizing device reliability and context awareness, we strating superior model learning performance.
can unlock the full potential of FL in ensuring the integrity • We evaluate the effectiveness of our framework by testing
and efficiency of machine learning processes within WSNs. it against real-world WSN attacks.
The continuous communication demands of FL also contribute The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
to increased network load, and bottlenecks may exacerbate reviews the current state of the art of WSN-based attacks.
this situation, potentially leading to congestion and straining Section III outlines our system model. Section IV introduces
the network infrastructure. While previous FL studies have our MAF-DRL framework. Section V details the trust-based
explored scheduling techniques aimed at optimizing resource recommendation system. Section VI presents the performance
utilization, focusing on resources such as time and local evaluation. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper.
computing power, these approaches often overlooked crucial
learning-related factors, including device trustworthiness.
 Sensors in WSNs exhibit various behaviors influenced by II. R ELATED W ORK
various factors such as environmental conditions, user interac- WSNs have demonstrated their adaptability in numerous
tions, and network activity. In WSNs, sensors can demonstrate fields [14], [15]. WSN security has become crucial, with
different patterns based on their locations, sensing capabili- several state-of-the-art schemes leveraging AI techniques to
ties, and communication protocols. Similarly, in e-commerce mitigate attacks in the wireless networks. In this section, we
systems, sensors embedded in devices or infrastructure can delve into some of the most prominent schemes leveraging
exhibit different behaviors depending on user preferences, AI techniques to ensure WSN security, along with their
purchasing habits, and browsing activities. Understanding and limitations.
analyzing these behavioral patterns are crucial for detecting Vu et al. [16] focused on the design and implementation
anomalies, identifying potential security threats, and opti- of a Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) routing protomizing system performance. Therefore, it’s crucial to group col optimized for energy efficiency within 5G networks.
sensors with similar behaviors into clusters to improve security Khera et al. [17] evaluated existing clustering-based methodand enhance overall system efficiency. ologies aimed at improving energy efficiency in sensor
 To address the challenges outlined above, this paper networks. The authors introduced a novel method called
introduces a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages Hibernated Clustering Wireless Sensor Networks to address
FL and MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks. these shortcomings. This methodology focused on extending
Our proposed framework enables distributed learning while the operational duration of individual sensor nodes, thereby
ensuring adaptive, flexible, and robust attack detection. Our enhancing the overall network lifespan. Liu et al. [18]
MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH 6911

Fig. 1. Two-Tier System Architecture for Enhanced WSN Security and Efficiency.

proposed a routing protocol modification, termed the Algorithm. ICITS aimed to meet stringent security and reli-
Improved Energy-Efficient LEACH (IEE-LEACH) protocol. ability requirements while collecting data from sensor nodes
The IEE-LEACH protocol takes into consideration both the deployed in road transport scenarios. Yingzi and Zhaoji [22]
remaining energy levels of individual nodes and the average proposed a hierarchical trust management system, TSW, taienergy status of the entire network. Wei et al. [19] introduced lored for Secure and Dynamic Wireless Sensor Networks
a distributed clustering algorithm to adapt cluster sizes based (SDWSNs).
on the hop distance to the data sink. To address the issues of these existing solutions, we intro-
 The importance of trust spans across WSNs and duce a novel framework (MAF-DRL) that leverages FL and
e-commerce platforms, where it ensures reliability and MARL to efficiently detect WSN-based attacks. Our proposed
integrity. In WSNs, trust guarantees accurate data exchange, framework enables distributed learning while ensuring adapwhile in e-commerce, it fosters secure transactions. tive, flexible, and robust attack detection. Our proposed
Chen et al. [20] introduced IoTrust, a novel trust framework framework involves clustering sensors based on their behavior,
that integrated Software Defined Network (SDN) with the which allows for more focused monitoring and analysis. This
Internet of Things (IoT), alongside a cross-layer authorization method expedites the detection of suspicious activities or
protocol rooted in IoTrust principles. This innovative approach deviations from normal behavior. Additionally, we propose a
provided a unique angle on trust administration within IoT trust-based scheduling mechanism, to allocate resources based
systems. Kumar et al. [21] introduced a novel approach to on agent reliability dynamically. This incorporation of trustevaluate trust in WSNs by employing ML techniques. This awareness enables FL systems to adapt to evolving network
method involves identifying specific trust attributes using a conditions and device behaviors. By prioritizing devices with
predefined model and then devising a unique algorithm that proven reliability, our approach not only enhances the energy
utilizes machine learning to categorize and integrate these efficiency of WSNs but also strengthens the resilience and
attributes into a comprehensive trust value. Chen et al. in [20] effectiveness of distributed ML paradigms.
introduced a novel approach to assess user trust within social
e-commerce platforms, aimed at addressing the shortcomings
of conventional methods marked by inaccurate evaluations III. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
and inefficiencies. This method leveraged AI techniques to Our system architecture (see Fig. 1) is structured into two
establish a novel framework grounded on diverse factors such tiers: Tier-1 consists of Base Stations (BS A, BS B, BS C,
as business, environmental, and social elements, facilitating BS D) responsible for collecting and processing real-time data
user trust levels. at the edge layer. Tier 2 comprises controllers to manage and
 Security measures are indispensable for safeguarding data process data from Tier 1. These controllers handle various
integrity and confidentiality in WSNs. Kumar et al. [21] intro- critical functions, including the aggregation of secure FL data,
duced an innovative approach termed Intelligent Clustering for reputation calculation, agent selection, and implementation of
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ICITS), which employed security actions and policies. The controllers communicate
a unique selection method for Cluster Heads (CHs) called using Southbound APIs, such as OpenFlow, to ensure real-
GABAT, blending Genetic Algorithm (GA) and BAT time data exchange and immediate response actions, such as
6912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

 TABLE I
blocking jamming attacks. This architecture facilitates dis- N OTATIONS
tributed learning across multiple agents with adaptive, flexible,
and robust attack detection, leveraging both FL and MARL to
improve the security and efficiency of WSNs. Table I shows
the notations used to present our system model. Also, our
proposed system model allows:
 1) Agent Representation: Each node in the network acts
 as an agent, representing either an individual device or
 a cluster of devices. Agents maintain localized datasets
 containing pertinent information about network activities, system logs, and relevant features.
 2) Local Attack Detection Models: Agents independently
 maintain their local attack detection models. Deep
 Q-Learning (DQL) is employed as the primary method
 for attack detection in this decentralized setup. DQL
 enables agents to continuously refine their models by
 dynamically interacting with the environment, resulting
 in a robust and adaptive defense mechanism against
 potential threats. The iterative improvement of local
 attack detection capabilities enhances the collective
 intelligence of the system, fostering a comprehensive Then, we introduce the federated joint value function, which
 and resilient security posture. quantifies the expected cumulative return when a group of
 3) Collaborative Learning: Agents participate in collabo- agents collaborates to detect and mitigate attacks within a
 rative learning via our FL training process, collectively shared network:
 contributing to the refinement of the global attack detec- ∞ N
 tion model. Through this collaborative effort, agents
 VFJ (s) = E γt rit s0 = s (3)
 leverage their diverse datasets to enhance the effectivet=0 i=1
 ness and robustness of the global attack detection model.
 4) Recommendation System based on Reputation: Each where, VFJ (s) represents the federated joint value function for
 agent has a reputation score that reflects the trustwor- the state s, while N is the number of agents dedicated to attack
 thiness and reliability of individual devices within the detection and mitigation. In this setting, s0 = s denotes the
 network. By considering reputation scores, the recom- initial state, t denotes the time step, and rit denotes the reward
 mendation system can offer personalized and reliable received by agent i at time step t.
 recommendations tailored to the specific needs and Furthermore, we define the federated joint action-value
 preferences of users. This enhances the overall user function for attack detection and mitigation as the cumulative
 experience and fosters a collaborative and trustworthy return when all agents collaboratively take a set of joint actions
 environment within the WSN ecosystem. to detect and mitigate attacks in a shared environment using
 5) Resource Usage Personalization: We introduce an inno- federated learning.
 vative scheduling algorithm that prioritizes participants ∞ N
 with higher reputation scores, ensuring efficient utiliza- QFJ (s, a) = E γt rit s0 = s, a0 = a (4)
 tion of resources. By strategically allocating bandwidth t=0 i=1
 to trusted devices, we aim to enhance the overall
 where, QFJ (s, a) signifies the federated joint action-value
 efficiency of the federated learning system, reducing
 function for the state s and joint actions a, with N as the
 overhead while accelerating model convergence.
 number of agents engaged in the detection and mitigation of
 attacks using FL (see Algorithm 1).
 IV. S ECURE AND E FFICIENT M ULTI -AGENT F EDERATED
 L EARNING
 A. Cluster-Based Anomaly Detection and Reward
 The traditional update rule in Q-learning for a single-agent
 Optimization
DQL is given by:
   In the pursuit of enhancing anomaly detection within the
   
 Q(s, a) ← Q(s, a) + α r + γ max Q s , a − Q(s, a) (1) Multi-Agent Framework for Deep Reinforcement Learning
 a (MAF-DRL), we introduce an innovative approach that lever-
 We then adapt the update rule for multiple agents, where i ages clustering techniques to group agents exhibiting similar
represents the agent’s index: behaviors. This method significantly improves anomaly detec-
   tion by focusing on deviations or unusual patterns within these
   
Qi (s, ai ) ← Qi (s, ai ) + α ri + γ max Qi s , ai − Qi (s, ai ) clusters. By isolating and analyzing specific cluster behaviors,
 ai the detection and response to security attacks become more
 (2) effective. We formulated this problem as an optimization
MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH 6913

Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Federated Deep Reinforcement into a differentiable form suitable for SGD, allowing for
Learning (MAF-DRL) gradient-based optimization. This transformation enables effi-
Input: Network environment, sensor agents, federated cient solution space exploration, facilitating the maximization
learning parameters of total reward values for the selected agents during training.
Output: Collaborative reinforcement learning model Subsequently, we employ SGD to iteratively update the
 1: Initialize federated learning environment values of xk,j to maximize the objective function. The update
 2: Initialize sensor agents with DQL models θi rule for each iteration i can be defined as follows:
  
 3: Initialize federated learning parameters: learning rate α, ∞
 (i+1) (i) (i)
 discount factor γ , exploration rate  xk,j = clip xk,j + α∇xk,j R(st , at )xk,j , 0, 1 (7)
 4: for each iteration t do t=0
 5: for each sensor agent i do where, α denotes the learning rate, ∇xk,j represents the gradient
 6: Receive state observation si from environment concerning xk,j , and clip(·) is a function that restricts the values
 7: Select action ai using DQL model: ai = to fall within the range [0, 1].
 argmaxa Q(si , a; θi )
 8: Execute action ai in environment V. R ECOMMENDATION S YSTEM BASED ON T RUST
 9: Receive reward ri from environment In our proposed MAF-DRL, we utilize Graph Neural
 10: Update DQL model using Eq. (3) Networks (GNNs) to enhance the evaluation of participants’
 11: end for trust in the FL process. Our proposed approach leverages a
 12: Share updated DQL models with other agents graph structure to model the relationships and interactions
 13: Aggregate models to form global model: θ̄ ← among participants. Also, we introduce a consensus-based
 N
 i=1 θi
 1
 N trust algorithm to capture the variance or disagreement among
 14: end for
 the FL participants. In this context, we use a distributed linear
 15: return Collaborative reinforcement learning model θ̄
 iterative algorithm to achieve consensus in the network.
 Let G = (P, E) be a network of FL participants, where P
 represents the set of FL participants and E represents the set
problem in which the objective is to maximize the cumulative of directed edges (connections between participants).
reward attained by the selected agents during training. The Each FL participant p ∈ P has an initial state x(0)v , which
reward for attack detection (Rdetection (St )) incentivizes agents is a real number representing its current value or opinion.
to accurately identify security threats based on the current The objective is to achieve consensus among the participants,
state. It is determined by a weight factor wdetection and can be where all participants eventually converge to a common value.
expressed as: The distributed linear iterative algorithm can be described by
 the following dynamics:
 1 if an attack is detected
 Rdetection (St ) = (5)
 0 otherwise x(t + 1)p = w(p, q)x(t)q (8)
 Each agent’s participation in the training process is where, x(t + 1)p denotes the state or feedback of participant
represented by a binary variable (xk,j ), where 0 denotes non- p at time t + 1, and x(t)q denotes the state or feedback of
selection and 1 denotes selection. This problem is formulated participant q at time t. The term w(p, q) represents the weight
as: of the participant directly connected to p.
 ∞ The algorithm then updates the state of each participant at
 maximize R(st , at )xk,j (6a) each time step by taking a weighted average of the states of its
 x neighboring agents. The weights w(p, q) determine the influt=0
 subject to ence or importance of each neighbor in the update process.
 In cases where participants p and q do not communicate with
 xk,j ≤ 1, ∀k ∈ [1, K], (6b)
 each other, the weights are w(p, q) = 0. In such instances, the
 j
 FL participants converge i.e., limt→∞ x(p) = x(∞).
 xk,j ≥ 1, ∀k ∈ [1, K], (6c) Based on the feedback of other FL participants, we evaluk ated each participant’s trust score. We averaging the feedback
 xk ∈ {0, 1}, ∀k ∈ [1, K]. (6d) ratings T(p) for participant p as follows:
 N
where, xk,j represents the binary variable indicating agent q=0 x(t + 1)q
selection for training, subject to constraints ensuring each T(p) = (9)
 N
cluster has at least one agent (6b) and each agent belongs where, x(t + 1)q represents the FL participants providing
to only one cluster (6c). The binary nature of the decision feedback about participant p, and N is the total number of
variable is enforced by constraint (6d). Notably, Problem (6a) participants providing feedback.
is NP-hard due to its mixed-integer non-linear nature. We then assign weights as follows:
 To tackle this complexity, we propose employing stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), where devices are assigned to clusters q w(q, p)x(t + 1)q
 T(p) = (10)
satisfying the constraints. The problem is then converted q w(q, p)
6914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

where, q represents the FL participants providing feedback Algorithm 2 Consensus Trust Algorithm
about p. 1: Input: Feedback from participants
 2: Output: Consensus trust score for the target participant
 3: Initialization:
A. Behavioral Clustering for Enhanced Anomaly Detection
 4: Initialize trust scores for all participants to neutral values
 The level of agreement or convergence achieved by partic- 5: Specify the number of iterations and consensus threshold
ipants within the network is assessed using a consensus error 6: Feedback Collection:
metric, which quantifies the disparity between the actual states 7: Gather feedback about the target participant’s behavior
of participants and the desired consensus value. Typically, from multiple sources
the consensus value is determined as the average state of 8: Consensus Error Trust Calculation:
all participants within the network. The difference between a 9: for i = 1 to N do
participant’s actual state and the consensus value is termed as 10: Compute the consensus error trust using Equation (8)
the consensus error, reflecting the reliability of FL participants. 11: Update the trust scores of all participants using
 We define the reliability vector x(t) = Equation (11)
[x1 (t), x2 (t), . . . , xn (t)] at time t, where x(t)p denotes the 12: end for
reliability state of participant p at time t. Here, the reliability 13: Consensus Verification:
state is binary, with x(t)p = 1 indicating a reliable agent and N
 14: if T  (p) ≤ i=0N
 T  (i)
 then
x(t)p = 0 indicating an unreliable agent. 15: return Consensus Reached
 The consensus error at time t quantifies the discrepancy or 16: else
deviation of each participant’s state from the average state. To 17: return Consensus Unreached
represent the consensus error at time t, we use the root mean
square error, defined as:
 
  where Wfeedback and Wconsensus represent the weights
 1 N  2
 ConsensusErr(t) =  x(t)p − x̄(t)p (11) assigned to feedback-based trust and consensus-based trust,
 N respectively.
 p=1
 To verify the trustworthiness of a participant, we propose a
where, x̄(t)p is the average state of all participants at time t. consensus algorithm among all participants. Algorithm 2 cal-
 The trust score is calculated based on the consensus error, culates the consensus trust score for the target participant using
where participants with smaller error values are considered inputs from various participants. Initially, it sets the number
more trustworthy. To provide a thorough assessment of a of iterations and the consensus threshold, then initializes a
participant’s trust, we accumulate the trust scores over multiple neutral trust value for each participant. The algorithm collects
time steps. Formally, the trust of a participant p can be information on the behavior of the target participant from
expressed as: multiple sources and computes the difference between each
 1 participant’s trust score and the overall average trust score. It
 T  (p) = T(p, t) (12) updates all participants’ trust scores using the consensus error
 T
 values. Finally, consensus is determined by checking if the
where T(p, t) represents the trust of participant p from time average trust score of each participant differs from the target
t = 1 to t = T. participant’s trust score by less than the consensus threshold.
 Incorporating feedback alongside the consensus error allows
for a more nuanced evaluation. While the consensus error B. Agent Selection
measures the level of agreement within the network, the
 Agent selection is crucial in dynamic environments where
feedback score captures the direct feedback received by
 diverse skills are required for each agent to perform effectively.
participants. The global trust of a participant is then computed
 Optimal agent selection improves overall system performance
as a combination of these factors:
   and reduces computational complexities, thus improving the
 1 efficiency of the learning process. Given the resource-intensive
 Tp = αx(p) + β (13)
 ConsensusErr(p) nature of large-scale models, efficient scheduling is necessary
 to evenly distribute the workload and optimize learning effiwhere (x(p)) denotes the feedback-based trust received for ciency. We propose an agent scheduling approach focused on
participant p, ConsensusErr(p) is the consensus error of resource optimization to prevent delays or interruptions during
participant p, and α and β are weighting variables that regulate model transmission. This study utilizes Orthogonal Frequency
the influence of feedback and consensus in trust calculation. Division Multiple Access (OFDMA), which allows simulta-
These components can be weighted based on their perceived neous data transmission from multiple agents by assigning
relevance or trustworthiness, similar to the feedback-based distinct subcarrier subsets to individual users, ensuring contrust formulation. current and interference-free communication.
 We then define the global trust of an FL participant as: The transmission rate (rk ) of a device to the Mobile Edge
 T  (p) = (Wfeedback × x(p)) Computing (MEC) server is calculated as follows:
    
 1 Pk gk
 + Wconsensus × (14) rk = αk B log2 1 + , ∀k ∈ [1, K], (15)
 ConsensusErr(p) αk BN0
MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH 6915

Algorithm 3 Greedy Bandwidth Allocation Algorithm xk ∈ {0, 1}, ∀k ∈ [1, K] (18d)
 1: Input: Total_Bandwidth, T, ttrain , and tup 0 ≤ bk ≤ 1, ∀k ∈ [1, K] (18e)
 2: Output: xk and bk
 3: N ← length(T) where, bk denotes the bandwidth fraction allocated to agent k.
 4: remaining_bandwidth ← Total_Bandwidth The constraint (18b) ensures that the total bandwidth alloca-
 5: selected_agents ← empty_list() tions among all agents do not exceed the available bandwidth.
 6: sorted_agents ← S ORTAGENTS B Y T RUST (T) In our formulation, where timely responses are critical and
 7: for each agent in sorted_agents do operations must align with specific temporal requirements
 8: k ← agent.index dictated by the dynamic WSN environment, we assert in
 9: if isCandidate(k) ∧ has Sufficient Bandwidth(k) then constraint (18c) that the selected agents must complete their
10: select Agent(k) model training and upload within a predefined time frame.
11: allocate Bandwidth(k) Constraint (18d) denotes the binary nature of xk , designating
12: update Remaining Bandwidth(k) device k as either selected or not. Bandwidth allocation ratios
13: add To Selected Agents(k) are bounded by constraint (18e). In particular, considering
14: end if constraints (18b), (18c), (18d), and (18e) solely mirrors the
15: end for complexity of a knapsack problem, making it NP-hard. To
16: return xk , bk = 0 tackle this challenge, we employ a greedy method, as detailed
 in Algorithm 3, effectively navigating the constraints while
 optimizing agent selection and bandwidth allocation, recognizing the intricate interplay between bandwidth considerations
where rk represents the transmission rate of device k to the
 and model training deadlines.
MEC server, αk denotes the allocated bandwidth for device
k, B signifies the total available bandwidth, Pk denotes the
 VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
transmission power of device k, gk represents the channel gain
of device k, and N0 stands for the power spectral density of We implemented our proposed framework (MAF-DRL)
Gaussian noise. using PySyft, a privacy-aware deep learning framework built
 We then propose a device scheduling algorithm that opti- on the PyTorch platform. We have considered a test envimizes not only the overall trust scores but also additional ronment, where multiple agents were deployed to conduct
factors related to agents’ interactions and the learning process. local training and then through the FL process conduct
 up
 The training time (tktrain ) and upload time (tk ) are calculated collaborative learning in a fully distributed manner. This capaas follows: bility empowers every agent to effectively attain an optimal
 We estimate the training time as: policy, maximizing the cumulative expected reward, while
 simultaneously upholding the privacy of each agent’s data. Our
 ζk
 tktrain =  Dtk (16) exploration encompasses two distinct scenarios (see Table II
 fk and Table III). The initial scenario involves binary classificawhere  serves as a scaling factor, Dtk represents the dataset tion, where the focus is on binary classification for jamming
of agent k, ζk denotes the number of CPU cycles required to events. The trained model is specialized in distinguishing
process a single data sample, and fk represents the processing between two possible outcomes: the presence or absence
power of the CPU. of jamming interference. This approach proves valuable in
 The upload time for transmitting a model from agent k to scenarios where a simple binary decision is sufficient, such
the central server can be expressed as: as determining whether a communication channel is under
 s intentional disruption. In the second scenario, we extend
 up
 tk = (17) our approach to multiclass classification for jamming attack
 rk
 detection. This involves configuring the model to handle more
where s denotes the size of the model to be uploaded, and rk than two classes, allowing it to categorize different types
signifies the achievable data rate of agent k. of jamming attacks. This classification is particularly useful
 We formulate an optimization problem for device in sophisticated environments where various jamming techscheduling that incorporates bandwidth constraints into the niques may be employed, each requiring a specific response.
decision-making process. The objective is to maximize the Throughout both scenarios, the training process involves opticumulative reward, denoted by k Rk xk , where xk is a binary mizing the model’s parameters to discern patterns and features
variable indicating the selection of agent k. The optimization indicative of jamming activities. The objective is to enhance
problem is expressed as: the model’s accuracy in detecting and classifying jamming
 events, contributing to the overall resilience of the Wireless
 maximize Rk xk (18a) Sensor Network.
 x,b
 k
 To feed the initial environment with attack data, we used the
 subject to
 WSN-DS dataset, which includes four distinct jamming attacks
 bk ≤ 1 (18b) that were simulated using the LEACH protocol. These attacks
 k
  comprise black hole, gray hole, flood, and scheduling attacks.
 up 
 xk tktrain + tk ≤ T, ∀k ∈ [1, K] (18c) In the black hole attack, a malicious node masquerades
6916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 2. Agent rewards for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 3. Model Accuracies for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrices for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 5. ROC Curves for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

as a Cluster Head (CH) and intentionally discards all data lifetime of the WSN, energy consumption, and overall network
packets relayed through it. The Grayhole attack involves services.
a deceptive CH selectively dropping packets, introducing a In this simulated environment, various scenarios were
random or targeted element. Flooding attacks disrupt the explored from 10 to 50 rounds of training. The evaluation of
LEACH protocol by flooding it with numerous advertising our proposed framework involved an extensive examination
CH messages, leading to increased energy consumption and using key metrics, including accuracy, F1 score, receiver
delayed decision-making by nodes. Scheduling attacks take operating characteristic (ROC) curves, and confusion matrices.
place during the setup phase, causing data loss by assigning These metrics serve as crucial indicators for quantifying the
the same time slot to all cluster members to transmit data. model’s performance across different dimensions.
The attacks were simulated with varying intensities (10%, Figs. 2(a), 2(b), and 2(c) show the convergence (i.e., cumu-
30%, and 50%) to thoroughly assess their impact on the lative average rewards) of our framework over 10, 25, and
MOUDOUD et al.: ADVANCING SECURITY AND TRUST IN WSNs: A FEDERATED MARL APPROACH 6917

 TABLE II TABLE IV
 WSN-DS L ABELS P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS OF MAF-DRL AND C URRENT AI-BASED
 M ETHODS

 TABLE III
 C LASSIFICATION S CENARIOS

 resource-constrained environments, such as wireless sensor
 networks. These promising results not only showcase the
 prowess of our proposed framework but also position it
 as a leading solution for WSN-DS applications. The high
 accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score collectively validate
 the framework’s ability to accurately classify and detect attacks
50 training rounds, respectively. We observe a continuous in the WSN-DS dataset.
improvement in the average reward with increasing training
rounds, reaching its maximum after only three rounds of training. Figs. 3(a), 3(b), and 3(c) show the obtained accuracy in VII. C ONCLUSION
both scenarios for 10, 25, and 50 training rounds, respectively. In this paper, we have introduced a novel framework that
We observe that the accuracy of our proposed framework uses a Multi-Agent federated learning and deep reinforcement
increases, reaching a maximum of 99. This shows that the learning Approach to secure WSNs against new emerging
agents learn from each other while preserving privacy, leading threats while preserving privacy. Our proposed framework
to a high accuracy score in the global model. Figs. 4(a), facilitates collaborative learning among multiple agents. This
4(b), and 4(c) show the confusion matrix curves of our enables each agent to efficiently acquire an optimal policy that
framework, highlighting its performance over 10, 25, and 50 maximizes the cumulative expected reward while maintaining
training rounds, respectively. Figs. 5(a), 5(b), and 5(c) show the privacy of individual agent data. The obtained results
the confusion matrix curves of our framework, highlighting its showed that our proposed framework improves WSN security
performance over 10, 25, and 50 training rounds, respectively. while ensuring privacy and resilient defense against potential
Our framework achieves an accuracy of 99% and an F1 score threats in the WSNs ecosystem. For future directions, we
of 99%. These curves offer a detailed visual breakdown of the intend to enhance the framework’s robustness against advermodel’s classification outcomes, emphasizing the distribution sarial attacks by incorporating adversarial training approaches
of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative and developing mechanisms to detect and mitigate adversarial
instances. These obtained results emphasize the robustness and manipulation attempts targeting the federated learning process.
reliability of our framework, showcasing its ability to produce
consistently accurate and precise predictions across varying R EFERENCES
training rounds. The visual representation through confusion
 [1] A. Taneja and S. Rani, “A novel energy conservation scheme for
matrix curves provides a general understanding of the model’s IoT-based wireless networks: A use case of E-commerce systems for
performance, further reinforcing its effectiveness in the context consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
of the implemented jamming attack detection system. pp. 1648–1655, Feb. 2024.
 [2] N. A. Pantazis, S. A. Nikolidakis, and D. D. Vergados, “Energy-efficient
 Table. IV shows the performance metrics of our proposed routing protocols in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” IEEE Commun.
framework and current AI-based methods using the WSN-DS Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 551–591, 2nd Quart., 2012.
dataset. We have compared the performance of our proposed [3] P. Chanak and I. Banerjee, “Congestion free routing mechanism for
framework with some recent AI-based solutions (i.e., Naive IoT-enabled wireless sensor networks for smart healthcare applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 223–232,
Bayes (NB) [23], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [24], Adaptive Aug. 2020.
boosting [25], and Boosting [25]) using the same WSN- [4] L. Yang, Y. Li, J. Wang, and R. S. Sherratt, “Sentiment analysis for
DS dataset. The remarkable performance metrics, including E-commerce product reviews in Chinese based on sentiment lexicon and
 deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 23522–23530, 2020.
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score all reaching 99%, [5] Z. A. El Houda, L. Khoukhi, and B. Brik, “A low-latency fog-based
signify the robustness and reliability of our proposed solution. framework to secure IoT applications using collaborative federated
One of the key highlights of our framework is its ability learning,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2022,
 pp. 343–346.
to achieve such exceptional results with a minimal training [6] W. Mao, Z. Zhao, Z. Chang, G. Min, and W. Gao, “Energy-efficient
time of only 52.12 seconds. This aspect underscores the Industrial Internet of Things: Overview and open issues,” IEEE Trans.
efficiency and time-saving benefits that our solution brings to Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7225–7237, Nov. 2021.
 [7] B. Kumar et al., “A static machine learning based evaluation method for
the table. The rapid convergence of our model during training usability and security analysis in E-commerce website,” IEEE Access,
further emphasizes its suitability for real-time applications and vol. 11, pp. 40488–40510, 2023.
6918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2024

 [8] R. Ketipov, V. Angelova, L. Doukovska, and R. Schnalle, “Predicting Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the
 user Behavior in e-commerce using machine learning,” Cybern. Inf. B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the
 Technol., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 89–101, 2023. Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco,
 [9] C. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Tu, G. Xu, and H. Wang, “Understanding in 2018, the first Ph.D. degree in computer enginode capture attacks in user authentication schemes for wireless sensor neering from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada,
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in computer
 pp. 507–523, Jan./Feb. 2020. engineering from the University of Technology of
[10] J.-Y. Yu, E. Lee, S.-R. Oh, Y.-D. Seo, and Y.-G. Kim, “A survey on Troyes, France, in 2022. Her research interests
 security requirements for WSNs: Focusing on the characteristics related include the security of the Internet of Things,
 to security,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 45304–45324, 2020. applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detec-
[11] Z. A. E. Houda, D. Naboulsi, and G. Kaddoum, “A privacy-preserving tion systems, and leveraging blockchain to enhance
 collaborative jamming attacks detection framework using federated the security of next-generation networks.
 learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164,
 Apr. 2024.
[12] Z. A. E. Houda, H. Moudoud, and B. Brik, “Federated deep reinforcement learning for efficient jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN,” IEEE
 Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 12153–12164, Apr. 2024.
[13] F. Ding, G. Zhu, M. Alazab, X. Li, and K. Yu, “Deep-learningempowered digital forensics for edge consumer electronics in 5G
 HetNets,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 42–50,
 Mar. 2022.
 Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
[14] J. Amutha, S. Sharma, and J. Nagar, “WSN strategies based on
 the first Ph.D. degree in computer science from
 sensors, deployment, sensing models, coverage and energy efficiency:
 the University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada,
 Review, approaches and open issues,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 111,
 in 2021, and the second Ph.D. degree in compp. 1089–1115, Mar. 2020.
 puter engineering from the University of Technology
[15] M. Shafiq, H. Ashraf, A. Ullah, and S. Tahira, “Systematic literature
 of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2021. He is curreview on energy efficient routing schemes in WSN—A survey,” Mobile
 rently a Professor with the Energy, Materials, and
 Netw. Appl., vol. 25, pp. 882–895, Jun. 2020.
 Telecommunications Center of the National Institute
[16] K. Q. Vu, V. K. Solanki, and A. N. Le, “A saving energy MANET routing
 of Scientific Research (INRS), Canada. He is also a
 protocol in 5G,” in Secure Communication for 5G and IoT Networks.
 member of the INRS-UQO Joint Research Unit in
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 213–220.
 Cybersecurity. Prior to joining INRS, he served as
[17] S. Khera, N. Turk, and N. Kaur, “HC-WSN: A hibernated clustering
 a research scientist in various institutions, contributing to significant research
 based framework for improving energy efficiency of wireless sensor
 projects on the application of machine learning for intrusion detection systems,
 networks,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 3879–3894,
 and studying the expansibility and robustness of these systems. His current
 Jan. 2023.
 research interests include applied AI for intrusion detection systems, security
[18] Y. Liu, Q. Wu, T. Zhao, Y. Tie, F. Bai, and M. Jin, “An improved energyin distributed machine learning, and blockchain for network security.
 efficient routing protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 19,
 no. 20, p. 4579, 2019.
[19] D. Wei, Y. Jin, S. Vural, K. Moessner, and R. Tafazolli, “An energyefficient clustering solution for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans.
 Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 3973–3983, Nov. 2011.
[20] J. Chen, Z. Tian, X. Cui, L. Yin, and X. Wang, “Trust architecture and
 reputation evaluation for Internet of Things,” J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz.
 Comput., vol. 10, pp. 3099–3107, Aug. 2019.
[21] A. Kumar, K. Singh, and S. Vats, “Trust evaluation-based machine
 learning for WSNs,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Comput. Sustain. Global
 Develop. (INDIACom), 2023, pp. 1430–1436. Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[22] Z. Yingzi and Y. Zhaoji, “Research on user trust evaluation of social e- the engineering degree (Ranked First) in comcommerce platform based on artificial neural network,” Optik, vol. 271, puter science and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
 Dec. 2022, Art. no. 170193. from Laghouat University, Algeria, in 2010, 2013,
[23] S. Ismail, Z. El Mrabet, and H. Reza, “An ensemble-based machine and 2017, respectively. He is currently working as
 learning approach for cyber-attacks detection in wireless sensor an Assistant Professor with the Computer Science
 networks,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 30, 2023. [Online]. Available: Department of Computing and Informatics College,
 https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/13/1/30 Sharjah University, UAE. Before joining Sharjah
[24] I. Almomani, B. Al-Kasasbeh, and M. AL-Akhras, “WSN-DS: A Dataset University, he worked as an Assistant Professor
 for intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor networks,” J. Sens., with the DRIVE Department, Bourgogne University,
 vol. 2016, no. 1, Aug. 2016, Art. no. 4731953. France. He has been (still) working on resources
[25] M. Nouman, U. Qasim, H. Nasir, A. Almasoud, M. Imran, and management and security challenges of 5G network slicing in the context
 N. Javaid, “Malicious node detection using machine learning and of H2020 European projects including MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD, and
 distributed data storage using blockchain in WSNs,” IEEE Access, 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests also include 5G and beyond networks,
 vol. 11, pp. 6106–6121, 2023. explainable AI, and machine/deep learning for wireless networks.