7612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 Adversarial Graph Neural Network for Multivariate
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Bolong Zheng , Member, IEEE, Lingfeng Ming, Kai Zeng, Mengtao Zhou, Xinyong Zhang, Tao Ye, Bin Yang ,
 Xiaofang Zhou , Fellow, IEEE, and Christian S. Jensen , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is one of the most significant tasks to determine whether performance failures happen in online
in multivariate time series analysis, while it remains challenging transaction processing (OLTP) workloads [4]. In industrial into model complex patterns for improving detection accuracy and frastructures, operators monitor equipments through sensors to
to interpret the root causes of anomalies. However, existing studies
either consider only the temporal dependencies, or simply recon- ensure the safety from attack [5].
struct the original input for detection, both neglecting the hidden re- As labeling anomalies by human experts is time consuming
lationships among multivariate. We propose an adversarial graph and labor intensive, time series often come without anomaly
neural network based anomaly detection model, called SGAT-AE, labels, so the anomaly detection is usually considered as an
which consists of a Self-learning Graph ATtention network (SGAT), unsupervised learning problem. In the past few years, classian Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component.
Specifically, SGAT is a prediction model that discovers the graph cal unsupervised statistical learning methods [6], [7], [8] are
dependency relationships among multivariate and acts as a sample proposed to deal with the dependencies among multivariate in a
generator to confuse AE, while AE reconstructs the samples and linear manner.
acts as a discriminator that distinguishes a real sample from a In order to extract more complex features of multivariate time
generated one. A novel adversarial training between SGAT and series data, deep learning based methods have been proposed for
AE is applied to amplify the errors of anomalies such that the
prediction performance of SGAT is improved and the overfitting anomaly detection, which can be mainly divided into predictionof AE is avoided. In addition, we aggregate the prediction error, based [1], [9] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [11],
the reconstruction error, and the adversarial error for anomaly de- [12]. In particular, prediction-based methods model the normal
tection, and develop a graph based anomaly interpretation method patterns of historical time series and predict the future trend,
that locates the root causes from both local and global perspectives. but they are easily affected by noise. The reconstruction-based
Extensive experiments with five real-world data offer evidence
that the proposed solution SGAT-AE is capable of achieving better methods learn latent representations of normal patterns and use it
performance when compared with the state-of-the-art proposals. to reconstruct the original input, and then use the reconstruction
 error to detect anomalies. Although these methods can reduce
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anomaly interpretation,
graph neural network, time series.
 the influence of noise, they are prone to overfitting. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13], [14] and variational
 I. INTRODUCTION autoencoders (VAEs) [12] are generative models that learn the
 N real-world applications, sensing technologies are being distributions of normal data, and detect anomalies with recon-
I deployed that produce increasing volumes of multivariate
time series data, which enables the monitoring capabilities with
 struction probabilities. More recently, ensemble models [15],
 [16] are proposed to improve the performance by combining the
the objective of supporting a variety of applications [1], [2], advantages of multiple base models. In addition, transformer-
[3]. The anomaly detection in time series is one of the most based methods [17], [18] are proposed that use attention-based
significant tasks, refers to identifying abnormal states within autoencoders for reconstruction.
a specific time period. For instance, database administrators However, anomaly detection in multivariate time series re-
(DBAs) monitor thousands of key performance indicators (KPIs) mains challenging due to the following reasons:
 (1) Hidden Spatial Dependency: In addition to the inherent
 temporal dependencies in time series, the spatial dependencies
 Manuscript received 24 November 2022; revised 22 April 2024; accepted 23
June 2024. Date of publication 2 July 2024; date of current version 13 November (hidden complex relationships) among multivariate exist and are
2024. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62372194 and unknown to operators. Consider an example in a water treatment
Grant 62322205 and has already been applied in Huawei’s GaussDB (DWS) plant where sensor 1 records the state of a valve and sensor 2
system." Recommended for acceptance by P. Tsaparas. (Corresponding author:
Bolong Zheng.) records the flow rate. The change of sensor 1 leads to the change
 Bolong Zheng and Lingfeng Ming are with the Huazhong University of of sensor 2, and this affection may also be delayed. Although
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zblchris@gmail.com). principal component analysis (PCA) [19], [20] and auto-encoder
 Kai Zeng, Mengtao Zhou, Xinyong Zhang, and Tao Ye are with Huawei,
Shenzhen 518129, China. (AE) [21], [22] can model the correlations of latent representa-
 Bin Yang is with East China Normal University, Shanghai 200050, China. tions among multivariate, they do not explicitly present these
 Xiaofang Zhou is with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, dependency relationships to operators. The ambiguous spatial
Hong Kong, SAR, China.
 Christian S. Jensen is with Aalborg University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark. dependencies make it difficult to detect and interpret anomalies
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3419891 correctly.

 1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7613

 (2) Indistinguishably Small Anomaly Score: Existing models relationships among multivariate, and interpret effectively the
learn the normal patterns during training and take the error anomaly from both local and global perspectives (Challenge 3).
between the model output and the ground truth as the anomaly Overall, the contributions are summarized as follows:
score, so a sample with a high score is labeled as an anomaly. 1) We propose a novel adversarial graph neural network
However, if the anomaly is relatively close to the normal data, SGAT-AE for anomaly detection in multivariate time sethe error might be too small to detect correctly. Therefore, the ries. SGAT learns graph dependency relationships among
core of improving the performance of anomaly detection is multivariate to better extract the spatial dependencies and
to amplify the errors, especially for the anomalies with low temporal dependencies. The idea of SGAT-AE is to emscores. Although USAD [5] proposes two AEs sharing a same ploy an adversarial training between SGAT and AE to
encoder for adversarial training to amplify the errors, it dose not amplify the errors of anomalies.
model the spatial and temporal dependencies, which limits the 2) We develop a novel anomaly interpretation method that
performance. effectively locates the root cause variables of the anoma-
 (3) Accurate Anomaly Interpretation: Most existing studies lies by considering the dependency relationships among
only focus on detecting the anomaly, but neglect the anomaly multivariate, which are obtained from the self-learning
interpretation that analyzes which main variables cause the graph in SGAT.
anomaly that can help speed up troubleshooting. Both DAE- 3) We conduct extensive experiments in five real-world
MON [23] and OmniAnomaly [2] simply identify the top-k datasets, and the experimental results show that SGATvariables with the largest errors or with the lowest reconstruction AE outperforms state-of-the-art baseline methods. A case
probabilities as the interpretation of the anomaly. However, they study also shows that the anomaly interpretation method
fail to consider the dependency relationships among multivariate effectively locates the root causes of anomalies.
and may miss the true root cause variables.
 To address the challenges above, we propose a novel adversarial graph neural network, called SGAT-AE, which consists II. PRELIMINARIES
of a Self-learning Graph-structured ATtention network (SGAT), We proceed to introduce the settings and formally define the
an Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component. problem of anomaly detection in multivariate time series.
SGAT is a prediction-based model that combines a self-learning
graph and an attention network to discover the hidden spatial
dependencies among multivariate (Challenge 1). Specifically, A. Settings
different from most graph learning methods [24], [25], SGAT Definition 1 (Time Series): A multivariate time series selearns a directed graph structure since the dependence patterns quence is denoted as X = {X1 , . . . , Xt , . . . , XT }, where Xt ∈
among multivariate time series are asymmetric. SGAT uses RN ×d is an observation at time t that contains N variables with
the multiscale 1D convolution to extract the nonlinear tem- d-dimensional features, and T is the length of the time series.
poral dependencies of multivariate time series. Different from To model the strong temporal dependencies of time series,
GDN [26] that only captures the spatial dependencies, SGAT we pre-process the original sequences into time windowed seenables to learn both the spatial and temporal dependencies quences.
simultaneously. AE is a reconstruction-based model that learns Definition 2 (Time Windowed Sequence): We denote a
the latent representations of normal patterns and reconstructs the windowed sample at time t with length w as Wt =
original input. {Xt−w+1 , . . . , Xt }, which contains the historical observations
 As mentioned previously, the reconstruction-based methods from time t − w + 1 to t in X . Therefore, X is transformed
enable to learn the normal patterns but are easy to get overfitting, into a time windowed sequence W = {W1 , . . . , Wt , . . . , WT  },
while the prediction-based methods are susceptible to noise. where T  = T − w + 1.
Therefore, to take the best of the both worlds, an adversarial In order to extract temporal patterns and reduce the impact
training process between SGAT and AE is adopted. The input of noise, we adopt a feature enrichment method [27], [28]
data is first processed by SGAT whose role is to reconstruct that uses the moving average to smooth short-term fluctuathe input as close as possible. Then AE tries to distinguish the tions and to highlight long-term trends. We denote Xtm as the
data generated by SGAT from the original input. It is worth moving average value of the latest m times at time t. Note
noting that AE is able to identify whether an input sample that, a large m indicates an emphasis on long-term trends.
is normal or not before reconstruction. So we introduce an Based on practitioner’s experiences, we adopt the moving avadversarial training that allows to amplify the reconstruction erage features of Xt3 , Xt5 for short-term patterns, and those
errors from data generated by SGAT to avoid over-parameterized of Xt10 , Xt20 for long-term patterns, respectively, in order to
(Challenge 2). Different from GANs [13], the reason why we obtain abundant temporal features and to reduce the impacts
use AE as the discriminator is to get rid of the mode collapse of noises by both the short and long-term patterns. For ease
and non-convergence owing to the stability of AE [5]. of presentation, we use Xt to represent all these moving av-
 We compute the anomaly score by aggregating the predic- erage features, i.e., Xt = [Xt3 ; Xt5 ; Xt10 ;Xt20 ], where [; ] reption error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial error resents the concatenation operation. Then, we transform Xt
together. In addition, we use the self-learning graph to clarify the to Wt .
7614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. The SGAT-AE model. Fig. 2. The architecture of SGAT.

B. Problem Statement merging its input and prediction output to obtain a generated sample W̃t , while AE discriminates whether the
 We study two problems as follows. input is an original input Wt or a generated input W̃t .
 1) Anomaly Detection: Given a windowed sample Wt and As a result, SGAT-AE enables to amplify the errors of
 the corresponding moving average feature Wt at time anomalies through the adversarial training between the
 t, SGAT-AE aims to label the observation Xt with yt ∈ two networks.
 {0, 1} by computing an anomaly score St based on the
 error between the original input and the model output. If B. Multivariate Time Series Forecasting
 St is larger than a threshold τ , we label Xt as an anomaly
 (yt = 1); otherwise, Xt is labeled as normal (yt = 0). We propose a graph neural network-based multivariate time
 2) Anomaly Interpretation: The anomaly interpretation is to series forecasting model SGAT that aims to model the historical
 answer the question of why an observation is detected variable patterns to predict the future trends. Specifically, we
 as an anomaly. Given a labeled anomaly Xt , we need to employ a self-learning graph and a graph attention network
 clarify the dependency relationships among multivariate to discover spatial relationships among multivariate, while we
 and diagnose the root variables that cause the anomaly. utilize multiscale 1D CNNs to extract nonlinear temporal dependencies.
 Forecasting Problem: At current time t, we slice Wt to obtain
 III. SGAT-AE
 Xt−w+1:t−p and Xt−p+1:t , which are used as the input and
 We proceed to introduce the details of SGAT-AE that consists the target of SGAT, respectively. Similarly, Wt is sliced to
of a Self-learning Graph-structured ATtention network (SGAT), 
 obtain Xt−w+1:t−p . The goal of SGAT is to learn a mapping
an Auto-Encoder (AE), and an adversarial training component function f that is able to predict X̃t−p+1:t given Xt−w+1:t−p
between SGAT and AE. SGAT models the historical patterns of 
 and Xt−w+1:t−p .
multivariate time series to predict the future trends, while AE
 f
learns to reconstruct the original input. The idea of SGAT-AE is [Xt−w+1:t−p , Xt−w+1:t−p
 
 ] −→ X̃t−p+1:t , (1)
to employ SGAT and AE for adversarial training to amplify the
anomaly error so that the performance of the multivariate time As illustrated in Fig. 2, SGAT consists of an input layer, q temseries anomaly detection is improved. poral learning modules (TLMs) and spatial-temporal learning
 modules (STLMs), and an output layer. The value of q depends
 on the problem complexity and we set q to 2. Both of the input
A. Network Architecture
 layer and the output layer are fully connected layers. The input
 The model architecture of SGAT-AE is illustrated in Fig. 1. layer first projects the input Xt−w+1:t−p into a latent space.
For the current input Wt : Then, it is processed in parallel by the following chains.
 1) SGAT: To extract the spatial and temporal dependencies 1) In the upper chain, it is first concatenated with the moving
 of multivariate time series, we propose a graph neural 
 average feature Xt−w+1:t−p to enrich the temporal feanetwork-based multivariate time series forecasting model tures, and is then processed by TLMs to extract nonlinear
 SGAT that employs the first (w − p)-step historical ob- temporal dependencies.
 servations to predict the following p-step values in Wt . 2) In the lower chain, it is processed by STLMs to mine
 When p = 1, it is a single-step prediction. When p > 1, it hidden spatial dependencies and to extract temporal deis a multi-step prediction. pendencies simultaneously.
 2) AE: To reduce the dimension of multivariate time series, The results of the two chains are concatenated and then taken
 AE is to learn the latent representations for normal patterns into the output layer to return the following p-step result, i.e.,
 and then back them into the original input space. X̃t−p+1:t ∈ Rp×N ×d . It is worth noting that residual and skip
 3) Adversarial Training: To improve the prediction accuracy operations [29] are employed to prevent network degradation.
 of SGAT and to avoid overfitting of AE, SGAT is trained The loss function of SGAT is:
 adversarially with AE (shown by the orange dashed arrow
 in Fig. 1). Specifically, SGAT works as a generator by Losspred = ||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22 , (2)
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7615

 this problem. Graph WaveNet [33] builds an adaptive graph
 structure through node similarity, and its adjacency matrix A
 is symmetric and bidirectional. In fact, the relationships among
 nodes (variables) may be directed. Consider an example in a
 water treatment plant. A change in sensor 1 will cause a change
 in sensor 2, but not vice versa. MTGNN [29] proposes a directed graph, which is more realistic in real-world applications.
 However, the edge weights may be negative which results in
Fig. 3. Spatial-temporal learning module (STLM). unnatural relationships. To solve the problem, we build directed
 relationships among multivariate time series as follows:

 f or i = 1, 2, . . . , N :
where || · ||2 represents L2-norm.
 1) Temporal Learning Module (TLM): As different variables A[:, i] = Sof tM ax(tanh(ηE2 Θ2 E1T [i, :])),
have different trends, the temporal dependencies in multivariate
time series are diversified. To address this issue, we employ A[i, :] = Sof tM ax(tanh(ηE1 [i, :]Θ1 E2T )), (4)
1D convolution filters [30] with multiple sizes to extract richer
temporal features. Therefore, different convolution filters can where Θ1 , Θ2 are learnable parameters, E1 , E2 ∈ RN ×c are
adapt to temporal patterns of different variables. node embeddings and c is the embedding dimension. These
 The temporal learning module (TLM) consists of 1D convolu- parameters are optimized by the back-propagation algorithm
tion filters with multiple sizes [29], i.e., Γ2×1 ∈ R2 , Γ3×1 ∈ R2 , after random initialization during training. η is the zoom factor.
and Γ5×1 ∈ R2 . The intuition is that these filters can be com- The in-degree weights A[:, i] and the out-degree weights A[i, :]
bined into multiple temporal lengths, such as 7, 9, 12, and so on. of each node are different, which ensures that A is asymmetric.
It is worth noting that we can choose more convolution filters We use the tanh activation function to scale the weights of edges
according to the problem complexity. Consider the current input to the same interval and then normalize through the Sof tM ax
Zin , the output of TLM is computed as follows: function. Note that A is a fully-connected graph in (4). To
 eliminate weak connections, for each node i (i = 1, 2, . . . , N ),
 Zout = Concat(Zin ∗ Γ2×1 , Zin ∗ Γ3×1 , Zin ∗ Γ5×1 ), (3) we only select k nodes with the largest edge weights as its
 neighbors, and set the weights of the other nodes to 0.
where ∗ denotes the convolution operation and Concat(·) de- Graph Attention Network: We employ a graph attention-based
notes the concatenation operation. Note that, a sequence with approach to aggregate the node’s information with its neighbors
time axis length h is reduced to h − k + 1 after passing through a base on the self-learning graph A in terms of the correlation
filter of Γk×1 with stride 1 and no padding. Therefore, the outputs weights among nodes. Different from the classic GAT [34] that
of the three filters are truncated to a same length according to only considers the time series node features to obtain attention
the filter Γ5×1 and then concatenated in the channel dimension. scores, we take into account the node embeddings obtained
 2) Spatial-Temporal Learning Module (STLM): In addition, from the process of graph construction. The intuition is that
it is also challenging to extract the complex spatial dependencies the information is transmitted among nodes through A, while
in multivariate time series since the causal relationships among node embeddings represent the graph structure. Therefore, the
multivariate are unknown. To address this issue, we transform attention score αij between nodes i and j is computed as follows:
the multivariate time series forecasting problem to a graph node
prediction problem that aims to learn a graph with dependency < [v i ; M Wti ], [v j ; M Wtj ] >
relationships among multivariate. eij = √ , (5)
 Dim
 Fig. 3 shows the details of the spatial-temporal learning modexp(eij )
ule (STLM) that consists of two identical structures. For each αij =  , (6)
structure, we consider variables as nodes in a graph and employ k∈N (i) exp(eik )
a self-learning graph to build topological relationships via node
embedding technology [31]. Thereafter, a graph attention net- where v i and v j denote the embedings of nodes i and j, Wti and
work is used to extract spatial dependencies among nodes. By Wtj represent the time series features of nodes i and j at time t,
combing with a TLM, we extract the spatial dependencies and respectively. M is a trainable weight matrix. M Wti represents
temporal dependencies simultaneously. We use a gate linear unit the transformed feature of node i. < ·, · > denotes the inner
(GLU) [32] to model the complex nonlinearity. The one followed product operation, and Dim is the dimension of [v i ; M Wti ].
by a sigmoid activation function works as a gate to control the Then, the attention score is normalized.
information output from the other one, where σ is the sigmoid Thereafter, the aggregated representation Zti of node i at time
function and ⊗ denotes the Hadamard product. t is computed as follows:
 Self-learning Graph: The self-learning graph aims to learn ⎛ ⎞
an adjacency matrix A without any additional prior knowledge 
through an end-to-end manner using the stochastic gradient Zti = σ ⎝M Wti + αij M Wtj ⎠ , (7)
algorithm. However, there exist only few studies focusing on j∈N (i)
7616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

where N (i) = {j|Aji > 0} represents the neighbors of node i Algorithm 1: SGAT-AE Training.
obtained from the self-learning graph A. σ denotes the sigmoid
activation function.

C. Auto-Encoder
 The Auto-Encoder (AE) learns to reconstruct the original
input. It consists of an encoder E and a decoder D. The encoder
maps the origin input Wt into a latent representation Z and
then the decoder maps it back into the input space to obtain a
reconstruction AE(Wt ). The reconstruction error between the
original input Wt and the reconstruction AE(Wt ) is calculated
as follows:
 Lossrec = ||Wt − AE(Wt )||22 , (8)
where AE(Wt ) = D(Z) and Z = E(Wt ). On the one hand, AE
is supposed to achieve accurate reconstruction by minimizing
the error Lossrec . On the other hand, if AE is too sensitive
to the input data, AE may only learn a mapping relationship
from the input to the reconstruction, resulting in overfitting.
To avoid this problem, AE is usually optimized by choosing
a reasonable dimension of the latent representation Z or adding
a regularization term. We train AE in an adversarial manner to
avoid overfitting.

D. Adversarial Training
 SGAT and AE are two different anomaly detection methods.
The former is a prediction-based method that considers the
prediction error as the anomaly score, while the latter is a
reconstruction-based method that uses the reconstruction error as the anomaly score. They both regard observation sam- On the one hand, SGAT acts as a generator with the goal
ples with high scores as anomalies. However, they both have of minimizing adversarial error Lossadv , as it wishes to make
shortcomings. SGAT models the historical patterns of multi- accurate predictions to generate sufficiently realistic sample W̃t
variate time series, which is susceptible to noise. AE is over- to confuse AE. Consider the prediction error of SGAT itself in
parameterized [15] and is easy to fit with anomalies, which (2), the adversarial training objective of SGAT is computed as
means that the reconstruction error of AE is small when the follows:
anomaly is close to the normal data, making it difficult to detect
 Loss1 = Losspred + Lossadv
the anomaly correctly. Therefore, the core of improving anomaly
detection performance is how to amplify the error of anomalies. = ||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22 + ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 ,
This problem can be solved if AE is able to identify whether (11)
an input sample is normal or not before reconstruction. The
generative adversarial network (GAN) technique [13] is a feasi- On the other hand, AE acts as a discriminator with the goal
ble solution that is based on a two-player minimax adversarial of maximizing the adversarial error Lossadv as it aims to disgame between two networks trained simultaneously. However, tinguish whether the input is a real sample Wt or a generated
the classic GAN neglects the spatial and temporal dependencies sample W̃t from SGAT. Consider the reconstruction error of AE
in multivariate time series. Therefore, we employ the prediction itself in (8), the adversarial training objective of AE is computed
model SGAT and AE for adversarial training to combine their as follows:
advantages to break through the bottleneck and to improve the
performance of anomaly detection in multivariate time series. Loss2 = Lossrec − Lossadv
 Specifically, the input and the prediction result of SGAT are = ||Wt − AE(Wt )||22 − ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 , (12)
merged to obtain a generated sample W̃t , which is reconstructed
by AE into AE(W̃t ). Therefore, the adversarial loss function It is worth noting that SGAT and AE both have two optimizaand the objective function of adversarial training are computed tion objectives, the weights of the two optimization objectives
as follows: should change with time [5]. So Loss1 and Loss2 are modified
 as follows:
 Lossadv = ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 , (9)
 1
 min max Lossadv , (10) Loss1 = ||Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t ||22
 SGAT AE n
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7617

 
 1 (2) Variable Aggregation Error: Since the anomalies mainly
 + 1− ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 , (13) affect a small number of variables, or even a single variable, we
 n
 use the max function to aggregate the errors of N variables to
 1
 Loss2 = ||Wt − AE(Wt )||22 obtain signal anomaly scores as follows:
 n
  Scorepred = max Erripred ,
 1
 − 1− ||Wt − AE(W̃t )||22 , (14) i∈{1,2,...,N }
 n
 Scorerec = max Errirec ,
 i∈{1,2,...,N }
where n denotes a training epoch. According to the above
description, SGAT tries to minimize both the prediction error Scoreadv = max Erriadv , (16)
and the reconstruction error of W̃t during the adversarial training i∈{1,2,...,N }

process. Besides, AE tries to minimize the reconstruction error
 where i represents the ith variable, and Erri denotes the norof Wt but to maximize that of W̃t to amplify the reconstruction
 malization error of the ith variable.
discrepancy of abnormal input samples. In order to speed up the
 (3) Aggregation Anomaly Score of Three Components: By
convergence of SGAT-AE, we adopt a strategy of combining
 combining the three kinds of errors, the final anomaly score St
individual training and adversarial training for SGAT and AE,
 is aggregated as follows:
which means that the parameters of each network are updated
twice for each mini-batch samples. The specific training process St = β1 Scorepred + β2 Scorerec + β3 Scoreadv , (17)
is summarized in Algorithm 1.
 where β1 , β2 , and β3 are the corresponding weights of the
 three kinds of anomaly scores, and β1 + β2 + β3 = 1. Different
 IV. ANOMALY DETECTION AND INTERPRETATION
 weights may result in different anomaly score St , and they are
 We proceed to introduce the anomaly detection approach. In used to trade off between false negatives and false positives.
addition to detecting the anomalies, we also aim to locate the root A large β1 means that we pay more attention to the prediction
causes of the anomalies based on the relationships in the self- error, so as a large β2 to the reconstruction error and a large
learning graph. We first compute an anomaly score to determine β3 to the adversarial error. The regulation of β1 , β2 , and β3
whether an observation is anomalous or not. Then, the anomaly allows parameterizing the sensitivity of SGAT-AE to meet the
interpretation is applied. requirements of a production environment. For example, in an
 industry company, managers may prefer a low sensitivity level,
A. Anomaly Score limiting the number of false positives but warning them only
 in case of important incidents, while technicians may prefer a
 The anomaly score is closely related to the anomaly detection high sensitivity level that limits the number of false negatives.
model since it is computed based on the error between the ground Therefore, we adopt 0.05, 0.05, 0.9 as the values of β1 , β2 , and
truth and the model output. As SGAT-AE consists of SGAT, β3 since the adversarial error is amplified by SGAT-AE, in order
AE, and an adversarial training component, the output brings to achieve a high sensitivity from a technician view.
the prediction error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial Finally, an observation Xt at time t is labeled as an anomaly
error. Consider these three kinds of errors, we first compute if St exceeds a threshold τ . Since the performance of anomaly
individual scores for each variable, and then aggregate them into detection is sensitive to the threshold τ , it needs to be set
a single score. Specifically, the anomaly score St of observation reasonably. On the one hand, if τ is too large, only a small
Xt is computed as follows: number of the observations are labeled as abnormal, while most
 (1) Time Dimension Aggregation Error: To pay more attention of the anomalies are not identified. For the false negatives, they
to the moment with the largest gap between the ground truth and may cause major equipment problems and even heavy losses.
the model output, we use the max function as the aggregation On the other hand, if the threshold τ is too small, most of the
function and compute the error of each variable over time as observations including the normal data are labeled as abnormal.
follows: For the false positives, the risk of excessive security warning
 exists that may result in an unnecessary waste of resources.
 Errpred = maxt |Xt−p+1:t − X̃t−p+1:t |,
 Therefore, the threshold τ requires a trade-off between false
 Errrec = maxt |Wt − AE(Wt )|, negatives and false positives. We employ the selection method
 proposed in OmniAnomaly [2] to set the threshold τ .
 Erradv = maxt |Wt − AE(W̃t )|, (15)

where Errpred ∈ RN , Errrec ∈ RN , Erradv ∈ RN represent B. Anomaly Interpretation
the prediction error, the reconstruction error, and the adversarial Different from anomaly detection, the anomaly interpretaerror, respectively. Since different variables may have different tion is a more complex task. For a labeled anomaly Xt , the
properties, they may also have different variation ranges. It is anomaly interpretation is to analyze which main variables cause
possible that the bias generated by one variable over-dominates the anomaly so that the operators can locate quickly the root
the other variables. To avoid this issue, we normalize the error cause. DAEMON [23] identifies the top-k variables with the
of each variable. largest errors as the interpretation of anomaly. It makes sense
7618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

to some extent, but it fails to take the dependency relationship TABLE I
 DATASET STATISTICS
among multivariate into account. Consider an example in a water
treatment plant. The change of sensor 1 will cause the change
of sensor 2, but the value change of sensor 1 is smaller than that
of sensor 2. When an anomaly occurs, DAEMON treats sensor
2 as the root cause which is incorrect since sensor 1 is the true
root cause variable of the anomaly.
 To avoid the issue, we propose a graph structure-based
anomaly interpretation method. Specifically, we clarify the
dependency relationships among variables before performing r WADI (Water Distribution):2 The dataset is an extension of
anomaly interpretation and then locate the root variables from SWaT dataset. It consists of 16 days of continuous operboth local and global perspectives. For a labeled anomaly Xt . ation: the first 14 days collected under normal operations
 r Local Anomaly Interpretation: First, the node (variable)
 are regarded as the training set and the last 2 days with
 with the largest prediction error determined by (16) is taken attack scenarios are regarded as the testing set.
 as an anomaly node. Then, its neighbors are obtained ac- r SMD (Server Machine Dataset):3 The dataset is a new 5-
 cording to the self-learning graph structure. Specifically, its week-long dataset collected from a large Internet company.
 in-degree neighbors and itself are regarded as the candidate It is collected from 28 different machines that form 28
 nodes of the root cause variables of the anomaly, while subsets. Each subset is divided into two parts with equal
 its out-degree neighbors help understand the direction of length for training and testing.
 anomaly error propagation. As in the above example, we r SMAP (Soil Moisture Active Passive) and MSL (Mars
 take sensor 2 as an anomaly node. The directed dependency Science Laboratory):4 These two datasets are labeled by
 relationship between sensors 1 and 2 is learned by SGAT- experts from NASA and are anonymized w.r.t. time. The
 AE and is reflected in the self-learning graph structure, testing set size of SMAP is more than 3 times of the training
 where sensor 1 is sensor 2’s in-degree neighbor. In a result, set while the testing set size of MSL is roughly 1.2 times
 both of the two nodes are regarded as candidate nodes that of the training set.
 cause the anomaly. Methods for Comparison: To study the performance of SGATr Global Anomaly Interpretation: According to the self-
 AE for multivariate time series anomaly detection, we compare
 learning graph, the nodes with only out-degree neighbors it with the following methods:
 and no in-degree neighbors are regarded as a main cause r AE [10]: A encoder-decoder architecture with three fullynode set, and the nodes with in-degree neighbors are de- connected layers that compresses the input into a latent
 pendent nodes. We select the largest top-k prediction errors representation and then maps it back to the input space.
 in the main cause node set as the root cause variable of r LSTM-VAE [35]: A reconstruction-based model that rethe anomaly, regardless of the dependent nodes. As in the places the feed-forward network of VAE with LSTM to
 above example, we regard sensor 1 as the main cause node extract temporal dependencies.
 and sensor 2 as the dependent node. Therefore, sensor 1 is r LSTM-NDT [1]: A prediction-based model with a noncorrectly regard as the root cause of the anomaly. parametric anomaly threshold, which employs LSTM to
 We take the candidate results from both local and global predict future trend based on the historical observations.
perspectives as the final interpretation results, so that we can r DAGMM [36]: A prediction-based model that utilizes a
diagnose the anomalies quickly and correctly. Section V-C2 deep AE to generate a low-dimensional representation and
demonstrates case studies. reconstruction error for each input, which is further fed into
 a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM).
 V. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY r BeatGAN [14]: A reconstruction-based model that employs
A. Experimental Settings an AE to work as a generator and uses an adversarial
 generation network to guarantee the robustness.
 The SGAT-AE model is implemented in Python3 with Py- r OmniAnomaly [2]: A reconstruction-based model that
torch. All experiments are run on a Linux (Ubuntu 18.04 LTS) adopts a stochastic recurrent neural network model that
machine with a NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU card. We use five glues GRU and VAE to learn the normal patterns of multipublicly available datasets with labeled ground-truth anomalies variate time series and uses the reconstruction probability
to evaluate our model. Table I summaries the dataset statistics.
 r SWaT (Secure Water Treatment):1 The dataset originates for anomaly judgement.
 r USAD [5]: A reconstruction-based model that consists of
 from a test bench for a real water treatment plant. It consists two AEs sharing the same encoder for adversarial training.
 of 11 days of continuous operation: the first 7 days collected r GDN [26]: A prediction-based model that combines a
 under normal operations are regarded as the training set and structure learning approach with graph neural networks,
 the last 4 days collected with attack scenarios are regarded
 as the testing set. 2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/dataset_info/#wadi
 3 https://github.com/smallcowbaby/OmniAnomaly
 1 https://github.com/JulienAu/Anomaly_Detection_Tuto 4 https://github.com/khundman/telemanom
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7619

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON WITH BASELINE MODELS

 and uses attention weights to provide the explainability for r Data Preprocessing and Training: We set by default the
 the detected anomalies. window size w to 15, and predict the future 3-step values
 r TranAD [18]: A reconstruction-based model that employs (p = 3) with d = 1 for all datasets. The random seed is
 a encoder-decoder model structure utilizing Transformer. 666, the batch size of the random gradient descent is 1024,
 TranAD leverages self-conditioning and adversarial train- and the dropout rate is 0.1. After randomly initializing the
 ing to amplify errors and gain training stability. learnable parameters, we train SGAT-AE up to 80 epochs
 r GTA [17]: A prediction-based model. GTA involves au- by using the Adam optimizer with the default learning rate
 tomatically learning a graph structure, graph convolution, 0.001.
 and modeling temporal dependency using a Transformerbased architecture.
 r RANSynCoders [37]: RANSynCoders utilizes Auto- B. Results of Anomaly Detection
 Encoder to extract features from the original asynchronous 1) Comparison With Baseline Models: Table II shows the
 time series, and then performs Fourier transform analysis performances of different methods for anomaly detection in
 on the sequence features to learn phase differences. Thus multivariate time series. We have the following observations:
 align asynchronous time series and obtain synchronous 1) In general, the prediction-based methods, such as LSTMtime series representations. NDT and DAGMM, show unsatisfactory performance. Al-
 Evaluation Metrics: We use Precision (Pre), Recall (Rec), and though these methods can capture temporal dependencies
F1-score (F1) to evaluate the performance. in multivariate time series, they ignore the hidden spatial
 dependencies, thus restricting their performances. GTA
 TP TP 2 ∗ P re ∗ Rec and GDN employ the graph structure to learn the hidden
P re = , Rec = , F1 = correlations and improves the performance. Although they
 TP + FP TP + FN P re + Rec
 use down-sampling strategy to reduce the noise impact,
 where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the numbers of true positives, true anomalies are still missed.
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively. 2) The reconstruction-based methods, including AE and
 In practice, the anomalies often occur continuously so that BeatGAN, exhibit poor performance since they are afthe contiguous anomaly segments are formed. Therefore, it is ac- fected by overfitting. USAD employs the adversarial trainceptable if an alert is triggered within any subset of a contiguous ing to amplify the reconstruction error, and has achieved
anomaly segment. Thus, we adopt a commonly used point-adjust better performance. But these methods all ignore tempoapproach [2] to measure the performance. That is, if at least one ral dependencies, which limits the performance improveobservation in an anomalous segment is detected correctly, all ment. LSTM-VAE, OmniAnomaly, and TranAD adopt
the other observations in the segment are also treated as detected RNNs and Transformer to extract temporal dependencies
correctly, even if they are not. while doing a reconstruction, respectively. They all exhibit
 Parameter Settings: We summarize the parameter settings of good performance in SMD, SMAP, and MSL. However,
SGAT-AE as follows. they all ignore the hidden complex dependencies between
 r SGAT: For the self-learning graph, we embed node IDs with multivariate. The deficiency is pronounced obviously in
 length of 32, k with 10, hidden layers with 32 neurons, and WADI of which the node dimension is highest. It can be
 the zoom factor η is 3. We use two layers of TLM and observed that the graph learning based methods such as
 STLM. The number of channels in the first and second GDN, GTA, and our SGAT-AE outperforms others signiflayers are 32 and 64, respectively. icantly since the graph structure helps to mine the spatial
 r AE: AE is composed of two symmetrical deep networks correlation among nodes. As for RANSynCoders, which
 with three fully-connected layers. The latent dimension of is a time series representation learning based method. It
 Z is set by default to 5 in SWaT, 3 in WADI, 3 in SMD, exhibits significantly poor performance in WADI when
 1 in SMAP, 1 in MSL, respectively. the variation of data dissatisfies periodicity.
7620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON WITH VARIANTS OF SGAT-AE

 3) SGAT-AE achieves the best performance in most datasets SGAT makes a great contribution to SGAT-AE. Moreover,
 except slightly worse than USAD in MSL. Specifi- both models have limited performance without the advercally, SGAT extracts temporal dependencies and hid- sarial training.
 den spatial dependencies simultaneously, and AE suc- 3) The performance decreases significantly without advercessfully reduces the impact of noise. Moreover, its sarial training. The reason is that the model degenerates
 adversarial training combines the advantages of the into two independent parts SGAT and AE. SGAT focuses
 above two parts, and makes SGAT-AE more robust. solely on minimizing prediction errors as its optimization
 More specifically, SGAT-AE improves the F1 score by objective, while AE’s objective is restricted to minimizing
 12.8% in SWaT, 20.3% in WADI, 1.8% in SMD, and reconstruction errors.
 0.7% in SMAP over the most competitive methods, 4) The experimental results show an interesting pherespectively, and the performance difference in WADI nomenon. The methods that adopt AE, such as RemSGAT,
 is the most statistically significant. SGAT-AE outper- LSTM-AE, and CNN-AE, perform worse than AE itself
 forms the other methods in terms of both the Precision in datasets SMAP and MSL. It means that the additional
 and Recall, where it increases the Precision from 0.796 network structures actually have a side effect. We believe
 (GDN) to 0.827 and the Recall from 0.827 (TranAD) the reason for the poor performance of RemSGAT is that
 to 0.999. the original AE is simplified in our model with fewer layers
 2) Ablation Study: To evaluate the effects of different com- and parameters. As for the reason for the performance of
ponents in our model, we compare different variants of SGAT- LSTM-AE and CNN-AE, a probable explanation is that
AE, including: they are not able to construct graph structures and model
 r Removing moving average (RemMA). the spatial relationship among node variables. Therefore,
 r Removing AE (RemAE). they fail to generate high-quality prediction results and
 r Removing SGAT (RemSGAT). adversarial samples.
 r Removing adversarial training (RemAT): We remove the 5) The performance is improved by considering the hidden
 adversarial training process and the adjusted anomaly score relationships between variables. Replacing SGAT with
 St∗ is aggregated as follows: AGCRN has better performance than that with classical LSTM or CNN. The reason is that both LSTM and
 St∗ = β1 Scorepred + β2 Scorerec (18)
 CNN ignore the hidden relationships between multivariwhere we adopt 0.5, 0.5 as the values of β1 and β2 . ate, while AGCRN discovers the relationship through a
 r Replacing SGAT with LSTM (LSTM-AE). self-learning graph and a graph neural network and has
 r Replacing SGAT with CNN (CNN-AE). more accurate prediction results.
 r Replacing SGAT with AGCRN [38] (AGCRN-AE): 6) SGAT-AE achieves the best performance, followed by
 AGCRN is also a GNN-based prediction model with an AGCRN-AE. Since SGAT learns a directed graph strucadaptive graph structure. Specifically, it designs a node ture while AGCRN learns an undirected one. In fact, the
 adaptive parameter learning module and an adaptive graph dependence patterns between multivariate are asymmetgeneration module to capture the dynamic spatial-temporal ric, thus a directed graph learned by SGAT-AE makes
 correlations in multivariate time series. more sense. Moreover, SGAT employs multiple convo-
 The results are shown in Table III. We have four observations. lution filters with different sizes to extract richer temporal
 1) Without moving average, the model has poor performance. features. Unlike GRU in AGCRN, the CNNs in SGAT-AE
 This is because moving average can reduce the effect of are computed in parallel. Therefore, SGAT-AE is more
 noise and is beneficial to extract richer temporal patterns efficient and suitable for real-time anomaly detection.
 for prediction. Overall, the results indicate that SGAT-AE is capable of
 2) No matter removing SGAT or AE from SGAT-AE, outperforming the competitors.
 the performance degrades. Specifically, RemSGAT is 3) Parameter Study: We study the effects of different parama reconstruction-based model, while RemAE is a eters on the performance of SGAT-AE. Note that, when we vary
 prediction-based anomaly detection model. The perfor- the value of a parameter, the other parameters are set to the
 mance of RemSGAT drops greatly, which indicates that default values.
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7621

Fig. 4. The effects of parameters.

 Effect of the Window Size w: Since the time series has strong TABLE IV
 COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT SCORING WEIGHTS
nonlinear temporal dependencies, the current observation Xt
is checked whether it is abnormal by taking the sequence Wt
with window size w as the input of SGAT-AE. Only short-term
temporal dependencies are considered when w is small, while
long-term temporal dependencies can be extracted when w is
large. However, as w increases, the training speed slows down
and the prediction difficulty rises. Fig. 4(a) shows the F1 scores
when varying w in all datasets. We can see that when w is 15,
the method achieves the best performance. So it is the best trade
off between short-term and long-term temporal dependencies, Effect of the anomaly scoring weights. Different weights of
and it enables both fast training and anomaly detection. β1 , β2 , and β3 will result in different anomaly score St , and
 Effect of the Prediction Step p: SGAT conducts p-step predic- they are used to trade off between false negatives and false
tion. On the one hand, the prediction error of SGAT increases positives. A larger β1 corresponds to giving more importance
as p increases. On the other hand, the predicted value X̃t−p+1:t to the prediction of SGAT-AE in St , while β2 corresponds to
deviates more from the ground truth, resulting in a larger de- the reconstruction of AE, and β3 corresponds to the adversarial
viation of the generated data W̃t . It is equivalent to increasing training. The changes of scoring weights can tune the detection
the effect of noise disturbance, which is beneficial to avoid the sensitivity.
overfitting in AE under the adversarial training. Fig. 4(b) shows We conduct multiple experiments of varying β1 , β2 , and β3 in
that the F1 scores when varying p in all datasets. Specifically, SWAT to evaluate the effect of the anomaly scoring weights. Due
F1 score first gradually increases with the increase of p, which to the space limitation, Table IV only reports some representative
is beneficial to the improvement of AE. Then, F1 score grad- experimental results of Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. It can
ually decreases as p increases to a certain extent, indicating be observed that the anomaly scoring strategy adopted in our
that the prediction error of SGAT is too large and weakens method as β1 = 0.05, β2 = 0.05, and β3 = 0.9 attains the best
the overall performance. Therefore, p is set to a medium-large F1-score and Recall. It indicates that our strategy can not only
value 3. achieve the best anomaly detection performance but also the
 Effect of the Dimension of Z: The dimension of the latent highest sensitivity.
representation Z of AE is assumed to be smaller than that of
the original data. On the one hand, if the dimension of Z is
 C. Results of Anomaly Interpretation
large, AE may only learn a mapping relationship from input to
reconstruction, resulting in overfitting. On the other hand, the 1) Comparison With Baseline Models: For a labeled
dimension of Z is too small, which may lead to underfitting. anomaly Xt , we locate the root variables that cause the anomaly
However, there is no standard strategy for choosing Z. Different from both local and global perspectives based on the selfdatasets have different values, which are all set by experience and learning graph. We use ASt to represent the root variables sugfine-tuned according to the experimental results. Fig. 4(c) shows gested by SGAT-AE, which are ordered by the errors. To evaluate
the F1 scores when varying the dimension of Z in all datasets. the anomaly interpretation quality, we adopt the HitRate@P %
We can see that the performance does not change significantly proposed in [2] as follows:
as the dimension of Z increases. It is because that the adversarial Hit@P % × |GTt |
training employed in SGAT-AE improves the robustness of AE. HitRate@P % = (19)
 |GTt |
According to the results in Fig. 4(c), the dimension of Z is set
to 5, 3, 3, 1, and 1 in SWaT, WADI, SMD, SMAP, and MSL where |GTt | is the length of ground truth array containing the
datasets, respectively. variables indeed contributing to anomaly, and P is selected from
7622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF ANOMALY INTERPRETATION

 Fig. 6. Attack example 1 on sensor 1_F IT _001_P V and the sensor
 1_P _001_ST AT U S with the largest anomaly score.
Fig. 5. The self-learning graph in WADI (the red nodes: 1_P _001_ST AT U S
and 2_F Q_401_P V , the blue nodes: 1_F IT _001_P V and
2_M CV _007_CO)
 the observation value, but it is within the normal variation range
 for this sensor, so detecting this anomaly is nontrivial (The red
 shaded area indicates the anomalous time period).
{100, 150, 200}. Hit@P % equals the number of overlapping Fig. 6(b) shows the predictions and observations of senvariables between GTt and the top P % × |GTt | contributing sor 1_P _001_ST AT U S with the highest anomaly score durvariables in ASt over |GTt |. If the root variables we obtain is ing this attack. Since the anomaly score is greater than the
fewer than P % × |GTt | , we choose the node with the sec- threshold τ , the observations are determined to be abnormal
ond largest prediction error and its in-degree neighnors as root and sensor 1_P _001_ST AT U S is considered as an abnorvariables and repeat this until obtaining at least P % × |GTt | mal sensor with the highest score, which indicates that sensor
variables. 1_P _001_ST AT U S is the attacked object, or is closely related
 Since only SMD has the ground truth for anomaly interpre- to the attacked sensor.
tation, we compare SGAT-AE with OmniAnomaly and USAD The self-learning neighbor relationships indicate the dein SMD. Note that, OmniAnomaly identifies the top-k variables pendencies among nodes (sensors). As shown in Fig. 5, the
with the lowest reconstruction probabilities as the interpretation red node on the right side represents the labeled abnormal
of anomalies, while USAD obtains the top-k variables with sensor 1_P _001_ST AT U S and its neighbors are connected
the largest reconstruction errors. Table V shows the values of with red edges, while the blue node on the right side repre-
HitRate@P % when varying P in SMD. SGAT-AE achieves sents the real abnormal sensor 1_F IT _001_P V . From a local
the best performance as we locate the root cause variables from perspective, 1_F IT _001_P V has the largest graph attention
both local and global perspectives based on the self-learning weight among the in-degree neighbors of 1_P _001_ST AT U S,
dependence graph. so the abnormal pattern of 1_P _001_ST AT U S is likely
 2) Case Study: We proceed to discuss how to locate anoma- caused by its neighbor 1_F IT _001_P V . From a global
lies. The edges in the graph structure learned by SGAT represent perspective, 1_P _001_ST AT U S is a dependent node,
the dependency relationships among multivariate, thereby pro- and 1_F IT _001_P V is the main cause node. Then,
viding explanation for anomaly localization. Fig. 5 shows the 1_F IT _001_P V is considered to be the cause of the anomaly
self-learning graph in WADI dataset, followed by case studies because it has the highest abnormal score in all main cause
to further demonstrate how to use this graph structure to locate nodes. Overall, 1_F IT _001_P V is regarded as the main
and explain an anomaly. cause of the anomaly from both local and global perspec-
 We study a case where the cause of an anomaly is already tives. In fact, 1_P _001_ST AT U S shows the valve status
known. As recorded in WADI dataset, at around 10:00 October of the flow measured by 1_F IT _001_P V . During the at-
10, 2017, the sensor 1_F IT _001_P V that monitored the water tack, the false reading of 1_F IT _001_P V leads its value to
flow was attacked, resulting in abnormal value via false reading. arise, and thus 1_P _001_ST AT U S responds to this change.
As shown in Fig. 6(a), the false reading results in a sharp rise in SGAT-AE learns the dependence between 1_F IT _001_P V
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7623

 VI. RELATED WORK
 A. Anomaly Detection
 Anomaly detection aims to detect observations which
 significantly deviate from the other observations. Classical unsupervised learning methods consist of distance-based methods [6], [39], [40], [41], [42], density-based methods [43],
 cluster-based methods [44], and classification-based methods [8], [45]. Matrix Profile [41], [42], [46] is a series of
 state-of-the-art distance-based methods. However, most of them
 deal with dependencies in a linear manner.
 Recently, many deep learning-based methods have been proposed to extract more complex nonlinear features. The mainstream methods can be divided into prediction-based methods [1], [9] and reconstruction-based methods [10], [11], [12],
 [13]. Specifically, prediction-based anomaly detection methods
 model the normal patterns of historical time series to predict
 the future trends, and thereafter employ the prediction errors to
 determine anomalies. These methods extract nonlinear temporal
 dependencies in multivariate time series, but they are easily
 affected by noise. Reconstruction-based methods learn latent
Fig. 7. Attack example 2 on sensor 2_M CV _007_CO and sensor representations of normal data patterns and then reconstruct the
2_F Q_401_P V with the largest anomaly score original input, and thereafter use the reconstruction errors to detect anomalies. Although these methods can reduce the influence
 of noise, they are prone to be overfitting and ignore nonlinear
 temporal dependencies. GANs [13], [14] and VAEs [12] are
and 1_P _001_ST AT U S. The learned historical change pat- generative models for learning normal data distributions and use
tern of 1_P _001_ST AT U S fails to predict the mutation sit- the reconstruction probabilities to determine anomalies. More
uation, resulting in a large prediction error. Then, the cause recently, ensemble models [15], [16] are proposed to improve
of the anomaly can be located from the highest anomaly the performance by combining the advantages of multiple base
score. models. In addition, transformer-based methods [17], [18] are
 Another anomaly case in WADI is recorded at around 17:40, proposed that use attention-based autoencoders for reconstruc-
October 10, 2017 that lasted for ten minutes. The sensor tion. USAD [5] consists of two AEs sharing the same encoder
2_M CV _007_CO was attacked, resulting in a continuous rise for adversarial training, which allows to amplify the anomaly
in the observation value. Fig. 7 shows the predictions and obser- errors. RCA [15] employs collaborative AEs to jointly identify
vations of sensor 2_M CV _007_CO itself and 2_F Q_401_P V normal observations from the data while learning its feature
with the largest prediction error during the attack. Since the representation. GAN ensemble [16] employs multiple GANs
anomaly score of 2_F Q_401_P V is greater than the thresh- and can better model the distribution of normal data.
old, the observations of this time period are correctly de- However, those methods do not consider the hidden relatermined to be abnormal even though the anomaly score of tionships among variables. GDN [26] employs a self-learning
2_M CV _007_CO is within the threshold. structure approach with graph neural networks and then uses the
 We observe that the observation value of sensor attention weights to provide explainability for detected anoma-
2_F Q_401_P V also shows a rise during the attack, which lies. It misses many anomalies with down-sampling strategy,
indicates that it is affected by the attacked sensor. It is confirmed which is not reasonable. Unlike above methods, we employ a
in the self-learning graph. As shown in Fig. 5, the attacked self-learning graph and an attention network to discover the
sensor 2_M CV _007_CO (the blue node on the left side) is the hidden relationships among multivariate and employ AE to
in-degree neighbor of sensor 2_F Q_401_P V (the red node on reconstruct the normal patterns. A novel adversarial training is
the left side). From the local perspective, the two sensors are designed to amplify the anomaly error and improve robustness.
regarded as the candidate nodes of the root cause variables of In addition, we propose a graph based anomaly diagnosis method
the anomaly with the largest prediction error. From the global to explain anomalies.
perspective, 2_M CV _007_CO is considered as the abnormal
node since it has the largest prediction error in all main cause
 B. Graph Based Multivariate Problems
nodes. So we accurately identify sensor 2_M CV _007_CO
as the root cause node from the two perspectives. According As is known to all, many multivariate problems with spatial
to the case studies, we can see that SGAT-AE is effective correlation can be solved by constructing graph structures since
for multivariate time series anomaly detection and anomaly the edges of the graph more or less indicate the correlation of
localization. nodes.
7624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 Existing approaches generally model the behavior of mul- analyzing which main variables cause the anomaly from the
tivariate time series based on graph neural network (GNN) self-learning dependency relationships among multivariate.
to extract spatial-temporal dependencies. They transform the
multivariate time series forecasting problem as the graph fore-
 VII. CONCLUSION
casting problem by employing graphs to represent the dependent
relationships between multivariate and employ GNNs to extract We propose a novel adversarial graph neural network SGATspatial dependencies. AE for anomaly detection in multivariate time series. Specifi-
 The traffic forecasting problem is one of the typical multivari- cally, SGAT learns the graph dependences among multivariate
ate time series forecasting problems, which has been extensively and models the historical patterns of multivariate time series to
explored. STGCN [24] captures temporal and spatial depen- predict the future trends, while AE learns the latent representadencies by using 2D convolutional networks and graph convo- tions of normal patterns and reconstruct the original input. The
lutional networks, respectively. Graph WaveNet [33] learns a idea of SGAT-AE is to employ SGAT and AE for adversarial
self-adaptive adjacency matrix and combines graph convolution training to amplify the anomaly error so that the performance
with dilated casual convolution to capture spatial and temporal of the multivariate time series anomaly detection is improved.
dependencies. MTGNN [29] is a general GNN-based framework Moreover, we provide an intuitive and effective way to analyze
designed specifically for multivariate time series data. the root cause of anomalies based on the self-learning graph. The
 Moreover, in the process of building graph structures, self- extensive experimental results demonstrate that SGAT-AE outlearning (self-adaptive) graph structures can be used in such performs the state-of-the-art methods in four real-world datasets,
scenario. AGCRN [38] designs a node adaptive parameter learn- while the largest improvement of F1 score is 20.3% in dataset
ing module and a data adaptive graph generation module to WADI.
capture the dynamic spatial-temporal correlations. [47] utilizes
the lifelong graph learning algorithm when dealing with out of
 REFERENCES
distribution detection problems by proposing a novel neighborhood aggregate method. [1] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström,
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dy-
 Last but not least, graph learning method could be combined namic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
with AE or adversarial learning. DAGNN [48] employs the dual Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
generative adversarial networks and the graph neural networks [2] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
to learn modality-invariant and discriminative common repre- network,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
sentations for cross-modal retrieval. Similar to DAGNN, [49] 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
propose a method consisting of the dual generative adversarial [3] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Crit.
networks and GNNs. The difference is that [49] employs a novel Inf. Infrastructures Secur., vol. 10242, 2016, pp. 88–99.
soft-multi-label contrastive loss for cross-modal retrieval. [4] M. Ma et al., “Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries in
 large-scale cloud databases,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13, no. 8,
 pp. 1176–1189, 2020.
C. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Interpretation [5] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 Anomaly interpretation is to answer the question why an in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 pp. 3395–3404.
observation is detected as an anomaly, which can help analyze [6] M. M. Breunig, H. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
the anomalies and speed up troubleshooting, and thus is often density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
required in practice. OmniAnomaly [2] identifies the top-k Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 [7] E. M. Knorr, R. T. Ng, and V. Tucakov, “Distance-based outliers: Algovariables with the lowest reconstruction probabilities as the rithms and applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Very Large Data Bases J.,
interpretation of anomalies, while DAEMON [23] identifies vol. 8, no. 3/4, pp. 237–253, 2000.
the top-k variables with the largest errors as the root cause [8] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. J. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. C.
 Platt, “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
variables. Anomaly interpretation is similar to the root cause Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
diagnosis [28], [50]. In fact, anomaly interpretation can be [9] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
regard as the upstream task of the root cause diagnosis, while Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 [10] A. Makhzani and B. J. Frey, “K-sparse autoencoders,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
the anomaly features obtained from anomaly interpretation are Learn. Representations, 2014.
taken as the input of the root cause diagnosis model. Many [11] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, I. Lajoie, Y. Bengio, and P. Manzagol, “Stacked
studies regard the root cause diagnosis as a classification task. denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network with a local denoising criterion,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 11,
iSQUAD [4] is a root cause diagnosis framework designed pp. 3371–3408, 2010.
for DB system, which requires causal hypotheses or labels of [12] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on variational autoencoders,” 2016,
root causes. Exathlon [50] labels the ground truth root cause arXiv:1606.05908.
 [13] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial networks,” 2014,
by introducing instances of six different types of anomalous arXiv:1406.2661.
events and then demonstrates explanation discovery tasks for [14] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous
root cause diagnosis. The study [28] uses the explainability rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. Int.
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
scores to evaluate which autoencoder based anomaly detection [15] B. Liu, D. Wang, K. Lin, P. Tan, and J. Zhou, “RCA: A deep collaborative
methods are more explainable, rather than explaining individ- autoencoder approach for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf.
ual anomaly. Different from those approaches, we focus on Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1505–1511.
ZHENG et al.: ADVERSARIAL GRAPH NEURAL NETWORK FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 7625

[16] X. Han, X. Chen, and L. Liu, “GAN ensemble for anomaly detection,” in [41] Y. Lu, R. Wu, A. Mueen, M. A. Zuluaga, and E. J. Keogh, “Matrix profile
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4090–4097. XXIV: Scaling time series anomaly detection to trillions of datapoints and
[17] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph ultra-fast arriving data streams,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detec- Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 1173–1182.
 tion in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, [42] C. M. Yeh et al., “Matrix profile I: All pairs similarity joins for time series:
 Jun. 2022. A unifying view that includes motifs, discords and shapelets,” in Proc. Int.
[18] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer networks Conf. Des. Mater., 2016, pp. 1317–1322.
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. VLDB [43] X. Yang, L. J. Latecki, and D. Pokrajac, “Outlier detection with globally
 Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022. optimal exemplar-based GMM,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining,
[19] E. J. Candès, X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright, “Robust principal component 2009, pp. 145–154.
 analysis?,” J. ACM, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 11:1–11:37, 2011. [44] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
[20] B. Schölkopf, A. J. Smola, and K. Müller, “Kernel principal component spaces,” Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 2431, 2002, pp. 15–26.
 analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 1997, pp. 583–588. [45] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
[21] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004.
 autoencoders,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data [46] T. Nakamura, M. Imamura, R. Mercer, and E. J. Keogh, “MERLIN:
 Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674. Parameter-free discovery of arbitrary length anomalies in massive time
[22] A. Goodge, B. Hooi, S. Ng, and W. S. Ng, “Robustness of autoencoders series archives,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Des. Mater., 2020, pp. 1190–1195.
 for anomaly detection under adversarial impact,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. [47] M. Hoffmann, L. Galke, and A. Scherp, “Open-world lifelong graph
 Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 1244–1250. learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2023, pp. 1–9.
[23] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and inter- [48] S. Qian, D. Xue, H. Zhang, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Dual adversarial graph
 pretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2021, neural networks for multi-label cross-modal retrieval,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 pp. 2225–2230. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 2440–2448.
[24] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks: [49] S. Qian, D. Xue, Q. Fang, and C. Xu, “Integrating multi-label con-
 A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. trastive learning with dual adversarial graph neural networks for cross-
 Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3634–3640. modal retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4,
[25] C. Zheng, X. Fan, C. Wang, and J. Qi, “GMAN: A graph multi-attention pp. 4794–4811, Apr. 2023.
 network for traffic prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, [50] V. Jacob, F. Song, A. Stiegler, B. Rad, Y. Diao, and N. Tatbul, “Exathlon:
 pp. 1234–1241. A benchmark for explainable anomaly detection over time series,” Proc.
[26] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2613–2626, 2021.
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 pp. 4027–4035.
[27] H. Yu et al., “Taxi-based mobility demand formulation and prediction using conditional generative adversarial network-driven learning approaches,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 3888–3899,
 Oct. 2019.
[28] T. Kieu et al., “Robust and explainable autoencoders for unsupervised Bolong Zheng (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 time series outlier detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2022, degree from the University of Queensland in 2017.
 pp. 3038–3050. He is a professor in Huazhong University of Sci-
[29] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting ence and Technology (HUST). His research interests
 the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural networks,” include spatial-temporal data management. He has
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, published more than 50 papers in prestigious journals
 pp. 753–763. and conferences in data management field such as
[30] R. Johnson and T. Zhang, “Effective use of word order for text catego- SIGMOD, ICDE, VLDB, ACM Transactions, and
 rization with convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. IEEE Transactions.
 Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2015, pp. 103–112.
[31] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
 networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 2016, pp. 855–864.
[32] B. Zheng et al., “SOUP: Spatial-temporal demand forecasting and competitive supply in transportation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35,
 no. 2, pp. 2034–2047, Feb. 2023.
[33] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph wavenet for deep Lingfeng Ming received the master’s degree from
 spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., the Huazhong University of Science and Technol-
 2019, pp. 1907–1913. ogy (HUST). His research interests include spatial-
[34] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio, temporal data management, fleet management, and
 “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903. reinforcement learning.
[35] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
 for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 2017, arXiv: 1711.00614.
[36] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018.
[37] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
 Kai Zeng received the bachelor’s degree in software
 pp. 2485–2494.
[38] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolu- engineering from Zhejiang University and the PhD
 degree in computer science from UCLA. He is the
 tional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 Chief Architect of Huawei Cloud Data Warehouse
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 17804–17815.
 Service. His research interest lies in large scale data
[39] D. Amagata, M. Onizuka, and T. Hara, “Fast and exact outlier detection
 in metric spaces: A proximity graph-based approach,” in Proc. ACM intensive systems.
 SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2021, pp. 36–48.
[40] L. Tran, M. Mun, and C. Shahabi, “Real-time distance-based outlier detection in data streams,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 141–153,
 2020.
7626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 Mengtao Zhou is a reliability architect of Huawei Bin Yang received the PhD degree in computer sci-
 Cloud Data Warehouse Service (DWS), and partic- ence from Fudan University, China. He is a professor
 ipating in the design and development of storage with East China Normal University, China. He has
 engine in DWS. He has many years of experience in been a professor with Aalborg University, Denmark
 cross domain operation and maintenance of network and was previously with Aarhus University, Denmark
 systems and data warehouse. He has participated in and the Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Gerthe research and development of large-scale network many. His research interests include machine learning
 equipment and published 10+ patents (the first au- and data management.
 thor).

 Xiaofang Zhou (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree in computer science from the University of
 Xinyong Zhang received the PhD degree in applied
 Queensland in 1994. He is the Otto Poon professor of
 mathmatics from the Department of Mathematics,
 engineering and chair professor of computer science
 Tsinghua University in 2018. He is currently a mainand engineering with the Hong Kong University of
 tenance system engineer of Huawei Cloud Data Ware- Science and Technology. He is Head of Department
 house Service (DWS). His research interests include
 of Computer Science and Engineering. His research
 massively parallel processing database and machine
 interests include spatial and multimedia databases,
 learning.
 high performance query processing, web information
 systems, data mining, and data quality management.

 Christian S. Jensen (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor of
 computer science with Aalborg University, Denmark.
 His research concerns data analytics and management
 Tao Ye received the PhD degree in computer science with focus on temporal and spatiotemporal data manfrom the Huazhong University of Science and Techagement. Christian is an ACM and an IEEE fellow,
 nology (HUST). He is the research and development
 and he is a member of the Academia Europaea, the
 director of Huawei Cloud Data Warehouse Service.
 Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, and
 His research interest lies in large scale data intensive the Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. He has
 systems.
 received several national and international awards for
 his research, most recently the 2019 IEEE TCDE
 Impact Award and the 2022 ACM SIGMOD Contributions Award. He was Editor-in-Chief of ACM TODS from 2014 to 2020
 and an Editor-in-Chief of The VLDB Journal from 2008 to 2014.