8220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 An Adaptability-Enhanced Few-Shot Website
 Fingerprinting Attack Based on Collusion
 Jingwen Tan , Huanran Wang , Shuai Han , Dapeng Man , and Wu Yang

 Abstract— Few-shot website fingerprinting (FSWF) attacks anonymous communication system Tor [5] is the biggest
attempt to identify whether the users have access to specific obstacle to traffic analysis. To achieve accurate traffic analysis
websites based on a few training data. Existing FSWF attack on Tor, the website fingerprinting (WF) attacks [6], [7] have
methods focus on adapting to variable network conditions in real
scenarios. They use various techniques to transfer the model to been widely studied by researchers. WF attacks are aimed at
adapt to test data which has a different distribution from training identifying whether a user has visited specific websites by
data. However, recent methods ignore the impact of pre-training analyzing the traffic patterns [8].
data diversity on adaptability. The poor data diversity caused The popular WF attacks [9], [10], [11] are based on deep
by the user-specific data crawl limits representation ability, and learning, which requires a large amount of data. Such a
further hinders rapid adaptation to new network conditions. Due
to the extreme Non-IId between multiple attackers’ datasets, requirement is challenging as attackers must continuously
it is not feasible to mix multiple datasets or perform traditional re-crawl in response to website updates and traffic crawl is
federated learning methods to improve representation ability. time-consuming. To conduct effective WF attacks based on
To address the issue, we propose a novel method based on a joint a few training data, few-shot website fingerprinting (FSWF)
learning framework to achieve the collusion FSWF attacks. The attacks have been launched. To apply FSWF attacks in realistic
proposed method fuses the feature spaces of multiple user-side
attackers to enhance the representation ability of the local scenarios, researchers have focused on the adaptability to
model, and constructs a virtual fusion center to mitigate the dynamic variations in network conditions (i.e. Tor Browser
impact of Non-IID. It improves the adaptability under variable version, circuits, and access time [9], [12]). They train a
network conditions for the local attacker. This paper conducts powerful pre-trained model and involve various techniques
comprehensive experiments to evaluate the performance of the
 (such as meta-learning and transfer learning) to mitigate this
proposed method in both closed-world and open-world settings.
Compared with the state-of-the-art method, the proposed method variation between pre-training data and test data. As they own
improves the accuracy by up to 13.02% in the closed-world limited data diversity which is caused by the user-specific
setting and the AUC by up to 0.085 in the open-world setting, data collection, the pre-trained models cannot obtain strong
respectively. representation abilities [13]. The poor representation ability
 Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, website finger- prevents them from improving FSWF models’ adaptability to
printing, few-shot learning, joint learning. diverse network conditions.
 To improve the adaptability of pre-trained models, there are
 I. I NTRODUCTION mainly two methods. One is to directly enrich the diversity of
 the pre-training data by mixing other attackers’ datasets [14].
U SER-SIDE Internet traffic analysis [1] is an important
 foundation for Internet Service Providers (ISPs), which
provides insights for malicious connections detection [2], fault
 As the datasets across attackers are collected under different
 network conditions, mixing multiple datasets will break the
 IID assumption in the feature distributions [15]. It constrains
diagnosis, application performance and application-specific
 the effectiveness of the pre-trained model which is based on
traffic forwarding strategies [3]. However, it suffers from
 deep learning [16]. In addition, sharing the private monitored
anonymous communication systems [4] where both the data
 website list and data with other attackers is impractical for
content and the domain name are invisible. The well-known
 privacy and bandwidth concerns [17]. The other is to enhance
 Manuscript received 11 February 2024; revised 30 May 2024; accepted the representation ability by performing joint learning based
10 July 2024. Date of publication 25 July 2024; date of current version on multiple attackers’ models [18]. As different monitored
18 September 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFB3101401, websites across datasets lead to the heterogeneity of the
in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang under Grant label distributions [19], the aggregation of models will be
TD2022F001, in part by NSFC-Xinjiang Joint Fund Key Program under ineffective. In summary, both two approaches fail due to the
Grant U2003206, in part by NSFC-Key Program of Enterprise Joint Fund
under Grant U20B2048 and Grant U21B2019, in part by the NSFC-Regional influence of the non-independent and identically distribution
Joint Fund Key Program under Grant U22A2036, and in part by the National (Non-IID) of the data.
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272127. The associate To resist the impact of Non-IID on the representation ability
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was Prof. Chia-Mu Yu. (Corresponding authors: Huanran Wang; Wu Yang.) of FSWF attacks, we design a seed-based multi-attacker
 The authors are with the College of Computer Science and collusion (called SMC) FSWF attack method. The SMC
Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: method constructs a joint learning framework to unite multtt19@hrbeu.edu.cn; huanran.wang@hrbeu.edu.cn; hshuai@hrbeu.edu.cn;
mandapeng@hrbeu.edu.cn; yangwu@hrbeu.edu.cn). tiple attackers distributed across multiple network domains.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3433586 It involves three components, seed data, feature space fusion
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8221

method (called FSF) and virtual fusion center generator (LSTM), where CNN has the best average results. Following
(called VFCG). To correlate the latent feature spaces of this, DF [10] takes into account the characteristics of traffic
multiple attackers, the SMC method shares the seed data (a and adjusts the CNN-based model for better extracting traffic
small amount of data) among all attackers. Then, the FSF pattern features. snWF [21] leverages a snapshot ensemble to
fuses latent feature spaces by minimizing the transfer cost of decrease the variance of neural networks, which can improve
the probability distribution over seed data. It allows weak local the robustness of the WF attack model [22]. To improve
attackers to learn other attack models’ representation abilities. the performance limited by the lack of relationship among
The VFCG generates a virtual fusion center based on a mixed packets, Relation-CNN [22] is proposed. It characterizes the
Gaussian distribution, which migrates the impact of Non-IID relationships among packets based on the graph structure and
during the fusing process. As a result, the representation modifies the model to learn the relational features effectively.
abilities of local models are further improved, allowing them to However, the effectiveness of the above methods depends on
rapidly adapt to new tasks with different network conditions. sufficient training data [11]. To alleviate the data dependency,
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows. the few-shot website fingerprinting attacks emerge.
 • We design a collusion FSWF attack method (SMC) to
 enhance the adaptability of user-side attackers by jointing B. Few-Shot Websites Fingerprinting Attacks
 multiple attackers. It helps local models rapidly adapt to To mitigate the data dependency, researchers investigate two
 new tasks with variable network conditions. types of solutions, i.e., the data augmentation-based method
 • The trainable FSF layer effectively fuses multiple feature and the transfer learning-based method.
 spaces that obey different feature and label distributions 1) Data Augmentation-Based Method: To demonstrate that
 based on shared seed data. Moreover, the VFCG utilizes a the diversity of training data affects the adaptability of the
 virtual fusion center to avoid the appearance of Non-IID FSWF model, this part introduces the data augmentation-based
 on fusion. method. This type of method aims to increase the amount
 • We empirically evaluate the SMC method with detailed of training data by transformation methods. HDA [23] and
 closed-world and open-world experiments based on four Tripod [24] focus on increasing the amount of training data
 datasets collected by different network conditions. Exper- by transformation methods, such as applying the operations
 imental results show significant improvement in FSWF including rotating, mixing, injecting, removing and losing on
 attacks compared with the state-of-the-art methods. traffic. To appropriate the intrinsic properties of websites’
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, traffic, TForm-RF [25] is proposed. Since the new samples
previous works about WF attacks, FSWF attacks and personal- are transformed from the original data, those methods can not
ized federated learning based on joint learning are introduced enrich the data diversity.
and discussed. Section III describes the threat model, defini- 2) Transfer Learning-Based Method: To clarify the probtions and preliminaries of the proposed method. The proposed lems of existing FSWF attacks in adapting to dynamically
method is described in detail in Section IV. Then, Section V varying network environments, this part presents the transfer
evaluates the performance of the proposed method in both learning-based method. This type of method is aimed to
closed-world and open-world settings. Finally, the conclusions decouple the feature extractor from the classifier and reuse the
of this paper are drawn in Section VI. feature extractor. A powerful feature extractor is pre-trained
 to allow the classifier to adapt to a new task by specific fine-
 II. R EALTED W ORK tuning. TF [26] and WF3A [27] achieve the FSWF attack
 Since deep learning-based website fingerprinting attacks are from model and feature perspectives, respectively. TF utilizes
the basis for few-shot website fingerprinting attacks, we first a triple network to learn the metric of the similarity between
present it in Chapter A. Chapter B summarizes the two types of traffic and performs the classification by the similarity of samexisting few-shot website fingerprinting attacks. To explain the ples. WF3A enhances the representation of website traffic by
importance of data diversity on the adaptability of models, data constructing multiple characteristics based on the direction and
augmentation-based FSWF attacks are introduced in the first length of packets. To better fine-tune the feature representation
part of Chapter B. Subsequently, the second part of Chapter of the pre-trained model based on new data, researchers pro-
B reviews transfer learning-based FSWF attacks which aim pose TLFA [28]. It uses former layers other than the softmax
to adapt to different network conditions. To illustrate that the as the feature extractor and re-training different classifiers
existing joint learning method can’t improve the adaptability Aiming on feature representation. As the performance of fewer
of the local FSWF attack model, we present personalized shots is poor, MBL [29] is proposed based on the idea of
federated learning in Chapter C. meta-learning. It introduced a new idea of model parameter
 factorization to learn generic feature representations useful for
A. Deep Learning-Based Websites Fingerprinting Attacks all different tasks. To utilize more auxiliary training data in the
 Traditional deep learning-based WF attacks are first intro- pre-training period, WFBDC [30] reuses the historical. It mitduced by [20]. They perform the WF attacks based on Stacked igates the deviation between historical and target datasets by
Automatic Encoding (SAE). AWF [9] explores the application transfer learning and multi-similarity loss. For the adaptability
of popular deep learning (DL) algorithms to WF, including of new Tor versions and website versions, CWFA [31] and
stacked denoising autoencoder (SDAE), convolutional neu- JAN [32] are proposed. CWFA embeds the original and the
ral networks (CNN) and long short-term memory networks target data into the same feature space from the perspective of
8222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

the cluster. JAN achieves the adaption of new Tor and website
versions based on aligning the features of the original and
target data. As this type of method only uses data from the
same network conditions to train the pre-trained model, the
diversity of the pre-training data is poor.

C. Personalized Federated Learning
 To show the difference between our proposed method and
existing joint learning approaches, we survey the typical
application of joint learning, i.e., federated learning (FL).
Traditional FL is focused on obtaining a better global model.
In contrast, personalized federated learning (PFL) expects to
achieve a more locally suitable model while data is Non-IID
 Fig. 1. The overview of collusion FSWF attacks.
across locals [15]. It is a similar goal to the SMC method.
APFL [33] finds the optimal mixing parameters of the local
and global models by deriving a generalization boundary for III. P RELIMINARIES AND D EFINITION
the mixing of the local and global models. Per-FedAvg [34]
 In this Section, we present the details of conducting colaims to find an optimal initial shared model that allows clients
 lusive attacks. The threat model and definitions are described
to quickly adapt the model to their own local dataset based on
 in Chapter A. The process of implementing collusion FSWF
one or several gradient descent steps. FedAMP [35] designs
 attacks is introduced in Chapter B.
an attentive message passing mechanism which encourages
the collaboration between personalized models with similar model parameters to improve collaboration performance. A. Threat Model and Definitions
pFedMe [36] decomposes the optimization of a personalized The overview of the threat model is shown in Fig. 1. There
model from the global model training by adding Moreau are n local (user-side) attackers related to different network
Envelope loss on the client side. It causes the client to domains and managed by the collusion attack manager. For
optimize a personalized model that matches its private data example, attacker i is a passive monitor that is located between
distribution based on the global model. FedRep [37] introduces Domain i and the Tor guard node. His purpose is to learn
representation learning into the federated framework. It learns the fingerprinting (unique feature) for every website from
a shared data representation across clients through parallel encrypted traffic. Based on fingerprinting, attacker i can idenlearning and trains unique local headers for each client. The tify which website the user’s traffic from Domain i belongs
effectiveness of these methods relies on the correlation in the to. As attackers have different preferences in simulating netdistribution of datasets. It means that at least one of the label work conditions, they own limited data diversity. To enhance
distributions and the feature distributions is consistent. In the the representation ability of pre-trained models and further
FSWF scenario, both monitored websites (label distributions) improve the adaptability of the FSWF attacks, they conduct
and network conditions (feature distributions) among attackers collusion.
are different. It restricts the effectiveness of PFL in the FSWF In the following, we introduce the definitions of collusion
attack with multiple attackers. FSWF attacks and summarize them in Table I.
 As the above FSWF attackers own the limited diversity of We use the Atk = {atk1 , atk2 , . . . , atkn } to represent the
pre-training data, the representation ability of the pre-trained local attackers participating in collusion, where n is the nummodel is limited. It restricts the adaptability of variable net- ber of local attackers. For an attacker, atki , the monitored webwork conditions. The intuition is to utilize PFL to enhance the site set can be denoted as Wi . Any sample of Wi can formally
representation ability of the local model. However, the lack of defined as traces = [cell1 , cell2 , . . . , celll ] , cell j∈[1,l] ∈
correlations both in feature distributions and label distributions {+1, −1}. The cell is a unit with a fixed size in Tor, l is
makes the traditional PFL methods invalid. the number of Tor cells, +1 represents a cell coming from
 To cope with the above issues, we propose a novel FSWF the user and −1 represents a cell coming from the website.
attack method SMC. Compared with traditional FSWF attacks, Di represents S the dataset of atki , and the training dataset is
the SMC method constructs a joint learning framework to D̂i = Di Dseed , where Dseed is the seed data consisting
achieve effective FSWF attacks. It enhances the represen- of a small number of samples for every attacker dataset. f i
tation ability of every attacker by fusing feature spaces, is the representation learning model of atki and θi is the
and mitigates the effects of Non-IID in the fusion pro- parameter of f i . For a local representation learning model
cess. In contrast to existing PFL approaches, the proposed f i , the feature space consisting of embedding vectors can
joint learning framework is more appropriate for FSWF defined as Si = f i ( D̂i ) [38]. We use 2 = {θ1 , . . . , θn } to
attacks with multi-attackers. The framework associates the present the parameter set of all local attackers’ representation
label distributions of different attackers based on a few learning models. In the process of joint learning, we use
shared seed data. It facilitates effective joint learning among Hi = f i (Dseed ) to represent the embedding vectors (i.e. latent
local models with inconsistent label distributions and feature features) of Dseed from f i . The set of all Hi s can present as
distributions. H. We use Mc to represent a mean set of class c in H, 1c
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8223

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF THE N OTATIONS

 Fig. 2. The representation learning process and optimization objectives of a
 single attack.

 TABLE II
 T HE ACCURACY OF M ODELS BASE ON D IFFERENT S IMILARITY M ETRIC

 Given a dataset D̂i that is composed of local data Di
to represent a covariance set of class c in H. Ĥ is denoted and seed data Dseed , the triplet samples (a, p, n) can be
as the virtual fusion center which obeys N (µ̂c , σˆc ). After one generated based on websites. For a selected sample a (anchor),
round of joint learning, the new parameters can be defined as p (positive) is a sample that comes from the same website with
θi′ = (1 − α)θˆi + αθi , where α is a scaling factor, θˆi is the a and n (negative) is a sample that comes from a different
parameters re-trained in the joint learning. website with a. Suppose the representation learning model
 f , aims to map the input to a low dimensional embedding
B. The Process of Collusion FSWF Attacks space. The distance between embedding vectors can represent
 The implementation of collusive attacks between multiple similarity. We make the similarity between (a, p) as high as
local attackers requires three steps, (1) data crawling and possible while the similarity between (a, n) as low as possible.
processing, (2) joint learning, and (3) attack launching. Among If the similarity is measured based on one-dimensional
them, the second step is the focus of this paper. vectors mapped from the high-dimensional features, a lot of
 1) Data Crawling and Processing: The local attacker sim- information is lost [30]. To avoid information loss, we measure
ulates the behavior of users who access monitored m websites the similarity directly based on the high-dimensional features.
W = {w0 , w1 , . . . , wm } and collects their encrypted traffic. As the features can be viewed as observations of a random
They can collect all traffic in communications but cannot mod- vector in a high-dimensional embedding space, the similarify the transmission nor decrypt the packet [39]. Furthermore, ity can be measured through probability distributions [40].
the attacker can parse the traffic in advance and filter out the To compute the similarity more comprehensively, we utilize
Tor traffic [7]. As Tor transfers packets based on fixed 512-size three similarity metrics that can measure the marginal and
units cell, the attacker can reconstruct TLS records and round joint distributions, i.e., Brownian Distance Covariance (BDC),
down their lengths to the nearest multiple of 512, forming the maximum mean difference (MMD), and mutual information
sequence trace [9]. Then, every attacker sends a few random (MI) [40]. To analyze the impact of the metric on representadata to the collusion attack manager, which will be used as tion learning, we utilize DS-19 [41] to evaluate the accuracy of
seed data Dseed for the subsequent joint learning process. single-attacker models based on different metrics under few-
 2) Joint Learning: Joint learning has two components, the shot scenarios. The results are shown in Table II.
representation learning process for a single attacker and the As shown in Table II, the BDC-based model outperforms
feature space fusion process for multiple attackers. models based on MI and MMD. MMD measures the similarity
 a) The representation learning process: Since the data of between two correlated distributions. MI measures the strength
a local attacker is crawled following the same pattern, it obeys of the dependency between distributions. As a and n are
IID. Every attacker can carry out their own representation independent, MMD and MI are unable to comprehensively
learning process based on the IID dataset. All local attackers measure similarity, which in turn limits the performance of
have the same representation learning model architecture. the representation learning model. In contrast, the BDC can
The representation learning performs based on triplet network fully characterize the correlation and independence of two
framework [26] and shown in Fig. 2. distributions. It enables a more comprehensive metric of the
8224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 3. The overview of the SMC method.

similarity between high-dimensional features of (a, p) and space fusion. Then, the VFCG generates the virtual fusion
(a, n). Accordingly, we use the BDC as the similarity metric center Ĥ for the FSF, which enhances the local IIDs during the
in the local representation learning process. fusion process. The FSF minimizes the distribution difference
 b) The feature space fusion process: Since a stable between H and Ĥ , which makes H and Ĥ to be low
feature space is necessary for fusion, every representation distinguishing. As a result, the representation abilities of local
learning model is trained for a certain epoch before interacting attackers have been enhanced based on the fusion of multiple
with the collusion attack manager. Every attacker uploads the feature spaces.
parameter θ to the collusion attack manager for interaction. Since seed data play a vital role in the SMC method, we first
The collusion attack manager generates f i (Dseed ) and mini- introduce the original intention of the seed data and its role in
mizes the transfer costs of f i (Dseed ) among multiple feature Chapter B. Due to the fusion of the two feature spaces being
spaces. As f i (Dseed ) is a part of feature space Si , the fusion a simple form of multiple feature spaces fusion, we conclude
of multiple f (Dseed ) will drive the fusion of S [42]. Once it in Chapter C. In Chapter D, the fusion of multiple feature
a certain epoch of joint learning is completed, the collusion spaces based on the virtual fusion center is described. Finally,
attack manager distributes every model’s updated parameters we present the workflow of the SMC method in Chapter E.
θ̂ to every attacker. All details will be described in Section IV.
 3) Attack Launching: Once the local attackers and the B. The Seed Data
collusion attack manager have completed multiple rounds of The SMC method expects to enhance the adaptability of
joint learning, every local attacker trains the K-NN classifiers local models by joining multiple attackers who own different
based on the embedding vectors generated by their latest network conditions. As network conditions implicitly reflect in
 f . The K-NN calculates the distance between the unknown the feature distributions, this goal can be achieved by fusing
traces and every training sample. It selects the K nearest feature spaces. Assuming that the labels are consistent across
training samples as the reference range. In this range, the attackers, multiple feature spaces with different feature distriwebsite with the highest number of occurrences is considered butions can be fused through linear model aggregation [43].
to be the website to which traces belongs. Unfortunately, the assumption cannot be satisfied due to the
 different monitored websites among multiple attackers. The
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY heterogeneity both in label and feature distributions makes
A. Overview the multiple feature spaces orthogonal [44], which hinders
 To improve the adaptability to variable network conditions, the effective fusion. This is also the reason for the failure
we propose the SMC method to enrich the representation of PFL. To correlate multiple feature spaces during the fusion
abilities for local attackers’ models. It conducts joint learning process, we add a small amount of fixed data called seed data
with multiple attackers, intending to fuse the multiple feature to each attacker’s dataset. Then, the SMC method retrains the
spaces. The overview of the SMC method is shown in Fig. 3. representation learning model to reduce the differences in seed
It involves three components, seed data Dseed , a feature space data’s latent features among multiple local models. In this
fusion method (FSF) based on the transfer cost of probability way, the fusion of feature spaces can be realized based on
distribution and a virtual fusion center generator (VFCG) the guidance of seed data.
based on mixed Gaussian distribution. Dseed is gathered from
all attackers before training and used to associate feature C. The Fusion of Two Feature Spaces
spaces among multiple attackers. Firstly, SMC extracts the As we mentioned above, the representation ability is
embedding vectors H from each f i based on Dseed . The implicitly included in the feature space. To enhance the
differences between different H are used to guide the feature representation ability of the pre-trained model, we design a
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8225

feature space fusion method FSF. Unlike the aggregation of To satisfy the above constraint, we clip w to a fixed range
FL, the FSF focuses on reducing the difference of seed data in [−0.01, 0.01] after the update, which follows the setup of [47].
feature spaces rather than solving for a global optimal update In this case, the WD between the embedding vectors in f a (s)
direction. It helps the local model learn extra representation and f b (s) can be estimated.
ability from other models while maintaining the original ability As we aim to minimize the WD between the two embedding
under the Non-IID scenario. vectors of Dseed that are generated by f a and f b , the loss
 The implementation of the FSF is based on a trainable function of the FSF layer can be defined as follows,
layer that connects the two representation learning models. N
It receives the embedding vectors from representation learning 1 X
 L F S Fa,b = − log(W ( f a (i), f b (i))) (5)
models as inputs. The objective of the FSF is to reduce the N
 i=0
distinction between those two embedding vectors. The main
base of the FSF is the known seed data Dseed . We use where N is the sample number of Dseed , i is the i-th sample
the Dseed as the anchors to associate two different feature in Dseed . To minimize the objective function, we use the
spaces. The fusion of feature spaces is based on the minimized Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm to update f a
difference of Dseed ’s embedding vectors H in two feature and f b . With the reduction of the L F S Fa,b , the two embedding
spaces. vectors from the same sample become similar. It guides the
 Specifically, given two local attackers’ representation learn- two feature spaces approximate to each other, which in turn
ing models f a and f b , the embedding vectors of a sample s achieves the fusion.
from Dseed can be expressed by f a (s) and f b (s). As they Following the fusion of the two feature spaces above,
are vectors in feature spaces, the difference between them we introduce the fusion of multiple feature spaces.
can be measured by probability distributions [40]. We use the
Wasserstein distance to estimate the difference between f a (s) D. Multiple Feature Spaces Fusion
and f b (s). The Wasserstein distance (WD) [45] evaluates the To avoid the impact of Non-IID on the fusion of multiple
similarity between two probability distributions by estimating
 feature spaces [48], we generate a virtual fusion center Ĥ
the minimal cost that should be paid to transform one disbased on the VFCG. We force the H of every local attacker
tribution into the other. The WD between f a (s) and f b (s) is
 to be low distinguishing with Ĥ based on different FSF layers.
defined as follows,
 As any distribution can be approximated with the Gaussian
 W ( f a (s), f b (s)) = in f E(x,y)∼γ [∥x − y∥] (1) distribution [49], it can be assumed that the embedding vectors
 γ ∈0( f a (s), f b (s)) h c of class c in Dseed obey a Gaussian distribution. The mean
 µc and the covariance σc are defined as follows,
where 0( f a (s), f b (s)) denotes joint probability distribution
γ ( f a (s), f b (s)) with marginals f a (s) and f b (s). The WD indi- 1 XcN
cates the minimum expectation of γ ( f a (s), f b (s)) to transform µc = h ic (6)
 Nc
the distribution f a (s) into the distribution f b (s). i=1
 To solve the minimum WD, we complete the proximity c N
 1 X
process [46] through a trainable function g, which is as σc = (h ic − µc )(h ic − µc )T (7)
 Nc − 1
follows, i=1

 1 where Nc is the sample number of class c, h ic is the i-th sample
 W ( f a (s), f b (s)) = sup Ex∼ fa (s) g(x) − E y∼ fb (s) g(y) (2)
 K of class c.
 The objective of g is to estimate the WD between the For n attackers, the mean set Mc = {µc,1 , µc,2 , · · · , µc,n }
embedding vectors in f a (s) and f b (s). Note that g must be and the covariance set 1c = {σc,1 , σc,2 , · · · , σc,n } of class c in
K-Lipschitz continuous, where ||gθ ( f a (s)) − gθ ( f b (s))|| ≤ Dseed can be used to generate a mixed Gaussian distribution
K || f a (s) − f b (s)|| for all f a (s), f b (s) ∈ R, and K ≥ 0 is N (µ̂c , σˆc ) by
the Lipschitz constant. Given the weights w, the bias β and 1 X Nc
 n
the activation function ρ of g, this constraint can be expressed µ̂c = µc,i (8)
 n n Nc
as follows, i=1
 c n N
 ||ρ(w f a (s) + β) − ρ(w f b (s) + β)|| ≤ K · || f a (s) − f b (s)|| 1 XX Nc
 σˆc = h ic (h ic )T − µ̂c (µ̂c )2
 Nc − 1 Nc − 1
 (3) i=1 j=1
 n n
 X Nc − 1 X Nc Nc
 As long as the condition is satisfied, the K-Lipschitz con- = σc,i+ µc,i µc,i
 T
 − µ̂c µ̂c T
straint of g can be guaranteed. n Nc − 1 n Nc − 1 n Nc − 1
 i=1 i=1
 In the FSF, g utilizes a linear activation function to hold (9)
the unchanged local optimal solution for each feature space.
Hence, ρ can be ignored and Equation (3) is simplified as Based on the N (µ̂c , σˆc ), the virtual features hˆc for class c
follows, in Dseed can be drawn as follows,
 p
 ||w( f a (s) − f b (s))|| ≤ K · || f a (s) − f b (s)|| (4) hˆc = µ̂c z + σˆc (10)
8226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

where z is a random vector which obeys standard normal In the computation of d, the original latent features are
distribution N (0, 1). Similarly, we can generate the fusion retained by f θi . It ensures that the performance of the model
center Ĥ consisting of the virtual features of all classes is not lower than it was before the interaction. The additional
 terms f θi (s) and f θi (k) generated from the joint learning bring
 ˆ ˆ
in Dseed .
 As we minimize the difference between the distributions of new features from other attacks’ models, which enhances the
H and Ĥ , the loss function of the FSF layer for atka can be representation ability. In this way, the SMC method improves
updated as follows, the performance of local attackers.
 N To demonstrate that the SMC method fuses multiple feature
 1 X spaces with different feature distributions and label distribu-
 L F S Fa = − log(W ( f a (i), hˆi )) (11)
 N tions, we conduct the similarity analysis of feature spaces
 i=0
 in different attackers’ models. We utilize datasets AWF [9],
where hˆi is the virtual feature corresponding to the class Wang [50], DS-19 [41] and DF-95 [10] to simulate four
to which sample i belongs. Since only the collusion attack attackers and generate feature spaces based on 100 random
manager has the right to obtain all models’ parameters 2, the samples per dataset. Three numerical metrics (Euclidean, Man-
VFCG and the FSF only be performed in the collusion attack hattan, Chebyshev) and two probability distribution metrics
manager. Finally, the collusion attack manager implements the (Jensen–Shannon divergence, MMD) are used to calculate
SMC method based on the objective function as follows, the distance between any two feature spaces. The results of
 n different metrics under independent learning and joint learning
 1X
 L S MC = min L F S Fi (12) are shown in Table III.
 n As illustrated in Table III, the distances of different feature
 i=0
where n is the number of local attackers. spaces have been reduced after joint learning. A smaller
 Compared with Equation (3), the inputs of the FSF layer distance indicates an increase in the similarity of two feature
are transformed into a representation learning model’s outputs spaces. It means that the joint learning framework fuses the
and the virtual fusion center. In this way, the FSF associates multiple feature spaces effectively. As the seed data associates
multiple local attackers based on the virtual feature center. multiple attack models, the FSF layers can achieve proximity
 By minimizing the above losses, feature spaces of all attack- between multiple feature spaces. Moreover, the virtual fusion
ers approximate to the mixed Gaussian distribution N (µ̂c , σˆc ). center generated from the VFCG integrates the representation
As a result, the fusion of multiple feature spaces that obey abilities of multiple models. It mitigates the impact of different
different distributions has been achieved. Further, owing to feature and label distributions on the fusion of multiple feature
the virtual feature center compound H, the impact of some spaces.
excessively influential feature spaces is migrated.
 For every interaction, the collusion attack manager performs E. Whole Process of The SMC Method
the SMC method to retrain every representation learning model The collusion attack manager executes the SMC method
independently based on the equation (10). After one round of after specific representation learning epochs. All steps of the
interaction, the parameters are updated as follows, SMC method are depicted in Algorithm 1.
 θi′ = (1 − α)θˆi + αθi (13) First, the SMC method extracts the embedding vectors H
 of the seed data based on all local models. It corresponds to
where θi is the original model parameters, θˆi is re-trained the steps 5-6 of Algorithm 1. Second, the VFCG uses H of all
model parameters through equation (9), α is a constant scale local models to generate a mixed Gaussian distribution, and
factor. Then, every local attacker uses D̂i to continue training sample the virtual fusion center Ĥ from the mixed Gaussian
based on θi′ until convergence. distribution. This process follows the steps 7-10 and 12-19 of
 In the following, we demonstrate the effect of the SMC Algorithm 1. Third, it performs the FSF to fuse the multimethod by the derivation of formulas. ple feature spaces and re-trains every representation learning
 Once the round of interactions is complete, the embedding model based on L S MC . This process follows steps 20-24 of
vectors embs of data s are changed to embs′ . It can be Algorithm 1. Fourth, it mixes the parameters of the original
expressed as follows, and re-trained model and returns new parameters to every
 attacker, which corresponds to steps 26-27 of Algorithm 1.
 embs = f θi (s) (14)
 Finally, the above steps are repeated until multiple feature
 embs′ = (1 − α) f θi (s) + α f θi (s)
 ˆ
 (15) spaces are fused.
 As the embedding vector changes, the distance used by the V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATIONS
K-NN classifier changes as follows,
 A. Datasets and Baselines
 d(m, n) :≡ d( f θi (s), f θi (k)) To correspond to multiple local attackers with different
 θˆi θi
 :≡ d((1 − α) f (s) + α f (s), network conditions in datasets, we selected four historical
 datasets as follows.
 (1 − α) f θi (k) + α f θi (k))
 ˆ
 (16)
 • AWF [9]. The dataset is the largest Tor dataset in hiswhere d is the distance metric used by K-NN. tory, containing 900 monitored websites and 400,000
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8227

 TABLE III
 T HE D ISTANCE d OF THE S EED DATA B ETWEEN D IFFERENT ATTACK M ODELS T RAINED BY D IFFERENT DATASETS

Algorithm 1 The SMC Method crawled by the same 10 machines on Tor Browser 7.0.6 in
Input: Representation learning model architecture f ,model 2016.
parameters 2 = {θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θn }, seed data Dseed with m • Wang [50]. The dataset contains 100 monitored blocked
classes, scale factor α, training rate η, training epoch epoch. websites from China, the UK and Saudi Arabia, as well as
Output: The updated model parameters {θ1′ , θ2′ , . . . , θn′ }. 9,000 unmonitored websites. It was crawled by iMacros
 1: for i = 1, 2, . . . , n do 8.6.0 on Tor Browser 3.5.1 in 2013.
 2: θˆi ← θi • DS-19 [41]. The dataset contains 100 monitored websites
 3: end for and 10000 unmonitored websites. It was crawled by a
 4: for e = 1, 2, . . . , epoch do single machine on Tor Browser 8.5a7 in 2019.
 5: for i = 1, 2, . . . , n do For the above four datasets, we set up the corresponding
 6: Hi ← Perform f i with θi on Dseed four local attackers. Every attacker performs representa-
 7: for c = 1, 2, . . . , m do tion learning based on the respective monitored websites.
 8: µc,i ← Compute the mean of h ic by Eq.(6) As described above, every dataset uses different Tor browser
 9: σc,i ← Compute the covariance of h ic by Eq.(7) versions and machines to crawl traffic in different years,
10: end for leading datasets to obey different feature distributions. In addi-
11: end for tion, the monitored websites in these datasets are different,
12: H ← {H1 , H2 , · · · , Hn } leading datasets to obey different label distributions. In such
13: for c = 1, 2, . . . , m do cases where both feature distribution and label distribution are
14: Mc ← {µc,1 , µc,2 , · · · , µc,n } different across local datasets.
15: 1c ← {σc,1 , σc,2 , · · · , σc,n } To demonstrate the validity of the SMC method, we select
16: N (µ̂c , σˆc ) ← Generate the mixed Gaussian five baselines from state-of-the-art methods.
 distribution based on Mc and 1c by Eq.(9) • var-CNN [10]. It combines statistical features and autoand (10) mated features from deep learning to decrease the volume
17: hˆc ← Sample virtual features of class c by Eq.(11) of training data. As it conducts attacks based on an end-
18: end for to-end classifier without pre-training, we use it to prove
19: Ĥ ← Generate virtual fusion center {h 1 , h 2 , · · · , h n } the importance of representation ability on adaptability.
20: for Hi in H parallel do • TF_all [26]. It learns a suitable metric for estimating the
21: Perform the FSF on Hi and Ĥ similarity of traces, and utilizes the triple network and
22: Optimize the complete loss L F S Fi with SGD comparative loss to reduce the demand for a large dataset.
23: θˆi ← θˆi − η∇L F S Fi TF_all uses all embedding vectors to train the classifier.
24: end for • TF_mev [26]. It follows the same framework as TF_all,
25: end for but uses the mean of all embedding vectors to train the
26: θi′ ← (1 − α)θˆi + αθi classifier.
27: return {θ1′ , θ2′ , . . . , θn′ } • TLFA [28]. It trains a task-agnostic embedding model
 with a large amount of training data and fine-tunes a
 task-specific classifier with a small amount of data. Here,
 we follow the setup of [28] and use SVM as the classifier.
 Since we focus on the ability of representation learning
 unmonitored websites from Alexa Top. It was crawled models, TLFA will not apply the data augmentation.
 by 15 virtual machines on an OpenStack-based private • WFBDC [30]. It introduces BDC to optimize the measure
 cloud environment on Tor Browser 6.5 in 2016. of similarity between samples. It also attempts to solve
 • DF-95 [10]. The dataset contains 95 monitored websites the data dependency by transferring the model from a
 and 9000 unmonitored websites from Alexa Top. It was historical dataset to a new data domain.
8228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 • JAN [32]. JAN is a PFL-based FSWF attack. It minimizes 64 and 32 hidden neurons, respectively. We set a learning rate
 the differences in feature distributions of the source of 0.001 and the SGD algorithm updates the local models and
 time-domain data and target time-domain data to address the FSF layer, which follows the setup of [52]. Similar results
 the concept drift. We transform JAN from the temporal can be achieved using other optimizers like Adam. It has been
 to the spatial domain through corresponding different experimentally shown that the fusion can be realized when the
 datasets of attackers to the source and target domain. training epoch of FSF layer is 1000. Since the scaling factor
 • JAN_four [32]. It follows the same framework as JAN and α is used for the merging of global and local parameters, its
 utilizes four attackers to correspond to the same scenario size does not affect the fusion. Thus, α is set to 0.5.
 as the SMC method. To make feature space fusion implemented when the local
 As the representation learning process of every attacker feature space is stable, we make attackers interact with the
in the SMC method additionally incorporates seed data, collusion attack manager every 10 epochs. With experimental
we improved the above baselines with seed data (10 samples testing, the best results are achieved after 5 interactions. All
from each of the 10 different websites randomly selected in the codes are publicly available.1
every dataset) to ensure fairness. Note that the var-CNN is 2) Evaluation Setting: To demonstrate that the SMC method
an end-to-end model with no representation learning process, improves the adaptability of FSWF attacks to variable network
there is no need to set seed data for it. The improved versions conditions, we designed the N-shot setting experiment followare TF_all_seed, TF_mev_seed, TLFA_seed, WFBDC_seed, ing [26], [30]. In this setting, we use the dataset with the
JAN_seed, JAN_four_seed. In those improved baselines, the poorest diversity to train the weakest representation learning
seed data participates in the representation learning process as model and use the other three datasets to generate a test task.
additional classes. The mixed test dataset assumes the rich and variable network
 conditions in the real world. For SMC, TF-based and WFBDC
B. Evaluation Metrics which use the triplet-based loss as the metric of representation
 learning, we set 25 pre-training samples for every monitored
 There are two settings for evaluating WF attacks, closed- website following with [26], [30]. For TLFA and JAN that
world and open-world. The closed-world setting assumes that use Cross-Entropy loss in pre-training, we set 100 pre-training
users only visit websites within monitored websites W , thus in samples for every monitored website following with [28]. For
the test phase, the attack model receives the traces of the same end-to-end model var-CNN, there is no pre-training process.
class as the training data. In this case, our goal is to evaluate During the test process, the attacker fine-tunes the classifier
whether the attack model can correctly classify traces into for the 295 classification task based on 1-20 samples per
the specified monitored website. As it can be considered as class. Then, 70 samples per website are used to evaluate the
a multi-classification task, we use the classification metrics performance. The number of samples is following the setup
accuracy to evaluate the efficiency [26], [30]. The open-world of TF [26].
setting assumes that users can visit more websites even if the
websites are not in W . In this setting, traces from both monitored and unmonitored websites are used to evaluate the WF D. The Closed-World Evaluations
attacks. The attack model is expected to distinguish between In the closed-world, we expect the attacker with poor
them. As it can be considered as a binary classification task, representation ability can improve the performance under rich
we use accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, AUC (Area Under and variable network conditions.
the ROC Curve) and AP (Average Precision) as metrics. To select the weakest attacker, we conduct a validation
 experiment using the TF_mev. The experiment tests the perfor-
C. Experimental Details mance in transferring a pre-trained model to another dataset.
 If the degradation of performance after model migration is
 1) Implementation of the SMC Method: For local attackers,
 extensive, the training dataset has poorer data diversity and
the architecture of the representation learning model is based
 the corresponding model with weaker representation ability.
on the DF [10]. Every attacker uses data from monitored
 The training data includes 95 websites with 25 samples per
websites and seed data to conduct representation learning.
 website, the test task is 95 websites with 5 fine-tuning samples
The seed data includes 400 samples consisting of different
 and 20 test samples. The results are shown in Table IV.
10 websites from every dataset. The effect of the amount of
 As shown in Table IV, the accuracy of transferring the
seed data on SMC will be shown in Chapter E. According to
 model trained on the DS-19 to other datasets decreased by
DF, the length of traces is 5000, the batch size is 128. The size
 10%-20%. It is the worst of all transfer results. Meanwhile, the
of the embedding vector is 128 which follows the setup of [51].
 models trained on other datasets can transfer well to the DS-19.
Referring to the setup of TF [26], every attacker updates the
 It indicates that the model trained on the DS-19 is difficult to
representation learning model using a learning rate of 0.001,
 adapt to different network conditions. Therefore, we evaluate
the SGD with a momentum of 0.9 and a weight decay of 1e-6.
 the performance of the FSWF attack model corresponding to
 During the re-training of the collusion attack manager, the
 the DS-19 in the following.
VFCG generates 10 virtual features for every class of seed
 We make the attacker pre-train the representation learning
data. It is the same number as the original seed data, which
 model based on the DS-19 and evaluate the K-NN classifier
facilitates the calculation of the transfer cost. The FSF is
composed of three fully connected layers containing 128, 1 https://github.com/Tanjingwen96/SMC
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8229

 TABLE IV rich and variable network conditions with fewer fine-tuning
 T HE ACCURACY OF T RANSFERRING THE M ODEL F ROM O NE samples, achieving excellent performance.
 DATASET TO THE OTHER DATASETS
 Secondly, compared with other baselines, WFBDC performs
 better. As it models the non-linear correlation of samples
 based on the joint distribution, the representation ability of
 the pre-trained model has been enhanced. Despite this, the
 poor representation abilities of local models lead WFBDC
 to get poor performance under 1 and 5-shot settings. TLFA
 obtains a similar performance with WFBDC but uses more
 pre-training data. It reveals that data diversity is far more
 important than the amount of data for effectively adapting to
 new network conditions. The poor data diversity in DS-19
 affects the representation ability of the pre-trained model
 and further hinders the improvement of the adaptability.
 TF-based method achieves poorer performance than WFBDC.
 The inefficiency stems from the cosine similarity metric and
 the limited data diversity of pre-training data. The cosine
 similarity only cares about the direction of the vectors instead
 of their magnitude. It results in the incorrect expression of the
 intra-class distribution variations. The limited data diversity
 further localizes the expression of intra-class distributions.
 Accordingly, it gains poor adaptability. In addition, TF_mev
 gains a lower accuracy than TF_all, which is contrary to
 the motivation of the algorithm in [26]. As the mixed data
 with rich network conditions breaks the IID assumptions,
 the simple averaging operation for the embedding vectors
 leads to a negative effect [16]. var-CNN performs badly
 under 1-10 shots but great under 15-20 shots. Once the new
 task appears, it randomly initializes a classifier to train. The
 classifier with random parameters has no representation ability,
 which makes it difficult to fit the new task based on a few
 samples. As opposed to the above baselines, JAN gets the
 worst average performance. JAN can only align the feature
 distributions of different local datasets under the same label
 distribution. As the label distributions of local datasets are
 not consistent, JAN struggles to find a common optimization
 direction. Moreover, JAN has a 10% lower performance than
 JAN_four. It indicates that more joint attackers increase the
 difficulty of solving the optimization direction, which makes
 joint learning more ineffective.
 Thirdly, Fig. 4 (b) illustrates the performance after adding
 seed data to all baselines. The performances of TF_seed-based
 and WFBDC_seed have improved by 1-3%. Owing to the
 use of triplet (a, p, n) in TF_seed-based and WFBDC_seed,
 the addition of a small amount of seed data leads to a
 Fig. 4. The accuracy on closed-world setting.
 large increase in pre-training data. Hence, the performance of
 TF_seed-based and WFBDC_seed has improved. Nevertheless,
 they are still worse than the SMC method as they have
based on the test data mixed by AWF, DF-95 and Wang. The weak representation abilities caused by poor data diversity.
results are shown in Fig. 4. Similarly, the performance of JAN_seed-based method has
 Firstly, as indicated in Fig. 4 (a), the SMC method performs improved by 2%-3%. The inclusion of seed data makes the
better than all baselines. Compared with the state-of-the-art label distributions of different attackers locally correlated.
WFBDC, the SMC method improves 13.02%, 5.03%, 2.92%, It facilitates the alignment of feature distributions. However,
1.61% and 0.8% respectively of accuracy under all shots. The the performance is still restricted by the inconsistent label
SMC method fuses the feature spaces from multiple attackers’ distributions. In contrast, the performance of TLFA_seed has
models and alleviates the impact of Non-IID data through a 1-2% performance drop. Since they train the ptr-trained
a virtual fusion center. As a result, the SMC enhances the model with Cross-Entropy loss, it is more sensitive to Non-IID
representation abilities of local attackers. It helps it adapt to caused by adding extra data with different feature distributions.
8230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 T HE I MPACT OF S EED DATA’ S S AMPLES ON THE SMC M ETHOD T HE I MPACT OF S EED DATA’ S S IZE ON F USION

 TABLE VI
 T HE I MPACT OF S EED DATA’ C LASS N UMBERS ON THE SMC M ETHOD significant increase in triples samples during the presentation
 learning process. For the seed data with m classes and k
 samples per class, the extra (a, p, n) training samples are
 m[k ∗ (k − 1) ∗ (m − 1) ∗ k] = (k 3 − k 2 )(m 2 − m). It enhances
 the representation ability of the re-trained model. Although m
 affects the number of (a, p, n) samples less than k, Although
 the impact of m on (a, p, n) sample numbers is less than k,
In addition, the performance improvement of all baselines increasing m brings more improvement in performance, which
by adding seed data is much less than by the increase of is shown in Table VI. As the class number is directly related
fine-tuning samples. It suggests that the performance of those to the number of anchors in the fusion process, increasing it
baselines is more dependent on the IID assumption. will drive the better fusion of multiple feature spaces.
 Compared with the single-attacker-based FSWF attacks, To further analyze the influence of seed data’s size in fusion
the SMC method utilizes the seed data to associate label feature spaces, we fix the size of seed data in the representation
distributions of different local datasets. It further fuses the learning process and change it in the fusion process. We follow
multiple feature spaces by maximizing the transfer cost of the 10w_10s setting in the representation learning process and
seed data. The fusion allows different local models to obtain utilize 5, 10 and 15 samples per class to generate a mixed
the representation abilities of other local models. Moreover, Gaussian distribution during the fusion process. The results
the SMC method mitigates the effects of Non-IID during the are shown in Table VII.
fusion process based on the virtual fusion center. It makes As illustrated in Table VII, the performances of the SMC
the SMC method better represent the data with different method improve a bit as the increase of seed data’s size in
feature distributions resulting from rich and variable network fusion. This is due to the direct relationship between the seed
conditions. Compared with the PFL-based FSWF attacks, the data and the generation of the mixed Gaussian distribution
SMC method can perform more effective joint learning with corresponding to the virtual feature center. The more sample
inconsistent label distributions and feature distributions. It is numbers per class used, the better the representation of mixed
supported by the combined effect of fake-task in the represen- Gaussian distribution. It facilitates the integration of other
tation learning, the FSF and the VFCG. The fake-task allows models’ representation abilities into the local model during
a model to learn the intrinsic features of the dataset rather the fusion.
than the biased features guided by specific tasks. It makes Note that privacy concerns are also guaranteed by the
joint learning possible even if the monitored websites among transmissions of processed traces and numerical labels (no
attackers are different. The FSF layer fuses latent features of one knows exactly what the data corresponds to). This further
shared seed data, which drives the fusion of any two feature illustrates the great potential for the SMC method to be applied
spaces. The visual fusion center generated from the VFCG to traffic analysis in the real world.
prompts the fusion of multiple feature spaces. As a result, the
SMC outperforms the existing PFL-based FSWF attacks. F. Open-World Evaluations
 In this Chapter, we perform an open-world evaluation based
E. The Impact of Seed Data’s Size on the trained representation learning models of the closed-
 As seed data is an important base of the SMC method, we set world. In the experiment, the monitored websites are the
up two experiments to analyze the impact of seed data’s size. same 295 class with closed-world. The unmonitored websites
The first experiment evaluated the effect of the sample number that did not participate in the pre-training are used as an
per class in the seed data on the SMC method. We set three additional class in the fine-tuning and test process. The unmonparameters corresponding to the use of 10 classes with 5, itored websites’ samples for evaluation are selected from the
10 and 15 samples, i.e., 10w_5s, 10w_10s and 10w_15s. AWF, Wang and DF-95. For data balancing, we randomly
The second experiment evaluated the effect of the class select 9000 samples of unmonitored websites from every
number on the SMC method. The parameters correspond to dataset, where 295-2950 samples are used for fine-tuning
the use of 10 samples every from 5, 10 and 15 websites, i.e., and 7000 samples are used for testing. With this setup, the
5w_10s, 10w_10s and 15w_10s. The results are illustrated in ratio of the monitored samples to the unmonitored samples is
Table V and VI. maintained at approximately 1:1.
 As shown in Table V, the performance of SMC method is The accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score are used to
improved with the increase of samples. It is driven by the evaluate the performance of the binary classification of the
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8231

 TABLE VIII
 T HE P ERFORMANCE OF THE B INARY C LASSIFICATION IN O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING W ITHOUT S EED DATA

 TABLE IX
 T HE P ERFORMANCE OF THE B INARY C LASSIFICATION IN O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING W ITH S EED DATA

model. If a test sample is predicted to be one of the monitored threshold, which can fully reflect the performance of the
classes, its prediction label is recorded as 1, otherwise is model.
recorded as 0. The AUC area is used to provide an overall Firstly, as indicated in Fig. 5 (a), the AUC of the SMC
description of the model’s capabilities. It is calculated based method outperforms that of the TF_all by 4.86 and 4.56 under
on the maximum prediction probability of a test sample being 5-shot and 10-shot, respectively. But it obtains a lower perforpredicted to a monitored class. The results of accuracy, preci- mance than that of WFBDC by 3.38% under 1-shot. In the case
sion, recall and F1-score without seed data in pre-training are of 1-shot, as all unmonitored websites are set as one class, the
shown in Table VIII. Table IX illustrates the same metric with fine-tuning samples of the unmonitored class are more than
seed data in pre-training. The results of the AUC area without that of each monitored class. It leads to each monitored class
seed data and with seed data are shown in Fig.5 (a) and (b). having no clear boundary with the unmonitored class in the
 As shown in Table VIII, the SMC method achieves the feature space of K-NN. With the increased fine-tuning sample,
highest accuracy and F1 scores. It demonstrates that the the boundary becomes certain and the SMC method improves
SMC method is able to identify both monitored and unmon- the AUC about to 0.9. The excellent performance benefits
itored samples well. Since the data diversity of the local from the fusion feature spaces based on the jointing learning
dataset is limited, the performances of var-CNN and TF-all process. The fusion improves the representation ability for
are poor with smaller fine-tuning samples. TF_mev, TLFA, monitored data. As the unmonitored data obeys the same
WFBDC cannot balance the precision and recall. It means feature distribution as monitored data, the SMC method also
that they only identify the monitored samples or the unmon- has a good representation ability for the unmonitored data.
itored samples. JAN-based method predicts all samples as Secondly, TF_all, TLFA and WFBDC gain lower perforthe unmonitored class. The inconsistent label distributions mances than the SMC method under 5-shot and 10-shot. The
among local attackers and the large number of unmonitored limited data diversity of DS-19 restricts them from effectively
samples affect the model’s ability to identify the monitored representing the monitored and unmonitored classes. Although
classes. As illustrated in Table VIII and IX, the inclusion WFBDC has a lower F1-score, its AUC is higher. It indiof the seed data does not improve performance except for cates that the ability of WFBDC in identifying unmonitored
TF_all. It demonstrates that the seed data cannot enhance the classes is stronger than that of identifying monitored classes.
representation ability. The poor representation of monitored TF_all outperforms WFBDC except for 1-shot, which is conand unmonitored classes restricts the performance of binary trary to the results in the closed-world. Since TF utilizes a
classification. KNN classifier, its ability to identify unmonitored websites
 In contrast to the accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score, is not affected by the imbalance of the fine-tuned data, i.e.,
the AUC does not depend on the choice of classification the unmonitored website class has more samples than each
8232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 5. The AUC in open-world setting.

monitored website class. var-CNN gains worse performance
in the open-world while is ineffective in the closed-world.
Moreover, var-CNN has a higher F1-score and a lower AUC. Fig. 6. The AP with increased open data size under 5-shot.
It illustrates that the generalization of the traditional end-toend model (var-CNN) to unseen data (unmonitored data) is close-world setting. The few same labels prompt joint learning,
poor with smaller fine-tuning samples. TF_mev, JAN-based which helps to improve the ability to identify monitored
method only gets about 0.5 of AUC, which means the model classes. However, the inconsistent labels affect the effectiveis not working. The invalid of TF_mev is caused by the average ness of joint learning and further lead to misclassification.
of the Non-IID embedding vectors. As the inconsistent label As opposed to these baselines, the SMC method achieves
distribution among attackers disrupts the direction of model the outperform performance in the open-world. As it fuses the
updates, JAN-based method is ineffective. multiple attack models through seed data-based joint learn-
 Thirdly, Fig. 5 (b) illustrates the performance after adding ing, it improves the representation ability for the pre-trained
seed data to baselines. There is a small increase in the model of monitored and unmonitored data. As a result, the
performance of TF_all_seed while a small decrease of SMC method can better distinguish between monitored and
WFBDC_seed, TLFA_seed. The improvement of TF_all_seed unmonitored classes.
drives from the enhanced representation ability resulting from
increased pre-training data, which is described in Chapter D. G. Robustness Under Larger Open-World
The performance degradation of TLFA_seed is affected by In a realistic scenario, the number of websites that users can
the Cross-Entropy-based pre-training. They cannot process the access is non-estimable. It means that the ratio of unmonitored
effective training while the seed data brings the Non-IID to to monitored website traffic is much larger than 1 when the
the dataset. For WFBDC_seed, this problem arises with the attack is executed. As this ratio increases, the difficulty of
downstream classifier rather than the pre-trained process. The FSWF attacks gradually rises. Our goal is to evaluate the
downstream classifier amplifies the influence and increases performance of SMC in a larger open-world. We set three
the probability of classifying an unseen unmonitored web- different open-world sizes, 20k, 40k, 100k. The size of the
site to a monitored class. In contrast, the performance of open-world means the amount of unmonitored website traffic
JAN_seed-based method is not stable, which is different in the during the test. On account of the unbalanced sample size
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8233

 Fig. 7. The 2D contour heat map of the train loss surface under 5-shot about independent learning.

between the monitored and unmonitored classes, we use the TABLE X
average precision as a metric. The AP results are displayed in T HE ACCURACY OF VARIANTS A BOUT THE SMC M ETHOD
Fig. 6.
 As shown in Fig. 6, with the increase of open-world
size increases, the performance of all methods decreases.
Among baselines, the SMC method performs best regardless
of whether sets seed data or not. In no seed data setting, the
SMC improves the average precision by 3.07%, 4.12%, 4.13%,
3.86% and 4.52% with the open-world size of 20k, 40k, ability of the local representation learning model. SMC_two
60k, 80k and 100k compared with the sub-optimal WFBDC. has a performance improvement over SMC_single by about
In the seed data setting, the SMC improves the average 1.0%, proving the validity of the FSF layer in the feature
precision by 3.51%, 5.41%, 5.72%, 5.9% and 7.87% with the space fusion. Meanwhile, the performance of the SMC method
open-world size of 20k, 40k, 60k, 80k and 100k compared improves by about 1%-3% compared with SMC_two. The
with the sub-optimal TF-all. It can be seen that as the size of results imply that the virtual fusion center generated by the
the open-world increases, SMC performance decreases slower VFCG is essential for the joint learning of multiple attackers.
than all baselines. In other words, the performance of the The VFCG controls the fusion direction and mitigates the
SMC method degrades more slowly compared with baselines. effects of Non-IID during the fusion, which promotes a better
It demonstrates the adaptability of the SMC method to the real fusion of the FSF between multi-feature spaces.
world.
 I. Analysis of Adaptability
H. Ablation Experiment
 To further analyze the adaptability of local models,
 The key to the SMC method is the fusion of multiple we visualize the loss surfaces of local models based on lossfeature spaces. It is realized in collaboration with the FSF landscape [53]. The loss surface displays the two-dimensional
and the VFCG. The virtual fusion center generated from the surface in which the loss function varies in the param-
VFCG provides a unified direction for the fusion of multiple eter space, which helps for analyzing the adaptability of
feature spaces. The FSF forces the latent features of seed models [54].
data in each local model to be close to the virtual fusion We visualize the loss surface of TF, TLFA, JAN_four,
center. To demonstrate the contribution of them, we set up SMC_single and the SMC method. As the loss of the
two variants as follows. pre-trained model in WFBDC has no relation with classifi-
 • SMC_single. It has the same representation learning pro- cation, there is no solution space for the classification task.
 cess as the SMC method but does not participate in the Hence, it is not necessary to visualize the loss surface of
 feature space fusion process. This variant is designed to WFBDC. The visualizations of single-attacker based FSWF
 evaluate the contribution of the proposed joint learning attacks are shown in Fig 7, the visualizations of multi-attackers
 framework. based FSWF attacks are shown in and Fig. 8.
 • SMC_two. It is a variant that removes the VFCG from As illustrated in Fig. 7, all loss surfaces based on indepenthe SMC method. The FSF is performed between any dent learning have only one global optimal solution, which
 two local models based on Equation (5). It is designed is located at point (0, 0). It corresponds to the classification
 to evaluate the contribution of the VFCG. In comparison solution for the local dataset. The range of effective solution
 with SMC_single, this variant can evaluate the contribu- space in SMC_single is the largest. It owes to the ability
 tion of the FSF. of BDC to comprehensively measure the similarity between
 The accuracy of variants is displayed in Table X. (a, p, n). The large range of the effective solution space
 As shown in Table X, the SMC method improves the accu- increases the possibility of the overlap in multiple solution
racy by 3.33%, 2.27%, 1.95%, 1.59%, 1.29% under all shots spaces from local models, which makes joint learning possible.
than SMC_single. It indicates that the feature space fusion As shown in Fig. 8, emJAN_four has only one global
of the multiple attackers indeed enhances the representation optimal solution. Since the label distributions are inconsistent
8234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 datasets. The results demonstrate that the SMC method
 achieves a higher accuracy than the baselines in the closedworld setting. Meanwhile, it improves the ability to distinguish
 between monitored websites and unmonitored websites in the
 open-world setting. In upcoming works, we will explore the
 problem of feature space drift in WF models due to changes
 in website content.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] Y. Lee and Y. Lee, “Toward scalable Internet traffic measurement
 and analysis with Hadoop,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
 vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 5–13, Jan. 2013.
 [2] F. Zola, L. Segurola-Gil, J. L. Bruse, M. Galar, and R. Orduna-Urrutia,
 “Network traffic analysis through node behaviour classification: A
 graph-based approach with temporal dissection and data-level preprocessing,” Comput. Secur., vol. 115, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 102632.
 [3] G. Siracusano et al., “Re-architecting traffic analysis with neural network
 interface cards,” in Proc. 19th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Design
 Implement. (NSDI), 2022, pp. 513–533.
 [4] A. Bowers, J. Du, D. Lin, and W. Jiang, “Easy-to-implement two-server
 based anonymous communication with simulation security,” in Proc.
 ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., May 2022, pp. 831–842.
 [5] Tor. (Jul. 2012). Tor Metrics Portal. Accessed: Feb. 2013. [Online].
 Available: https://metrics.torproject.org/
 [6] G. Cherubin, R. Jansen, and C. Troncoso, “Online website fingerprinting:
 Evaluating website fingerprinting attacks on Tor in the real world,” in
 Proc. 31st USENIX Security Symp., Aug. 2022, pp. 753–770.
 [7] A. Montieri, D. Ciuonzo, G. Aceto, and A. Pescapé, “Anonymity
 services tor, I2P, JonDonym: Classifying in the dark (Web),” IEEE Trans.
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 662–675, May 2020.
 [8] A. Abusnaina, R. Jang, A. Khormali, D. Nyang, and D. Mohaisen,
 “DFD: Adversarial learning-based approach to defend against website
 fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (IEEE INFO-
 COM), Jul. 2020, pp. 2459–2468.
Fig. 8. The 2D contour heat map of the train loss surface under 5-shot about [9] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. V. Goethem, and W. Joosen,
jointing learning. “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
 [10] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
across locals, JAN_four cannot fuse the latent features of other Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Oct. 2018,
local models effectively. It indicates that JAN-based method pp. 1928–1943.
 [11] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-efficient
is not applicable to FSWF scenarios. In contrast, the SMC website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc. Privacy
method not only has the same global optimal solution at Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, Oct. 2019.
point (0, 0) but has two local optimal regions. The two extra [12] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on Tor,”
 in Proc. 12th ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Nov. 2013,
local optimal solutions are derived from the fusion of multiple pp. 201–212.
feature spaces. It makes the pre-trained model adapt to a new [13] K. Wang, B. Kang, J. Shao, and J. Feng, “Improving generalization
task with network conditions based on fewer data. in reinforcement learning with mixture regularization,” in Proc. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 7968–7978.
 [14] H. Shi, M. Xu, and R. Li, “Deep learning for household load
 VI. C ONCLUSION forecasting—A novel pooling deep RNN,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
 vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 5271–5280, Sep. 2018.
 In this paper, the proposed FSWF attack method, SMC, [15] H. Zhu, J. Xu, S. Liu, and Y. Jin, “Federated learning on non-IID data:
improves the adaptability to variable network conditions for A survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 465, pp. 371–390, Nov. 2021.
user-side attackers. The SMC method constructs a joint learn- [16] K. Hsieh, A. Phanishayee, O. Mutlu, and P. Gibbons, “The non-iid
 data quagmire of decentralized machine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
ing framework and leverages seed data as the anchors to Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 4387–4398.
guide the fusion of feature spaces. As opposed to tradi- [17] J. Bang, J. Jeong, and J. Lee, “FedFingerprinting: A federated learning
tional personalized federated learning, it can handle extreme approach to website fingerprinting attacks in tor networks,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 11, pp. 78431–78444, 2023.
Non-IID across multiple attacker datasets. Specifically, the [18] X. Ma, J. Zhu, Z. Lin, S. Chen, and Y. Qin, “A state-of-the-art survey
VFCG generates a virtual fusion center based on a mixed on solving non-IID data in federated learning,” Future Gener. Comput.
Gaussian distribution, and the FSF forces the latent features of Syst., vol. 135, pp. 244–258, Oct. 2022.
 [19] X.-C. Li and D.-C. Zhan, “FedRS: Federated learning with restricted
seed data for local attackers to approximate the virtual fusion softmax for label distribution non-IID data,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD
center based on Wasserstein distance. Thus, the SMC method Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, pp. 995–1005.
enriches the representation ability for local attackers while [20] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on tor anonymity using deep
migrating the impact of Non-IID during fusing multiple feature learning,” in Proc. Asia–Pacific Adv. Netw., vol. 42, 2016, pp. 15–20.
 [21] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “SnWF: Website
spaces. We evaluate the performance of the SMC method fingerprinting attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE
in closed-world and open-world settings on four historical Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, Mar. 2022.
TAN et al.: ADAPTABILITY-ENHANCED FSWF ATTACK BASED ON COLLUSION 8235

[22] H. Zou, Z. Wei, J. Su, S. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Relation-CNN: Enhancing [39] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
 website fingerprinting attack with relation features and NFS-CNN,” Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15.
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 247, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 123236. [40] J. Xie, F. Long, J. Lv, Q. Wang, and P. Li, “Joint distribution mat-
[23] M. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting ters: Deep Brownian distance covariance for few-shot classification,”
 attack with data augmentation,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022,
 pp. 1–13, Sep. 2021. pp. 7972–7981.
[24] Y. Zhang, X. Sun, X. Qin, C. Li, S. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Tripod: Use data [41] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
 augmentation to enhance website fingerprinting,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security),
 Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Sep. 2021, pp. 1–7. 2020, pp. 717–734.
[25] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Luo, and M. Chen, “TForm-RF: An [42] X. Liang, Y. Qian, Q. Guo, H. Cheng, and J. Liang, “AF: An
 efficient data augmentation for website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. association-based fusion method for multi-modal classification,” IEEE
 IEEE Int. Perform., Comput., Commun. Conf. (IPCCC), Nov. 2022, Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 9236–9254,
 pp. 169–178. Dec. 2022.
[26] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet [43] L. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Bai, B. Du, and L.-Y. Duan, “Federated learning
 fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with for non-IID data via unified feature learning and optimization objec-
 N-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., tive alignment,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Nov. 2019, pp. 1131–1148. Oct. 2021, pp. 4400–4408.
[27] Z. Wang, T. Li, M. Yin, X. Yuan, X. Luo, and L. Li, “WF3A: A N-shot [44] X.-B. Shen, Q.-S. Sun, and Y.-H. Yuan, “Orthogonal canonical correwebsite fingerprinting with effective fusion feature attention,” Comput. lation analysis and its application in feature fusion,” in Proc. 16th Int.
 Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103796. Conf. Inf. Fusion, Jul. 2013, pp. 151–157.
[28] M. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Xu, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting [45] Y. Rubner, C. Tomasi, and L. J. Guibas, “The earth mover’s distance as
 attack,” Comput. Netw., vol. 198, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 108298. a metric for image retrieval,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 40, pp. 99–121,
[29] M. Chen, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting Nov. 2000.
 attack with meta-bias learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 130, Oct. 2022, [46] C. Li et al., “Adversarial learning for weakly-supervised social network
 Art. no. 108739. alignment,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
[30] H. Zou, J. Su, Z. Wei, S. Chen, and B. Zhao, “An efficient cross- pp. 996–1003.
 domain few-shot website fingerprinting attack with Brownian distance [47] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein GAN,” 2017,
 covariance,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 109461. arXiv:1701.07875.
[31] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, and T. Lu, “Few-shot website fingerprinting [48] M. Luo, F. Chen, D. Hu, Y. Zhang, J. Liang, and J. Feng, “No fear
 attack with cluster adaptation,” Comput. Netw., vol. 229, Jun. 2023, of heterogeneity: Classifier calibration for federated learning with non-
 Art. no. 109780. IID data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021,
[32] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and H. Song, “Joint alignment pp. 5972–5984.
 networks for few-shot website fingerprinting attack,” Comput. J., vol. 67, [49] B. G. Lindsay, Mixture Models: Theory, Geometry, and Applications.
 no. 6, pp. 2331–2345, Jun. 2024. Waite Hill, OH, USA: Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 1995.
[33] Y. Deng, M. M. Kamani, and M. Mahdavi, “Adaptive personalized [50] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective
 federated learning,” 2020, arXiv:2003.13461. attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd
[34] A. Fallah, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar, “Personalized federated USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2014, pp. 143–157.
 learning: A meta-learning approach,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07948. [51] B. Yu, T. Liu, M. Gong, C. Ding, and D. Tao, “Correcting the triplet
[35] Y. Huang et al., “Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-IID selection bias for triplet loss,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV),
 data,” Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 7865–7873, 2018, pp. 71–87.
 May 2021. [52] Z. Yang, J. Liang, C. Fu, M. Luo, and X.-Y. Zhang, “Heterogeneous
[36] C. T. Dinh, N. H. Tran, and T. D. Nguyen, “Personalized federated face recognition via face synthesis with identity-attribute disentanglelearning with Moreau envelopes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. ment,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1344–1358,
 Syst., Dec. 2020, pp. 21394–21405. Mar. 2022.
[37] L. Collins, H. Hassani, A. Mokhtari, and S. Shakkottai, “Exploiting [53] H. Li, Z. Xu, G. Taylor, C. Studer, and T. Goldstein, “Visualizing the
 shared representations for personalized federated learning,” in Proc. Int. loss landscape of neural nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul. 2021, pp. 2089–2099. vol. 31, 2018, pp. 1–11.
[38] I. Kansizoglou, L. Bampis, and A. Gasteratos, “Deep feature space: [54] D. Stutz, M. Hein, and B. Schiele, “Relating adversarially robust
 A geometrical perspective,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., generalization to flat minima,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 6823–6838, Oct. 2022. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 7787–7797.