IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024 12125

 An Anomaly-Free Representation Learning
 Approach for Efficient Railway Foreign
 Object Detection
 Tiange Wang , Zijun Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Min Xie , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Applying machine vision to facilitate railway particularly foreign objects on rail tracks. Manual inspection
anomaly detections faces a grand challenge in that anoma- often falls short in meeting the demands of high precision and eflous samples for model training are insufficient due to their ficiency necessitated by advancements in industrial intelligence.
infrequent occurrence and wide diversity. An anomaly-free
representation learning approach (ARLA) is developed in Recent attention has been directed toward anomaly detection in
this article to realize a machine vision-powered railway for- computer vision using machine/deep learning models. Various
eign object detection (RFOD) that does not rely on anoma- methodologies aim to classify normal and anomalous images
lous samples. The ARLA consists of two components, a within railway settings. Despite these efforts, challenges persist
memory-suppress diffusion network module and a conin achieving reliable and effective foreign object detection
trastive dissimilarity network. The former network module
well considers the diversity of normal patterns and re- due to the specific characteristics of railway anomalies. The
constructs high-fidelity normal images. The latter network following discussion delves into these challenges in detail.
module enables image-level and pixelwise foreign object 1) Limited accessibility of field data: The accumulation and
detections based on well-defined dissimilarity scores and retention of extensive data hold the potential for enhancdistance maps. The ARLA realizes an efficient RFOD, which
 ing analysis and facilitating immediate insights using
leverages only normal images in training and does not compromise the detection performance at the inference stage. progressive data-driven methods. However, the lack of
Improvements offered by ARLA in terms of pixelwise detec- publicly accessible field data presents a significant barrier.
tion performance and model complexity against two groups Concerns on data privacy, intellectual property rights, and
of benchmarks have been consistently observed based on logistical challenges of managing and sharing valuable
computational studies using the railway dataset.
 resources often lead to the nondisclosure of datasets.
 Index Terms—Anomaly-free, contrastive learning, diffu- Consequently, gaining access to authentic anomalous data
sion models, image analytics, railway scenes. becomes a serious impediment, hindering the development of effective anomaly detection techniques.
 I. INTRODUCTION
 2) Limited availability of anomalous images: Anomalies in
 N RAILWAY contexts, ensuring safety and operational
I efficiency heavily relies on the detection of anomalies,
 industrial environments are often sporadic and infrequent,
 resulting in a scarcity of anomalous images for training
 and evaluation purposes. Although a subset of defective
 Manuscript received 29 June 2023; revised 27 September 2023, images can be obtained, the inherent imbalance between
10 February 2024, and 17 May 2024; accepted 4 June 2024. Date anomalous and normal instances poses a significant chalof publication 4 July 2024; date of current version 7 October 2024.
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen-Hong Kong-Macau Sci- lenge. Such scarcity underscores the importance of innoence & Technology Category C Project (SGDX20220530111205037), vative approaches that can effectively utilize limited data
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (72371215 resources and address class imbalance issues.
and 72032005), in part by the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong
(11200621 and 11201023), and in part by the Hong Kong Innovation 3) Imprecise outcomes of anomaly detection: Precise
and Technology Commission (InnoHK Project CIMDA) and Hong Kong anomaly detection requires distinguishing between nor-
Institute of Data Science under Project 9360163. Paper no. TII-23-2378. mal and anomalous instances at both image and pixel
(Corresponding authors: Zijun Zhang; Min Xie)
 Tiange Wang is with the Institute of Rail Transit, National Ma- levels. However, obtaining pixelwise annotations for
glev Transportation Engineering Research and Development Center, anomaly detection presents formidable challenges. The
Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail: wangtiange@tongji. manual annotation process is labor-intensive, timeedu.cn).
 Zijun Zhang is with the School of Data Science, City University of consuming, and prone to human errors, introducing biases
Hong Kong Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: zijzhang@cityu.edu.hk). and inaccuracies in the labeling process. Such imprecision
 Min Xie is with the Department of Advanced Design and Sys- undermines the reliability and effectiveness of anomaly
tems Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China, and also with the City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen detection systems in real-world applications, where accu-
Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: minxie@cityu. rate anomaly localization is critical for timely intervenedu.hk). tion and decision-making.
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2024.3413965. This study focuses on the field of railway foreign object
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2024.3413965 detection (RFOD) and introduces a novel approach called
 1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
12126 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 II. RELATED WORK
 In the field of RFOD, extensive research has been conducted
 on the task of classifying and segmenting anomalous instances
 within images. This section provides a comprehensive review of
 the approaches developed specifically for image-level anomaly
 detection in railway infrastructure. Additionally, we explore the
 methods that have been generalized to handle pixelwise anomaly
 detection on widely recognized public datasets. By examining
 both specialized techniques for railway infrastructure and more
Fig. 1. Motivation of ARLA. (a) Normal rail image is well recon- general methods, we gain valuable insights into ensuring the
structed by memory-suppress diffusion. (b) Anomalous rail image is safety and reliability of intricate railway systems.
reconstructed with the normal patterns recorded in memory-suppress
diffusion.
 A. Anomaly Detection in Railway Infrastructure
 Due to the complexity and numerous subcomponents within
the anomaly-free representation learning approach (ARLA). railway infrastructure, there exists a broad spectrum of research
It addresses the aforementioned challenges by incorporating areas dedicated to anomaly detection in this domain. Existing
anomaly rejection mechanisms into the learning process. One methods primarily focus on identifying anomalous scenes reof the key advantages of ARLA is that its training is free of lated to rail tracks, rolling stock, and catenary systems [1].
anomalous samples at the representation learning stage. The Maintenance tasks for railway infrastructure can be broadly clasanomaly rejection mechanism in ARLA ensures that the learned sified into two main categories, surface defect detection (such as
representations predominantly capture normal or nonanomalous cracks and corrugations on rails [2], [3] and defects on fasteners
patterns. This approach effectively minimizes the influence of [4]) and anomaly inspection (such as broken/missing parts [5],
outliers or noises in the training data, resulting in more robust, [6], foreign objects/obstacles [7], and anomalies in components
and reliable representations. Moreover, during the testing phase, [8], [9]). The image data employed in these research endeavors
ARLA offers versatility by providing both image-level and are often acquired through custom systems and meticulously
pixelwise detection results. Such a capability enables ARLA to hand-labeled, thus limiting their public availability.
offer comprehensive insights into the presence and location of Considering the scale and availability of the image data, some
anomalies contained in railway images. Image-level detection studies leverage the third-party data to pretrain the model and
results provide an overall assessment of anomaly presence, adopt transfer learning approaches [2], [10]. Pretrained models
whereas pixelwise detection results offer finer-grained infor- serve as the initial learning point, preserving computational
mation, pinpointing the exact locations of anomalies within resources and enhancing overall detection performance.
the image. This comprehensive detection capability enhances During the inference stage, many studies focus on image-level
the utility of ARLA in real-world applications, where precise anomaly detection in railway infrastructure while neglecting the
anomaly localization is crucial for effective decision-making and localization of anomalies. To address this limitation, segmentaintervention. Fig. 1 provides a visual depiction of our motivation tion tasks aim to precisely assign pixels within input images
in the context of anomalous railway scenes. to anomalous regions [4], [11]. The output is a segmentation
 Our main contributions are summarized as follows. map with the same size as the input image, which facilitates
 1) We present a pioneering attempt for formulating RFOD as subsequent diagnosis and maintenance. Nevertheless, the segan anomaly-free representation learning process, which mentation of anomalies is usually implemented in a supervised
 aims to address the challenge of limited anomalous data manner, calling for more advanced data-driven solutions to
 in railway contexts. perform pixelwise anomaly detection when limited anomalous
 2) A novel memory-suppress diffusion process that captures image data is available.
 the prototypical patterns of normal data in ARLA is
 introduced. By quantizing code memories, we enhance
 the reconstruction of images and prevent excessive model B. Anomaly Detection via Deep Generative Models
 generalization, thereby improving the accuracy of RFOD. As a typical type of method for anomaly detection, deep
 3) A novel dissimilarity loss function is proposed to de- generative models strive to compress and reconstruct the norvelop the contrastive dissimilarity network in ARLA. It mal images and detect potential anomalies by evaluating the
 ensures the discriminative power between the input and its pixel differences between the inputs and their reconstructions.
 reconstruction, enabling both image-level and pixelwise Autoencoder-based (AE-based) [12] methods and generative addetection results. versarial network-based (GAN-based) methods [13], [14] have
 4) The ARLA offers a new state-of-the-art performance for been widely employed in industrial image analysis, exhibiting
 RFOD, which is verified via computational experiments promising results in anomaly localization. Typically, the learnconducted on a collected real dataset. Ablation studies are ing process of these methods follows a semisupervised manner,
 also conducted to justify the effectiveness and superiority assuming that only normal image representations are learned.
 of each component in ARLA. During testing, the models struggle to reconstruct anomalous
WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION 12127

images as accurately as normal ones, providing an opportunity TABLE I
 TABLE OF NOTATIONS
for anomaly detection. In addition to commonly used distance
metrics [13], [15], reconstruction probability [12] and likelihood
score [16] are defined as supplementary anomaly measures.
 AE-based methods possess a strong theoretical foundation,
but designing an effective loss function remains challenging,
resulting in suboptimal reconstructions. GAN-based methods
perform well in various applications, yet they face issues such
as training difficulties, vanishing gradients, model collapse, and
limited diversity in generated outputs. In summary, generating
high-quality images for comparisons is a daunting task, as reconstructing sharp edges and complex texture characteristics often
proves challenging, leading to a high number of false abnormal
alarms [17].
 Denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [18],
originating from probabilistic likelihood estimation methods, rather than focusing on capturing every detail of training samhave recently emerged as powerful tools in computer vision ples, which is a major difference from the GAN-based methods.
tasks, particularly in generative modeling. DDPMs excel in gen- Progressive methods enhance their robustness by relying less on
erating high-quality and diverse samples through forward and negative pairs through asymmetric structures [28], [29] or novel
reverse diffusion stages [19]. They incorporate a vast amount of objective functions [30].
images and utilize multiscale representations from the diffusion So far, CRL-based methods continue to be an active area of
decoder [20]. Compared with AE- and GAN-based methods, research, and we anticipate that these methods will pave the way
DDPMs offer both tractability and flexibility in analytically for future advancements in pixelwise anomaly detection.
evaluating and fitting arbitrary data structures. They possess
advantages over alternative generative models when dealing III. ARLA FRAMEWORK
with smaller datasets, as they provide improved sample quality and a stable training scheme. Furthermore, the continuous This section presents the ARLA, a novel framework designed
advancements in the sampling speed of DDPMs (requiring to generate detailed anomaly maps in anomalous railway scenes.
significantly fewer sampling steps, up to hundreds of times The overview of ARLA is illustrated in Fig. 2. Initially, we
faster) demonstrate their potential in terms of time efficiency explain the memory-suppress diffusion module and its role
and computational cost [21], [22]. in reconstructing input images. Subsequently, we introduce
 the contrastive dissimilarity network, which measures anomaly
 maps between input and reconstruction, providing image-level
 and pixelwise detection results. Finally, we define the training
C. Anomaly Detection via Contrastive Representation mechanism and illustrate the testing procedure, which handles
Learning different anomalies in railway scenes.
 The ability to learn latent representations of raw input data Table I lists the main notations involved in Section III.
establishes a connection to the broader domain of representation
learning. As one of the powerful approaches in self-supervised A. Memory-Suppress Diffusion Module
learning, contrastive representation learning (CRL) has shown The proposed memory-suppress diffusion module comprises
promising results in capturing shared features among similar three essential steps. First, the noise encoding step follows the
images while distinguishing differences among dissimilar basic diffusion process in DDPM to generate a sequence of
images [23]. noise-perturbed images [18]. Next, a set of code memories ob-
 The main idea of CRL is to define a similarity distribution that tained from the previous step is integrated to establish consistent
maps the similar pairs close and the dissimilar samples far apart representations of normality in the normality memorizing step.
in the embedding space. Unlike the supervised approaches, CRL Finally, the denoise memory-suppress sampling step continudefines similarity based on the data itself, thereby alleviating ously reconstructs the normal railway images from the Gaussian
the reliance on a labeled dataset with a substantial number of noise input using memory-suppression techniques.
anomalies. Nevertheless, if additional labels are available, CRL 1) Noise Encoding: The goal of the noise encoding procan be flexibly integrated into a supervised detection framework cess in DDPM is to produce a sequence of noisy images
[24]. As a result, CRL offers a straightforward yet potent means {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT } given an input image x0 from the real image
to learn representations in both supervised and self-supervised dataset with density distribution x0 ∼ q(x0 ). The noise level of
settings. the image is steadily increased in T steps, which follows the
 Previous research has developed notable CRL-based methods, Markovian process
including contrastive predictive coding (CPC) [25], augmented   
multiscale deep infoMax (AMDIM) [26], and momentum con- q (xt |xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I ∀t ∈ {1, . . . , T }
trast (MoCo) [27]. These methods aim to learn features for
effectively distinguishing training samples from other samples (1)
12128 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2. Overall architecture of the proposed ARLA.

Fig. 3. Architecture of the memory-suppress diffusion module.

 
 T {M1 , M2 , . . . , MT }, where the tth memory Mt ∈ R1×K×n
 q (x1:T |x0 ) = q (xt |xt−1 ) (2) records prototypical patterns from the noise encoding in the
 t=1 tth step. We denote each query Mtk ∈ R1×1×n , where k =
where the step sizes are dominated by a variance scheduler 1, 2, . . . , K. The noise encoding result Xt ∈ RH×W ×n is output
{βt ∈ (0, 1)}Tt = 1 . Usually, a larger update step is obtained when from a batch of images, where H, W , and n are height, width,
the image becomes noisier and thereby β1 < β2 < · · · < βT . and the size of training batches, respectively. The normality
I is the identity matrix with the memorizing step serves two purposes: 1) transform the feature
 √ same dimension as x0 . The vector Xti of size 1 × 1 × n using the code memory Mt and
normal distribution N of mean 1 − βt xt−1 and variance βt I
is operated to produce xt . In (1) and (2), x0 gradually loses the 2) update the memory query Mtk of size 1 × 1 × n using the
distinguishable features as the noise level deepens. This recur- feature map Xt .
sion can be formulated explicitly using the reparameterization As shown in Fig. 3, the cosine similarity between each entrick as follows: coded vector Xti and the code memory Mt is first calculated as
    follows:
 q (xt |x0 ) = N xt ; α̂t x0 , (1 − α̂t ) I  T 
 exp Mtk Xti
   wti,k =  
 ⇒ xt = α̂t x0 + 1 − α̂t zt (3) K 
 k T X i
 (4)
 
 k =1 exp M t t
 
where α̂t = ti=1 (1 − βi ) and zt ∼ N (0, I). By (3), the latent
noise xt can be sampled at arbitrary time steps, which is further where wti,k is the corresponding weights after the softmax
used to calculate the tractable objective loss Lt . function. By integrating the memory queries with corresponding
 2) Normality Memorizing: The process of normality memo- weights, the transformed feature vector X̂ti taking into account
rizing involves specific mechanisms to effectively capture and all normal patterns is obtained
retain the normal patterns during the forward noise encoding K
  
process. Fig. 3 shows the schematic illustration of the nor- X̂ti = wti,k Mtk . (5)
mality memorizing step. Denote the code memories as M : k =1
WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION 12129

 Applying (4) and (5) to all encoded vectors in Xt results in a the loss function defined as the variational lower bound loss
transformed feature map X̂t ∈ RH×W ×n , which is then added to T
Xt and fed into the next denoise sampling step. Similar to (4), Lvlb = Lt
we then compute the cosine similarity between each memory t=0
query Mtk and the encoded feature map Xt as follows:  
 q (x1:T |x0 )
  T  = Eq(x0:T ) log
 exp Mtk Xti pθ (x̂T :0 )
 vti,k =  T   (6) = Eq [− log pθ (x0 |x̂1 ) → L0
 H×W
 i =1 exp Mtk Xti
 + DKL (q (xt−1 |xt , x0 ) pθ (xt−1 |x̂t )) → Lt>1
and normalize vti,k considering the feature indices for the corre- t>1
sponding features of Mtk
 +DKL (q (xT |x0 ) pθ (xT ))] → LT (12)
  vti,k
 vti,k =  . (7) where DKL denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence between
 maxi ∈Dtk vti ,k two Gaussian distributions, which can be expressed in a closed
 form. The first term L0 is modeled using a separate decoder,
 With the normalized weights in (7), the query in code memory which is derived from N (x0 ; μθ (x̂1 , 1), Σθ (x̂1 , 1)) as in [18].
Mt is updated as follows: The second term Lt>1 ensures that at each time step t, the esti-
 ⎛ ⎞
 mation of pθ (xt−1 |x̂t ) is close to the true posterior of q(xt−1 |xt )
 
 Mtk ← f ⎝Mtk + vti,k Xti ⎠ (8) as much as possible when conditioned on the input image. The
 i∈Dtk
 last term LT is constant since the encoding function q has no
 learnable parameters and xT is a Gaussian noise. We can find in
where f (·) denotes the L2 norm, and Dtk denotes the indices of (12) that LT does not depend on θ, implying that it can be ignored
the multiple feature vectors nearest to Mtk according to (6). during training. Based on (12), an alternative loss function is
 In the normality memorizing step, a set of code memories employed to offer better reconstruction quality over Lvlb
obtained from the noise encoding step is integrated to establish  
consistent representations of normality for subsequent steps. Ls = Et∼[1:T ], x0 ∼p(x0 ),zt ∼N (0,I) zt − zθ (x̂t , t) 2 (13)
 3) Denoise Memory-Suppress Sampling: The last denoise
sampling is a reverse process approximating q(xt−1 |xt ) as in where E is the expected value and zθ (x̂t , t) is the predicted noise
DDPM. When t = T , image samples with high fidelity should in the sampling step t.
be reconstructed from isotropic Gaussian noise. Unlike the first
step, the reconstruction requires the knowledge of all previous B. Contrastive Dissimilarity Network
gradients, which can only be obtained with a learning model. The contrastive dissimilarity network uses the input image
Thus, this step aims to train a subnetwork with learned pa- and the reconstructed image to calculate the correlation map and
rameters θ, thereby estimating pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt )) based on the further predict the anomaly map. Inspired by [30], three comnormality memorizing function fu . It is formulated with mean ponents are involved in the contrastive dissimilarity network,
and variance as follows: including an encoder, a projector, and a fusion block as shown
 in Fig. 2.
 pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt ))
 1) Architecture: We utilize a pretrained visual geometry
 = N (xt−1 ; μθ (fu (xt ) , t) , Σθ (fu (xt ) , t)) (9) group (VGG) as the encoder to process both the original input
 x0 and the reconstruction pθ (x0 ), resulting in two embedding
where the mean function and the variance function are computed vectors. We then project the two vectors into a larger space with a
as in [19] higher dimension d = 1024. It is simply a three-layer perceptron
 1 1 − αt with batch normalization and ReLU activation and learns the
 μθ (fu (xt ) , t) = √ (fu (xt ) − √ zθ (fu (xt ) , t)) invariance of the two images. The design of the vector projection
 αt 1 − α̂t
   is common and crucial in CRL-based methods, since it is capable
 Σθ (fu (xt ) , t) = exp v log βt + (1 − v) log β̃t (10) of squeezing all invariant information and preventing model
 collapse. The output of the projector is denoted as follows:
where αt = 1 − βt , β̃t = 1− 1−α̂t βt , and v is a mixing vector
 α̂t−1
 hA = fE,P (x0 ) ∈ Rd
via model predicting. If we apply (9) in all T time steps, the
trajectory from xT to x0 is: hB = fE,P (pθ (x0 )) ∈ Rd . (14)
 
 T The final fusion block aims to compute the correlation map
 pθ (xT :0 ) = p(xT ) pθ (xt−1 |fu (xt )) . (11) C(hA , hB ). Given the projector output, the correlation map
 t=1 is expected to be as close to the identity matrix as possible.
 A T B
 Let the transformed features x̂t = fu (xt ). The objective of For a batch size n, C = (h )n h ∈ Rd×d is the empirical
this module is to train the sampling function pθ (xt−1 |x̂t ) with correlation map. The diagonal elements of the target C (i.e.,
12130 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Cii ) are equal to 1, forcing the embeddings invariant to the RFOD at the image level
reconstruction. The off-diagonal elements of the target C (i.e.,  
  ij 
Cij for i = j) are equal to 0, which decorrelates the different ε (x) = Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 )) xij
 0 − (p θ (x 0 ) )  (16)
 2
components of embedding vectors and reduces the redundancy i,j

between hA and hB . With the fusion block, the network is di- where Wij is the weight function defined as follows:
rected to pay attention to high-dissimilar areas in the correlation    
  ij 
map. 1 − exp −xij 0 − (pθ (x0 ) ) 
 2) Objective Function: The objective function of the con- Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 )) =   2 
 .
  ij ij 
trastive dissimilarity network encompasses multiple compo- i,j 1 − exp −x0 − (pθ (x0 ) ) 
 2
nents aimed at achieving effective differentiation between the (17)
input image and its corresponding reconstruction. Additionally, It determines the relative significance of each term and allows
it involves a pointwise correlation with the high-level embedding the ARLA to focus more on the regions with high dissimilarity.
vectors. The objective can be expressed through three distinct Meanwhile, a threshold ζ is empirically decided to minimize the
terms, i.e., reconstruction loss Lrec , projection feature loss Lpro , errors corresponding to false alarms and miss-detected anomaand contrastive loss Lcon as follows: lies. A small E(x) indicates a normal input while a large E(x)
 exceeding ζ for an anomalous input.
 Ld = Lrec + Lpro + Lcon Once the testing sample is determined as anomalous, a stacked
 pixelwise anomaly map is generated by merging a score distance
 n
 map Ms and a feature distance map Md along the depth dimen-
 = x0 − pθ (x0 ) 2
 sion. The two maps are defined as follows:
 i
  
  ij 
 n
  A  Ms = Wij (x0 , pθ (x0 ))xij0 − (pθ (x0 ) )  ∈ R
 H×W
 +λ  h − hB  2
 2
 2
 i Md = ω F (x0 ) − F (pθ (x0 )) 2 (18)
 2
 + (1 − Cii ) + λcon 2
 Cij (15) where Ms is derived from the dissimilarity score. Md is derived
 i i i=j from the encoded feature maps in a contrastive dissimilarity
 network. F denotes the last activation layer before feature flatwhere Lrec measures the L2 distance between the original images tening. ω is the mean squared error (MSE) weight to explore the
and their reconstructions, ensuring a faithful representation. Lpro effect of Md .
calculates the L2 distance between the embedding vectors hA 3) Architecture Training Complexity: This section provides
and hB . Lcon plays a crucial role in balancing the tradeoff an analysis of the complexity of the ARLA in training. As the
between the invariance term and the redundancy reduction term. ARLA is composed of a memory-suppress diffusion module and
It consists of two components: 1) the sum of squared differences a contrastive dissimilarity network, its training complexity is de-
1 − Cii within the diagonal elements of the contrastive matrix C, scribed as follows. Let g1 (·) denote the complexity of memorywhich emphasizes the preservation of invariance and 2) the sum suppress operation, the complexity of the memory-suppress
of squared differences Cij2
 for all nondiagonal elements (i = j) diffusion with K code memories within T steps over N training
of C, promoting redundancy reduction. Lcon is the tradeoff iterations is described as fMDM ∈ O(N · T · g1 (K)T ). Let g2 (·)
parameter controlling the invariance term and the redundancy denote the complexity of convolution operation and Cl denote
reduction term. the output channels of the lth layer, the complexity of contrastive
 learning process of dissimilarities within D layers over N training iterations is described as fCDN ∈ O(N · D l g2 (Cl−1 Cl )).
C. Training and Testing
 Combining these two parts involves considering the composition
 1) Semisupervised Training: During the training process, the and interactions of each part, such as the determination of
memory-suppress diffusion module and the contractive dissim- anomalous samples at the image level.
ilarity network are jointly optimized to minimize the sum of Ls
and Ld . The code memories are continuously updated to record IV. EXPERIMENTS
the prototypical patterns of normal images. To speed up the
 In this section, we first introduce the railway dataset and
sampling process, we adopt a multistep solution approximating
 setups employed during training and testing. Then we show
the high-order derivatives as recommended in [21].
 some properties of ARLA and compare it with state-of-the-art
 The training of contrastive dissimilarity networks also adopts
 methods on pixelwise RFOD. Finally, we present discussions on
a semisupervised manner that does not rely on negative pairs.
 the components of ARLA.
It incorporates a quantification mechanism to assess the degree
of abnormality, enabling the differentiation between normal and
anomalous images. A. Implementation Details
 2) Image-Level and Pixelwise Detection: A key aspect of 1) Dataset: The railway dataset used in our experiments was
ARLA lies in its ability to achieve high-fidelity reconstruction. collected by the Hong Kong Metro Corporation via industrial
We define a weighted dissimilarity score E(x) to express the cameras. A selection of collected samples is presented in Fig. 4.
WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION 12131

 Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis of weight parameters λ and ω.

Fig. 4. Collected samples from (a) Dtrain and (b) Dtest .
 Fig. 6. Losses of benchmarks during training.

The dataset comprises two main subsets: Dtrain , consisting of 3) Inference Details: At the inference stage, the image is
normal images intended for training, and Dtest , which includes noise encoded and denoised back within 50 steps. Following the
images with anomalies intended for testing. reconstruction, a dissimilarity score E and an anomaly map M
 All images are labeled at the image level. Dtrain consists of are calculated. We determine the threshold ζ based on Dval such
6656 normal images. Dtest comprises 541 anomalous images that any image with E larger than ζ is identified as anomalous.
and 490 normal images. To select the optimal hyperparameters The batch size at the inference stage is set to 1.
during training, a small portion of Dtest is reserved as the 4) Evaluation Metrics: Two distinct sets of evaluation metvalidation set Dval , which consists of 120 anomalous images and rics are employed to assess the detection performance of ARLA
100 normal images. Apart from the image-level labels, pixelwise and benchmarking methods in our study. The first set encomannotations as ground truths for training are not provided. The passes commonly used metrics Precision, recall, and F1 score
anomalies manifest themselves in the form of over ten different for image-level RFOD. The second set of evaluation metrics
classes of foreign objects, such as phones, bags, and umbrellas. including dice coefficient and mean intersection over union
Before being fed into the ARLA model for training and testing, (mIoU) evaluates the pixelwise detection performance. Moreeach image is resized to a resolution of 256 × 256 and normal- over, the model complexity in terms of parameters, floating point
ized to values between 0 and 1. Furthermore, the images are operations per second (FLOPs), inference time, and FPS are also
converted to grayscale. considered.
 Note: The dataset will be available for sharing upon request
via email after the expiration of the nondisclosure agreement,
 B. Results
strictly for scientific research purposes.
 2) Training Settings: The training process for the memory- 1) Sensitivity Analysis: In this section, we perform expersuppress diffusion module involves utilizing Dtrain to learn the iments to evaluate the sensitivity of two hyperparameters: λ
normal patterns and update the code memories. In this regard, and ω, which govern the impact of projection feature loss and
a setting T = 50 is applied to the noise encoding and sampling feature distance map on image-level and pixelwise detections,
steps based on experimental trials. Details will be disclosed in respectively. Fig. 5 describes the performance of the ARLA
Section IV-C. The variance scheduler βt is defined in the range model in terms of the F1 score and dice coefficient based on
of [0.0001, 0.02] as recommended in [19]. In the contrastive dis- different hyperparameter configurations. Results show that the
similarity network, the encoder and projector are initialized us- ARLA model achieves its peak F1 score with λ = 5 and ω = 1.
ing Xavier initialization. The hidden dimension of the projector Intriguingly, a remarkable consistency is observed in the optimal
output is set to 1024. Grid searches are conducted to determine thresholds obtained across both groups of experiments, with
the optimal weights for the hyperparameters λ and ω, aiming to minimal variance. A threshold ζ = 0.4 is selected as a better
achieve the best performance based on Dval . Additionally, the performance is achieved based on the validation dataset Dval .
value of λcon is set to 5 × 10−3 according to [30]. These selected hyperparameters are subsequently employed for
 The entire pipeline of ARLA is trained end-to-end using evaluation on Dtest .
the hybrid loss objective composed of Ls and Ld , with an 2) Comparison With Benchmarks: We compare our pro-
AdamW optimizer ( β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99). We adopt the initial posed ARLA against two groups of benchmarking methods.
learning rate of 5 × 10−4 and the weight decay of 10−4 . The The first group includes two GAN-based methods: f-AnoGAN
default training schedule is 300 k iterations, with the learning [13] and GANomaly [14]. The second group involves two
rate divided by 10 at 200 k and 250 k iterations. All modules are DDPM-based methods: Nichol and Dhariwal [19] and AnoDtrained with a batch size of 24 on three NVIDIA GeForce RTX DPM [20]. Fig. 6 shows the training loss and validation loss
2080 GPUs. throughout the 300 k iterations. Default settings are adopted
12132 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 7. Validation performances of ARLA and benchmarking methods.

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON WITH TWO GROUPS OF BENCHMARKING METHODS

for all benchmarking methods. In Fig. 6, we first observe that
the training losses of GANomaly and f-AnoGAN exhibit significant fluctuations after 30 k iterations while still showing a
decreasing trend, whereas the training loss of the other three
methods remains relatively stable. This indicates the necessity
of continuing the training after the sudden drop in loss values.
Second, the validation loss values of these five methods also
show a gradual decline as the number of iterations increases,
especially for GANomaly and f-AnoGAN. After 100 k iterations, their validation loss values experience noticeable fluctuations and then level off. Fig. 7 further illustrates the validation Fig. 8. Visualization of activation maps in neural networks.
performance of ARLA and benchmarking methods. Results
demonstrate a clear trend that the training iterations higher than performance in terms of dice coefficient and mIoU. Notably,
30 k lead to discernible improvements in performance metrics our method involves fewer steps in the memory-suppress diffuwhile the performance becomes stable after 300 k training itera- sion module than AnoDDPM, resulting in faster reconstruction
tions. Another finding is that most of the methods have reached progress during the inference stage. Finally, we summarize their
optimal performance before the end of training. Therefore, FLOPs, total number of parameters, inference time, and FPS in
during the inference stage, we exploit the model weights achiev- Table II to provide a more intuitive representation of their coming the optimal validation performance to detect anomalies in plexity. The results indicate that GAN-based methods require
Dtest . significantly less time and computational resources compared
 Quantitative comparisons based on Dtest with respect to to DDPM-based methods. Among the DDPM-based methods,
image-level and pixelwise metrics are represented in Table II. our proposed ARLA demonstrates reasonable parameter volume
Initially, we compare ARLA against the two GAN-based meth- and testing time while showing a certain advantage in terms of
ods. Within this subgroup, ARLA outperforms the previous FLOPs.
methods, particularly in pixelwise detection, where the dice 3) Inference Visualization: We visualize the network weights
coefficient and mIoU exhibit significant improvements. Subse- of the contrastive dissimilarity network in ARLA as well as those
quently, we compare ARLA against the DDPM-based methods, of two GAN-based methods. Fig. 8 provides valuable insights
which require pixelwise annotations during training. Given the into the ability of each method to capture and localize anomalous
imbalance between normal and anomalous samples, Dtrain and regions based on testing images. While ARLA predominantly
Dval are combined to form the training set for the DDPM- focuses on highly concentrated anomalous regions, the GANbased methods. By simply evaluating the difference between based methods tend to highlight partially normal regions as
reconstructions and the ground-truths, the anomalous images well. This divergence in focus is reflected in the corresponding
are identified with highlighted pixels via DDPM-based meth- metrics, such as the dice coefficient and mIoU, as shown in
ods. Table II shows that our method achieves a noteworthy Table II. The visualization comparison underscores the efficacy
2.6% improvement in F1 score while maintaining comparable of ARLA in capturing dissimilarities between the input and its
WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION 12133

Fig. 9. ROC curves and p-values via DeLong’s test.

 TABLE III
 ABLATION STUDIES ON EACH COMPONENT

 Fig. 10. Data augmentation samples and their visualized detection
 results from Daug .

 that ARLA requires a sufficient number of sampling steps to
 achieve the high-fidelity reconstruction of input images. However, excessive sampling steps result in minimal improvement in
 fidelity while consuming more time and affecting mIoU during
 the inference stage. As a result, we set the sampling step value as
 T = 50 to strike a balance between speed and quality in RFOD.
 Furthermore, we validate the effectiveness of the memorysuppression strategy, as shown in Table III(b). When evaluating
 ARLA without the utilization of DDPM, normal images are
 directly fed into the contrastive dissimilarity network to learn
 the normal patterns between different images. Our findings
 indicate that the performance of ARLA significantly degrades
 in the absence of both DDPM and memory-suppression. Morereconstruction, thereby facilitating precise pixelwise localiza- over, ARLA struggles to identify anomalous images when only
tion of anomalies. DDPM is employed without the memory-suppression strategy,
 4) Statistical Significance Test: Statistical significance tests highlighting the necessity of incorporating memory-suppression
are essential for confirming the effectiveness of the model. In in ARLA for effective detection performance.
this section, we incorporate DeLong’s test [31] for comparing In addition, we investigate different distance maps in
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and the area Table III(c), including a score distance map Ms and a feature
under ROC curves (AUROC) of all benchmarking methods. As distance map Md . The experimental results demonstrate that
shown in Fig. 9, the p-values of the four comparison groups combining these two maps yields the best performance for
are all smaller than a significance level of 0.05, indicating that pixelwise RFOD.
the detection performance of benchmarking methods differs 2) Data Augmentation: We also explore the promoting effect
significantly from the proposed ARLA. When comparing ARLA of data augmentation techniques on the ARLA framework. One
with Nichol and Dhariwal, it shows a slightly higher p-value set of experiments was based on traditional data augmentation,
than the other groups. Adjusting the significance level will affect including geometric transformations (flipping, cropping, rotawhich groups are deemed significantly different. Nevertheless, tion, and stretching) and color space transformations (brightness
a significance level of 0.05 is commonly used for conservative change and saturation change), resulting in an enhanced version
significance tests. ARLA-AUG. Another set of experiments utilizes advanced data
 augmentation, Moment Exchange [32], leading to another model
 version named ARLA-ME. Additionally, we construct a larger
C. Discussions dataset Daug using traditional data augmentation techniques to
 1) Ablation Studies: We conduct comprehensive ablation examine the detection capabilities of these models when faced
studies on Dtest to thoroughly analyze the individual contribu- with more complex samples. To offer a visual representation of
tions of the components in the proposed ARLA. The results are our findings, we present Fig. 10, which showcases samples from
summarized in Table III, where the default settings of ARLA are Daug and elucidates their corresponding visualized detection
marked in gray. First, we investigate the impact of sampling steps results.
in the memory-suppress diffusion module. Table III(a) demon- The assessment based on Dtest and Daug with quantitative
strates that a sampling step value of 50 achieves a comparable insights are summarized in Table IV. We first find that even on
F1 score, outperforming other groups by up to 40%. It is evident a larger dataset Daug , the detection prowess of the ARLA series
12134 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 TABLE IV and >30%. The majority of samples exhibit anomaly sizes
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS BASED ON Dtest AND Daug
 ranging from 20-30%, indicating the prevalence of this size
 range in the dataset. Anomalies below 10% and between 10%
 and 20% occur less frequently, suggesting a lower incidence of
 smaller anomaly sizes. Anomalies exceeding 30% are relatively
 uncommon. Fig. 11(b) shows the discrimination ability of the
 ARLA across different anomaly severity levels. Impressively,
 ARLA demonstrates commendable detection performance even
 for small anomaly sizes, showcasing its versatility and robustness in detecting anomalies of varying magnitudes.
 4) Computational Efficiency Improvement: We explore the
 data-free knowledge distillation method [33], [34], which derives lightweight model versions using the knowledge acquired
 from the original ARLA, to enhance the computational efficiency. Fig. 11(c) shows the tradeoff between computational
 efficiency (represented by FLOPs and total parameters) and
 detection performance (measured by AUROC). The lightweight
 versions, Versions 1–3, demanding fewer computational resources tend to exhibit lower AUROC. However, it is noteworthy that ARLA consistently maintains superior detection
 performance across all lightweight versions, underscoring its
 efficacy in anomaly detection tasks. Meanwhile, we notice that
 Version 3 emerges as a promising solution that strikes a balance
 between accuracy and efficiency for the RFOD problem. The
 enhanced performance of Version 3 underscores the potential of
 computational efficiency optimization strategies in advancing
 anomaly detection systems.

 V. CONCLUSION
 This study presented a comprehensive investigation of imagelevel and pixelwise RFOD without requiring anomaly samples in
 the context of anomalous railway scenes. We developed a novel
 approach, the ARLA, for classical RFOD tasks, which, in reality,
Fig. 11 (a) Histogram of all anomalous images in Daug , where was challenging to collect a sufficient amount of diverse anomaly
anomaly severity is categorized into four levels: <10%, 10%–20%, samples. The ARLA included two complementary modules, a
20%–30%, and >30%. (b) ROC curves and AUROC of four anomaly memory-suppress diffusion module, and a contrastive dissimseverity levels. (c) Tradeoff between computational efficiency and detection performance based on Dtest . ilarity network. ARLA offered several advantageous features,
 such as less reliance on extensive anomalous data, ensuring
 a high-fidelity image reconstruction, and robustly performing
models remains impressively robust. Furthermore, our compara- RFOD with precise dissimilarity measurement. Through extive analysis between ARLA-AUG and ARLA-ME yields note- tensive experiments on a railway dataset, ARLA demonstrated
worthy insights. While ARLA-AUG fails to manifest substantial superior performance compared to existing GAN-based and
improvements in both image-level and pixel-level detection, DDPM-based methods, positioning it as a potential solution for
ARLA-ME emerges as a compelling alternative. Notably, in deployment in autonomous railway maintenance machines.
the context of Daug , ARLA-ME achieves a remarkable 2.1%
enhancement in both dice coefficient and mIoU. These results
discernments distinctly underscore the scalability advantages REFERENCES
inherent to the ARLA framework when faced with larger datasets [1] D. Morandi and S. Jüngling, “Anomaly detection in railway infrastrucand the intricacies of more complex railway environments. ture,” in Proc. AAAI Spring Symp., Combining Mach. Learn. Knowl. Eng.,
 3) Severity Differentiation: Extensive experiments are con- 2021.
 [2] D. Zhang, K. Song, Q. Wang, Y. He, X. Wen, and Y. Yan, “Two deep
ducted to validate the robustness of ARLA in detecting anoma- learning networks for rail surface defect inspection of limited samples with
lies in different severity levels. In these experiments, the anomaly line-level label,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 6731–6741,
severity is defined as the proportion of anomalous pixels in Oct. 2021.
 [3] X. Ni, Z. Ma, J. Liu, B. Shi, and H. Liu, “Attention network for rail
the entire image. Fig. 11(a) shows the distribution of anomaly surface defect detection via consistency of intersection-over-union (IoU)-
sizes across 3138 anomalous images. The anomaly severity guided center-point estimation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 3,
is categorized into four levels, <10%, 10%–20%, 20%–30%, pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2022.
WANG et al.: ANOMALY-FREE REPRESENTATION LEARNING APPROACH FOR EFFICIENT RAILWAY FOREIGN OBJECT DETECTION 12135

 [4] X. Wei, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, D. Wei, L. Jia, and Y. Li, “Railway track fastener [29] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent a new approach to
 defect detection based on image processing and deep learning techniques: self-supervised learning,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
 A comparative study,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 80, pp. 66–81, 2019. pp. 21271–21284, 2020.
 [5] L. Zhuang, H. Qi, T. Wang, and Z. Zhang, “A deep-learning-powered [30] J. Zbontar, L. Jing, I. Misra, Y. LeCun, and S. Deny, “Barlow twins: Selfnear-real-time detection of railway track major components: A two-stage supervised learning via redundancy reduction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 computer-vision-based method,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 19, Learn., 2021, pp. 12310–12320.
 pp. 18806–18816, Oct. 2022. [31] E. R. DeLong, D. M. DeLong, and D. L. Clarke-Pearson, “Comparing the
 [6] C. Chen, K. Li, C. Zhongyao, F. Piccialli, S. C. H. Hoi, and Z. Zeng, areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves:
 “A hybrid deep learning based framework for component defect detec- A nonparametric approach,” Biometrics, vol. 44, pp. 837–845, 1988.
 tion of moving trains,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, [32] B. Li, F. Wu, S.-N. Lim, S. Belongie, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On feature
 pp. 3268–3280, Apr. 2022. normalization and data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 [7] T. Wang, Z. Zhang, and K.-L. Tsui, “A deep generative approach for rail Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 12378–12387.
 foreign object detections via semisupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [33] G. Fang et al., “Up to 100x faster data-free knowledge distillation,” in
 Inform., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 459–468, Jan. 2023. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intel., 2022, pp. 6597–6604.
 [8] Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Li, and Z. Han, “A high-precision loose strands [34] G. Fang, J. Song, C. Shen, X. Wang, D. Chen, and M. Song, “Data-free
 diagnosis approach for isoelectric line in high-speed railway,” IEEE Trans. adversarial distillation,” 2019, arXiv:1912.11006.
 Ind. Inform., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1067–1077, Mar. 2018.
 [9] J. Zhong, Z. Liu, C. Yang, H. Wang, S. Gao, and A. Núñez, “Adversarial
 reconstruction based on tighter oriented localization for catenary insulator
 defect detection in high-speed railways,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1109–1120, Feb. 2022.
 Tiange Wang received the B.Eng. degree in
[10] Y. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Guo, and H. Zhang, “A unified light industrial engineering from Nanjing University,
 framework for real-time fault detection of freight train images,” IEEE
 Nanjing, China, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree
 Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7423–7432, Nov. 2021.
 in data science from the City University of Hong
[11] Y. Wu, Y. Qin, Y. Qian, F. Guo, Z. Wang, and L. Jia, “Hybrid deep learning
 Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China, in 2022.
 architecture for rail surface segmentation and surface defect detection,” She is currently an Assistant Professor with
 Comput.-Aided Civil Infrastruct. Eng., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 227–244, 2022.
 the Institute of Rail Transit and the National Ma-
[12] P. Bergmann, S. Löwe, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Improving
 glev Transportation Engineering Research and
 unsupervised defect segmentation by applying structural similarity to
 Development Center, Tongji University, Shangautoencoders,” in Proc. 14th Int. Joint Conf. Comput. Vis., Imag. Comput. hai, China. Her research interests include rail-
 Graph. Theory Appl., 2019, pp. 372–380.
 way/maglev health monitoring, intelligent trans-
[13] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
 portation, time-series data analytics, and image processing.
 “f-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44, 2019.
[14] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly: Semisupervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
 Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 622–637.
[15] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpaint- Zijun Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 ing for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, 2021, the B.Eng. degree in systems engineering and
 Art. no. 107706. engineering management from The Chinese
[16] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
 context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in China, in 2008, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intel., 2021, pp. 3110–3118. in industrial engineering from the University of
[17] J. Yang, R. Xu, Z. Qi, and Y. Shi, “Visual anomaly detection for images: A Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA, in 2009 and 2012,
 systematic survey,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 199, pp. 471–478, 2022. respectively.
[18] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” He is currently a Professor and an Associate
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020. Dean with the School of Data Science, City Uni-
[19] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic versity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, China.
 models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8162–8171. His research interests include machine learning and computational in-
[20] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “Anoddpm: telligence with applications in renewable energy, facility energy manage-
 Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using ment, and intelligent transportation domains.
 simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Prof. Zhang is an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 Workshops, 2022, pp. 649–655. SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, IEEE POWER ENGINEERING LETTERS, and Journal
[21] C. Lu, Y. Zhou, F. Bao, J. Chen, C. Li, and J. Zhu, “DPM-Solver++: of Intelligent Manufacturing.
 Fast solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models,” 2022,
 arXiv:2211.01095.
[22] C. Lu, Y. Zhou, F. Bao, J. Chen, C. Li, and J. Zhu, “DPM-solver: A fast
 ODE solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps,”
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, pp. 5775–5787, 2022. Min Xie (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. de-
[23] P. de Haan and S. Löwe, “Contrastive predictive coding for anomaly gree in quality technology from Linkoping Unidetection,” 2021, arXiv:2107.07820. versity, Linkoping, Sweden, in 1987.
[24] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natu- He is currently the Chair Professor with the
 ral language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, Department of Systems Engineering, City Unipp. 8748–8763. versity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
[25] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with He authored or coauthored more than 300 peercontrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748. reviewed journal articles and 8 books on quality
[26] P. Bachman, R. D. Hjelm, and W. Buchwalter, “Learning representations and reliability engineering. More than 50 Ph.D.
 by maximizing mutual information across views,” Adv. Neural Inf. Process. students have graduated under his supervision.
 Syst., vol. 32, 2019. Prof. Xie was elected as a member of the
[27] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for European Academy of Science and Arts in 2022. He is an Editor and
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. an Associate Editor and on the editorial board of many established
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. international journals. He has chaired many international conferences
[28] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learn- and given keynote speeches. He was a recipient of the Prestigious Lee
 ing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, Kuan Yew Research Fellowship in 1991.
 pp. 15745–15753.