2402 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

An Autoencoder-Based Hybrid Detection Model for
 Intrusion Detection With Small-Sample Problem
 Nan Wei, Lihua Yin , Jingyi Tan, Chuhong Ruan, Chuang Yin, Zhe Sun , and Xi Luo

 Abstract—Cyber-attacks have become more frequent, targeted,
and complex as the exponential growth in computer networks and
the development of Internet of Things (IoT). Network intrusion
detection system (NIDS) is an important and essential tool to
protect network environments. However, the low performance of
a NIDS against small malicious samples has seriously threatened
the security of networks, thus directly leading to the loss of
personal property and national interests. Given this, we propose
an auto encoder-based hybrid detection model, abbreviated as
AHDM, for the intrusion detection with small-sample problem.
AHDM has a dual classifier framework. It trains first neural Fig. 1. Complaints and Losses from 2018 to 2022.
network based on the encoding features obtained from the
autoencoder feature enhancement algorithm to detect smallsample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network using the continuous expansion of IoT devices and technology, there
the original features to detect normal traffic and large-sample is a heightened risk of compromising sensitive information
malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious traffic
is obtained by combining the detection results of the two neural due to constant connectivity and data sharing [2]. These risks
networks. In experiments, we use three classic datasets (KDD are further compounded by the development of 5G technol-
CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23) and simulate the malicious ogy, which enables faster and more efficient communication
traffic detection targeting extremely small-sample malicious between devices but also increases the potential for cyberattraffic. The results show that AHDM has a higher detection tacks and security breaches [3]. Therefore, it is crucial for
rate for small-sample malicious traffic compared to the advanced
detection models (DNN and ACID). In the IOT-23 dataset, the enterprises to prioritize cybersecurity measures and implement
AHDM model shows an absolute advantage in detecting DDoS robust strategies to safeguard their data and networks against
type of malicious traffic, with a detection rate of 0.71, which is potential threats. Fig. 1 shows the Complaints and Losses
much higher than the DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models. over last five years, statistics from the Federal Bureau of
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, autoencoder, IOT-23, Investigation’s annual Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
network intrusion detection system, small-sample dataset. report. In 2022, cybercrime costed Americans $10.3 billion, a
 significant increase from $6.9 billion in 2021, indicating a 49%
 increase [4]. This highlights the urgent need for businesses to
 I. I NTRODUCTION take strong steps to protect themselves from cyberattacks and
 HE INCREASING adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) financial losses. Given this, various studies have been actively
T technology presents businesses with new opportunities to
generate value and enhance integration in industries such as
 conducted to prevent potential netwo5rk threats.
 Network intrusion detection systems (NIDSs) provide
transportation, energy, and power systems [1]. However, with protection through real-time monitoring and analysis of
 the system communication behavior [5]. Traditional NIDSs
 Manuscript received 20 May 2023; revised 2 September 2023; accepted applied the misuse detection to identify network attacks. The
10 November 2023. Date of publication 17 November 2023; date of current
version 15 April 2024. This work was supported in part by the National misuse detection compared the signature (e.g., a sequence
Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFB3104100), the Guangdong Basic of bytes in the payload) of the network traffic with a preand Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2021A1515012454), the Project established threat dataset [6]. Such detection methods are then
of Guangzhou Association for Science and Technology (No. 202201010609),
the Young Talent Support Project of Guangzhou Association for Science proved to be ineffective in the complex environment of IoT
and Technology (No. QT20220101122), and the Major Research Plan of the system due to it is computationally inefficient to collect the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 92167203). The associate signature of the target traffic and compare it with a largeeditor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication
was M. Conti. (Corresponding author: Lihua Yin.) scale threat dataset, especially for the resource-constrained IoT
 Nan Wei, Lihua Yin, Chuhong Ruan, Chuang Yin, Zhe Sun, and Xi Luo devices [7].
are with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou An alternative strategy is malicious traffic detection, which
University, Guangzhou 510006, Guangdong, China (e-mail: joey_weinan@
126.com; yinlh@gzhu.edu.cn; RUAN1597438160@163.com; yinnchuang@ monitors and analyzes the features of network traffic to iden-
163.com; sunzhe@gzhu.edu.cn; luoxi0930@gzhu.edu.cn). tify normal or malicious traffic [8]. This strategy can dominate
 Jingyi Tan is with the Department of Information Resource Management, the misuse detection as it can detect unknown attacks that have
Guangzhou Xinhua University, Guangzhou 510520, Guangdong, China
(e-mail: jytan1204@163.com). distinct behaviors from the normal ones. Particularly, recent
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3334028 advance in machine learning (ML) facilitates the development
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION 2403

of malicious traffic detection techniques, as state-of-the-art malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious traffic
ML models can distinguish normal and abnormal network is obtained by combining the detection results of the two
activities with higher accuracy and less restriction [9]. This neural networks.
is mainly because the ML-based techniques have a strong III. A case study with three classic datasets (KDD CUP
capability of extracting insights or useful knowledge from the 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23) are designed delicately for
data in a timely and intelligent way, which allows themselves validating the performance of AHDM. Considering the effect
discover hidden patterns in large amount of network traffic of small-sample malicious traffics, we simulate the intrusion
boosting intrusion detection accuracy. However, these data detection with small-sample dataset. Moreover, the proposed
driven-based NIDSs require large samples. Constrained by the solution is compared with advanced NIDSs, such as deep
high acquisition and labeling cost of traffic data, it is difficult learning neural networks (DNN) and adaptive clustering-based
to integrate a large number of labeled traffic data from real intrusion detection (ACID), for revealing its detection accuracy
world network systems [10]. The training and updating of and generalization ability.
ML-based NIDSs can only use small-sample malicious traffic
data, e.g., the amount of malicious traffic data is less than II. R ELATED W ORK
100 or even less, which makes the ML-based NIDSs receiving
 This section briefly reviews the recent published papers
low detect rates. Thus, it is essential to design a ML-based
 relevant to the ML-based intrusion detection models for IoT
malicious traffic detection model using small-sample malicious
 networks and the malicious traffic detection methods targeting
traffic to detect the network intrusion.
 small-sample dataset, and highlights their shortcomings.
 Recent studies have proposed a range of few-shot learning
methods for detecting malicious traffics with small-sample
dataset [11]. These methods train the ML-based detection A. ML-Based Intrusion Detection Models for IoT Networks
models with sufficient dataset from source network and fine Various ML-based models have been proposed to propound
tune the models with few shots from target network. However, intrusion detection mechanisms to efficiently detect and idenit is often difficult to realize such an assumption in IoT tify intruders in IoT systems [13]. Shukla [14] presented three
networks where threat type always varies with the nonstation- intrusion detection methods based on K-means clustering,
ary environment. In the situation, NIDS with small-sample decision tree, and an ensemble of these two classical ML
data can be described as a ML-based model which is treated algorithms. The proposed approach is lightweight and is
with the sensors network data and may be not applicable to capable of accurately detecting wormhole attacks targeting
the network of actuators or appliances [12]. Furthermore, the IoT. Anthi et al. [15] focused on the intrusion detection of
attack distribution usually varies with network scale, protocol, smart home IoT devices and proposed a three layers intrusion
and attack vector. The low performance of a NIDS against detection system (IDS) that uses a supervised approach to
small-sample data has seriously threatened the security of IoT detect a range of popular network based cyber-attacks on IoT
systems, thus directly leading to the loss of personal property networks. In their work, several popular classifiers, such as
and national interests. Therefore, the NIDS needs to be trained naive Bayes, support vector machines, etc., were evaluated to
with the small-sample malicious traffic data of single network detect seven network attack categories on a realistic testbed.
and ensure high precision. Since DDoS attacks targeting IoT devices can cause severe
 To address the above-mentioned problem, we propose an corruption to the IoT metasystems, Jia et al. [16] proposed an
autoencoder-based hybrid detection model for the intrusion LSTM-based IoT defense scheme termed FlowGuard for the
detection. Additionally, to validate the detection performance detection of IoT DDoS attacks. The results indicated that the
of the proposed model, we design a craft case study with three identification accuracy of the FlowGuard is as high as 98.9%.
classic datasets (KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23), Similarly, Injadat et al. [17] and Moubayed et al. [18] proposed
and compare the proposed system with advanced NIDSs in a decision tree (DT) based classification model and a genetic
detection accuracy and generalization ability. In a nutshell, the algorithm optimized random forest model to detect Botnet for
contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: protecting IoT networks against DDoS attacks.
 I. We develop an autoencoder-based feature enhancement Deep learning (DL) is considered an evolution of machine
(AFE) algorithm that use autoencoders to enhance the feature learning consisting of deeper neural networks. Ge et al. [19]
description of small-sample malicious traffic, thereby improv- and McDermott et al. [20] successively developed DL-based
ing the detection accuracy of malicious traffic. This method intrusion detection models, e.g., a feedforward neural network
groups normal and malicious traffic features based on Gaussian and a bidirectional long short term memory (LSTM) based
features, and uses autoencoders to encode the features in each recurrent neural network, for IoT networks. Meidan et al. [21]
group, and the obtained encoding features are used as input proposed a novel network-based anomaly detection method for
data for the model to detect small-sample malicious traffic. the IoT called N-BaIoT that extracts behavior snapshots of the
 II. We propose an autoencoder-based hybrid detection network and uses deep autoencoders (AE) to detect anomalous
model, abbreviated as AHDM, for network intrusion detection. network traffic from compromised IoT devices.
This model trains first neural network based on the encoding It is clear that intrusion detection models based on machine
features obtained from the AFE algorithm to detect small- learning techniques such as Bayesian networks and AE have
sample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network using become effective means of detecting IoT network attacks.
the original features to detect normal traffic and large-sample However, these data-driven models require a large amount of
2404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

data to train the model. For IoT networks, it is difficult to
obtain a large amount of training data. At the same time, the
number of malicious traffic samples in IoT networks is much
less than that of normal traffic, often leading to insufficient
training of machine learning models and low detection rates.

B. Malicious Traffic Detection Targeting Small-Sample
Dataset
 Many NIDSs have been designed by cybersecurity
researchers to protect networks from attacks based on smallsample datasets. However, these existing NIDSs have failed
to provide a high detection rate for small-sample datasets. To
address this issue, Xiao and Xiao [22] proposed a simplified
residual network consisting of several cascaded simplified Fig. 2. The framework of AHDM.
residual blocks. This method has shown higher accuracy,
recall, and F-score, especially for R2L and U2R attacks, extremely small-sample cyber-attacks, e.g., the extremely
compared to conventional residual networks. Zhang et al. [23] small-sample cyber-attacks (e.g., the amount of attack samples
encoded network traffic data using P-Zigzag encoding scheme is less than 10), which always making intrusion detection more
and detected cyber-attacks with a hybrid model based on challenge.
convolutional neural network (CNN) and random forest to
reduce the false alarm rate of malicious traffic detection with III. M ETHODOLOGY
small-sample datasets. Maglaras et al. [24] built an intrusion
 We propose an autoencoder-based hybrid detection model,
detection system using data from a small-sample SCADA
 abbreviated as AHDM to detect the malicious traffic of
testbed, while Gao et al. [25] constructed an ensemble model
 network. This work aims at applying AHDM to detect the
that combined decision tree, random forest, and deep learnmalicious traffic, particularly facing the situation of extremely
ing neural network for intrusion detection. Their experiment
 small-sample cyber-attacks; and developing a lightweight
showed that optimizing the feature selection and preprocessing
 detection model for quickly adapting to the resource conof intrusion detection data can greatly improve the detection
 strained IoT devices. These aims are achieved by combining
rate.
 three key parts, including data preprocessing, AFE algorithm,
 Transfer learning technique can improve the accuracy of
 and malicious traffic hybrid detection. AHDM’s framework is
intrusion detection for the target domain that has fewer data
 shown in Fig. 2.
by transferring the learned knowledge from a related source
 I. Data preprocessing: this step involves converting raw
domain, which is also called few-shot network intrusion detecnetwork packets into vectors of header and statistical features,
tion [26]. Chen et al. [27] trained a cross-domain DL-based
 and removing any invalid network features that could interfere
model with imbalanced data and achieved high detection
 with anomaly detection. Additionally, we will convert discrete
accuracy. Considering that malicious traffic data for IoT is
 variables into numeric values and normalize the continuous
expensive to collect and seldom available, several domain
 variables of raw features.
adaptation (DA) approaches were proposed to transfer the rich
 II. AFE algorithm: in this step, we analyze the statistical
knowledge from the network intrusion domain to facilitate the
 attributes of various traffic classes to identify subtle differences
intrusion detection for data-scarce IoT domains [28]. Since
 between normal and malicious traffic. We then encode features
the network and IoT share several common attack types, by
 using autoencoder for detecting small-sample malicious traffic.
mapping both domains into a common feature subspace, these
 III. Hybrid detection: to improve detection accuracy and
DA approaches can transfer the enriched network intrusion
 reduce false alarms, we construct a dual classifier that uses
knowledge to assist intrusion detection in the target IoT
 deep neural network (DNN).
domain [29]. Wu et al. [30] proposed a joint semantic transfer
 The following sections will provide more details on each
network toward effective intrusion detection for IoT network.
 of these methods and show how their synergies lead to
By using a multisource heterogeneous DA algorithm, the
 remarkable detection performance for malicious traffic.
proposed method obtained average a 10.3% of accuracy boost
in their experiments.
 However, the DA-based approaches rely heavily on the A. Data Preprocessing
common attack types between source and target domains. AHDM processes large amounts of traffic by converting
For the IoT network, due to the many types of sensors and raw network packets into statistical features, which are then
actuators, and the big differences in network traffic charac- used for enhancing features and detecting malicious traffic.
teristics, these transfer models based on the DA algorithm The data preprocessing involves two main steps. Firstly,
are difficult to apply to the intrusion detection of the IoT statistical processing is done to remove duplicate streams
network. Additionally, these published papers fail to validate from raw network packets and normalize continuous variables.
the detecting performance of their proposed models targeting Secondly, raw stream encoding is done to encode discrete
WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION 2405

Fig. 3. Architecture of the AFE algorithm.

variables using one-hot encoding and convert labels to numeric where t = {1, 2, 3} represents the coefficient of mean x l·,j ,
values using the word2vec method [31]. These steps are the standard deviation σjl , and skewness Sjl , respectively. The
basic operations of the data preprocessing method, which may upper quartile qj ,t = [qj ,1 , qj ,2 , qj ,3 ] is used as a threshold of
cause some latency depending on the capabilities of the device contribution index gj .
where AHDM is deployed.
 1, where stdj ,t > qj ,t
 gj ,t = (5)
 0, else
B. AFE Algorithm
 We creatively propose an autoencoder-based feature where gj ,t is the contribution index of j-th feature and t-th
enhancement method to describe the subtle difference between tuple. The final contribution index of j-th feature can be
normal traffic and abnormal traffic. Compared with traditional obtained by gj = 1 + T t=1 gj ,t , where the value of gj
clustering methods, this novel can screen out the clustering ranges from 0 to 3. Consequently, the four subgroups of raw
information from the features of traffic types, and describe the features (x = [x 0 , x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ]) can be obtained according
subtle difference between normal traffic and malicious traffic to the contribution index of raw features. For instance, x 1
with low-dimensional embedded features. As shown in Fig. 3, involves the features that has a contribution index gj = 1.
this novel method implemented with two major steps: feature Step II: feature encoding is implemented by auto-encoder
grouping and feature encoding. (AE). Suppose the input network features x g belongs to ng
 Step I: the feature grouping is first proposed in our previous dimensional space and the encoding features z g belongs to kg
work [32], and here is applied to separate the raw features into dimensional space. Considering the contribution index of the
four subgroups according to their statistical characteristics, features, we use four auto-encoders for each encoded feature
providing grouped features for generating clustering features. group. The encoding dimensional kg can be defined as:
Let xi,j l be value of i-th traffic sample and j-th feature. kg = 4 − g, g = 0, 1, 2, 3 (6)
l = 1, 2, . . . , L denotes the traffic type, for instance, l = 1
represents normal traffic, l = 2 represents DOS traffic. i = An auto-encoder is a special and tricky three-
1, 2, . . . , M is the number of traffic samples, j = 1, 2, . . . , N layered neural network in which we set the output
is the number of traffic features. Let F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , fN }
 g T
 hW ,b (x g ) = (x1g , x2g , . . . , xm ) equal to the input x g =
 g g g T
be the features of traffic and fjl is the j-th feature of l-th (x1 , x2 , . . . , xm ) . J is the reconstruction error. AE is an
type traffic. Then, we can calculate the three tuples of the unsupervised learning algorithm and uses back propagation
features of each traffic type, including the coefficient of mean algorithm for training. The description of AE are as follows:
x l·,j , standard deviation σjl , and skewness Sjl , using the follow
 hW ,b (x g ) = g(f (x g )) ≈ x g (7)
equations:
 1   2
 m J (W , b; x g , z g ) = hW ,b (x g ) − z g  (8)
 1  l 2
 x l·,j = xi,j (1)
 m where W and b are the weight and bias of the auto-encoder
 i
  network. The final encoded features are combined as z g =
  m  2
  1  [z 0 , z 1 , z 2 , z 3 ].
 σjl =  l − xl
 xi,j ·,j (2)
 m −1
 i=1
  3 C. Malicious Traffic Hybrid Detection
 m l − xl
 1  xi,j ·,j The malicious traffic detection system utilizes a dual classjl =  3 (3)
 m sifier that uses deep neural networks to process both raw and
 i=1 σjl generated features. The output of the model determines the
 After that, we use the standard deviation of the traffic type to class to which the traffic belongs. The architecture of the
illustrate the difference of j-th feature for traffic types, which malicious traffic detection model is illustrated in Fig. 4.
can be describes as follows: The raw features are inputted into classifier I of the malicious
  traffic detection model to identify large-sample network traffic.
 stdj ,t = stdj ,1 , stdj ,2 , stdj ,3 (4) The encoding features are inputted into classifier II of the
2406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 B. Datasets
 Three well-known intrusion detection datasets, including
 KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23, are applied to
 build network intrusion detectors [33], [34]. As the same as
 [31], the preprocessed dataset is then divided into a training
 and a testing set using a 7:3 split ratio. For validating the
 performance of proposed detection model targeting smallsample dataset, we synthesized seven training datasets with
 different percentage between normal and abnormal traffic
 samples for each dataset. The numbers of the dataset used in
Fig. 4. Architecture of the hybrid detection model. our experiment are shown in Table I.

malicious traffic detection model to identify small-sample
malicious traffic. Furthermore, the final detection results are C. Feature Enhancement
obtained by combining the outputs of both detection models. For visualizing the performance of feature enhancement
 method, we apply principal component analysis to extract the
 IV. I MPLEMENTATION three principal components and plot the 3D scatter of the
 We ran AHDM on a 64-bit Windows 11 system with features (see Fig. 5).
32GB of RAM, 1TB of storage space, an 11th Gen Intel The RF represents the raw features of network traffic
Core i7-11800H CPU running at 2.30GHz, and an NVIDIA instances. The CC means the clustering center of the feature
GeForce RTX 3050Ti Laptop GPU with 16GB of memory. clusters obtained by k-means algorithm, which is the same to
The detection model we used was implemented in Python the feature enhancement methods used in [31]. The CD applies
3.9 and relied on the numpy, pandas, sklearn, and PyTorch the clustering distance between traffic sample and clusters,
libraries. For the malicious traffic detection model, we used which is used in [35]. The AE represents the features obtained
fully-connected neural networks with 3 hidden layers, each by auto-encoders. The AFE is the features refined by the AFE
comprising 50, 30, and 10 neurons, respectively, for each algorithm proposed in this work.
classifier. The number of neurons in the input and output layers The visualized results reveal some interesting observations.
was equal to the number of features and the number of traffic For the dataset of KDD CUP 99, the differences between
types, respectively. We trained the neural networks using the Normal and PROBE in RF are more obvious, but it is difficult
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. to distinguish them from the space concentrated at (0,0,0) in
 DOS. The similarity between R2L and Probe sample spaces
 is high, making it difficult to distinguish them. After using
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 AE, the distribution of network traffic features is similar to
 In this section, we first describe the datasets and evaluation the original features, and there is no significant change in
metrics used in our performance evaluation. Then, we discuss the differences between features. After using CC and CD
how the feature enhancement method can magnify the subtle features, the resolution of R2L samples with other network
differences between normal and abnormal traffic, highlighting traffic features has been improved, but the overlap between
its superiority. Finally, we validate the performance of AHDM other malicious traffic features and Normal features is high.
by comparing it with advanced NIDSs in the KDD CUP 99, The enhanced features obtained by using the AFE algorithm
CIC-IDS-2017, and IOT-23 datasets. have significantly enhanced the differences between DOS and
 PROBE, and can clearly distinguish the spatial distribution
A. Evaluation Metrics of the two. R2L samples are distributed on the periphery of
 We utilize the testing data to calculate confusion matrices, Normal samples, and R2L malicious traffic features can be
which are then used to determine the values of True Positive easily identified by visualization.
(TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP), and False The CIC-IDS-2017 dataset contains 10 types of malicious
Negative (FN) inferences. In addition, we employ five classic traffic features and Benign traffic features, totaling 11 catmetrics to assess the quality of the classification results, egories. The Heartbleed sample features in the RF and AE
including Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F-score (F1), and false features show a significant difference in distribution compared
alarm rate (FAR). As the number of traffic classes exceeds to other traffic features, making them easy to distinguish.
two and the distribution of raw traffic is imbalanced, we use The remaining traffic, including the Benign feature, has a
weighted averaging for each metric. more concentrated spatial distribution, making it difficult to
 distinguish between malicious and normal traffic. The use of
 Accuracy = (TP + FN )/(TP + FP + FN + TN ) (9)
 CC and CD features has increased the spatial distribution
 Precision = TP /(TP + FP ) (10) difference between Benign and DOS samples, but the overall
 Recall = TP /(TP + FN ) (11) recognizability of the samples has not significantly improved.
 F 1 = 2 ∗ Precision ∗ Recall /(Precision + Recall ) The use of AFE features has made the spatial distribution of
 network traffic samples more dispersed, with high recognition
 (12)
 rates for DOS, BOT, DDoS, PortScan, Xss, and Benign
 FAR = FP /(FP + TN ) (13) samples, which is beneficial for improving the detection rate
WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION 2407

 TABLE I
 T HE N UMBERS OF T RAFFIC C LASSES

of malicious traffic detection models. However, in the 3D helps improve the detection of malicious traffic by increasing
distribution map, the Infiltration and Sql_Injection types of feature distinctiveness, it also leads to an increase in false
malicious traffic samples have a small number, making it alarms. The AHDM model achieves a prediction accuracy,
difficult to distinguish them visually. precision, recall, and F-score of 99.76%, 99.75%, 99.76%,
 Regarding to the dataset of IOT-23,IOT-23 dataset has a and 99.74%, respectively, all of which are higher than those
small sample size and an imbalance in the number of malicious of the DNN, AFE+DNN, and ACID models. Additionally,
traffic samples. The article mentions that the Benign, C&C, the AHDM model has a false alarm rate of only 0.06%,
and PortScan malicious traffic samples are easier to distinguish which is lower than that of the other three models. Therefore,
using the RF, CC, CD, and AE features, but it is difficult to by adopting a dual detection framework, it is possible to
visually distinguish the small sample size of DDoS samples. effectively combine the advantages of DNN and AFE+DNN,
However, in the AFE feature, DDoS is more recognizable. enhancing detection accuracy while reducing the model’s FAR.
 Overall, using the AFE algorithm to obtain enhanced fea- The same situation also occurred in the CIC-IDS-2017
tures compared to the original features, the spatial distribution dataset (Fig. 6 (b)). In this case, the AHDM model improved
recognizability of network traffic samples is more obvious, by 0.05%, 0.10%, 0.05%, and 0.07% respectively in terms
which is beneficial for enhancing the detection rate of mali- of accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score compared to the
cious traffic detection models. DNN model; again, the false positive rate decreased by 0.01%.
 On the other hand, the ACID model decreased by 0.06%,
 0.07%, 0.06%, and 0.07% respectively in terms of accuracy,
D. Network Intrusion Detection Results precision, recall, and F-score compared to the DNN model;
 According to Fig. 6, there are four models shown in the false positive rate increased by 0.01%. Compared to the
three classic datasets, and their accuracy, precision, recall, DNN model, the AFE+DNN model exhibits a slight increase
F-score, and FAR are displayed in a radar chart. The models in FAR, while precision has improved by 0.01%.
are deep learning neural networks (DNN), AFE algorithm In the IoT-23 dataset, AHDM model shows significant
combined with DNN (AFE+DNN), and adaptive clustering- improvements in accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score combased intrusion detection (ACID). In Fig. 6(a), for the KDD pared to the DNN model, with increases of 0.12%, 0.09%,
CUP 99 dataset, the ACID model performs poorly with 0.12%, and 0.17%, respectively; and the FAR has decreased by
an F-score of only 99.69% and a FAR of 0.07%. This 0.04%. Although the overall performance of the ACID model
indicates that using CC features for enhancement does not is not as good as the AHDM model, it still shows a slight
effectively improve the detection of malicious traffic. The improvement compared to the DNN model, especially in terms
DNN model, compared to ACID, shows an improvement of of detection precision, with an increase of 0.09%.Overall, the
0.02% to 0.03% in accuracy, precision, recall, and F-score detection performance of the AHDM model is better than that
while reducing the false alarm rate by 0.01%. Building upon of the DNN, AFE+DNN, and ACID models, especially in the
this, incorporating the AFE algorithm into the DNN model detection of malicious traffic in small-sample of IOT networks,
results in a further 0.01% improvement in accuracy, precision, with significant improvements in detection accuracy and false
recall, and F-score but also increases the FAR by 0.01%. It is positive rates compared to traditional models. Although AFE
evident that while the AFE algorithm enhances features and algorithm can improve the accuracy, precision, recall, and
2408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Fig. 6. Detecting performance of the models. (The datasets include: (a) KDD
Fig. 5. Visualization of feature enhancement methods. (The datasets include: CUP 99, (b) CIC-IDS-2017, and (c) IOT-23).
(a) KDD CUP 99, (b) CIC-IDS-2017, and (c) IOT-23).

 ACID, and AHDM all reached 0.77. When malicious traffic
F-score of DNN, but it may increase the FAR as well. accounts for 5%, the number of Probe, R2L, and U2R samples
Additionally, the ACID model is not as effective as the DNN is 122, 58, and 4 respectively. The detection rates of AHDM
model in KDD CUP 99 and CIC-IDS-2017, it performs better for Probe, R2L, and U2R are 0.920, 0.840, and 0, respectively.
than the DNN model in detecting malicious traffic in small- In this case, when the number of malicious traffic samples is
sample of IOT networks. less than 5, the malicious traffic detection models are unable
 Based on the sample ratio shown in Table I of the KDD to successfully detect the malicious traffic. Additionally, by
CUP 99 dataset, it can be seen that the number of Normal using AFE algorithm, 0.005 of the Probe type traffic are
and DOS samples is greater than 500, and the ACID, DNN, detected as DOS, which may increase the FAR of AFE+DNN
AFE+DNN, and AHDM models all have a detection rate over model.
99% for these two types of traffic. In Fig. 7, when malicious When malicious traffic accounts for 10%, the detection rates
traffic accounts for 1%, the number of Probe, R2L, and U2R of ACID, DNN, AFE+DNN, and AHDM for U2R are 0.420.
samples is less than 50, with 24, 12, and 2 respectively. For It proves that when the number of malicious traffic samples
the U2R with the least number of samples, all four models is greater than 5, the detection rate of the detection model
used in this study were unable to successfully detect it. For can reach 0.420. When malicious traffic accounts for 15%, the
R2L type of malicious traffic, the detection rate of the AHDM number of U2R traffic samples is 13, and the detection rate of
model was improved by 0.02 compared to DNN due to the use AFE+DNN and AHDM are 0.58, which are higher than that
of the AFE algorithm. For PROBE, the detection rate of DNN, of DNN and ACID at 0.5. When malicious traffic accounts for
WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION 2409

Fig. 7. Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in KDD CUP 99.

20%, AHDM’s detection rate for R2L is 0.98, which is better
than other three models. When malicious traffic accounts for
30%, the number of malicious traffic samples exceeds 25, and
the detection effects of the three models are equivalent. The
detection rates for malicious traffic are all higher than 0.9.
Overall, although the AHDM model cannot detect malicious
traffic when the number of malicious traffic samples is less
than 5 in this dataset, its detection rate is higher than DNN and
ACID when the number of malicious traffic samples is greater
than 5. Again, by introducing dual classifier framework, the
FAR of AHDM is lower than that of AFE+DNN model.
 According to the flow sample ratio in Table I of the CIC-
IDS-2017 dataset, there are 10 types of malicious traffic, which
is more than the KDD CUP 99 dataset. In Fig. 8, when the
malicious traffic accounts for 1%, the sample sizes of Bot,
Brute_Force, Heartbleed, Infiltration, PortScan, Sql Injection,
and Xss are all less than 5. DNN, ACID, and AHDM can
only detect Heartbleed attacks that have significant differences
from other traffic features, but they are powerless against Bot,
Infiltration, Sql Injection, and Xss malicious traffic. As for the
Bot malicious traffic that DNN and ACID cannot recognize,
the detection rate of AFE+DNN and AHDM model reach
0.1 and 0.3, respectively. At the same time, in terms of the
detection rate of PortScan malicious traffic, AFE+DNN and Fig. 8. Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in CIC-IDS-2017.
AHDM are 0.07 higher than ACID. However, in this case,
the false alarms caused by the adoption of the AFE algorithm
are also quite evident. For instance, in the case of a larger AFE+DNN and ACID in detecting small-sample malicious
sample size for DOS attacks, AFE+DNN exhibits a 0.02 traffic.
decrease in detection rate compared to DNN, with 0.4% of The IOT-23 dataset collects much less data than KDD
them being incorrectly identified as DDoS attacks. Therefore, CUP 99 and CIC-IDS-2017. In Fig. 9, the Benign has only
in this dataset, the AHDM model has an advantage over DNN, 1500 samples, with C&C, PortScan, and DDoS having 15, 1,
2410 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 9. Normalized confusion matrixes of detection results in IOT-23.

and 1 sample respectively when malicious traffic accounts for VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
1%. DNN, AFE+DNN, ACID, and AHDM can all achieve This paper focus on the malicious traffics detecting with
100% detection rate for C&C type detection. This is because, small-sample dataset. Given this, we propose an auto encoderas shown in Fig. 5(c), the distinguishability of C&C is high, based hybrid detection model, namely AHDM, for the
even with a small number of samples, accurate detection can malicious traffics detection in IoT systems. This model trains
still be achieved. In terms of detecting DDoS type malicious first neural network based on the encoding features obtained
traffic, AFE+DNN and AHDM model show absolute advan- from the autoencoder feature enhancement algorithm to detect
tages, with the detection rate of 0.71, much higher than the small-sample malicious traffic. It trains second neural network
DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models.
 using the original features to detect normal traffic and large-
 When the malicious traffic accounts for 5%, the detection
 sample malicious traffic. The final detection result of malicious
rate of ACID model for DDoS is 0.29, which is better than
 traffic is obtained by combining the detection results of the two
DNN and AHDM. When the malicious traffic accounts for
 neural networks. Additionally, for validating the performance
20% and 30%, the number of PortScan and DDoS samples
 of AHDM, we design three delicate case study with the classic
are less than 5. The detection rate of DNN and ACID
 datasets, including KDD CUP 99, CIC-IDS-2017, and IOTmodels for PortScan reaches 0.29, but is still lower than
 23, and compare it with advanced network intrusion detection
that of AFE+DNN and AHDM model (0.71). When the
malicious traffic accounts for 25%, the detection rates of the systems (NIDSs). The experimental results show that:
four models for PortScan and DDoS are consistent, which I. The detection performance of the AHDM model is
are 0.14 and 0.67 respectively. However, at this time, the superior to that of the DNN and ACID models, with significant
AHDM model will classify the remaining PortScan as DDoS improvements in detection accuracy, recall rate, and false
in the detection results. Although the model cannot accurately alarm rate (FAR) compared to advanced models. In the IoTidentify the PortScan type, it can distinguish it from the Benign 23 dataset, the AHDM model shows significant improvements
and determine it as malicious traffic. Furthermore, in the in accuracy, precision, recall rate, and F-score compared to
predictions produced by the AFE+DNN model, due to the the DNN model, with increases of 0.12%, 0.09%, 0.12%, and
influence of the AFE algorithm’s enhanced features, when 0.17%, respectively. At the same time, the false alarm rate has
the proportion of malicious traffic is at 15%, 20%, and 30%, decreased by 0.04%.
the detection rate for the C&C-type malicious traffic decreases II. The AHDM model has a higher detection rate for
by 0.4%. Building upon this, the dual-structured AHDM model small-sample malicious traffic compared to the DNN and
effectively mitigates this risk. ACID models. Based on the KDD CUP 99 dataset, when
 Therefore, AHDM has a significant advantage over DNN, the malicious traffic accounts for 1% of the dataset, the R2L
AFE+DNN, and ACID models in terms of detection rate for sample size is 12. For this type of malicious traffic, the
small-sample IoT network malicious traffic detection. Even AHDM model has detection rate improvements of 0.01 and
when the number of malicious traffic samples is less than 5, 0.13 compared to the DNN and ACID models, respectively. In
it can achieve a high detection rate and effectively detect IoT the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset, the AHDM model has a detection
network attack behaviors. rate of 0.3 for the Bot that the DNN and ACID models
WEI et al.: AUTOENCODER-BASED HYBRID DETECTION MODEL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION 2411

cannot detect. In the IOT-23 dataset, the AHDM model shows [18] A. Moubayed, M. Injadat, and A. Shami, “Optimized random forest
an absolute advantage in detecting DDoS type of malicious model for botnet detection based on DNS queries,” in Proc. 32nd Int.
 Conf. Microelectron. (ICM), 2020, pp. 1–4.
traffic, with a detection rate of 0.71, which is much higher [19] M. Ge, X. Fu, N. Syed, Z. Baig, G. Teo, and A. Robles-Kelly, “Deep
than the DNN (0.14) and ACID (0.14) models. learning-based intrusion detection for IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE 24th
 However, we also found that in our case studies, when the Pac. Rim Int. Symp. Depend. Comput. (PRDC), 2019, pp. 1–9.
 [20] C. D. McDermott, F. Majdani, and A. V. Petrovski, “Botnet detection
number of malicious traffic sample is less than 5, the NIDSs in the Internet of Things using deep learning approaches,” in Proc. Int.
we used are difficult to detect these small-sample malicious Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2018, pp. 1–8.
traffics. Thus, how to improve the detection rate of the NIDSs [21] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 17,
with such extremely small-sample malicious traffic is still an no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
important issue for our future research. [22] Y. Xiao and X. Xiao, “An intrusion detection system based on a
 simplified residual network,” Information, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 356, 2019.
 [23] X. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, L. Han, and J. Lin, “A multiple-layer
 representation learning model for network-based attack detection,” IEEE
 R EFERENCES Access, vol. 7, pp. 91992–92008, 2019.
 [24] L. Maglaras, T. Cruz, M. A. Ferrag, and H. Janicke, “Teaching the
 [1] S. Smys, A. Basar, and H. Wang, “Hybrid intrusion detection system for process of building an intrusion detection system using data from a
 Internet of Things (IoT),” J. ISMAC, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 190–199, 2020. small-scale SCADA testbed,” Inf. Sci., vol. 3, no. 1, p. e132, 2020.
 [2] S. Hameed, F. I. Khan, and B. Hameed, “Understanding security [25] X. Gao, C. Shan, C. Hu, Z. Niu, and Z. Liu, “An adaptive ensemble
 requirements and challenges in Internet of Things (IoT): A review,” J. machine learning model for intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
 Comput. Netw. Commun., vol. 2019, Jan. 2019, Art. no. 9629381. pp. 82512–82521, 2019.
 [3] A. Qureshi, H. Larijani, J. Ahmad, and N. Mtetwa, “A heuristic intrusion [26] R. Duan, D. Li, Q. Tong, T. Yang, X. Liu, and X. Liu, “A survey of
 detection system for Internet-of-Things (IoT),” in Proc. Intell. Comput. few-shot learning: An effective method for intrusion detection,” Security
 Conf., 2019, pp. 86–98. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–10, 2021, Art. no. 4259629.
 [4] Z. Yang et al., “A systematic literature review of methods and datasets [27] Y. Chen et al., “Cross-domain industrial intrusion detection deep model
 for anomaly-based network intrusion detection,” Comput. Security, trained with imbalanced data,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 1,
 vol. 116, May 2022, Art. no. 102675. pp. 584–596, Jan. 2023.
 [5] M. Chalé and N. D. Bastian, “Generating realistic cyber data for training [28] J. Wu, H. Dai, Y. Wang, K. Ye, and C. Xu, “Heterogeneous domain
 and evaluating machine learning classifiers for network intrusion detec- adaptation for IoT intrusion detection: A geometric graph alignment
 tion systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 207, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 117936. approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 10764–10777,
 [6] G. Apruzzese, L. Pajola, and M. Conti, “The cross-evaluation of machine Jun. 2023.
 learning-based network intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. [29] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, and J. Zhao, “A novel hierarchical attention-
 Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5152–5169, Dec. 2022. based triplet network with unsupervised domain adaptation for network
 [7] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “Manda: On intrusion detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, pp. 11705–11726, May 2023.
 adversarial example detection for network intrusion detection system,” [30] J. Wu et al., “Joint semantic transfer network for IoT intrusion detec-
 IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, tion,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3368–3383, Feb. 2023.
 Mar./Apr. 2023. [31] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
 [8] A. Basati and M. M. Faghih, “PDAE: Efficient network intrusion classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 detection in IoT using parallel deep auto-encoders,” Inf. Sci., vol. 598, Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
 pp. 57–74, Jun. 2022. [32] N. Wei et al., “A feature enhancement-based model for the malicious
 [9] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Adversarial attacks against traffic detection with small-scale imbalanced dataset,” Inf. Sci., vol. 647,
 deep learning-based network intrusion detection systems and defense p. 119512, 2023.
 mechanisms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1294–1311, [33] A. S. Shekhawat, F. Di Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of
 Jun. 2022. encrypted malicious traffic,” Exp. Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141,
[10] S. Shitharth, P. R. Kshirsagar, P. K. Balachandran, K. H. Alyoubi, Jul. 2019.
 and A. O. Khadidos, “An innovative perceptual pigeon galvanized [34] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “BotMark: Automated
 optimization (PPGO) based likelihood Naïve Bayes (LNB) classification botnet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based and graph-based
 approach for network intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, traffic behaviors,” Inf. Sci., vol. 511, pp. 284–296, Feb. 2020.
 pp. 46424–46441, 2022. [35] L. Duan and Y. Xiao, “An intrusion detection model based on fuzzy Cmeans algorithm,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Emerg. Commun.
[11] W. Ma, R. Liu, K. Li, S. Yan, and J. Guo, “An adversarial domain adapta-
 (ICEIEC), 2018, pp. 120–123.
 tion approach combining dual domain pairing strategy for IoT intrusion
 detection under few-shot samples,” Inf. Sci., vol. 629, pp. 719–745,
 Jun. 2023.
[12] D. Wang, J. Yang, W. Cui, L. Xie, and S. Sun, “CAUTION: A
 robust WiFi-based human authentication system via few-shot open-set
 recognition,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 18, pp. 17323–17333,
 Sep. 2022.
[13] S. Arisdakessian, O. A. Wahab, A. Mourad, H. Otrok, and M. Guizani,
 “A survey on IoT intrusion detection: Federated learning, game theory,
 social psychology and explainable AI as future directions,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4059–4092, Mar. 2023.
[14] P. Shukla, “ML-IDS: A machine learning approach to detect wormhole
 attacks in Internet of Things,” in Proc. Intell. Syst. Conf. (IntelliSys), Nan Wei received the Ph.D. degree from Southwest
 2017, pp. 234–240. Petroleum University in 2020. He is currently a
[15] E. Anthi, L. Williams, M. Słowińska, G. Theodorakopoulos, and Lecturer of Network Security with the Cyberspace
 P. Burnap, “A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou
 IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 9042–9053, University, Guangzhou, China. He has authored
 Oct. 2019. more than 20 publications published by refer-
[16] Y. Jia, F. Zhong, A. Alrawais, B. Gong, and X. Cheng, “Flowguard: An eed international journals and conferences, e.g.,
 intelligent edge defense mechanism against IoT DDoS attacks,” IEEE Information Sciences, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 9552–9562, 2020. N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, Applied
[17] M. Injadat, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “Detecting botnet attacks in Energy, and Energy. His research interests include
 IoT environments: An optimized machine learning approach,” in Proc. network traffic analysis, anomaly detection, and load
 32nd Int. Conf. Microelectron. (ICM), 2020, pp. 1–4. forecasting.
2412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Lihua Yin received the Ph.D. degree from the Chuang Yin is currently pursuing the B.Eng. degree
 Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China. She in cyberspace security with Guangzhou University,
 is currently a Professor and an Associate Dean with Guangzhou, China. His research focuses on network
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology, anomaly detection.
 Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. She has
 been a Project Leader of the National Natural
 Science Foundation of China, the National Key
 research and Development Plan of China, the Major
 State Basic Research Development Program of
 China, and the National High-Tech Research and
 Development Program of China. She has authored
more than 120 papers published by refereed international conferences and
journals, e.g., IEEE T RANSACTION ON K NOWLEDGE DATA E NGINEERING,
IEEE T RANSACTION ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS, IEEE T RANSACTION
ON S OFTWARE E NGINEERING , Computer Security, and Infocom. Her Zhe Sun received the B.S. degree from the
research interests include network security, Internet of Things, secure threat Dalian University of Technology in 2010, the
intelligence sharing, and big data. She is an Editorial Board Member of the M.S. degree from the University of Science and
Journal of Network and Information Security. Technology of China in 2012, and the Ph.D.
 degree from the University of Chinese Academy of
 Sciences in 2019. He is an Associate Professor with
 the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technology,
 Guangzhou University, China. He has authored
 over 30 publications in international conferences
 Jingyi Tan received the master’s degree in com- and journals, focusing on privacy-preserving mechaputer science from the University of Birmingham, nisms for multiparty data sharing and deep learning.
 U.K. She is currently an Associate Professor with In recognition of his exceptional achievements, he was awarded the pres-
 Guangzhou Xinhua College and serves as the tigious President’s Award by the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019.
 Director of the Information Resource Management Moreover, he serves as a Committee Member of the Big Data Security and
 Program. Her research focuses on data mining and Privacy Computing Committee within the Chinese Association for Chinese
 big data analytics. Information Society.

 Xi Luo received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the Institute
 of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 Sciences in 2019. He is currently an Associate
 Chuhong Ruan is currently pursuing the B.Eng. Professor of Network Security with the Cyberspace
 degree in cyberspace security with Guangzhou
 Institute of Advanced Technology, Guangzhou
 University, Guangzhou, China. His research focuses
 University, Guangzhou, China. He has authored
 on malicious traffic detection.
 more than 30 publications published by refereed
 international journals and conferences, e.g., IEEE
 T RANSACTION ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS,
 Computer Communications, Neural Computing and
 Applications, High Performance Computing and Communications. His
 research interests include AI-enabled threat analysis, Internet of Things
 security, and network anomaly detection.