18172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 ARISE: Graph Anomaly Detection on Attributed
 Networks via Substructure Awareness
 Jingcan Duan , Bin Xiao , Siwei Wang , Haifang Zhou, and Xinwang Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Recently, graph anomaly detection on attributed X ∈ Rn×d Attribute matrix of G.
networks has attracted growing attention in data mining xi ∈ R1×d Attribute vector of vi .
and machine learning communities. Apart from attribute
 H(ℓ) ∈ Rn×d
 ′
 Hidden subgraph representation of the ℓth
anomalies, graph anomaly detection also aims at suspicious
topological-abnormal nodes that exhibit collective anomalous layer.
 h(ℓ) ∈ R1×d
 ′
behavior. Closely connected uncorrelated node groups form Node hidden representation of the ℓth layer.
 W(ℓ) ∈ Rd ×d
 ′ ′
uncommonly dense substructures in the network. However, Network parameters of the ℓth layer.
existing methods overlook that the topology anomaly detection R t
 Number of topology anomaly detection
performance can be improved by recognizing such a collective pattern. To this end, we propose a new graph anomaly round.
detection framework on attributed networks via substructure Ra Number of attribute anomaly detection
awareness (ARISE). Unlike previous algorithms, we focus on the round.
substructures in the graph to discern abnormalities. Specifically, yi ∈ {0, 1} Ground-truth label of a instance pair.
we establish a region proposal module to discover high-density score(vi ) Final anomaly score of vi .
substructures in the network as suspicious regions. The average
node-pair similarity can be regarded as the topology anomaly
degree of nodes within substructures. Generally, the lower the I. I NTRODUCTION
similarity, the higher the probability that internal nodes are topology anomalies. To distill better embeddings of node attributes,
we further introduce a graph contrastive learning scheme, which
observes attribute anomalies in the meantime. In this way, ARISE
 A TTRIBUTED networks have the powerful capability of
 modeling and analyzing numerous complex scenarios in
 the real world. In recent years, researches [1] on attributed netcan detect both topology and attribute anomalies. Ultimately,
extensive experiments on benchmark datasets show that ARISE
 works tasks are becoming an increasingly appealing direction
greatly improves detection performance (up to 7.30% AUC and for academia and industry. In particular, anomaly detection
17.46% AUPRC gains) compared to state-of-the-art attributed has been a vital topic in attributed networks [2], which has
networks anomaly detection (ANAD) algorithms. ubiquitous applications in many fields, such as financial fraud
 Index Terms— Attributed networks, graph anomaly detection, detection [3], social spam detection [4], network intrusion
graph neural networks (GNNs), network substructure. detection [5], and information system error detection [6].
 Attributed networks anomaly detection (ANAD) intends
 to discern anomalous nodes that diverge from frequent pat-
 N OMENCLATURE terns [2]. Unlike the raw data widely applied in other
 Notations Definitions fields [7], [8], [9], attributed networks include both network
 G Attributed network. topology and node attribute information. According to the
 Cj Substructure in the network. previous literature [10], [11], [12], [13], the mismatch between
 vi ith node of G. the above two types of information will cause two typical
 A ∈ Rn×n Adjacency matrix of G. kinds of anomalies in attributed networks, i.e., the topology
 D ∈ Rn×n Degree matrix of A. anomalies and attribute anomalies. As illustrated in Fig. 1,
 the topology anomaly has normal attribute values at a glance,
 Manuscript received 23 September 2022; revised 28 March 2023 and 14 July while it densely links to the uncorrelated nodes [14]; on the
2023; accepted 31 August 2023. Date of publication 22 September 2023; date contrary, the attribute counterpart has a normal neighborhood
of current version 3 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Project connectivity relationship, while its attribute values may be con-
2020AAA0107100 and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation taminated by noise and are not similar to the neighborhoods.
of China under Project 62325604 and Project 62276271. (Corresponding Further analysis demonstrates that the pattern of topology
authors: Bin Xiao; Xinwang Liu.)
 Jingcan Duan, Haifang Zhou, and Xinwang Liu are with the College anomalies is the collective behavior of a group of anomalous
of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense nodes, which form uncommonly dense substructures in the
Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: jingcan_duan@163.com; networks.
haifang_zhou@nudt.edu.cn; xinwangliu@nudt.edu.cn).
 Bin Xiao is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Early shallow methods [15], [16], [17], [18], [19] primarily
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, focus on feature engineering or pattern recognition methods
China (e-mail: xiaobin@cqupt.edu.cn). to detect the anomalous behaviors of nodes. Such models
 Siwei Wang is with the Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory, Beijing
100071, China (e-mail: wangsiwei13@nudt.edu.cn). rely on specific domain knowledge of researchers to improve
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3312655 detection performance. Besides, they cannot effectively dig
 2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18173

 under such a strategy. Therefore, a new algorithm that can
 effectively detect topology anomalies and cooperate well with
 attribute anomaly detection needs to be explored.
 In this article, we make a new attempt to remedy the
 mentioned defects in ANAD. To this end, we propose a novel
 graph Anomaly detection framework on attRIbuted networks
 via Substructure awarEness (ARISE), which both detects
 the topology and attribute anomalies concurrently. Topology
 anomalies are groups of uncorrelated nodes with dense links
 between them. Such a group of anomalous nodes viewed as
 a whole will form an uncommonly dense substructure in the
 networks. It is the anomalous behavior manifested by nodes
 combined together. However, existing works are unaware that
 the key to topology anomaly detection is discerning such a
 collective pattern from the network topology. To overcome this
 challenge, we elaborate a new topology detection scheme from
 a substructure-based perspective, which can detect their collective anomalous behaviors. To be specific, we first leverage a
Fig. 1. Toy example contains two typical anomalous nodes in attributed
networks: 1) Topology anomaly: uncorrelated nodes with dense links in the
 density-based algorithm in the region proposal module to disred circle. 2) Attribute anomaly: nodes with dissimilar attribute values from cover high-density substructures as suspicious regions. Then,
neighborhoods. the anomalous degrees of the internal nodes are measured
 by their attribute similarities. On the other hand, we adopt
 a graph contrastive network for attribute anomaly detection.
deep nonlinear information from the topology structure and It can distill better node embeddings for similarity meathe node attributes. The above reasons hinder them from sures in topology anomaly detection simultaneously. Finally,
discriminating abnormal nodes effectively. a well-designed aggregator is utilized to fuse the topology
 Recently, the graph neural network (GNN) has made and attribute anomalous information. Extensive evaluations
remarkable advances in many fields, e.g., natural language pro- and comprehensive metrics on benchmarks show ARISE’s
cessing [20], traffic systems [21], recommender systems [22], astonishing effectiveness compared to strong competitors.
and chemistry [23]. Therefore, GNN has become a natural In general, the main contributions of this work are summachoice for the ANAD task and can solve the problems faced by rized below.
traditional methods better. DOMINANT [24] designs a graph 1) We redesign a new principle to detect the topology
convolution network (GCN)-based autoencoder, which regards anomalies. Specifically, it perceives their collective
the reconstruction errors of structure and attribute matrices as anomalous behaviors from the perspective of network
the anomalous degrees. AnomalyDAE [25] replaces GCN with substructures.
graph attention network (GAT). ResGCN [26] improves GAT 2) We propose a new integrated anomaly detection frameby adding residual information. Differently, [27] combines work (ARISE) in attributed networks, which experts in
multiple graph filters and solves the anomalous information detecting topology anomalies and attribute anomalies
smoothing of nodes caused by GCN’s low-pass filter. To avoid simultaneously.
the labor-intensive and time-consuming cost of collecting node 3) Experiments demonstrate the remarkable advantage of
labels, CoLA first introduces the graph contrastive learning ARISE against current ANAD methods.
paradigm into ANAD. [28], [29], [30] boost the detection performance with the addition of node-level contrastive network,
generative loss, and graph multiview contrastive paradigm. II. R ELATED W ORK
 Although existing works have achieved impressive results In this section, we will review the related work in terms of
in the detection performance, there is still a relative lack 1) ANAD and 2) graph contrastive learning.
of research on effectively detecting topology anomalies.
The common practice of most contrastive-based previous
approaches is the comparison of attributes between the target A. Attributed Networks Anomaly Detection
node and its neighbors. Besides, reconstruction-based methods An attributed network is a structured network with multidicompare the original attribute and topology information of the mensional attribute information. Many traditional algorithms
target node with the one reconstructed from its neighbors. have been proposed in ANAD. They are based on the nondeep
It is obvious that such a strategy is effective in detecting anomaly detection way, which captures anomalous patterns
the anomalous behaviors of attribute anomalies. An attribute from either topology or node attributes of the network.
anomalous node can be easily captured if it is dissimilar from LOF [15] and Radar [18] find the differences in attributes
its neighbors. However, the topology anomaly has normal between the target node and the context or most of the
attribute values but more complex connectivity relationships nodes. Among the methods based on topology information,
with other topology anomalies. It is difficult to discern them SCAN [16] is one of the most well-known works. AMEN [17]
18174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

and ANOMALOUS [19] both use node attribute informa- for model training. The other one is cross-scale contrastive
tion and network topology information to achieve powerful learning. The pioneering work DGI [45] proposes to maximize
results. However, the traditional methods cannot excavate the mutual information of node representation and graph-level
deep information, making it difficult to improve performance representation to obtain global information. After generating
continuously. two views through data augmentation, MVGRL [46] maxi-
 The emergence of GNN has dramatically improved the mizes the node representation in one view and the graph-level
ability of the algorithms to extract the deep information of representation in the other view. Therefore, we focus on
the attributed networks. They have been widely used in many using cross-scale contrastive learning, which provides a better
fields [31], [32], [33], [34], [35]. It is natural to introduce GNN solution to distill the representation of node attributes for
to graph anomaly detection. AAGNN [36], which is improved ANAD tasks.
from the traditional anomaly detection algorithm, incorporates
the one-class support vector machine (SVM) algorithm into IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
attributed networks to identify anomalous samples. Algorithms
based on the self-supervised learning paradigm have also In this section, we will first define the main problem of
achieved great success. The generative self-supervised learn- ANAD formally. The primary notations used throughout this
ing method DOMINANT [24] performs anomaly detection article are summarized in Nomenclature. Then, we introduce
by calculating the differences between the attribute matrix, the proposed framework, ARISE. Finally, we conduct comthe adjacency matrix, and the original matrices after GCN plexity analysis of the model.
reconstruction. COMMANDER [37] pays attention to solving
the cross-domain problem in ANAD. Auxiliary attribute- A. Attributed Networks Anomaly Detection
based HCM [38] adopts a node-to-hop count pretext task An attributed network G = (V, E, X) consists of: 1) the
that takes the predicted values of hop counts of nodes and set of nodes V, where |V| = n; 2) the set of edges E, where
first-order neighbors as node anomaly scores. CoLA [14] |E| = m; and 3) the node attributes matrix X ∈ Rn×d , indicates
introduces the contrastive learning paradigm to ANAD for the the attribute values of nodes. In addition, the adjacency matrix
first time, constructing node- and subgraph-level comparisons A ∈ Rn×n contains the topology information of the network,
to identify anomalies by the differences between the node and Ai j = 1 represents there is an edge between node vi
and contrastive subgraph attributes in positive and negative and v j , otherwise, Ai j = 0. In ANAD, the model is trained to
pairs. ANEMONE [28], SL-GAD [29], and Sub-CR [30] learn a function score(vi ) that calculates the anomaly score for
do further research based on CoLA. Multiscale strategies [39] node vi in G. The larger the anomaly score, the more likely
have been proven effective in other domains. ANEMONE the node is anomalous. It is worth noting that we conduct the
forms multiscale contrastive with new node-level comparison ANAD task strictly unsupervised in this article.
and captures more anomalous information. SL-GAD adopts
both contrastive learning and reconstruction patterns. Sub-CR
works in a multiview way with a global graph view generated B. Proposed Method
by the diffusion model. Differently, PAMFUL [40] captures In this subsection, we will introduce our method ARISE.
global information by a synergistic approach. However, most As shown in Fig. 2, it consists of three main components.
of these methods focus on digging the information of node The first part is the topology anomaly detection module,
attributes and pay less attention to the topological information. which uses a density-based algorithm to perceive high-density
 substructures as suspicious regions. The anomaly degrees of
 III. G RAPH C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING internal nodes are evaluated by the average node-pair similarity
 The primary purpose of GNN algorithms is to transform in the substructure. The second part is the attribute anomaly
the attributes of nodes into low dimensions according to the detection module, which forms a contrast of node-subgraph
needs of specific tasks. The expensive label collection progress level to obtain node attribute anomaly degree. It should be
limits the supervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms. pointed out that these two modules leverage both node attribute
As an essential branch of the graph self-supervised paradigm, information and network topology information. The last one
graph contrastive learning can compensate for the above is the anomaly score calculation, which aggregates the anomaproblem to a certain extent by obtaining enough supervision lous information from the first two modules to obtain the final
information from ingeniously designed pretext tasks. Based anomaly score for each node. Such two types of anomaly score
on the contrastive scale [41], most graph contrastive learning calculations are performed under multiround detection. In each
methods can be divided into two leading mainstream. One detection, the former employs a multisize substructure scoring
is same-scale contrastive learning. GRACE [42] generates strategy, which takes into account the size of the substructure.
two comparison views by graph augmentation methods that The latter combines the effects of both positive and negative
bring the positive pair nodes in the view closer and push pairs.
the negative pair nodes farther. After two graph views are 1) Topology Anomaly Detection: Previous methods [14],
generated, HeCO [43] is trained on the heterogeneous graph [28], [29] constitute node-subgraph pairs in the contrastive
with encoders maximizing the mutual information of the same network by random walk [47], [48], [49], [50], [51]. Neverthenodes in the views. To alleviate the burden of constructing less, the uncertainty caused by random walk does not always
negative pairs, BGRL [44] uses the Siamese network approach contribute to learning the node-local topology information
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18175

Fig. 2. Overview of the ARISE model. It consists of three modules. 1) Topology anomaly detection: we design a region proposal module to perceive
high-density substructures as suspicious regions. The average node-pair similarity indicates the anomaly degrees of nodes within the substructure. 2) Attribute
anomaly detection: the target node forms a positive pair with its located subgraph and forms a negative pair with the irrelevant subgraph. After the contrastive
learning network, the node embeddings are also used in topology anomaly detection. 3) Anomaly score calculation: we treat the reciprocal of average node-pair
similarity as the topology anomaly estimates of its inner nodes and adopt a multiscale substructure scoring strategy. The node attribute anomaly score is
calculated by measuring the relationship between it and its contrastive subgraphs. Finally, the aggregator calculates the final anomaly score by fusing the
attribute and topology anomaly scores of each node.

that is beneficial for the task. In extreme cases, the sam- workers and secretaries could be regarded as abnormality [53].
pled subgraph around an anomalous node may contain a Therefore, some suspicious regions have only normal nodes,
few similar nodes in its neighborhoods, which will harm while others contain normal nodes and topology anomalies.
detecting it. On the other hand, this node-subgraph contrastive In light of this, we measure the anomaly degree of internal
mode ignores the collective abnormal behavior of topology nodes by average node-pair similarity in the substructure.
anomalies on the network topology. Therefore, we make a It should be pointed out that the nodes with more significant
new attempt to leverage local topology information from the differences in attributes have a higher anomalous possibility.
perspective of substructures in the networks. We design a To obtain more accurate similarity, we utilize the embeddings
region proposal module to extract suspicious substructures and of node attributes instead of the original attribute values.
overcome the above deficiency. Afterward, we discriminate Specifically, we choose cosine distance as the node-pair simthe anomalous nodes in the substructure based on the average ilarity measurement
node-pair similarity.
 dk,q = Similarity z k , z q = cos z k , z q
  
 (1)
 a) Region proposal module: A group of topology anomalies will form an uncommonly dense substructure in the where z k and z q represents the embedding of node vk and vq .
networks. To this end, we employ a density-based algorithm After that, we utilize an average function to compute the
to discover the high-density substructures that may contain average node-pair similarity for each substructure
topology anomalies. In practice, we first utilize a k-core
 n̂ j
method [52] to find the k-core graphs. Then, they will be 1 X (l)
partitioned into substructures based on the node connectivity. dj = d (2)
 n̂ j l=1 k,q
In addition to this straightforward density-based algorithm,
other more sophisticated algorithm strategies are also appli- where n̂ j is the number of the node pairs in the substructure C j .
cable under our substructure-aware framework as one of the And node vk and vq belong to C j .
potential directions in the future. Ultimately, these substruc- So far, it has not been solved how to obtain more qualified
tures {C0 , . . . , Cb } with possible anomalous nodes can be node embeddings for the similarity metric in (1). In addition,
regarded as suspicious regions. it is essential to detect attribute anomalies in ANAD. Hence,
 b) Topology anomaly degree estimate: In reality, there we introduce the graph contrastive learning scheme in attribute
are some scenarios where normal samples possess close anomaly detection, which can acquire better node representaconnections between them, e.g., there are frequent email tions in the meantime.
correspondences between managers and their secretaries. Con- 2) Attribute Anomaly Detection: The recent success of
versely, the intensive email exchanges between assembly line graph contrastive learning introduced in Section III has shown
18176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

great potential to discern attribute anomalies. Inspired by this, i.e., the similarity
we define contrastive instance pairs following [14]. Afterward,
 si = Bilinear(z i , ei ) = sigmoid z i We
 e i⊤
 
 (6)
the node attribute anomaly degree is calculated by measuring
the similarity between the embeddings of instance pairs. More where W e denotes the parameter matrix and sigmoid(·) is the
importantly, ARISE can learn better node representations logistic sigmoid function.
served in the topology anomaly detection module. According to the characteristics of the ANAD task,
 a) Subgraph sampling: The construction of positive and we decide to apply the binary cross-entropy loss [45] as
negative pairs is vital for contrastive learning. While there are the objective function of the module. It can be expressed as
multiple-scale contrasts, one of the most potent comparisons is follows:
the contrast of node and subgraph for ANAD. The supervision Xn
information from the subgraph includes both neighborhood L=− (yi log (si ) + (1 − yi ) log (1 − si )) (7)
attributes and topology. For the target node vi , it forms a i=1
positive pair with the subgraph where it is located and forms where yi is equal to 1 in positive pairs, while is equal to 0 in
a negative pair with the subgraph where another random negative pairs.
node is located. To avoid the interaction between the node 3) Anomaly Score Calculation:
and subgraphs, the attribute values of the node are masked, a) Topology anomaly score: Since the average node-pair
i.e., all attribute values are set to 0. similarity is negatively correlated with the anomaly degree
 There are many subgraph sampling methods, but we use of nodes in the substructure, the reciprocal of the avera random walk-based algorithm in this article. Because it age node-pair similarity is naturally used to represent their
is practical and straightforward to implement. A generated anomaly degrees. Then, we treat the reciprocal value as the
subgraph is composed of a node and its neighborhoods. topology anomaly estimate of each internal node within the
 b) Contrastive learning network: The contrastive learn- substructure. We calculate the topology anomaly estimate for
ing network pulls the positive pairs and pushes the negative each node in the substructure
pairs into the latent space. In this process, the node represen- 1
tations are optimized. First, we learn the representation of the ti = (8)
 dj
subgraph corresponding to the target node vi through a GCN
layer. The hidden layer representation of the subgraph in the where d j is the inner-node similarity of substructure C j . And
positive pair can be defined as ti represents the topology anomaly score of the target node vi
  −1 that belongs to C j .
 −1
 Hi(ℓ+1) = σ e Di 2 Hi(ℓ) W(ℓ)
 
 Di 2 e
 Ai e (3) It is unknown which substructure the topology anomalies
 belong to. We perform multiround detections with a gradually
where Hi(ℓ+1) and Hi(ℓ) denote the hidden representation of the increasing k. To avoid unnecessary calculations, we start the
(ℓ + 1)th and ℓth layer, eDi
 −(1/2) e e−(1/2)
 Ai Di is the normalization detections with a specific k equal to the average node degree δ.
of the adjacency matrix, W(ℓ) denotes the network parameters, The substructure discovery algorithm will be stopped when
and σ (·) is activation function ReLU here. returning NULL. In each detection, we compute the topology
 After GCN, we manage to define a Readout function, which anomaly estimates for the nodes detected in any substructure
converts the embedding of the subgraph Ei to the same shape via (1), (2), and (8). The other nodes that have not been
as vi . In practice, we choose average to achieve Readout detected in any substructure will be assigned with a topology
 anomaly score of 0. Noble and Cook [54] and He et al. [55]
 1 X
 ñi indicate that smaller substructures appear frequently in the netei = Readout(Ei ) = (Ei )l (4) work while larger substructures appear infrequently. According
 ñ i l=1
 to the characteristics of ANAD, we design the topology
 anomaly scoring method by combining the average node-pair
where ñ i denotes the number of nodes within the subgraph,
 similarity and the substructure size. In general, we adopt a new
(Ei )l denotes the ℓth row of Ei , and ei is the final represenmultisize substructure scoring strategy for topology anomaly
tation of the subgraph.
 detection. In practice, we adopt the number of nodes in the
 Then, we need to encode the attribute of the target node into
 substructure to measure this impact. Therefore, we finally
the same embedding space as subgraphs. The embedding of
 average the anomaly scores from multiround detection to
the target node can be acquired by using the model parameters
 determine the topology anomaly score for each node. So, the
of GCN
 final topology anomaly score of the target node can be defined
 hi(ℓ+1) = σ hi(ℓ) W(ℓ)
  
 (5) as follows:
 Rt
 1 X
where hi(ℓ+1) and hi(ℓ) denote the hidden representation of the score_t(vi ) = C j ti(r ) (9)
 (ℓ)
 R t r =1
(ℓ + 1)th and ℓth layer, W denotes the network parameters,
and σ (·) is ReLU here. The last two are both shared with where |C j | indicates the number of the node in the substructure
GCN. z i is the final representation of the target node. C j that vi belongs to. And R t is the number of topology
 We utilize a bilinear model to tease out the relationship anomaly detection rounds. score_t (vi ) denotes the final topolbetween the target node vi and its counterpart subgraph, ogy anomaly score of the target node vi .
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18177

 b) Attribute anomaly score: The attribute anomaly detec- Algorithm 1 Proposed ARISE
tion module obtains the similarities between the embeddings Input: An attributed network G = (V, E, X); Number of
of each target node and contrastive subgraphs. We calculate training epochs E; Batch size B.
the node attribute anomaly score according to the similarities
 Output: Anomaly score function scor e(·).
information. For a normal node, its embedding should be
similar to the subgraph in the positive pair, i.e., si, p is
 1: // Topology anomaly detection
close to 1. On the contrary, it is dissimilar to the subgraph
 2: Calculate the average degree δ of nodes in graph.
in the negative pair, i.e., si,n is close to 0. For an anomalous
 3: for k = δ to kmax do
node, its embedding should be dissimilar to the subgraphs in
both positive and negative pairs, i.e., si, p and si,n are both close 4: Detect high-density substructures {C0 , . . . , Cb }.
to 0. Therefore, we define the attribute anomaly estimate of 5: for C j do
the target node as follows: 6: Measure the inner-node embedding similarities of
 C j via Eq.(1).
 ai = si,n − si, p (10) 7: Calculate the average node-pair similarity of C j via
 Eq.(2).
where si,n is the similar degree of vi and its corresponding
 8: end for
subgraph in a negative pair, and si, p is the similar degree of vi
 9: end for
and its corresponding subgraph in a positive pair.
 10: // Attribute anomaly detection
 Due to the randomness of the subgraph sampling method,
 11: for e = 1 to E do
it cannot reflect all the attribute information of the node
 12: V is divided into batches with size B by random.
neighborhoods in one sampling. Thus, we perform multiround
 13: for vi ∈ B do
detection and construct multiple groups of positive and nega-
 14: Form the positive and negative pairs by random
tive pairs. Then, the final attribute anomaly score of the target
 walk sampling.
node is expressed as follows:
 15: Estimate the similarity scores for the embeddings of
 Ra the target node and two subgraphs in the positive
 1 X (r )
 score_a(vi ) = a a (11) and negative pair via Eq.(6).
 R r =1 i
 16: Calculate the loss L via Eq.(7).
where score_a(vi ) denotes the final attribute anomaly score of 17: Back propagation and update trainable parameters.
the target node vi and R a is the number of attribute anomaly 18: end for
detection round. 19: end for
 c) Final anomaly score: After the topology and attribute 20: // Anomaly score calculation
anomaly scores for each node are determined, we employ an 21: By multiple round detection, calculate the final anomaly
aggregator to fuse them. First, each kind of score is normalized score for each node via Eq.(8), (9), (10), (11), and (12).
to unify its magnitudes. Then, the aggregator sums the two
scores according to weight and obtains the final anomaly score
score(vi ) for each node TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF T IME C OMPLEXITY FOR D IFFERENT A NOMALY
 score(vi ) = (1 − α) · score_t(vi ) + α · score_a(vi ) (12) D ETECTION M ETHODS IN ATTRIBUTED N ETWORKS . R I S THE
 N UMBER OF ROUNDS IN I NFERENCE FOR THE C OMPARED
where α ∈ [0, 1] is a trade-off parameter to balance the impor- M ETHODS . A ND THE OTHER N OTATIONS A RE THE
tance between two scores. S AME AS S ECTION IV-C
 In general, the overall procedures of ARISE are shown
in Algorithm 1.

C. Complexity Analysis
 We analyze the time complexity of each component in
ARISE. In the topology anomaly detection module, the time
complexity of k-core method is O(max(n, m)) (n is the
number of nodes in the graph and m represents the number of
edges in the network). Therefore, R t rounds of detection need
O(max(n, m)R t ). For the attribute anomaly detection module,
each RWR subgraph sampling for all nodes is O(cδn) (c is time complexity of the proposed model is O(max(n, m)R t +
the number of nodes within the subgraphs and δ is the mean n(cδ + K qd + K cd 2 )(T + R a )).
degree of the network). The time complexity of GCN for all In the meantime, we conduct time complexity analysis of
nodes is O((K qd + K cd 2 )n) (K is the number of layers, d is recent important ANAD methods. Table I shows that since the
the dimension of node attributes in hidden space, and q is augmented view is generated by graph diffusion, Sub-CR [30]
the number of edges in subgraphs). Hence, this module needs has the largest time complexity of all the methods. In sum-
O(n(cδ+K qd+K cd 2 )(T +R a )) (T is the number of epochs in mary, our method improves performance without significantly
training and R a is the round of attribute detection). The overall increasing complexity.
18178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE II 3) Baselines: We select eight well-known ANAD algo-
 S TATISTICS OF DATASETS rithms to compare with our proposed framework, ARISE. They
 are LOF1 [15], ANOMALOUS2 [19], DOMINANT3 [24],
 CoLA4 [14], ANEMONE5 [28], SL-GAD6 [29], HCM7 [38],
 and Sub-CR8 [30]. The first two are nondeep methods, and
 the last six are deep methods. Following the operation of
 CoLA, the datasets are first preprocessed before running
 ANOMALOUS. Specifically, the attributes dimension of nodes
 is reduced to 30 by PCA.
 4) Evaluation Metric: Our experiments employ three common metrics to evaluate the model comprehensively.
 V. E XPERIMENT a) AUC: The ROC curve is a plot of the true-positive
 rate against the false-positive rate according to the ground
 To verify the effectiveness of ARISE, in this section, truth and the anomaly scores of the nodes. AUC value is
we conduct experiments on six benchmark datasets and eval- the area under the ROC curve. A higher value means the
uate the model through three metrics. score function assigns a higher score to the randomly chosen
 anomalous sample than a normal sample.
 b) AUPRC: The PR curve is a plot of precision against
A. Experimental Settings recall according to the ground truth and the anomaly scores
 1) Datasets: We perform experiments on six datasets com- of the nodes. AUPRC value is the area under the PR curve,
monly used in ANAD. The details of each dataset are reflecting the performance of the positive samples. In practice,
presented in Table II. They are Cora [56], CiteSeer [56], we use the method of calculating the average precision to
DBLP [57], Citation [57], ACM [57], and PubMed [56]. obtain AUPRC value [58].
DBLP is an author network. There is an edge between two c) Precision@K: It indicates the proportion of trueauthors if they have a coauthor relationship. The others are positive samples among the top k samples with the largest
publication network datasets, which are composed of scientific anomaly scores. The value of Precision@K ranges from 0 to 1,
publications. Each paper is regarded as a node. The citation and close to 1 means the model performs better.
relations form the edges of the network. 5) Parameter Settings: In the attribute anomaly detection
 2) Anomaly Injection: Since the above six datasets are com- module, we set the size of subgraphs in positive pairs and
monly attributed network datasets, they are usually considered negative pairs to be 4. In the meantime, the basic network
to have no anomalies. Therefore, we need to inject anoma- model (GCN) is one layer, and the latent embedding dimenlous nodes into these datasets for the experiment to work sion is 64 on all datasets. The learning rate of the model
successfully. Following the previous literature [10], [11], [12], for Cora, CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation, ACM, and PubMed is
we inject both topology and attribute anomalies into the 0.003, 0.003, 0.0005, 0.001, 0.0005, and 0.001. To get better
datasets. Considering the balance, such two types of anomalies performance, the number of training epochs on Cora, CiteSeer,
have the same number in each dataset. and PubMed is 100. It is set to 400 on DBLP, Citation,
 a) Topology anomaly injection: Topology anomalies are and ACM.
mainly generated by perturbing the topology of the attributed 6) Computing Infrastructures: Except for ANOMALOUS,
networks. If many nodes in the dataset with dissimilar the experiments of other models run on the PyTorch
attributes are much more closely connected than the average, 1.10.2 platform using an Intel9 Core10 i9-10850K CPU
this can be considered a typical anomalous situation [10], [12]. (3.60 GHz), 64 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX
Specifically, we randomly select m̂ nodes that make them 3070 8 GB GPU. The experiments of ANOMALOUS run on
fully connected and repeat this operation p times. The number MATLAB R2020b platform using the same machine.
m̂ is set to 15 in practice. The number p is 5, 5, 10,
15, 15, and 20 on Cora, CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation ACM, B. Experimental Results
and PubMed. 1) Analysis of Performance Comparison: The ROC curves
 b) Attribute anomaly injection: Attribute anomalies are of these nine models on these six datasets are shown in Fig. 3.
mainly generated by perturbing the attribute values of nodes. The specific AUC values and AUPRC values are shown
Using the method proposed in the literature [11], attribute 1 https://github.com/damjankuznar/pylof
anomalies are generated by modifying node attribute values. 2 https://github.com/zpeng27/ANOMALOUS
First, we randomly select a node vi and another n̂ nodes. The 3 https://github.com/kaize0409/GCN_AnomalyDetection_pytorch

number n̂ is usually 50. Then, we calculate the Euclidean 4 https://github.com/GRAND-Lab/CoLA

distance between vi and each of the n̂ nodes. Finally, the 5 https://github.com/GRAND-Lab/ANEMONE
 6 https://github.com/KimMeen/SL-GAD
attribute values of vi are changed to be the same as that of 7 https://github.com/Juintin/GraphAnomalyDetection
node v j , which has the largest Euclidean distance. The number 8 https://github.com/Zjer12/Sub
of attribute anomalies is 75, 75, 150, 225, 225, and 300 on 9 Registered trademark.

each dataset, respectively. 10 Trademarked.
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18179

Fig. 3. ROC curves comparison on six benchmark datasets. The area under the curve is larger, the anomaly detection performance is better. The black dotted
lines are the “random line,” indicating the performance under random guessing. (a) ROC curve of Cora. (b) ROC curve of CiteSeer. (c) ROC curve of DBLP.
(d) ROC curve of Citation. (e) ROC curve of ACM. (f) ROC curve of PubMed.

 TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR AUC AND AUPRC. OOM I NDICATES THE I SSUE OF O UT- OF -M EMORY H APPENS D URING T RAINING . T HE B OLD AND
 U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST AND RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

in Table III. Meanwhile, the Precision@K of total anomaly and These indicate that ARISE has a more comprehensive pertopology anomaly line diagrams are shown in Fig. 4. Through formance and can adapt to the different needs of various
comparison, we can conclude as follows: scenarios. It is worth noting that the well-design topology
 a) AUC and AUPRC results: As shown in Table III, anomaly detection module brings about 2.19%–15.29% AUC
we observe that ARISE has a stronger ability to distinguish and 11.97%–34.32% AUPRC gains when compared with the
anomalous nodes from normal nodes than other models. pioneering baseline CoLA.
In particular, ARISE attains a remarkable AUC gain of Fig. 3 offers an intuitive illustration that the under-curve
2.46%, 0.62%, 1.85%, 7.30%, 2.92%, and 0.52% on Cora, areas of the deep methods are significantly larger than most
CiteSeer, DBLP, Citation, ACM, and PubMed, respectively. nondeep methods, and the contrastive learning-based methods
At the same time, the AUPRC results reflect that ARISE work best among the deep methods. This indicates that deep
makes a remarkable improvement in the positive sample detec- methods, especially contrastive learning-based methods, can
tion compared with its competitors on most datasets, and it learn more effective embeddings of node attributes than nonobtains about 17.46% AUPRC increment on the ACM dataset. deep methods for the ANAD task.
18180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 4. Performance comparison results with respect to Precision@K of total anomaly and topology anomaly on six benchmark datasets.

 b) Precision@K results: For a more comprehensive method [13]. Our article adopts the first method in the experevaluation, we also report Precision@K on the six datasets iments, which has been widely used in [14], [24], [28], [29],
in Fig. 4. For each dataset, the odd columns are Precision@K and [30].
results reflecting the proportion of true total anomalies, which We perform comparative experiments to further investigate
contains both attribute and topology anomalies, in its top k the generalization ability of our model on topology anomaly
ranked nodes. The even columns are Precision@K measuring detection. To be specific, we follow the second injection
the proportion of veritable topology anomalies in its top k method of topology anomalies, which drops out 10% edges
anomaly scores. As suggested by results in Fig. 4, ARISE between the randomly selected nodes (the injection of attribute
achieves best or comparable results in odd column subfigures. anomalies remains unchanged). As shown in Table IV, our
It is noticeable that ARISE brings tangible Precision@K model still outperforms the competitors on all experimental
improvement to the competitors except on Citation in even datasets. Besides, we observe that most methods suffer from
column subfigures. These phenomena verify the effective- performance degradation under the new injection condition.
ness of our novel substructure-based paradigm on topology This means such an injection method would make it more
anomaly detection. According to the odd column subfigures, difficult to discern topology anomalies from normal nodes.
the proposed framework has stronger comprehensive detection This will be one of the challenges for future work.
performance than competitors. 3) Analysis of Time Efficiency: We further concretely
 2) Study on Topology Anomaly Injection: Currently, there investigate the time efficiencies of all methods. In pracare two major topology anomaly injection methods. The first tice, we compute the average running time (second) for
one is making randomly selected nodes fully connected [12]. each epoch out of 100 epochs. Fig. 5 shows the relation-
The other is to randomly dropout partial links between ships between performance and running time (second) for
the selected nodes after the operation of the first injection all methods on Citation. Most methods spend near time,
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18181

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR AUC U NDER D IFFERENT T OPOLOGY A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE S UBSTRUCTURE D ETECTION M ETHOD IN
 I NJECTION S ETTINGS (D ROPOUT 10% E DGES B ETWEEN S ELECTED THE T OPOLOGY A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODULE W ITH R ESPECT TO
 N ODES ). OOM I NDICATES THE I SSUE OF O UT- OF -M EMORY AUC VALUES . T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS
 H APPENS D URING T RAINING . T HE B OLD AND
 U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST
 AND RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE VII
 A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE C OMPONENTS OF (2) AND (9) W ITH
 R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES . “W/O AVERAGING ” M EANS D ELETING
 THE AVERAGING T ERM IN (2). A ND “N ODE PAIR ” I NDICATES
 R EPLACING THE N UMBER OF N ODES IN THE S UBSTRUCTURE
 W ITH THE N UMBER OF N ODE PAIRS . T HE B OLD AND
 U NDERLINED VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST AND
 RUNNER -U P R ESULTS , R ESPECTIVELY

 classical community search algorithms. EHPPG [59] divides
Fig. 5. Relationships between AUC result and running time for all models the graph into communities by iteratively swapping node pairs
on Citation. The running time results (second) are calculated by averaging the to reduce the edge cut between them. Greedy Modularity [60]
running time for each epoch out of 100 epochs.
 modifies the community partition of nodes by a greedy pattern
 until it reaches the max modularity of the graph. Label Prop-
 TABLE V
 agation [61] is a semisynchronous label propagation method.
 A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE M ETHOD OF O BTAINING N ODE
 R EPRESENTATIONS W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES .
 DANMF [62] detects communities in the graph by combining
 T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS nonnegative matrix factorization and deep autoencoder. PercoMCV [63] first performs the clique percolation algorithm,
 then computes eigenvector centrality. EdMot [64] designs
 an edge enhancement approach for motif-aware community
 detection. DNTM [65] works based on a distributed neighborhood threshold method. As shown in Table VI, the adopted
while ANOMALOUS runs significantly longer. And our model k-core [52] based method outperforms the other community
takes comparable time and achieves the best performance. search methods, which means it can more effectively capture
 suspicious substructures and work better with the framework.
C. Ablation Study 3) Analysis of Topology Anomaly Score Calculation:
 In this section, we investigate the effects of the node As for topology anomaly score calculation, the number of node
representation acquisition strategies, the substructure detec- pairs can also be used to measure the size of substructures
tion method in the topology anomaly module, the topology in (9). To study the effectiveness of the averaging component
anomaly score calculation strategy, and the score-fusion strat- in (2), we conduct additional experiments on all datasets.
egy on the model performance. The comparison between the first and last row in Table VII
 1) Analysis of Node Representations Acquisition: In the indicates that the number of nodes works better in our
topology anomaly module, the inner-node embedding simi- scheme. In the meantime, compared with “W/O Averaging,”
larities are highly correlated with the anomalous degree of the our scheme achieves the best or comparable performance. The
substructure. Hence, how to enjoy better node representations experiment results verify the effectiveness of our topology
becomes a vital problem. We compare the performance of anomaly score calculation strategy.
using raw node attributes with node embeddings from the 4) Analysis of Fusion Strategy for Topology and Attribute
contrastive network. Table V shows that the contrastive net- Anomaly Scores: After gathering important topology and
work learns more effective node representations for topology attribute anomaly scores, we analyze the fusion strategies to
anomaly detection, further enhancing the ANAD performance. get final anomaly scores. To boost the performance, we explore
 2) Analysis of Substructure Detection Method: In the mean- three different combination strategies: 1) Max: we choose the
time, we perform ablation study on the substructure detection largest value to represent the node anomaly degree; 2) sum:
method in the topology anomaly module with other seven we sum the two scores directly; and 3) weight: the scores are
18182 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION A NALYSIS FOR THE F USION M ETHOD OF T OPOLOGY AND
 ATTRIBUTE A NOMALY S CORES W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC VALUES .
 T HE B OLD VALUES I NDICATE THE B EST R ESULTS

Fig. 6. Trade-off parameter α with respect to AUC values.

summed by weight. As shown in Table VIII, ARISE adopts
the weight fusion strategy, which is not always the best but
the most comprehensive and effective choice.

D. Parameter Analysis
 In the following subsection, we analyze the influence
of coefficient α and its related settings on the detection
performance.
 1) Score-Fusion Strategy: We first study the direct effect of Fig. 7. Impact of trade-off parameter α with respect to Precision@K of total
α on the score-fusion strategy. As shown in Fig. 6, we vary the anomaly, topology anomaly, and attribute anomaly on Citation and PubMed.
coefficient α from 0 to 1.0 and obtain its effect on the AUC (a) Citation (α = 0.2). (b) Citation (α = 0.8). (c) PubMed (α = 0.2).
 (d) PubMed (α = 0.8).
value. Finally, we adopt α equal to 0.8 on all datasets. We note
that the lines show an upward trend followed by a downward
trend. The performance on α = 0 or α = 1 is significantly TABLE IX
lower when α is between 0 and 1. This reflects that using the I MPACT OF T RADE -O FF PARAMETER α W ITH R ESPECT TO AUC R ESULTS
topology and attribute anomaly module concurrently greatly
improves the detection ability of the model compared with
only one.
 To further explore this phenomenon, we report the Precision@K results of topology anomaly and attribute anomaly
when α = 0.2 and α = 0.8 on Citation and PubMed
in Fig. 7. Table IX shows the AUC comparison of our model Under these circumstances, our model would have a more
on different datasets. When α = 0.2, ARISE relies more comprehensive detection performance. Therefore, we employ
on topology anomaly scores than attribute ones. In this case, such a value strategy for α.
Fig. 7 indicates that the performance of detecting topology 2) Imbalanced Anomaly Injection: As mentioned in
anomalies is much better than detecting attribute anomalies on Section V-A2, we inject two types of anomalous nodes
all datasets. The model has a weak ability to detect attribute with the same number into the original graph. However,
anomalies. an imbalanced injection method might affect the selection of
 However, we aim to effectively detect such two types the trade-off parameter α. We perform further experiments
of anomalies simultaneously. Apparently, the model cannot to study the relationship between the ratio of two types of
achieve the goal when α = 0.2. The comparison of AUC nodes and α. In practice, we design five different injection
results in Table IX also validates it. On the contrary, α = ratios of the topology anomalies and the attribute anomalies
0.8 can balance the effects of two types of anomaly scores as shown in Table X. The total number of anomalies remains
and enhance the detection performance of attribute anomalies. unchanged in all datasets and we change the ratio according
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18183

 TABLE X
 N UMBER OF E ACH T YPE OF A NOMALIES I NJECTED I NTO E ACH DATASET. “TA” R EPRESENTS THE T OPOLOGY A NOMALIES , “AA”
 I NDICATES THE ATTRIBUTE A NOMALIES . “R ATIO ” I S THE R ATIO OF T OPOLOGY A NOMALIES AND ATTRIBUTE A NOMALIES

Fig. 8. Impact of trade-off parameter α with respect to AUC values under different ratios of topology and attribute anomalies. (a) Ratio = 9:1. (b) Ratio =
7:3. (c) Ratio = 1:1. (d) Ratio = 3:7. (e) Ratio = 1:9.

to the injection method in Section V-A2. Fig. 8 indicates the new topology anomaly detection principle from the perspective
effect of the trade-off parameter α under different anomaly of network substructure. Specifically, we use a density-based
ratios on detection performance. algorithm to detect high-density substructures as the region
 We can intuitively observe that the model achieves the best proposed. Then, the average node-pair similarity of nodes is
performance on most datasets when α = 0.8 in Fig. 8(a)–(d). measured to discern topology anomalies. For this purpose,
And all of the detection performances reach the peak when we introduce a graph contrastive learning method to obtain
α = 1.0 in Fig. 8(e). As mentioned in Section V-D1, better embeddings of node attributes and to detect attribute
α = 0.8 can provide a more comprehensive detection per- anomalies. The experiments demonstrate that ARISE makes
formance for such two types of anomalies in most cases. a great improvement on ANAD. In future work, we continue
However, the number of attribute anomalies is nine times to explore how to better aggregate the attribute and topology
more than the number of topology ones under the last anomaly scores of nodes to avoid information loss.
anomaly injection ratio. The model needs a stronger attribute
anomaly detection performance under such an imbalanced R EFERENCES
injection. Hence, when α = 1.0, the model achieves the best [1] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A compreperformance. hensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
 [2] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
 VI. C ONCLUSION with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access,
 In this article, we propose a novel graph anomaly detection Oct. 8, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815.
 [3] G. Zhang et al., “eFraudCom: An e-commerce fraud detection system
framework on attributed networks via substructure awareness via competitive graph neural networks,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 40,
termed ARISE. Different from existing works, we design a no. 3, pp. 1–29, Jul. 2022.
18184 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 [4] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detection: [28] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
 Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl., Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
 vol. 186, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115742. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
 [5] M. Mongiovì, P. Bogdanov, R. Ranca, E. E. Papalexakis, C. Faloutsos, [29] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative
 and A. K. Singh, “NetSpot: Spotting significant anomalous regions on and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,”
 dynamic networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, May 2013, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021, doi:
 pp. 28–36. 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326.
 [6] Y. Boshmaf, K. Beznosov, and M. Ripeanu, “Graph-based Sybil Detec- [30] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
 tion in social and information systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022,
 Adv. Social Netw. Anal. Mining (ASONAM), Aug. 2013, pp. 466–473. arXiv:2205.04816.
 [7] Z. Cheng, S. Wang, P. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Liu, and E. Zhu, “Improved [31] X. He, K. Deng, X. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and M. Wang, “LightGCN:
 autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommenvol. 36, no. 12, pp. 7103–7125, Dec. 2021. dation,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.,
 [8] Z. Cheng, E. Zhu, S. Wang, P. Zhang, and W. Li, “Unsupervised outlier Jul. 2020, pp. 639–648.
 detection via transformation invariant autoencoder,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, [32] L. Chen, L. Wu, R. Hong, K. Zhang, and M. Wang, “Revisiting
 pp. 43991–44002, 2021. graph based collaborative filtering: A linear residual graph convolutional
 [9] J. Hu, G. Yu, S. Wang, E. Zhu, Z. Cai, and X. Zhu, “Detecting anomalous network approach,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34,
 events from unlabeled videos via temporal masked auto-encoding,” in no. 1, pp. 27–34.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6. [33] L. Wu, P. Sun, R. Hong, Y. Fu, X. Wang, and M. Wang, “SocialGCN:
[10] D. B. Skillicorn, “Detecting anomalies in graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. An efficient graph convolutional network based model for social recom-
 Secur. Inform., May 2007, pp. 209–216. mendation,” 2018, arXiv:1811.02815.
[11] X. Song, M. Wu, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka, “Conditional anomaly [34] J. Liu, Z.-J. Zha, R. Hong, M. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Deep adversarial
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 631–645, graph attention convolution network for text-based person search,” in
 May 2007. Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 665–673.
[12] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on attributed [35] J. Shuai et al., “A review-aware graph contrastive learning framework
 networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, for recommendation,” 2022, arXiv:2204.12063.
 Jan. 2019, pp. 357–365. [36] S. Zhou, Q. Tan, Z. Xu, X. Huang, and F.-L. Chung, “Subtractive
[13] K. Liu et al., “BOND: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detec- aggregation for attributed network anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th
 tion on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. 26th Conf. Neural Inf. Process. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2021, pp. 3672–3676.
 Syst. Datasets Benchmarks Track, 2022, pp. 1–15. [37] K. Ding, K. Shu, X. Shan, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Cross-domain graph
[14] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33,
 detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learn- no. 6, pp. 2406–2415, Jun. 2022.
 ing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, [38] T. Huang, Y. Pei, V. Menkovski, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Hop-count
 pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022. based self-supervised anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2021,
[15] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying arXiv:2104.07917.
 density-based local outliers,” ACM SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, [39] Y. Wang, J. Peng, H. Wang, and M. Wang, “Progressive learning with
 pp. 93–104, Jun. 2000. multi-scale attention network for cross-domain vehicle re-identification,”
[16] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. J. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1–15, Jun. 2022.
 clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. 13th ACM SIGKDD Int. [40] T. Zhao, T. Jiang, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “A synergistic approach
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2007, pp. 824–833. for graph anomaly detection with pattern mining and feature learning,”
[17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2393–2405,
 neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, Jun. 2016, Jun. 2022.
 pp. 207–215. [41] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
[18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
 detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017, pp. 2152–2158. [42] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph
[19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint contrastive representation learning,” 2020, arXiv:2006.04131.
 modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in [43] X. Wang, N. Liu, H. Han, and C. Shi, “Self-supervised heteroge-
 Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3513–3519. neous graph neural network with co-contrastive learning,” in Proc.
[20] D. Marcheggiani and I. Titov, “Encoding sentences with graph convo- 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
 lutional networks for semantic role labeling,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical pp. 1726–1736.
 Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2017, pp. 1506–1515. [44] S. Thakoor, C. Tallec, M. G. Azar, R. Munos, P. Veličković, and
[21] J. Zhang, X. Shi, J. Xie, H. Ma, I. King, and D. Y. Yeung, “GaAN: Gated M. Valko, “Bootstrapped representation learning on graphs,” in Proc.
 attention networks for learning on large and spatiotemporal graphs,” in Workshop Geometrical Topological Represent. Learn. (ICLR), 2021,
 Proc. 34th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell. (UAI) 2018, pp. 1–10. pp. 1–14.
[22] R. Ying, R. He, K. Chen, P. Eksombatchai, W. L. Hamilton, and [45] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
 J. Leskovec, “Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale rec- R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. ICLR, vol. 2, no. 3, 2019,
 ommender systems,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. pp. 1–17.
 Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 974–983. [46] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view represen-
[23] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, tation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
 “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. Int. Conf. pp. 4116–4126.
 Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1263–1272. [47] H. Tong, C. Faloutsos, and J.-Y. Pan, “Fast random walk with restart
[24] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detec- and its applications,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), 2006,
 tion on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining. pp. 613–622.
 Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2019, pp. 594–602. [48] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learning of
[25] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2014, pp. 701–710.
 Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 5685–5689. [49] J. Qiu et al., “GCC: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network
[26] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN: pre-training,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 1150–1160.
 attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Anal. [50] Y. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Lin, and X. Zhao, “Unsupervised
 (DSAA), Oct. 2021, pp. 1–2. metric fusion over multiview data by graph random walk-based cross-
[27] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for view diffusion,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1,
 anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2205.15508. pp. 57–70, Jan. 2017.
DUAN et al.: ARISE 18185

[51] Y. Wang, X. Lin, and Q. Zhang, “Towards metric fusion on multi-view Siwei Wang received the Ph.D degree from
 data: A cross-view based graph random walk approach,” in Proc. 22nd the National University of Defense Technology
 ACM Int. Conf. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), 2013, pp. 805–810. (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2023.
[52] V. Batagelj and M. Zaversnik, “An O(m) algorithm for cores decompo- He is currently an Assistant Research Professor
 sition of networks,” 2003, arXiv:cs/0310049. with the Intelligent Game and Decision Laboratory,
[53] R. Yu, H. Qiu, Z. Wen, C. Lin, and Y. Liu, “A survey on social media China. He has published several articles. His current
 anomaly detection,” ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newslett., vol. 18, no. 1, research interests include kernel learning, unsuperpp. 1–14, Aug. 2016. vised multiple-view learning, scalable clustering,
[54] C. C. Noble and D. J. Cook, “Graph-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. and deep unsupervised learning.
 9th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2003, Mr. Wang served as a PC Member/reviewer
 pp. 631–636. in top journals and conferences, such as IEEE
[55] W. He, G. Hu, and Y. Zhou, “Large-scale IP network behavior anomaly T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE),
 detection and identification using substructure-based approach and mul- IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YS -
 tivariate time series mining,” Telecommun. Syst., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 1–13, TEMS (TNNLS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING (TIP),
 Apr. 2012. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS (TCYB), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
[56] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Gallagher, and ON M ULTIMEDIA (TMM), International Conference on Machine Learning
 T. Eliassi-Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag., (ICML), IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference
 vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 93–106, Sep. 2008. (CVPR), European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), International
[57] X. Yuan, N. Zhou, S. Yu, H. Huang, Z. Chen, and F. Xia, “Higher-order Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelstructure based anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE ligence (AAAI), and International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2021, pp. 2691–2700. (IJCAI).
[58] H. Schütze, C. D. Manning, and P. Raghavan, Introduction to Information Retrieval, vol. 39. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[59] B. W. Kernighan and S. Lin, “An efficient heuristic procedure for
 partitioning graphs,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 291–307,
 Feb. 1970.
[60] A. Clauset, M. E. J. Newman, and C. Moore, “Finding community structure in very large networks,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. Phys. Plasmas Fluids
 Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 70, no. 6, Dec. 2004, Art. no. 066111.
[61] G. Cordasco and L. Gargano, “Community detection via semi- Haifang Zhou received the Ph.D. degree from
 synchronous label propagation algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop, the National University of Defense Technology
 Bus. Appl. Social Netw. Anal. (BASNA), Dec. 2010, pp. 1–8. (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2003.
[62] F. Ye, C. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Deep autoencoder-like nonnegative She is now a Professor at the College of Computer
 matrix factorization for community detection,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Science and Technology, NUDT. She has pub-
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2018, pp. 1393–1402. lished more than 60 peer-reviewed papers, including
[63] N. Kasoro, S. Kasereka, E. Mayogha, H. T. Vinh, and J. Kinganga, those in highly regarded journals and conferences
 “PercoMCV: A hybrid approach of community detection in social such as Concurrency and Computation Practice and
 networks,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 151, pp. 45–52, Jan. 2019. Experience (CCPE), Journal of Software, Paral-
[64] P.-Z. Li, L. Huang, C.-D. Wang, and J.-H. Lai, “EdMot: An edge lel Computing, International Conference on Parallel
 enhancement approach for motif-aware community detection,” in Proc. Processing (ICPP), etc. Her current research interests
 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, include bigdata processing and intelligent parallel computing.
 pp. 479–487.
[65] R. Jaiswal and S. Ramanna, “Detecting overlapping communities using
 ensemble-based distributed neighbourhood threshold method in social
 networks,” Intell. Decis. Technol., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 251–267, Jun. 2021.

 Jingcan Duan is currently pursuing the master’s
 degree with the College of Computer Science and Xinwang Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 Technology, National University of Defense Tech- the Ph.D. degree from the National University of
 nology (NUDT), Changsha, China. Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in
 His current research interests include graph rep- 2013.
 resentation learning, graph anomaly detection, and He is now a Professor at the College of Computer
 artificial intelligence (AI) for science. Science and Technology, NUDT. He has published
 more than 100 peer-reviewed papers, including
 those in highly regarded journals and conferences
 such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PATTERN A NAL -
 YSIS AND M ACHINE I NTELLIGENCE (T-PAMI),
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA
 E NGINEERING (T-KDE), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING
 (T-IP), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING
 S YSTEMS (T-NNLS), IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA (T-MM),
 Bin Xiao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY (Tin electrical engineering from Shanxi Normal
 IFS), International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Conference
 University, Xi’an, China, in 2004 and 2007, respection Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), International Confervely, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
 ence on Computer Vision (ICCV), IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern
 from Xidian University, Xi’an, in 2012.
 Recognition Conference (CVPR), AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 He is currently a Professor with the Chongqing
 (AAAI), International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), etc.
 University of Posts and Telecommunications,
 His current research interests include kernel learning and unsupervised feature
 Chongqing, China. His research interests include
 learning.
 image processing and pattern recognition.
 Dr. Liu serves as the Associate Editor of Information Fusion Journal. More
 information can be found at https://xinwangliu.github.io/.