IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024 5411

 Artificial Intelligence-Based Zero Trust Security
 Approach for Consumer Industry
 Senthil Murugan Nagarajan , Member, IEEE, Ganesh Gopal Devarajan , Senior Member, IEEE,
M. Suresh Thangakrishnan , T. V. Ramana, Ali Kashif Bashir , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ahmad Ali AlZubi

 Abstract—Development in Internet technology made consumer Index Terms—Artificial intelligence, consumer industry, deep
electronics growth to another extent where several consumers learning, security, zero trust.
from all over the world utilize various essentials through recent
development. However, consumer electronics based devices could
be vulnerable to cyber attacks if it is not appropriately secured.
In this research work, we proposed AI-enabled deep learning
model based zero trust security (AIDL-XTS) framework for I. I NTRODUCTION
verification and authentication for devices, users, and appli- ECENT advancements in technologies have made world
cations for every access request. We use smartphone sensor
data for user authentication using Deep CNN-BiLSTM network.
Furthermore, we proposed Bayes theorem based trust score
 R to become victims of connectivity with digitization.
 Because of increasing connection between devices and trendto evaluate the zero trust security. This proposed framework ing tools such as Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing,
assumes all users, devices, and applications are un-trusted which and sensors within the network which exchanges information
requires verification and authentication for every access request, or data across various places which results in need and imporregardless of the user’s location or device. To evaluate the trust
score in the zero trust security model, Bayes theorem-based trust tance of network security requirements [1], [2]. In today’s
score (Bayes-TSC) model is proposed. The performance of model modern world, various security concepts used in the network
is analyzed over three datasets: WISDM-HARB, HMOG, and is based on separation between external and internal networks.
UCI-HAR, using four metric measures: accuracy, equal error The internal networks are isolated using Network Access
rate, success rate, and authentication time. From the results, Controls (NACs), Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), and
the performance of proposed framework outperforms when
compared with traditional benchmark deep learning models for Firewalls [3]. Different services, devices, users are trustworthy
user authentication while protecting against unauthorized access when they are inside the protected internal network. However,
in minimal authentication time. other devices and users who are outside will be treated as
 intruders. This is where the realm of trustworthy protocol or
 zero trust security is playing an important role that should be
 practiced in various consumer environment [4], [5].
 These challenges were adversely promoted by zero-trust
 Manuscript received 8 May 2023; revised 21 August 2023, 20 October concept that is growing in recent days. In this methodology,
2023, 4 February 2024, and 4 April 2024; accepted 3 June 2024. Date of the main idea behind this is develop no trustworthy in which
publication 27 June 2024; date of current version 11 December 2024. This
work was supported by the King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, each and every request or information must be validated and
through the Researchers Supporting Project under Grant RSP2024R395. approved before transferring through the network. Several
(Corresponding author: Ganesh Gopal Devarajan.) organizations are still depend on perimeter-based model
 Senthil Murugan Nagarajan is with the Department of Mathematics,
Université du Luxembourg, L-4365 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg despite of the potential ability towards zero-trust solutions for
(e-mail: senthil.nagarajan@uni.lu). secure networking [6], [7]. However, there is a multifaceted
 Ganesh Gopal Devarajan is with the Department of Computer Science and complex process in investing for new security approaches.
and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, SRM Institute of
Science and Technology (Delhi NCR Campus), Ghaziabad 201204, India This becomes more important for customers, employees, and
(e-mail: dganeshgopal@gmail.com). business process to take informed decisions for their consumer
 M. Suresh Thangakrishnan is with the Department of Computer Science based industries. Various research has focused on technical
and Engineering, Einstein College of Engineering, Tirunelveli 627012, India
(e-mail: suresh.nellai@gmail.com). aspects of zero trust security and business oriented questions
 T. V. Ramana is with the Department of Computer Science were neglected [8], [9].
and Engineering, Jain University, Bengaluru 562112, India The paradigm of cyber-security is known to be zero trust
(e-mail: Venkataramana.t@gmail.com).
 Ali Kashif Bashir is with the Department of Computing and Mathematics, where it is mainly focused on protection of resources in
Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6GB Manchester, U.K., also which continuous evaluation is must before implicitly granting
with the Woxsen School of Business, Woxsen University, Hyderabad trust. Trustworthiness is the degree that viewed coarsely for
502345, India, and also with the Department of Computer Science and
Mathematics, Lebanese American University, Beirut 03797751, Lebanon the people who has confidence for the product or service
(e-mail: dr.alikashif.b@ieee.org). that behaved as promised, intended, and advertised [10]. In
 Ahmad Ali AlZubi is with the Computer Science Department, the environment of Zero-trust, continuous authorization and
Community College, King Saud University, Riyadh 11437, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: aalzubi@ksu.edu.sa). verification are required for users while they access to the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3412772 resources of enterprise. The Zero Trust Architecture (ZTA)
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

helps in improving analytics and viability across various machine learning and security experts for protecting the edge
enterprise network. An Ericom software survey has detailed computing network from unknown and known attacks by
that 83% out of 1300 risk and security specialists have minimizing false alarm rate.
responded and thus the zero trust is agreed and implemented Grzonkowski and Corcoran [20] proposed authentication
the solutions for their enterprise [11], [12], [13]. framework by user centric approach for home networks.
 Transition towards ZTA will be an questionable task and Authors used zero knowledge proof authentication scheme
also challenging to understand and long journey to have proper into the cloud infrastructure by allowing users to transuse. The migration to Zero Trust ecosystem is an challenging fer their service temporarily within a trusted environment.
and have several barriers for the enterprise industries [14]. It Furthermore, sophisticated services and sharing of personal
is due to lack of concrete frameworks and industry standards content is enabled over convenient TCP/IP protocol by using
that can efficiently implement this methodology in different this approach. Wan et al. [21] presented zero knowledge proof
enterprises. The requirements for infrastructure must be under- with high efficiency for data authentication by extending the
stood clearly before migrating to ZTA as various standards previous zk-SNARK scheme. Authors developed off-chain
of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and IT system interoperability data based on zero-knowledge authenticated and zk-AuthFeed
and compatibility is different. More applicability towards AI for achieving both authenticity and privacy for blockchain
and zero trust security is integrated to develop an reliable enabled DApps.
architecture to improve trust in enterprise industries [12], [15]. Dubin [22] presented deep Content Disarm and
The main contributions of this research is summarized below: Reconstruction (CDR) methodology based on zero-trust in
 • User authentication is analyzed using DeepCNN BiLSTM which the validation is first executed using the CDR and
 network based on smartphone sensor data. prevention rate with effect of disarming were presented and
 • Furthermore, the trust-score of zero trust security solution measured. Authors used well-know dataset for analyzing the
 is evaluated using Bayes theorem. performance of DeepCDR model where they proved that
 In this research, we proposed AI-enabled deep learning reconstruction file is functional and usable. Chen et al. [23]
model based zero trust security (AI-DL-XTS) framework proposed a protection and security awareness system for
for verification and authentication for devices, users, and 5G-based healthcare platform using zero-trust architecture.
applications for every access request. We use smartphone Four key dimensions were considers in 5G-based healthcare
sensor data for user authentication using Deep-CNN-BiLSTM such as terminals, users, and much more for constructing
network. Furthermore, we proposed Bayes theorem based trust trust-able dynamic access control models.
score to evaluate the zero trust security. Zhang et al. [24] realized the intelligent emergency
 analysis, management and trustworthy using emergent semantic based information centric-fog system. They designed
 II. R ELATED W ORKS efficient dissemination network for emergency information
 Organizational operations have been changed these days and aggregating. Furthermore, authors filtered fake conwith increase in work from home popularity where devices tents using semantic based trustworthy routing scheme.
and users need dynamic access to various applications and Abou-Nassar et al. [25] come up with the solution where
data from the outside to connect with internal network of semantic gaps is reduced by the Indirect Trust Inference
certain consumer based industries, organizations, and much System (ITIS) and budget authentication by smart contract
more [1]. Syed et al. [16] presented a extensive survey and enhanced estimation of Trustworthy Factor (TF) using
about zero trust and critical infrastructure risk management. network edges and node with the help of proposed Blockchain
Authors described the role of access control and authentication Decentralized Interoperable Trust framework (DIT) for IoT
of zero trust architectures in different scenarios. Authors zones.
also discussed the various challenges associated with access Hosney et al. [26] proposed an alternative solution based
control schemes, software-defined perimeter, contemporary on machine learning algorithms for saving time and increase
authentication schemes, micro-segmentation approaches, and efficiency for maintaining security posture with less human
risk computation techniques which affect the zero trust intervention. In this mode, configured policies and information
implementation. about security feeds are enforced and maintain zero-trust
 Eidle et al. [17] presented Observe, Orient, Decide, Act network policies. Kant and Johannsen [27] used AI based secu-
(OODA) framework implementation based on experimental rity features in small and medium sized companies (SMEs) and
test-bed results of plane feedback with automatic control. In concluded the potential impact of security level is surveyed.
their model, automated threat response with identity man- Saleem et al. [28] proposed zero-trust security framework
agement and combined with packet-based authentication of based on rich model for verification of trust by involving
trust levels towards eight distinct network. Poppo et al. [18] federated learning in the cloud environments.
presented two main frameworks for supply chain management Tiwari et al. [29] demonstrated secure data aggregation
on zero trust security. First one authors mentioned as calcu- without using bi-linear groups with the support of verifiable
lative trust in which economics transaction cost is associated federated learning method to address malicious third-party
closely and second is relational-trust in which sociological aggregation. Patil and Kundu [30] proposed a scheme based
theories were closely aligned. Sedjelmaci et al. [19] proposed on member reputation and member list chain based associhybrid model for security framework which combined of ation (MLC-R b A) for changing the type of authenticated
NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY 5413

data. Authors also proposed two necessary functions for
root authentication without using external trust for hierarchical trust model in which revoked members were controlled
without causing inconvenience to user. Kumar et al. [31]
introduced authentication and key agreement (AKA) and
AI based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for analyzing
computation cost. However, authors proposed explainable AI
based on blockchain for securing consumer applications in
smart cities. Itani et al. [32] computed situation values by
integrating three factors such as IoT-threat, IoT-attack, and
IoT-attack probabilities. Then authors applied proposed model
to decompose sequences with the help of variational mode
decomposition (VMD) and developed CNN-BiLSTM model
for predicting sub-sequences.

 III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
 The growth of recent technologies made consumer electronics to reach millions of people and increased in usage for daily
life style. Such consumer electronic devices like smart phones,
banking transactions, smart environment, and much more
made ease of usage and routine work life balance which also
lead consumers to obtain different advantages. However, this
flexibility also leads to severe cyber attacks as these devices
are not always protected from firewall devices. To enable
security against Internet-enabled consumer electronics, we
proposed an AI-based deep-learning enabled zero-trust security (AI-DL-XTS) model that use deep-learning techniques
for bio-metric authentication to detect authorized smartphone
user. Smartphones are equipped with various sensors that sense
user touch during a different activities like reading, writing,
eating, sitting, walking, etc. based on the sensor data, the
proposed deep learning model detects user authentication. The Fig. 1. Proposed AL-DL-XTS Framework.
zero trust security model uses DL method outcomes and other
networking activities to allow or deny the user request. Fig. 1
represents the proposed AL-DL-XTS model architecture for DL-CNN BiLSTM Model: We proposed a deep learningdetecting cyber attacks in consumer electronics. based CNN-BiLSTM (Deep-CNN-BiLSTM) model for user
 Zero Trust Security model: Here, it assumes by default authentication that uses smartphone-based sensor data for
that no user, device, or network is trusted and all resources typical user patterns and behavior. The proposed Deep-CNNmust be secured and continuously authenticated. In the context BiLSTM consists of deep learning-based Convolutional Neural
of consumer electronics, such as smartphones and laptops, Networks (Deep-CNN), which helps in the extraction of
implementing a Zero Trust security model requires several features and Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BiCNNcomponents working together, including a policy enforcement LSTM) network that is used for extracting temporal dynamic
point, policy engine, data store, and deep learning-based trust elements from the input data. The trust engine is a deep
engine for user authentication using various factors such as learning-based system that continuously evaluates user behavsmartphone, IP address, device, and location. ior and makes authentication decisions based on multiple
 Policy Enforcement Point (PEP): It is the component that factors. It analyzes patterns and behavior over time to build a
enforces the security policies in the Zero Trust model. It sits user profile and establish a baseline of “normal” behavior for
at the point of access to resources and ensures that only that user.
authenticated and authorized users can access them. The proposed model in Fig. 1 outlines a scenario where an
 Policy Engine: It defines the security policies that the PEP authenticated user (AU) is accessing her account file using her
enforces. It determines the criteria for granting or denying smartphone device, and a deep learning-enabled Zero Trust
access to resources based on the user’s location, device, IP model is used to verify her location, Internet connection,
address, and behavior patterns. and behavior patterns to authenticate her. The model also
 Data Storage: The data store contains information about the checks her authorization to access the specific account file and
users, devices, and resources in the system. The trust engine grants her access if authorized. When an unauthorized user
uses it to build user profiles, establish baselines for normal (UAU) gains access to Alice’s device and tries to access the
behavior, and store authentication data. account file, the model detects a deviation from Alice’s typical
5414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

behavior patterns and blocks Bob’s access. Similarly, when connected layer that generates output DeepFCO , and can be
an unauthorized user (UAU1) tries to access the account file expressed mathematically as per (6).
from a different location and Internet address using an other
device, the model analyzes the context of the access request DeepFCO = WFC ∗ BiLSTMho + bFC (6)
and blocks John’s access as his behavior patterns do not where, WFC and bFC are weight matrix and bias term applied at
match Alice’s typical behavior. The proposed model combines fully connected layer, and BiLSTMho is the final hidden output
authentication, authorization, threat detection, and contextual state of the BiCNN-LSTM network. The softmax classifier
analysis to enhance user authentication security measures. is used for user authentication classification and is expressed
 Let Sdatax be input to the Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model in (7).
that gathers from smartphone sensor reading,  the learning
parameter, and Deepy be the target output. Equation (1) Deepy = Softmax(DeepFCO ) (7)
represents the formula for Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model. During the training phase, the model parameters (weights
 Deepy = Softmax(Sdatax ; ) (1) and biases) are learned by minimizing the loss function using
 an optimization algorithm such as Stochastic Gradient Descent
 The softmax function is used classifier that uses features (SGD) or Adam. The loss function can be represented as
extracted from CNN and Bi-CNN-LSTM network. The Deep- per (8).
CNN component applies a series of convolutional filters to   
 Loss = − Deepyi ∗ log Deepyi
the smartphone sensor input data to extract relevant features.  
  
Equation (2) represents the mathematical expression for fea- − 1 − Deepyi ∗ log Deepyi (8)
ture extraction.
   where, Deepyi is the ground truth label of the sensor input data
 Concf = ReLU Wcf ∗ x + bcf (2) (“authenticate” or “unauthenticated”), Deepyi is the predicted
 probability of the sensor input data belonging to the authenwhere, Wcf and bcf represents the convolutional weighted filter ticated user, and a log is the natural logarithm. Main goal of
and bias term, and ReLU is the rectilinear activation function this optimization algorithm is to minimize the loss function
and is expressed as ReLU(x)=max(0,x). The output Concf of loss value by updating the model parameters iteratively.
the CNN component represent a set of feature maps. Bayes theorem-based trust score (Bayes-TSC) Process: The
 To extract temporal characteristics of smartphone sensor Zero Trust security model uses a trust score to determine
data, we apply the BiCNN-LSTM network over a con- whether a device, user, or network should be granted access
volutional feature set Concf . BiCNN-LSTM network is a to a resource or not. The trust score is calculated using a
bidirectional CNN-LSTM network that extracts features from mathematical equation based on Bayes’ theorem. The decision
two networks in two directions: forward network in the to grant or deny access can be made based on a threshold
forward direction with learning parameter FD
 lstm and backward probability. For example, if the threshold probability is set to
network in the backward direction with model learning param- 0.7, access will be granted if Trust score > 0.7, and denied if
eter BK
 lstm . The output of forward and backward CNN-LSTM Trust score < 0.7. The equation can be expressed as per (9).
networks are given in (3) and (4).
 Let BiLSTMhfd and BiLSTMhbk be the output of forward and Trust Score = P(Req|UID , DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times )
backward CNN-LSTM networks, respectively. = ω1 ∗ P(UID |Req) + ω2 ∗ P(DID |Req)
   +ω3 ∗ P(NetLoc |Req)
 BiLSTMhfd = BiLSTMhfd Concf ; FDlstm (3)
   +ω4 ∗ P(IPAdd |Req)
 BiLSTMhbk = BiLSTMhbk Concf ; lstm
 BK
 (4)
 +ω5 ∗ P(times |Req) (9)
where, BiLSTMhfd and BiLSTMhbk are the functions implemented by the BiCNN-LSTM network in the forward and where, Req is the access request, UID is the user identity, DID
backward directions. The output of the forward network is the device identity, NetLoc is the network location, IPAdd is
BiLSTMhfd and backward network BiLSTMhbk is concatenated the IP address, and times is the time of the access request. To
to produce the final hidden output state of the BiCNN-LSTM calculate the probability of granting access (Req), given the
network, and mathematically, it is expressed in (5). user identity (UID ), device identity (DID ), network location
 (NetLoc ), IP Address (IPAdd ), and time (times ), we need to
    
 BiLSTMho = tanh Who ∗ BiLSTMhfd ⊕ BiLSTMhbk + bho consider conditional probability P(En|Req) is given in (10).
 (5) P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗ P(En)/P(Req) (10)
where, [BiLSTMhfd ⊕ BiLSTMhbk ] represents the concatenated where, P(En|Req) is the probability of the Entity (En)
hidden state output of the forward and backward BiCNN- being valid given the access request (Req), P(Req|En)
LSTM, Who is the weight matrix, bho is the bias term, and is the probability of observing the access request (Req)
tanh is the tangent activation function. given that the entity (En) is valid, P((En)) is the prior
 The concatenated output of the final hidden output state probability of the Entity (En) being valid. P(Req) is the
of the BiCNN-LSTM network then passes through a fully probability of observing the access request (A); EntityEn =
NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY 5415

Algorithm 1 Proposed DL-TE Algorithm FAER represents the probability of categorizing a pattern as
Input: Smatphone sensor reading,  is the learning parameter, “Authenticate” if it does not belong to it and mathematically
Sdatax is the input data it is expressed as (11).
Output: Deepy is target output
 FAV
 Apply convolution filter for Sdatax using Conff = FAER = (11)
 FAV + TRV
 ReLU(Wcf ∗ x + bcf )
 if device type=smartphone then FRER represents the probability of not classifying a pattern
 Yl = Deep − CNN − BiLSTM(Sdata, ) as “Authenticate” if it does and is expressed mathematically
 Compute P(En|A) = P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗ as per (12).
 P(En)/P(Req) //for each Entity FRV
 Compute Trust Score = FRER = (12)
 FRV + TAV
 P(Req|UID , DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times ) = ω1 ∗
 Accuracy measures the likelihood of a pattern classifying
 P(UID |Req) + ω2 ∗ P(DID |Req) + ω3 ∗ P(NetLoc |Req) +
 correctly and is expressed mathematically as (13).
 ω4 ∗ P(IPAdd |Req) + ω5 ∗ P(times |Req)
 else Accuracy = ((TAV + TRV))/((TAV + TRV + FAV + FRV))
 ComputeP(En|A) = P(En|Req) = P(Req|En) ∗ (13)
 P(En)/P(Req)//foreachEntity
 Compute Trust Score= EER is the error rate obtained by equalizing FAER and
 P(Req|DID , NetLoc , IPAdd , times ) = ω1 ∗ P(DID |Req) + FRER using the system’s detection threshold. The EER is
 ω2 ∗P(NetLoc |Req)+ω3 ∗P(IPAdd |Req)+ω4 ∗P(times |Req) calculated using the formula: EER = FAER+FRER
 2 , where
 end if |FAER + FRER| is the smallest value.
 if trust score ≥ 0.7 then
 UserAut=Authenticated A. Dataset Description
 else
 The UCI-HAR dataset [33], also known as the “UCI
 UserAut=Unauthenticated
 Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset,” is
 end if
 a dataset collected from smartphone sensors that can be used
 Return UserAut
 to recognize human activities such as walking, standing, and
 sitting. The dataset contains 10,299 instances of 561 features
 extracted from accelerometer and gyroscope signals collected
{useridentity(B), deviceidentity(C), networklocation(D)}, from 30 subjects while performing six activities. The dataset
{Ipaddress(E), timeoftheaccessrequest(F)}. The pseudo-code is commonly used for machine learning, data mining, and
for proposed model is depicted in Algorithm 1. activity recognition research.
 The WISDM-HAR dataset [34], also known as the
 “Wireless Sensor Data Mining for Human Activity
 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION Recognition dataset,” is a dataset collected from an Android
 phone’s accelerometer and gyroscope sensors that can be
 This section typically describes the experiments conducted
 used to recognize human activities such as walking, jogging,
to evaluate the performance of the proposed deep learningand sitting. The dataset contains 1,098,207 instances of three
based zero trust security (DL-XTS) model. Furthermore,
 features (x, y, and z acceleration) collected from 29 subjects
we proposed a Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model for continuwhile they performed six activities. The dataset is commonly
ous user authentication using smartphone sensing data. Our
 used for research in machine learning, data mining, and
experiments were conducted on three benchmark datasets:
 activity recognition.
WISDM-HARB, HMOG, and UCI-HAR. To evaluate the
 The HMOG dataset [35], also known as the “Human Motion
performance of the proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model, we
 Database,” is a dataset collected from an inertial measurement
used three authentication metrics: confusion matrix, accuracy,
 unit (IMU) that can be used to recognize human activities
and Equal Error Rate (EER). To assess the effectiveness of the
 such as walking, running, and jumping. The dataset contains
proposed DL-XTS model, we used success rate as a metric
 data collected from 11 subjects while they performed various
measure.
 activities. The dataset includes a total of 12,960 instances
 The proposed user authentication Deep-CNN-BiLSTM
 of 10 features extracted from the IMU sensors. The dataset
model is evaluated using error rate-based metrics, such as false
 is commonly used for machine learning, data mining, and
rejection error rate (FRER) and false acceptance error rate
 activity recognition research.
(FAER). FRER and FAER increase and decrease, respectively,
as sensitivity rises. The equal error rate (EER) represents the
sensitivity point where FRR and FAR are equal. Metrics such V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
as FAER, FRER, accuracy, and EER are calculated using This study evaluated the proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM
formulas to determine authentication failures. Additionally, authentication framework against basic deep learning
accuracy and confusion matrices are used to evaluate the algorithms using three public datasets: UCI-HAR, WISDMclassification performance of the authentication scheme. HARB, and HMOG. The following subsections provide the
5416 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 2. Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on UCI-HAR Fig. 3. Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on WISDM-HARB
Dataset. Dataset.

 which involves sensor data from 30 volunteers engaging in six
experimental observations of these deep learning methods
 activities.
trained on mobile sensing data on various datasets.
 B. WISDM-HARB Dataset
A. UCI-HAR Dataset For WISDM-HARB dataset, 44 individuals that encom-
 Figure 2 demonstrates the authentication performance com- passes mobile sensor data performing 18 physical activities are
parison of proposed work with different models such as considered. The dataset was evaluated using three deep learn-
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), CNN-LSTM, Long ing models: CNN, CNN-LSTM, and Deep-CNN-BiLSTM.
Short Term Memory (LSTM), Deep Neural Network (DNN), The authentication performance metrics for each of the 18
ensemble based deep federated learning (E-DFL), and cas- physical activities were computed, including Accuracy and
caded federated deep learning (C-FDL) using UCI HAR Equal Error Rate (EER). Based on Fig. 3, the Deep-CNNdataset. For performance evaluation for this work, we consid- BiLSTM model exhibited the highest accuracy of 99.81%
ered the UCI HAR dataset comprises smartphone sensor data (±0.529%) for sitting, while the lowest EER of 0.19%
collected from 35 volunteers. The accuracy and EER (Equal (±1.714%) was obtained for clapping by the same model.
Error Rate) are the metrics assessed. As shown in Fig. 2, the Results indicate that the proposed model outperforms the
Deep-CNN-BiLSTM based PEP model outperforms existing other models for most physical activities, followed by E-DFL,
models such as CNN, CNN-LSTM, LSTM, DNN, E-DFL, and C-FDL, and CNN-LSTM model, and then the CNN model.
C-FDL in terms of accuracy and EER across all six activities
(walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, stand- C. HMOG Dataset
ing, and laying). The Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model achieves an Fig. 4 depicts the authentication performance metrics of
average accuracy of 94.4% (±8.432%) and an average EER of CNN, CNN-LSTM, Deep-CNN-BiLSTM, and Deep-CNN-
5.16% (±8.532%). On the other hand, the CNN model obtains BiLSTM models for the HMOG dataset, which consists of
an average accuracy of 96.20% (±4.603%) and an average sensor data collected from 100 smartphones for six different
EER of 5.27% (±7.034%). In comparison, the CNN-LSTM activities. Accuracy and equal error rate (EER) are the reported
model achieves an average accuracy of 88.60% (±11.593%) metrics. For reading, while sitting, all three models achieved
and an average EER of 10.41% (±14.874%). However, E-DFL accuracy above 99.45%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the
and C-FDL performs better and close to proposed method. highest accuracy of 99.64% and the lowest EER of 0.46%.
Consequently, the Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model performs better Similarly, all three models showed an accuracy above 99.50%
than the CNN and CNN-LSTM models for the given dataset. for reading while walking, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM again
Proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model in Fig. 2 outperforms having the highest accuracy of 99.62% and the lowest EER
current baseline deep learning models in average accuracy and of 0.38%. For writing, while sitting, all models achieved very
EER across all activity patterns using the UCI-HAR dataset, high accuracy, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest
NAGARAJAN et al.: AI-BASED ZERO TRUST SECURITY APPROACH FOR CONSUMER INDUSTRY 5417

Fig. 4. Result Analysis for Different Physical Activities on HMOG Dataset. Fig. 5. Success Rate and Authentication Time-based Analysis for Proposed
 Model.

accuracy of 99.99% and the lowest EER of 0.01%. However,
for writing while walking, the accuracy of all models was Authentication time is the time taken by the model to
slightly lower, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest authenticate a user and is expressed in Eqn. (15):
accuracy of 99.34% and the lowest EER of 1.02%. For the
activity of using a map while sitting, all models obtained high TTAU
accuracy above 98.77%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the AT = ms (15)
 Number of Users
highest accuracy of 99.99% and the lowest EER of 0.01%.
For using a map while walking, all models achieved accuracy where, AT is the authentication time and TTAU is the Total
above 99.08%, with Deep-CNN-BiLSTM having the highest Time Taken to Authenticate All Users.
accuracy of 99.55% and the lowest EER of 0.73%. Overall, Figure 5 (b) shows the outcome of authentication time. It
the results suggest that Deep-CNN-BiLSTM outperformed the is observed that in terms of authentication time, the proposed
other models regarding accuracy and EER for most activities AI-DL-XTS model also performs better. The proposed AI-DLin the HMOG dataset. XTS model authenticates all the user nodes between 10 to 100
 in 80 ms to 81 ms, while the non-AI-DL-XTS model takes
D. Success Rate 90.5 to 91.5 ms. From the result, it was suggested that the
 Success rate states how the proposed model correctly AI-DL-XTS model is faster at authenticating users than the
recognizes the authenticated user and allows access permission non-AI-DL-XTS model.
to request files and is mathematically expressed in Eqn. (14): The proposed zero-trust security solution not only stands out
 in terms of technical innovation but, more importantly, offers
 NSA
 SR = ∗ 100 (14) tangible benefits for end-users. Unlike traditional approaches,
 TNAA our framework prioritizes user-centric security by reduced
where, SR is the success rate, NSA is the Number of false positives and increased accuracy. This work focused
Successful Authentication, and TNAA is the Total Number of in ensuring a seamless and secure digital experience for
Authentication Attempts. consumers. In the realm of cyber-security, the user experience
 Figure 5(a) represents the success rate for the proposed AI- is paramount. This work distinguishes itself by placing a
DL-XTS and non-AI-DL-XTS models. The result showed that strong emphasis on enhancing the overall user experience. By
the proposed AI-DL-XTS model has a higher success rate than minimal authentication hassles and adaptive security which
the non-AI-DL-XTS model (MEC without ZTS). The success ensures that consumers can stay secure. Furthermore, leverages
rates for the AI-DL-XTS model were 78.5% to 81.5% for threat intelligence data to proactively update security policies
different user node configurations, while the success rates for and block access to known malicious entities. The proposed
the non-AI-DL-XTS model were 39% to 61%. This indicates algorithm can classify and monitor sensitive data, ensuring that
that the AI-DL-XTS model is more effective at accurately proper access controls are in place and sensitive information
authenticating users. is not compromised.
5418 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 VI. C ONCLUSION [12] P. Phiayura and S. Teerakanok, “A comprehensive framework
 for migrating to zero trust architecture,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 With the increasing use of consumer electronics, including pp. 19487–19511, 2023.
smartphones and laptops, in our daily lives, the threat of [13] N. Vashistha, M. M. Hossain, M. R. Shahriar, F. Farahmandi, F. Rahman,
cyber-attacks is also increasing. In this regard, we have and M. M. Tehranipoor, “eChain: A blockchain-enabled ecosystem
 for electronic device authenticity verification,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
proposed an AI-based deep learning-enabled zero-trust secu- Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 23–37, Feb. 2022.
rity (AI-DL-XTS) model that uses deep learning techniques [14] J. Chen et al., “Collaborative trust blockchain based unbiased control
Deep-CNN-BiLSTM for secure authentication to detect autho- transfer mechanism for industrial automation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl.,
 vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 4478–4488, Aug. 2020.
rized smartphone users. We presented the Bayes-TSC method [15] Z. A. Collier and J. Sarkis, “The zero trust supply chain: Managing
for trust score calculation in the zero trust security model. supply chain risk in the absence of trust,” Int. J. Prod. Res., vol. 59,
The proposed Deep-CNN-BiLSTM model for continuous user no. 11, pp. 3430–3445, 2021.
 [16] N. F. Syed, S. W. Shah, A. Shaghaghi, A. Anwar, Z. Baig, and R. Doss,
authentication using smartphone sensing data has been eval- “Zero trust architecture (ZTA): A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Access,
uated on three benchmark datasets: WISDM-HARB, HMOG, vol. 10, pp. 57143–57179, 2022.
and UCI-HAR. Our experiments demonstrate that the Dee- [17] D. Eidle, S. Y. Ni, C. DeCusatis, and A. Sager, “Autonomic security
 for zero trust networks,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Annu. Ubiquitous Comput.,
CNN-BiLSTM model outperforms other deep learning models, Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), 2017, pp. 288–293.
namely CNN-LSTM, LSTM, DNN, E-DFL, and C-FDL in [18] L. Poppo, K. Z. Zhou, and J. J. Li, “When can you trust “trust”?
terms of accuracy and equal error rate for all six activities. Calculative trust, relational trust, and supplier performance,” Strategic
 Manag. J., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 724–741, 2016.
The proposed AI-DL-XTS model has also shown high suc- [19] H. Sedjelmaci, S.-M. Senouci, N. Ansari, and A. Boualouache, “A
cess rates, providing a robust and secure solution against trusted hybrid learning approach to secure edge computing,” IEEE
cyber-attacks. Future enhancements to this model can further Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 30–37, May 2022.
 [20] S. Grzonkowski and P. M. Corcoran, “Sharing cloud services: User
improve its performance and extend its capabilities to various authentication for social enhancement of home networking,” IEEE Trans.
other scenarios. Furthermore, analysis based on cloud native Consum. Electron., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1424–1432, Aug. 2011.
environments for zero trust security. [21] Z. Wan, Y. Zhou, and K. Ren, “zk-authfeed: Protecting data feed to
 smart contracts with authenticated zero knowledge proof,” IEEE Trans.
 Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1335–1347, Apr. 2023.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [22] R. Dubin, “Content disarm and reconstruction of RTF files a zero
 file trust methodology,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
 The authors thank King Saud University for funding this pp. 1461–1472, 2023.
work through the Researchers Supporting Project number [23] B. Chen et al., “A security awareness and protection system for 5G
 smart healthcare based on zero-trust architecture,” IEEE Internet Things
(RSP2024R395), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10248–10263, Jul. 2021.
 [24] Q. Zhang, J. Wu, M. Zanella, W. Yang, A. K. Bashir, and W. Fornaciari,
 R EFERENCES “Sema-IIoVT: Emergent semantic-based trustworthy information-centric
 fog system and testbed for Intelligent Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE
 [1] Y. Chen, H.-C. Hu, and G.-Z. Cheng, “Design and implementation Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 70–79, Jan. 2023.
 of a novel enterprise network defense system bymaneuveringmulti- [25] E. M. Abou-Nassar, A. M. Iliyasu, P. M. El-Kafrawy, O.-Y. Song,
 dimensional network properties,” Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng., A. K. Bashir, and A. A. A. El-Latif, “Ditrust chain: Towards blockchainvol. 20, no. 2, pp. 238–252, 2019. based trust models for sustainable healthcare IoT systems,” IEEE Access,
 [2] M. Wazid, A. Kumar Das, and S. Shetty, “BSFR-SH: Blockchain- vol. 8, pp. 111223–111238, 2020.
 enabled security framework against ransomware attacks for smart [26] E. S. Hosney, I. T. A. Halim, and A. H. Yousef, “An artificial intelligence
 healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 18–28, approach for deploying zero trust architecture (ZTA),” in Proc. 5th Int.
 Feb. 2023. Conf. Comput. Informat. (ICCI), 2022, pp. 343–350.
 [3] J. Y. V. M. Kumar, A. K. Swain, K. Mahapatra, and S. P. M. verify, [27] D. Kant and A. Johannsen, “Evaluation of Ai-based use cases for
 “Fortified-NoC: A robust approach for trojan-resilient network-on-chips enhancing the cyber security defense of small and medium-sized
 to fortify multicore-based consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. companies (SMEs),” Electron. Imag., vol. 34, no. 3, p. 387, 2022.
 Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 57–68, Feb. 2022. [28] M. Saleem, M. Warsi, and S. Islam, “Secure information processing for
 [4] B.-C. Chifor, S.-C. Arseni, I. Matei, and I. Bica, “Security-oriented multimedia forensics using zero-trust security model for large scale data
 framework for Internet of Things smart-home applications,” in analytics in SaaS cloud computing environment,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl.,
 Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Control Syst. Comput. Sci. (CSCS), 2019, vol. 72, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103389.
 pp. 146–153. [29] P. Tiwari, A. Lakhan, R. H. Jhaveri, and T.-M. Grønli, “Consumer-
 [5] A. Moubayed, A. Refaey, and A. Shami, “Software-defined perimeter centric Internet of Medical Things for cyborg applications based on
 (SDP): State of the art secure solution for modern networks,” IEEE federated reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 Netw., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 226–233, Oct. 2019. vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 756–764, Nov. 2023.
 [6] X. Yan and H. Wang, “Survey on zero-trust network security,” in [30] V. C. Patil and S. Kundu, “Realizing robust, lightweight strong PUFs for
 Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Secur. (ICAIS), Hohhot, China, 2020, securing smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 1,
 pp. 50–60. pp. 5–13, Feb. 2022.
 [7] C. Buck, C. Olenberger, A. Schweizer, F. Völter, and T. Eymann, “Never [31] A. Kumar, G. Rathee, C. A. Kerrache, M. Bilal, and T. R. Gadekallu,
 trust, always verify: A multivocal literature review on current knowledge “A secure architectural model using blockchain and estimated trust
 and research gaps of zero-trust,” Comput. Secur., vol. 110, Nov. 2021, mechanism in electronic consumers,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 Art. no. 102436. vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 996–1004, Nov. 2023.
 [8] E. Weishäupl, E. Yasasin, and G. Schryen, “Information security [32] S. Itani, S. Kita, and Y. Kajikawa, “Multimodal personal ear authentiinvestments: An exploratory multiple case study on decision-making, cation using acoustic ear feature for smartphone security,” IEEE Trans.
 evaluation and learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 77, pp. 807–823, Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 77–84, Feb. 2022.
 Aug. 2018. [33] J. Reyes-Ortiz, D. Anguita, A. Ghio, L. Oneto, and P. Xavier, 2012,
 [9] D. Xu, C. Peng, W. Wang, H. Liu, S. A. Shaikh, and Y. Tian, “Privacy- “Human activity recognition using smartphones,” UCI Machine Learning
 preserving dynamic multi-keyword ranked search scheme in multi-user Repository. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24432/C54S4K
 settings,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 890–901, [34] G. M. Weiss, WISDM Smartphone and Smartwatch Activity and
 Nov. 2023. Biometrics Dataset, UCI Mach. Learn. Repository, Irvine, CA, USA,
[10] P. Laplante and J. Voas, “Zero-trust artificial intelligence?” Computer, 2019.
 vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 10–12, 2022. [35] Z. Sitová et al., “HMOG: New behavioral biometric features for con-
[11] M. Campbell, “Beyond zero trust: Trust is a vulnerability,” Computer, tinuous authentication of smartphone users,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 110–113, 2020. Security, vol. 11, pp. 877–892, 2015.