IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024 2509510

Asymptotic Consistent Graph Structure Learning for
 Multivariate Time-Series Anomaly Detection
 Huaxin Pang , Shikui Wei , Youru Li , Ting Liu , Huaqi Zhang ,
 Ying Qin , Member, IEEE, and Yao Zhao , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Capturing complex intervariable relationships is IoT systems, and large amounts of time-series data are thus
crucial for anomaly detection for multivariate time-series (MTS) generated [4]. With the advances in big data analysis and deepdata. In recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been learning technologies [5], [6], intelligent models are developed
introduced to explicitly model complex intervariable relationships from global static or local dynamic views, improving the to improve the efficiency of monitoring data processing and
performance of anomaly detection tasks significantly. However, provide timely alerts to any potential anomalies to prevent
these approaches usually ignore exploring distinct interaction damage from expanding.
patterns within short context windows or fail to capture unbiased The primary challenges in anomaly detection tasks are the
intervariable relationships over longer time windows. To address availability of labeled data and the diversity of anomalous patthis limitation, we propose a novel asymptotic consistent graph
structure learning (ACGSL) framework for MTS anomaly detec- terns [7]. As such, unsupervised learning strategies are usually
tion. Specifically, a sequence aggregation module (SeAM) together to be considered and used for modeling and training detection
with a denoising filter is developed to learn the unbiased represen- frameworks. For univariate time-series data, the existing methtation for each temporal variable more effectively. Furthermore, ods usually rely on the periodicity or trend of time series to
a feature-accumulation graph construct module (FA-GCM) detect anomalies, for example, autoregressive moving average
enhanced by asymptotic consistent graph optimization (ACGO)
loss is proposed to construct stable interaction graphs over adap- (ARMA) [8] and long short-term memory (LSTM) encoder–
tive time windows. We conduct experiments on five benchmarks decoder [9]. However, for these methods, the multivariate
and achieve remarkable performance enhancement in anomaly time-series (MTS) data consecutively generated by a copious
detection, even acquiring a maximum gain of 3.64% over the amount of sensors from IoT infrastructures are too complex to
second-best baseline. Furthermore, ACGSL can explicitly give
 model effectively. Deploying multiple monitors of univariate
stable intervariable interacted graphs over arbitrary local normal
or anomalous states. Extensive experiments and ablation studies time series in parallel will decrease the speed of the server
demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed inference and increase the computing and storing loads. Fur-
ACGSL in anomaly detection. thermore, it is noteworthy that time-series data from different
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, deep learning, graph convo- sensors are often correlated with each other. Consequently,
lution, graph structure learning, multivariate time series (MTS). detecting sensor-specific anomalies of each sensor individually
 can lead to missed detection or failure to localize the root
 I. I NTRODUCTION cause. To tackle this challenge, a series of frameworks adapted

T HERE is now a growing need for security monitoring
 of many Internet-of-Things (IoT) infrastructures built on
cyber-physical systems (CPSs) [1], such as smart factories,
 to MTS anomaly detection have been proposed. According
 to the discrepancies of the core backbone, those frameworks
 can be roughly divided into three categories: recurrent neural
cloud servers, and smart transportation [2], due to their high network (RNN)-based [10], Transformer-based [7], and graph
complexity and susceptibility [3]. Accordingly, more and more neural network (GNN)-based methods [11].
sensors are being deployed to monitor the behavior of these Given the impressive performance exhibited in existing
 Manuscript received 3 January 2024; revised 29 January 2024; GNN-based models, attributed to their proficiency in capturing
accepted 2 February 2024. Date of publication 26 February 2024; date of intervariable relationships, constructing accurate graphs, and
current version 4 March 2024. This work was supported in part by the effectively propagating contextual influences from neighboring
National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2021ZD0112100; and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation contexts, our framework is established upon GNN-based techof China under Grant U1936212, Grant 62120106009, Grant 52202486, and niques. For such approaches, constructing graphs in MTS data
Grant 62106201. The Associate Editor coordinating the review process was is important for describing the propagation of relationships
Dr. Yang Song. (Corresponding author: Shikui Wei.)
 Huaxin Pang, Shikui Wei, Youru Li, Huaqi Zhang, Ying Qin, and Yao Zhao between temporal variables. The previous approaches mainly
are with the School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing focused on the following aspects, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: 20112005@bjtu.edu.cn; The first mode [12], [13] calculates the relevant graph via
shkwei@bjtu.edu.cn; liyouru@bjtu.edu.cn; 20112040@bjtu.edu.cn; yingqin@
bjtu.edu.cn; yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn). several similarity metric algorithms before training the model.
 Ting Liu is with the School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytech- As for the second mode, for example, the graph deviation
nical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: liuting@nwpu.edu.cn). network approach (GDN) [1] utilizes a graph structure module
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2024.3369159, provided by the authors. to optimize the global graph during the training procedure.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3369159 However, graphs generated by those two modes are framed to
 1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2509510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 graphs while the values are similar at neighbor time
 points. Thus, we can model stable interrelationship
 graphs depicting arbitrary local states.
 3) Experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate that
 ACGSL can achieve better anomaly detection performance than known competitive baselines and can model
 dynamic stable graphs to match the real MTS variation.

 II. R ELATED W ORK
 Anomaly detection of MTS has become an active research
 topic in data science due to its importance in the manage-
Fig. 1. Comparison of different interrelationship graphs constructing methods
 ment and monitoring of intelligent systems [6]. Traditional
for MTS data. statistical-based methods [8] have been proven to be effective,
 but heavily rely on prior knowledge. With the advancement
 of machine learning, anomaly detection in MTS makes great
be static during the test stage and neglect variable-dependence progress in performance and efficiency [5]. Dong et al. [17]
changes in the short time segment. proposed a subsequence time-series clustering-based unsu-
 In contrast, the deep variational graph convolutional recur- pervised approach, STS-AD, for anomaly detection of the
rent network (DVGCRN) [14], one of the representative hydraulic system. Omnianomaly [18] utilized a stochastic
models in the third mode, designs the deep embedding-guided RNN and a planar normalizing flow to generate reconstruction
probabilistic generative network to model hierarchical non- probabilities. Meanwhile, an adjusted peak over the threshdeterministic interrelationships based on segmented subse- old (POT) [19] was used to realize the automated anomaly
quences. However, learning graphs based on short context threshold selection. CrossFuN [20] designed a time–frequency
windows are biased [15], [16], compared with real interseries joint cross-fusion block to capture the relationship between
dependence. Meanwhile, as MTS has become more data- the time and frequency domains and could detect diverse
intensive, arbitrarily enlarging the context window size to types of anomaly. Recently, Transformers [21], [22] have
learn stable graphs also increases the storage complexity in shown great power in sequential data as the capacity to
the inference process. Though DyGraphAD [16] introduces discover reliable temporal dependencies by the self-attention
the dynamic time warping distance (DTW) strategy to extend mechanism. TransAD [7] built the deep transformer network
the reception field, which is also insufficient for modeling to swiftly perform inference with the knowledge of the
the long-range time dependence between variables. Thus, how broader temporal trends in the data. Anomaly Transformer [23]
to adaptively model stable and consistent interaction graphs renovated the self-attention mechanism to the anomaly attenover arbitrary time spans to depict both normal and abnormal tion and proposed a mini–max strategy to amplify the
patterns remains a serious challenge. normal–abnormal pattern. However, Liang et al. [24] com-
 To this end, we propose an asymptotic consistent graph bined generative adversarial networks and autoencoder to build
structure learning (ACGSL) framework. It can model the stable the framework, CCG-EDGAN, achieving anomaly detection
interrelationship in MTS data adaptively for detecting anoma- and location simultaneously.
lies. Specifically, the sequence aggregation module (SeAM) As for Graph-based methods [1], [25], their superiority lies
with MTS denoising filters is developed to learn the unbi- mainly in the ability to explicitly model the spatial–temporal
ased temporal embedding for individual variate subsequences dependencies between variates. For instance, MSCRED [15]
after filtering noisy interference effectively. Furthermore, the introduced a multiscale convolutional recurrent encoder and
feature-accumulation graph construct module (FA-GCM) is decoder to learn spatial correlations and temporal characdesigned to capture the explicit dependencies in dynamic teristics in MTS. Grattarola et al. [26] developed a graph
graphs for each time window. Moreover, to adaptively con- autoencoder combining the Riemannian manifolds and adverstruct stable interaction graphs over arbitrarily wide time sarial training strategy to detect anomalies. MTAD-GAT [27]
periods, we also propose an asymptotic consistent graph employed the graph attention network as a spatial–temporal
optimization (ACGO) strategy that imposes constraints on encoder to learn intervariable and intertemporal dependenthe convergence of neighbor graphs to the consistent state. cies. GDN [1] proposed a graph structure module that
Meanwhile, based on the stable graph, we utilize GNNs learns an underlying stationary graph structure and a graph
to capture the passing interacted information and learn the attention network. Though learning static relational graphs
graph-based representations. Finally, a time-series forecasting obtains limited gain on anomaly detection, the aforementioned
decoder makes the one-step-ahead forecast for each variable. approaches neglect to detect deviation of intervariable associ-
Our main contributions are highlighted as follows. ations between normal and anomalous states.
 1) A novel ACGSL framework for MTS anomaly detection GReLeN [28] was the first to dynamically construct graph
 is developed to explicitly model the evolving interrela- structures. It used dynamic graphs to compute the total
 tionship between variables effectively. changes in the in-degree and out-degree values for variable
 2) We propose a simple, yet efficient loss, asymptotic nodes and found the sudden changes promote the robustness
 consistent loss, to minimize the difference of neighbor for the detection of anomalous events. Dai and Chen [29]
PANG et al.: ASYMPTOTIC CONSISTENT GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING FOR MTS ANOMALY DETECTION 2509510

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed framework. It consists of four components. The SeAM with denoising preliminarily filters noisy signals and learns
historical features. The stable graph structure learning constructs a robust dynamic graph for each sequence. The graph-based representation learning uses
graph convolution layers to learn the interactive embedding. The prediction decoder can forecast the next time-series values.

proposed a graph-augmented normalizing flow model GANF that M sensors are viewed as M features again. A test set is
by imposing a Bayesian network among constituent series. a time series with M features collected over a different span
Conversely, GIF [30] employs a high-dimensional graph-level of time ticks. MTS anomaly detection is defined as a problem
embedding method based on the idea of random Fourier that determines whether an observation from a certain task at
features to discover anomalous observations. DVGCRN [14] a certain time is anomalous or not.
developed a deep embedding-guided probabilistic generative X c is a subsequence extracted from S (S is split into a series
network to model dynamic interrelationships within MTS to of subsequences with stride 1), which represents a collection of
perform the accurate posterior inference. MEGA [31] con- time ticks within a sliding context window of length w: X c :=
sidered integrating discrete wavelet transform (DWT) into an [Si· , i ∈ {c − w + 1, c − w + 2, c}], where Si· ∈ R M is the MTS
autoencoder to decompose MTS into multifrequency compo- at timestamp t. The range of c is 0 ≤ c ≤ T − 1. Meanwhile,
nents. However, existing methods pay less attention to the we use xmc to present the cth sequence of the sensor m. The
bias between dynamic graphs of short sequences and local work aims at assigning an anomaly score to each time tick in
stable graphs reflecting the real dependence of MTS over long- the test set, which is later thresholded to a binary label, with
range periods. If feed more long context sequences, time cost 0 being normal and 1 being abnormal.
will accordingly increase in the inference stage. Consequently,
we focus on designing a distinct framework to learn stable and IV. M ETHODOLOGY
unbiased relational graphs by using short sequences.
 A. SeAM With Denoising
 III. P RELIMINARIES MTS datasets collected from real-world scenarios usually
 unavoidably suffer from intrinsic noise, which detrimentally
A. Model Overview
 affects the effective modeling and robust learning of time-
 In this section, we give a brief overview of the proposed series representations. Consequently, most of the existing
framework: At the beginning, raw MTS data are input into approaches incorporate noise filtering as a preliminary prothe denoising module to eliminate the effect of common noise. cess, that is, by learning the noise rules in the MTS, then
Next, the sliced subsequences serve as the input for the SeAM, constructing a model to fit the noise values at each moment
the graph structure learning module, and the GNN, respec- in time, and finally subtracting the noise from the raw data.
tively. Furthermore, the graph-based subsequence embedding This process can be defined as
and long-time temporal representation are concatenated as the
input of the prediction decoder to forecast the latter MTS’s X̄ = X − f D (X ; 2 D ) (1)
values. Moreover, we propose two vital loss functions to
 where X̄ denotes the MTS data after filtering the noise
jointly optimize the whole model during training. Finally, the
 and f D (X c ; 2 D ) represents the noise-fit function with the
hybrid scores are calculated based on the predicted states to
 parameters 2 D . Considering that the temporal fluctuations
detect anomalies at test time. The overall pipeline is shown in
 and relational features need to be reserved, we adopt a sim-
Fig. 2.
 ple, yet effective MTS denoising module, a linear projection
 layer with bias, to fit the noise. Specifically, f D (X c ; 2 D ) =
B. Problem Statement Sigmoid(W D X c + b D ), W D ∈ Rw×w , b D ∈ Rw . For each
 In this work, we are given an MTS S ∈ R M×T , collected sequence X c ∈ R M×w , the denoised sequence is denoted as
over T times ticks with M sensors, as a training set. Note X̄ c ∈ R M×w . After filtering the noise, we construct a module
2509510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

aggregating multiple sequence features to learn the long-range
temporal embeddings for MTS.
 For the anomaly detection task, it is crucial to capture
and learn vital information from historical sequences. Inspired
by Malhotra et al. [9] and Chen et al. [14], we leverage
a stacked LSTM to characterize multilevel and long-range
temporal dependencies. Furthermore, an SeAM is designed
to integrate relevant historical features for each-variate time
series, as follows: Fig. 3. Schema of the ACGO strategy.

 H c , (N c , O c ) = LSTMs X̄ c , N c−1 , O c−1 ; 2 L
  
 (2)
where N c ∈ R M×d and N c−1 ∈ R M×d represent the current Though we leverage both features X̄ c of N c to generate
c-timepoint and the prior c − 1-timepoint output embeddings, dynamic graphs, these graphs include biased and inadequate
respectively. O c ∈ R M×d and O c−1 ∈ R M×d are the hidden relationships caused by the short sequence X̄ c . Besides, existstated representations at the corresponding moment. Moreover, ing models cannot address the challenge above. However,
H c = N c , we let H c serve the predicted decoder, and N c we intuitively find that when the moment value of neighbor
is employed in the graph-generated process. 2 L denotes the times is ∥Y c+1 − Y c ∥1 → 0, the relational graphs should be
learnable parameters in the LSTM module. Note that the Ac+1 ≈ Ac , otherwise Ac+1 ̸ = Ac . Inspired by the pattern
LSTMs are shared among different time series to reduce above, we propose a novel and effective strategy, named the
learned parameters. ACGO strategy, to constrain neighbor dynamic graphs to keep
 the same with the guidance of ground truth. We also give a
 schematic in Fig. 3 to illustrate the core idea of the ACGO.
B. Feature-Accumulation Graph Construct Module
 The formula definition is as follows:
 A major goal of our framework is to learn the interrela-  T T 
 min φ f θ X c+1 · f θ X c+1 − f θ X c · f θ X c
  
tionships between several time series in the form of a stable θ
graph structure. Different from the existing approaches [1], ∀ Y c+1 − Y c 1 ≤ σ (5)
[32], we first design an FA-GCM, which integrates the current
denoised sequence features as well as the historical state where f θ and φ denote the feature learning and graph differinformation to generate a robust dynamic graph. The nodes ence calculation, respectively. σ is a tiny constant. We expect
represent sensors and edges represent dependency relation- that neighbor graphs should be consistent if the discrepancy
ships between them in the current cth time point. To do of labels is less than σ , otherwise, graphs are dynamic and
this, we define the state matrix V c = X̄ c ∥N c , where V c ∈ changeable. With ACGO, our method prefers to capture stable
V M×(w+d) and ∥ denotes the concatenation operation. Accord- dependencies over long-range time series. The implemented
ing to the state vector vic ∈ Rw+d , the dependent weights details of ACGO are introduced in the model optimization
can be calculated by the normalized dot product between the section.
embedding vectors of sensors, which can be formulated by
 vic v cj T C. Graph-Based Representation Learning
 eicj = , i, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M} (3)
 ∥vic ∥·∥v cj ∥ Based on these stable interactions captured by the proposed
 FA-GCM, sensors can bring to bear on others, which further
where eicj denotes the correlation value between sensor i and can change the subsequent behaviors of relevant sensors.
sensor j. All eicj form the weighted adjacency matrix Ac . To better predict the next-time state of MTS, it is necessary
However, with this calculation method, most values of eicj to model the influence from other neighbor sensors for each
are greater than 0, indicating that nearly every sensor has sensor. Hence, we utilize GNN architecture with parameters
many relations with other sensors. This implies that unrelated 9G to learn the passing influence features and generate the
sensors might be aggregated with each other. In addition, the new sequence representation
dependencies patterns between sensors are not symmetric, that
 G c = GNN X̄ c , Āc ; 9G .
 
is, eicj is not equal to ecji . Hence, Ac can be further refined by (6)
transforming it into a directed graph, retaining only the key
 To retain the original sequence features X̄ c at the same time
edges
 aggregating the influence exerted by other sensors, we employ
 Āicj = 1, c
 : k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M} \ {i}
  
 j ∈ TopK eik (4) a simple architecture, graph isomorphism network (GIN) [33].
 GIN achieves maximum discriminative power among GNNs
where TopK denotes the indices of top-K values, which is and promotes the preserved energy of original nodes by
implemented by selecting top k values from the weighted introducing the flexible adjusted variable ϵ. In our work,
adjacency matrix computed by the normalized dot products. we employ the single graph convolution layer to integrate the
In this manner, we can obtain the refined discretized adjacency first-order interactions among nodes. Specifically, GIN updates
matrix Āc . Note that the value of k is adaptable for each dataset node representations g c as
and can be adjusted flexibly by users according to the desired
 gic = f 9 (1 + ϵ)xic + aggregate x cj , j ∈ N (i) .
  
refined level. (7)
PANG et al.: ASYMPTOTIC CONSISTENT GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING FOR MTS ANOMALY DETECTION 2509510

Here, multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) are used to model and TABLE I
learn f 9 , as MLPs can represent the composition of functions. K EY H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS IN F IVE DATASETS
Given the hyperparameter ϵ, we empirically select a fixed
scalar, that is, ϵ = 0.1. Furthermore, we utilize the sum
mode to aggregate the embeddings of the neighbors N (i) over
node i, according to the researched results [33].

D. Time-Series Forecasting Decoder
 Following [7], we build the time-series forecasting decoder
to generate the time-series value vector y c = s c+1 ∈ R M at As the loss LcR , we utilize P the mean square error (MSE)
the next time (c + 1). Considering that the MTS next-time loss, that is, LcR = (1/M) m=1 M
 ( ŷ cm − ymc )2 , to minimize
values are not only relevant to the current features but have the error between the forecasting value and the ground truth.
a dependency on the historical state, we concatenate the In addition, ∥Ac ∥2 is a regularization constraint to graphs via
graph-based sequence representation G c and long-range tem- the l2 norm. α, β, and γ are three hyperparameters to realize
poral dependency embedding H c and then feed this combined the tradeoff between these losses.
representation into the prediction decoder. The forecasting
vector Ŷ c is defined as V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSES
 Ŷ c = σ f 2 f 1 G c ∥H c .
 
 (8) A. Datasets and Evaluation Metrics
The activated function σ we used is a general ReLU function. We use five publicly available datasets to evaluate our
Both f 1 and f 2 are two feed-forward networks with the param- model performance. The soil moisture active passive (SMAP)
eter matrices and biases {W1 , b1 } and {W2 , b2 }, respectively. and Mars Science Laboratory rover (MSL) [10] datasets are
Subsequently, Ŷ c is used to calculate the loss in the training published by NASA. The secure water treatment (SWaT) [34]
phase and the anomaly score in the test phase. dataset is released by iTrust Center to support the cyberattack investigation. The SMD [18] is a server machine
E. Model Optimization dataset collected from a large internet company. Moreover, the
 MSDS [35] dataset is recorded from a complex distributed sys-
 1) Asymptotic Consistency Loss: We used the FA-GCM to tem for AI operation monitors. The details of their description
build the relation graph for each sequence. The sequences are and preprocessing are found in the Supplementary Material.
constantly changing, giving rise to diverse graphs. We propose To compare the performance between our model and
the ACGO strategy to converge the neighboring graphs to the other baselines, we used the evaluation metrics that are
same and eliminate the disturbance of spurious correlations used in experiments. We use precision (P), recall (R),
and noise. To realize the ACGO strategy, we construct the F1 score (F1), and area under the receiver operating charasymptotic consistency loss (ACLoss) function to minimize acteristic curve (AUC) on the test data and its ground truth
the variability of the graphs of neighbor sequences by intro- to measure the capability of models. Following the prior
ducing the supervision of ground truth. The ACLoss is defined works [7], [16], [36], the widely used POT [19] method is
as follows: applied to choose the threshold automatically and dynamically
 " M
 # M M
 1 X
 c−1 1 X X c  as the one that achieves the best F1 over the test set. Besides,
 c c
 Ai j − Aic−1
 
 LA = 1 − yi − yi · 2 j we follow the point-adjusting strategy suggested in [18], which
 M i=1 M i=1 j=1
 labels a whole anomaly segment as 1 as long as one of the
 = 1 − Y c − Y c−1 1 · Ac −Ac−1 1
 
 (9) points within the segment is detected as an anomaly.
where Y c and Ac present the ground-truth label and weighted
adjacency matrix of the sequence X c , respectively. Similarly, B. Baselines
{Y c−1 , Ac−1 } are the ones corresponding to the sequence X c−1 . We compare the performance of our proposed frame-
Note that we adopt the Ac instead of Āc to meet the loss work with several popular anomaly detection methods.
gradient backpropagation. Assuming that ∥Ac −Ac−1 ∥1 is a These baseline methods are as follows: LSTM-NDT [10],
fixed scalar, when ∥Y c − Y c−1 ∥1 → 0, the loss gradually DAGMM [37], OmniAnomaly [18], MSCRED [15], MADincreases, and the model needs to do the large optimization. GAN [38], USAD [36], MTAD-GAT [27], CAE-M [39],
Otherwise, ∥Y c − Y c−1 ∥1 → 1 means nothing to optimize. InterFusion [40], GDN [1], TranAD [7], CrossFuN [20],
 2) Whole Objective Function: Since training sets of many DyGraphAD [16], and Anomaly Transformer [23]. We further
datasets only provide the normal data samples, inspired by give detailed descriptions of datasets and baselines in the
Tuli et al. [7], our method aims to predict a one-step-ahead Appendix.
forecast based on historical data. Hence, the whole objective
function used to optimize our model parameters is defined as
 C. Experimental Settings
 C
 1 X We implement our method in PyTorch version 1.8.1 with
 αLcR + βLcA + γ Ac 2 .
 
 L= (10)
 C c=1 CUDA 11.4 and deep graph library (DGL) version 0.9.1.
2509510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ACGSL W ITH BASELINES ON F IVE B ENCHMARKS . AUC: A REA U NDER THE ROC C URVE , F1: F1 S CORE (%). T HE
 B EST AND S ECOND -B EST S CORES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD AND W ITH U NDERLINES , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF ACGSL W ITH BASELINES ON F IVE B ENCHMARKS . P: P RECISION (%), R: R ECALL (%). T HE B EST AND S ECOND -B EST
 S CORES A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD AND W ITH U NDERLINES , R ESPECTIVELY

We train them on a server with Intel1 Xeon1 Gold 6248R for the compared methods. Our model code is released at
CPU @ 3.00 GHz and 1 NVIDIA Geforce RTX 3090 graphics https://github.com/xinhuaxi/ACGSL-for-MTS.
card. The models are trained using the AdamW optimizer with
different learning rates for each dataset and step scheduler D. Performance Comparison
with a step size of 0.5. The window size is set as 10. The
hidden dimension in the SeAM and FA-GCM modules is 32. We compare the proposed models with several existing
We also set the dropout rate as 0.2 in the prediction layer. methods, and experimental results (AUC and F1 score) are
Considering the diversities of the number of variates (features) reported in Table II and precision (P) and recall (R) scores
and time-series trends in each dataset, we specifically searched are in Table III. We can observe that our model ACGSL
for the optimized combination of key hyperparameters for each obtains significant improvements over all datasets of different
dataset to get the best performance. These hyperparameter forecast horizons. For the MSL dataset, ACGSL has better
settings are reported in Table I. For the learning rate and performances on the F1 score than OmniAnomaly, TranAD,
max epochs, we refer to the TranAD and further make and GDN, by 13.59%, 4.87%, and 3.81%. Over the AUC
slight adjustments according to the number of parameters score, our model also achieves competitive performances comof our model. The selected process of loss hyperparameter pared to SOAT baselines and made some solid gains even
combination {α, β, γ } is shown in the experimental section. on top of our higher results, such as the gain of 0.071%
For our model ACGSL, we conduct experiments five times than the Anomaly Transformer in SWaT. For the precision
with different random seed settings and report the mean score and recall metrics, our method still achieves competitive
of all metrics. Besides, we adopt the parameter settings that performance. Though most of the baselines realize the high
are consistent with those detailed in their respective papers recall, the precisions are low, which means that they can
 detect all anomalies by predicting more states as anomalies.
 1 Registered trademark. However, ACGSL realizes the lower false positive ratio (i.e.,
PANG et al.: ASYMPTOTIC CONSISTENT GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING FOR MTS ANOMALY DETECTION 2509510

 TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDIES OF THE ACGSL IN T ERMS OF AUC AND F1 S CORES ON F IVE DATASETS

Fig. 4. Empirical analysis for the tradeoff between loss hyperparameters α and β on several datasets. (a) SMAP. (b) SWaT. (c) SMD. (d) MSDS.

1 − precision) while accurately recognizing the presence of are biased and unstable because of the short sequence input.
multiple types of outliers in the dataset. Our method still outperforms them in terms of AUC and F1 as
 Moreover, we summarize some extra views as follows: ACGSL uses historical features and ACGSL to generate a
1) These methods (LSTM-NDT, MAD-GAN, etc.) obtain dynamic and unbiased graph without the limit of the predepoor performances since they adopt the recurrent mechanism fined window.
to only capture the temporal context dependencies without
modeling the relationships among variables. This presents E. Ablation Studies
learning the relationships of variables are necessary; 2) Com- To study the necessity of key components of our method,
pared to models based on RNN architecture, these approaches we observe how the model performance degrades by exclud-
(OmmiAnomaly, GDN, and MTAD-GAT, etc.) learn static ing each component: the denoise module, Hh in FA-GCM,
interseries relevances to predict next-step values, neglecting X d in FA-GCM, Ht in the decoder module, and ACLoss,
the changes of relationships under the different states. They respectively. The intention of removing the denoise module
cannot deal with MTS with changed dependencies well, such is to figure out whether is necessary to filter extensively
as SMAP (F1 = 88.80%, 85.18%) and GDN datasets existing noise in real-world data. Furthermore, we remove
(F1 = 86.83%, 96.05% for MTAD-GAT and GDN); and the embedding Hn or X d to distinguish the dependence of
3) DyGraphAD improves the performance by capturing the the graph construction process on history features and current
multiseries relevances in the small-range window. TranAD features. Note that the effect of the gradual consistency loss
and Anomaly Transformer use self-attention to capture the is discussed in Section V-F. The results are summarized in
dependencies. However, the relationships these models learned Table IV and provide the following findings.
2509510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 5. ROC_AUC score and F1 score with percentage of retained edges (top-K ) on five datasets. (a) ROC AUC. (b) F1 Score.

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT GNN F RAMEWORKS ON F IVE DATASETS

 1) There are significant drops in performance without the significant decline when the hyperparameter β exceeded 0.05.
 denoise module in all datasets. This implies that simply This unexpected result could potentially be attributed to model
 filtering noise is conducive to finding the real state of overfitting, thereby highlighting the importance of carefully
 each sensor and capturing the correct interaction. tuning hyperparameters to avoid such issues.
 2) Removing any of Hn and X d can cause performances 2) Selection of Top-K: Using the top-K strategy is condegradation. However, the decreased degrees are differ- ducive to straightforwardly eliminating noise and dispensable
 ent in the five datasets. For instance, when we do not interacted influences and capturing the potential cause–effect
 employ the Hn in the FA-GCM, the AUC of anomaly among sensors. Here, we design experiments to investigate
 detection decreases by 0.0349 over SMAP. On the whether different top-K setups affect the model perforcontrary, there is only a slight change from 0.9944 to mance. Since the number of sensors in datasets is various,
 0.9922 in MSL. we adopt the percentage of retained edges to unify the
 3) During the decoding process, introducing the embedding process of selecting top-K . The range of percentage is
 Ht containing the historical prior information can help {20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100%}. We can observe in Fig. 5
 precisely construct the next value, further significantly that each dataset corresponds to a different percentage of
 improving the accuracy of anomaly detection. edges (top-K ). For instance, we only reserve the 20% of edges
 4) All metric scores realize the significant decrease without for each sensor (top-K = 5) to realize the high AUC score on
 using the ACLoss, which presents learning the stable the MSL dataset. In contrast, the SMAP dataset needs 80% of
 graphs as crucial for the anomaly detection task. interactions (top-K = 40).
 3) Selection of GNN: Generally, given the fixed graph
 and nodes’ embeddings, using different GNN modules
F. Parameter Analyses can construct different nodes’ representations. Therefore,
 1) Influence of Hyperparameters in the Loss Function: to explore which is suitable for anomaly detection, we select
We conduct comprehensive experiments to find the desired several classic GNNs, such as GCN [41], GAT [42], Graphcombination between reconstructed loss weight α and grad- SAGE [43], ChebyNet [44], and GIN [33]. The results of AUC
ual consistency loss weight β for optimal convergence with and F1 scores are reported in Table V. We can observe that the
limited epochs. The experimental F1 scores are reported in performances using GIN are superior to other GNN modules
Fig. 4 with the one-to-one correspondence of α and β. When on multiple datasets, where the F1 score promotes 22.09%
β = 0.0, the performances have a distinct decrease on multiple than the GAT module on the SMAP dataset. This is because
datasets, presenting that the proposed ACLoss is essential GIN can reserve more original information during the message
for anomaly detection. We further summarize all results, passing.
finding that the ACGSL reaches the optimal performance as
the ratio α/β is within the interval [10, 100]. Interestingly, G. Case Studies
a surprising observation was made on the SMD dataset [see 1) Learned Graph Visualization: To investigate whether
Fig. 4(c)], where the model’s performance experienced a learned graphs exist the progressive consistency, we conduct
PANG et al.: ASYMPTOTIC CONSISTENT GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING FOR MTS ANOMALY DETECTION 2509510

Fig. 6. Empirical analysis for learned graphs on the SMD test set. The top row presents heat maps of learned adjacency matrices at different times. The
bottom row shows the relation between anomaly label sequence and graph difference sequence.

 2) Predicted Results Analysis: We compared the predicted
 and observed sensor values in Fig. 7 to intuitively evaluate
 the capability of ACGSL in learning normal patterns of
 complex MTS. The regions highlighted in blue in Fig. 7 exhibit
 considerable spikes in anomaly regions. For different sensors,
 our model can learn the correct change paradigm and precisely
 construct the values based on the interaction among sensors
 and historical data. These values of special abnormal locations
 are also predicted well. Accurate predictions are beneficial
 to timely finding anomalies and further analyzing the reason
 behind the phenomena.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 In this work, an ACGSL framework is proposed for MTS
 anomaly detection. To model the unbiased and stable intervariable relationship graphs of local normal and anomalous states,
 we develop two task-oriented modules and one significant
 loss function. The SeAM with denoising not only filters the
 noise of the sequence data, but can also learn long-range
Fig. 7. Predicted and ground-truth labels for the SMD test set, where temporal embedding containing historical semantics. The
each dimension denotes the specific sensor. The blue bands present the true
anomaly. FA-GCM integrates the context features to generate robust
 dynamic graphs. More importantly, the asymptotic consistent
a case study by taking the SMD test set as an example. loss efficiently enforces gradual consistency among adjacent
We visualize the interacted graph among sensors at specific dynamic graphs. It helps ACGSL adaptively model stable and
timestamps as shown in Fig. 6. Edges in learned graphs unbiased interaction graphs along any time span and sensiprovide interpretability by indicating which sensors are related tively capture the difference between normal and anomalous
to one another. Besides, the attention weights further indicate signals. Experiments on five datasets have shown the effecthe importance of each node’s neighbors in modeling the tiveness of the proposed method in anomaly detection tasks.
node’s behavior. The results explicitly indicate that when the ACSGL realizes the best performances on several datasets over
interval time 1t = 5, their graphs are similar generally. F1 score (98.83% on SMAP, 99.43% on SMD, and 99.56% on
Especially, these vital edges are still changeless. Moreover, MSL) and AUC metrics (0.9883 on SWaT, 0.9990 on SMD,
to explore the differences of contiguous timestamps on the and 0.9944 on MSL). Additionally, unbiased intervariable
whole test set, we calculated the graph difference degree: relationship graphs can help us intuitively understand the
1i = Mean(G i − G ( i − 1)). We can find that when the labels changes during abnormal periods. For future work, the more
are the same, the 1i is close to zero. This means that ACGSL complex denoising architecture, hyperparameter selection, and
learned stable and dependable relations. As labels happen to high-order asymptotics will be further explored.
change, the graph difference degrees are increased, which R EFERENCES
indicates the graph structure is adjusted. This presents that
 [1] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
ACGSL can adaptively capture dynamic interaction among in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf., 2021, vol. 35, no. 5,
sensors. pp. 4027–4035.
2509510 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 [2] D. Lee, Y. Gu, J. Hoang, and M. Marchetti-Bowick, “Joint interaction [25] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 and trajectory prediction for autonomous driving using graph neural graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
 networks,” 2019, arXiv:1912.07882. detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
 [3] S. Madakam, R. Ramaswamy, and S. Tripathi, “Internet of Things (IoT): Jun. 2021.
 A literature review,” J. Comput. Commun., vol. 3, no. 5, p. 164, 2015. [26] D. Grattarola, D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Change detection
 [4] D. M. Hawkins, Identification of Outliers, vol. 11. London, U.K.: in graph streams by learning graph embeddings on constant-curvature
 Chapman & Hall, 1980. manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 6,
 [5] S. Thudumu, P. Branch, J. Jin, and J. J. Singh, “A comprehensive survey pp. 1856–1869, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2927301.
 of anomaly detection techniques for high dimensional big data,” J. Big [27] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 Data, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 42, 2020. attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 [6] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, S. Sorour, and M. Guizani, “Deep Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
 learning for IoT big data and streaming analytics: A survey,” IEEE [28] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2923–2960, 4th Quart., 2018. anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,”
 [7] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), Vienna, Austria, 2022,
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. pp. 2390–2397.
 VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. [29] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 [8] P. J. Brockwell and R. A. Davis, Time Series: Theory and Methods. detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. ICLR, 2022, pp. 1–16.
 Springer, 1991.
 [30] D. Zambon, L. Livi, and C. Alippi, “Graph iForest: Isolation of anoma-
 [9] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and lous and outlier graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN),
 G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly Jul. 2022, pp. 1–8.
 detection,” in Proc. ICML Anomaly Detection Workshop, 2016, pp. 1–5.
 [31] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
[10] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 2502911.
 nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min., 2018, pp. 387–395. [32] W. Xiong and X. Sun, “MGADN: A multi-task graph anomaly detection
 network for multivariate time series,” 2022, arXiv:2211.12141.
[11] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
 Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” 2023, [33] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
 arXiv:2307.03759. neural networks?” in Proc. ICLR, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 2019,
[12] Y. Wu, M. Gu, L. Wang, Y. Lin, F. Wang, and H. Yang, “Event2Graph: pp. 1–17.
 Event-driven bipartite graph for multivariate time series forecasting and [34] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. CIKM Workshop (AMLTS), vol. 3375, 2022, testbed for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workpp. 1–8. shop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016,
[13] W. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Cheng, C. Yang, and X. Ren, “Time-series event pp. 31–36.
 prediction with evolutionary state graph,” in Proc. WSDM, Mar. 2021, [35] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. K. Mandapati, S. Becker, J. Cardoso,
 pp. 580–588. and O. Kao, “Multi-source distributed system data for AI-powered
[14] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep analytics,” in Proc. 8th IFIP WG 2.14 Eur. Conf. (ESOCC). Crete,
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time Greece: Springer, 2020, pp. 161–176.
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, [36] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 pp. 3621–3633. “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
[15] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min.,
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
 Conf., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1409–1416. [37] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
[16] K. Chen, M. Feng, and T. S. Wirjanto, “Multivariate time series anomaly pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.,
 detection via dynamic graph forecasting,” 2023, arXiv:2302.02051. 2018, pp. 1–19.
[17] C. Dong, J. Tao, Q. Chao, H. Yu, and C. Liu, “Subsequence time [38] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 series clustering-based unsupervised approach for anomaly detection Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
 of axial piston pumps,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
 Art. no. 3512212. 2019, pp. 703–716.
[18] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly [39] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [40] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpreta-
[19] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 pp. 3220–3230.
[20] Y. Bai, J. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Miao, and Y. Lin, “CrossFuN: Multiview
 joint cross-fusion network for time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE [41] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 3532109. graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICLR, Toulon, France,
[21] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Apr. 2017, pp. 1–14.
 Inform. Process. Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [42] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and
[22] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, and D. Metzler, “Efficient transformers: Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR, Vancouver, BC,
 A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 6, p. 109, 2023. Canada, May 2018, pp. 1–12.
[23] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time [43] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. ICLR, learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Long
 Apr. 2022, pp. 1–20. Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
[24] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly detec- [44] M. Defferrard, X. Bresson, and P. Vandergheynst, “Convolutional
 tion and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering,”
 graph-based encoder–decoder GAN,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Barcelona, Spain, 2016,
 vol. 71, 2022, Art. no. 3504210. pp. 3837–3845.