9374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

ATVITSC: A Novel Encrypted Traffic Classification
 Method Based on Deep Learning
 Ya Liu , Xiao Wang , Bo Qu , and Fengyu Zhao

 Abstract— The increasing prevalence of encrypted communi- I. I NTRODUCTION
cation on the modern internet has presented new challenges
for traffic classification and network management. Traditional
traffic classification methods cannot handle encrypted traffic
effectively. Meanwhile, many existing methods either rely on
hand-crafted features or fail to extract the underlying interac-
 I N RECENT years, network security has been elevated to
 a significant strategic position in many countries. Encryption technology is one of the most widely used methods to
tion patterns between data packets adequately. In this paper, safeguard network security [1]. However, cybercriminals can
we propose a novel encrypted traffic classification method called
the Attention-based Vision Transformer and Spatiotemporal for
 also be hidden in the encrypted network traffic. To address
Traffic Classification (ATVITSC). In the preprocessing stage, this challenge, encrypted traffic classification has been extenpacket-level images within a session, generated from the payload sively applied in intrusion detection systems and malware
of data packets, are combined into a session image to mitigate propagation detection. It seems impossible to classify the
information confusion. In the classification stage, session images encrypted traffic if the encrypted algorithm is applied safely.
are first processed by the packet vision transformer (PVT)
module, which employs the transformer encoder and multi-
 Nevertheless, this hypothesis is not always correct. Lin et al.
head self-attention mechanism, to capture the global features. [2] evaluated the randomness of 5 ciphers through 15 sets
In parallel, session images are also processed by the spatiotem- of statistical tests, and found that all these ciphers could not
poral feature extraction (STFE) module, where spatial features achieve the ideal randomness. Furthermore, because encrypted
of packets are extracted by the convolution operation with the communication increases the payload and latency of the netattention mechanism and temporal features between packets are
then combined by the bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory
 work, different types of encrypted traffic may result in different
(LSTM). The global and spatiotemporal features are fused in impacts on the network. Hence, if encrypted traffic is classified
the feature fusion classification (FFC) module by a dynamic correctly, network administrators can better understand and
weighting mechanism and encrypted traffic is finally classified manage various communication behaviors [3].
based on the fused features. Comprehensive experiments on Early traffic classification relies on port numbers, where difvarious types of encrypted traffic, including virtual private
network (VPN), onion router (Tor), malicious traffic, and mobile
 ferent types of network traffic can be classified based on their
traffic, show that the ATVITSC successfully improves the macro- source and destination ports [4]. However, with the widespread
f1 scores to 97.88%, 98.79%, 99.67%, 94.90%, respectively. The usage of dynamic and non-standard ports, port-based methods
results also reveal that the ATVITSC exhibits better classification become less reliable. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) methperformance and generalization ability than the state-of-the-art ods [2], which classify network traffic by analyzing the
methods.
 content of network packets, are more precise than port-based
 Index Terms— Encrypted traffic classification, self-attention methods but only applicable to unencrypted traffic and require
mechanism, a dynamic weighting mechanism, spatialtemporal substantial computational resources. Machine learning is also
network.
 used to classify network traffic by analyzing the behavior
 Received 19 December 2023; revised 9 June 2024; accepted 16 July or statistical features of network traffic, such as the trans-
2024. Date of publication 25 July 2024; date of current version 10 October mission frequency, size, and flow duration of packet [5].
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62002184, in part by the Doctoral Startup Although this method is more robust than port-based and
Fund of Guangdong University of Science and Technology under Grant DPI methods, the performance depends on manually designed
XJ2023002001, in part by the Open Topics from The Lion Rock Labs of features.
Cyberspace Security under Project #LRL24017, and in part by the Scientific
Research Initiation Fund for High-Level Talents of Shanghai Publishing and The application of deep learning in traffic classification
Printing College under Grant 2024rcky22. The associate editor coordinating can automatically extract features, which avoids the laborious
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Prof. Ghassan steps of feature engineering [6]. Deep learning models can
Karame. (Corresponding author: Bo Qu.)
 Ya Liu is with the School of Optical-Electrical and Computer Engineering, adapt to different encryption scenarios and perform end-to-end
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, China, encrypted traffic classification [7]. Encrypted traffic classificaand also with the Lion Rock Labs of Cyberspace Security, CTIHE, Hong tion based on deep learning has been a hot spot of network
Kong, China.
 Xiao Wang is with the School of Optical-Electrical and Computer Engineer- security in recent years. However, on the one hand, previous
ing, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology, Shanghai 200093, research studies extracted the spatial or temporary features
China. of network flows and the relationships among packets inad-
 Bo Qu is with the School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of
Science and Technology, Dongguan 523083, China (e-mail: bo@qubo.im). equately, resulting in the limited ability of feature extraction
 Fengyu Zhao is with the Department of Information and Intelligence and insufficient robustness of classification [8]. On the other
Engineering, Shanghai Publishing and Printing College, Shanghai 200093, hand, some methods that attempt to capture the spatiotemporal
China.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3433446 features of traffic may lead to confusion in temporal informa-
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9375

tion. For example, in the cascaded structure of convolutional (4) A large number of comprehensive experiments on four
neural networks and recurrent neural networks, convolutional datasets, i.e., USTC-TFS, ISCX-Tor, ISCX-VPN and Crossoperations are based on local neighborhoods, which may lead Platform (U.S. Android APP), are performed to demonstrate
to a lack of temporal relationships among the spatial features the superior performances of ATVITSC. From the view of
extracted from packets, thereby affecting the extraction of the accuracy, Macro-F1, Macro-Recall and Macro-Precision,
spatiotemporal features [9]. ATVITSC outperforms ten advanced schemes in most cases.
 To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose a In addition, we also explain the reasons for selecting hypernovel scheme called Attention-based Vision Transformer and parameters by conducting experiments, such as the number of
Spatiotemporal for Traffic Classification (ATVITSC). In the chosen packets, the first m bytes selected from each packet
preprocessing stage, the raw traffic is split into network ses- and the temperature.
sions. Within each session, the packet sequence is transformed The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II
into a sequence of packet images, which are combined into a introduces the related work on encrypted traffic classificasession image. All session images are divided into fixed-size tion. Section III presents our novel approach ATVITSC.
patches to avoid information distortion. In the classification Section IV provides a detailed experimental analysis of
stage, session images are fed into the packet vision transformer ATVITSC. Finally, section V concludes the paper.
(PVT) and spatiotemporal feature extraction (STFE) modules
in parallel to capture the global and spatiotemporal features. II. R ELATED W ORK
In the PVT module, the patches are transformed through The current approaches employed for traffic identification
packet embedding, positional embedding, and length embed- can be categorized into port-based methods, payload-based
ding, which are added together to feed into a PVT encoder methods, machine learning methods that rely on statistical
with a Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) mechanism to features and end-to-end deep learning methods [10].
extract global features of the network flow. In the STFE mod- As discussed above, port-based traffic classification and
ule, the patches are transformed through the attention-based payload-based methods such as DPI cannot be suitable for
convolution operation and the bidirectional LSTM network analyzing the encrypted traffic. Machine learning methods use
to capture spatial features of each packet within the ses- statistical features to perform encrypted traffic classification.
sion and temporal features among packets, thereby obtaining For instance, AppScanner [11] trained a random forest classispatial-temporal features of the entire network session. The fier using statistical features based on the packet size, while
global and spatial-temporal features are fused in the feature BIND [12] used statistical features based on time features.
fusion classification (FFC) module by a dynamic weighting However, these features are only suitable for specific scenarios,
mechanism and encrypted traffic is finally classified based on and it is difficult to design a universal set of statistical features
the fused features. The main contributions of this paper are that can be adapted to different encryption scenarios.
summarized as follows: In recent years, encrypted traffic classification methods
 (1) Propose a packet-level preprocessing method to trans- based on deep learning have developed very rapidly. Liu et al.
form encrypted traffic into session images, which not only proposed an FS-Net based on recurrent neural networks
mitigates the issue of information disorder but also enhances (RNNs) to automatically extract the simplistic features from
the capability to learn inner relations among packets. In addi- the sequence of packet sizes for the encrypted traffic classifition, this preprocess method adopts both position encoding and cation [13]. Shapira and Shavitt used FlowPic [14] to extract
length encoding to capture the order and length information packet size and arrival time from raw traffic to construct
among packets, which alleviates the problem of information images for classification. Wang et al. used 1D-CNN [15]
loss after image generation. and 2D-CNN [16] approaches for the traffic classification by
 (2) Design the PVT and STFE modules with the atten- converting the first 768 bytes of network flows into grayscale
tion mechanism, which accurately identifies network traffic. images. However, they didn’t handle them at the packet level,
In the PVT module, three kinds of embedding operations thereby resulting in the confusion of packet image information
are designed, and then added together to feed into a PVT from different periods during the convolutional operations.
encoder with the MHSA mechanism to retain the time and Shen et al. proposed GraphDApp based on graph neural
position information and extract global features fully. In the networks to classify encrypted traffic by constructing a Traffic
STFE module, the convolution operation with the self-attention Interaction Graph (TIG) [17]. However, compared to other
mechanism and bidirectional LSTM network are designed methods, GraphDApp takes more time to label unknown flows
so that ATVITSC can accurately capture spatiotemporal and the accuracy decreases when adjustments are made to
features. the application fingerprints. Huoh et al. [18] considered the
 (3) Propose a dynamic weighting mechanism that adaptively raw bytes, metadata and inter-packet relationships in traffic to
adjusts the weights of global and spatial-temporal features, construct a traffic graph. They used graph neural networks
thereby resulting in the appropriate fusion of these two fea- to extract graph representations for classification. In traffic
tures. Additionally, by introducing a temperature parameter, recognition, Wang [19] stressed the significance of detecting
ATVITSC avoids the highly imbalanced weight distribution essential byte features, and analyzed the impact of the first
of different features during the feature fusion process. Mean- 25 bytes, the first 100 bytes and the least helpful 300 bytes
while, it ensures that different feature extraction modules of the payload for encrypted traffic classification to indicate
perform sufficient learning during the training stage. the initial 200 bytes were the most crucial. Lotfollahi et al.
9376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 1. The frame of ATVITSC.

discovered that 96% of packet payloads have a length of less capture the relationships among packets in the flow. Therefore,
than 1480 bytes [20]. Hence, they used the first 1500 bytes as TSCRNN cannot extract the global features of the entire
the model’s input and considered protocol fields in the network flow. The CMTSNN [24] proposed by Zhu et al. also used
and transport layers. Taking the entire payload as input will a cascaded structure of CNN and LSTM. In a word, these
increase the computational complexity of the model. However, methods do not adequately capture the dependencies among
these fields are primarily designed for network transmission local features and the interaction among packets of the network
rather than application classification. Thus, protocol fields flow.
below the application layer usually contain minimal helpful
information. Excessive irrelevant information would increase III. ATVITSC
the data complexity and potentially lead the model to rely This section introduces a novel method ATVITSC, shown
on unimportant details, thus reducing its ability to differen- in Figure 1. It comprises a preprocessing layer, the packet
tiate fine-grained traffic classification. Yao et al. proposed vision transformer, the spatiotemporal feature extraction layer,
HAN [21] by combining the attention mechanism with LSTN and the feature fusion classification layer. First, the raw traffic
to extract temporal features from raw traffic. Kumano et al. is partitioned into bidirectional flows called sessions. Second,
[22] demonstrated that the minimum number of packets extract a portion of the payload of each data packet within
needed for processing certain features was 10. This result one session to generate a byte-level grayscale image for each
provided a basis for reducing the number of packets required. packet, which is then combined to construct session-level
Lin et al. proposed TSCRNN [23] by combining CNN and grayscale images. Next, these session-level grayscale images
LSTM in a cascade structure, which only extracted temporal are input into the PVT and STFE modules to capture global
and spatial features from network flows and did not fully and spatiotemporal features, respectively. Finally, a dynamic
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9377

Fig. 2. Generation of grayscale image for application layer data of the packet.

weighting mechanism (DW) is proposed in the feature fusion
classification layer to perform the feature fusion, thereby
accurately achieving the encrypted traffic classification.

A. Raw Packets Preprocess
 Fig. 3. The combined operation of the packet image, Pi represents the image
 The raw traffic, including various types of packets, of the i-th packet in the session flow.
is divided into flows to achieve a more precise classification.
IP addresses, port numbers, and protocol types are typically
used to identify and organize flows [25]. Specifically, the the application layer’s data for each of the n packets, where
original network traffic data can be denoted by R as follows: m is a perfect square s p 2 and n is also a perfect square.
R = {(ti , si , spi , di , dpi )}i=1
 n , where t , s , d , sp and d p repi i i i i The application layer’s data will be truncated if its length
resent the timestamp of the i-th packet, the source IP address, is more than m bytes. Otherwise, it will be padded with
the destination IP address, the source port and destination port 0 × 00. Similarly, the number of packets will be padded to
number, respectively. Partition R into different network flows: n if the number of packets is less than n. Read each packet
S = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }. Each flow S j contains a set of packets byte by byte, convert each byte to an integer, and transform
with the same source IP address s j , the same source port sp j , each integer to a packet image of size s p × s p , represented as
the same destination IP address d j and the same destination Pi ∈ Rs p ×s p . Finally, the packet images are combined into a
 nj
port d p j : S j = {(t j,k , s j,k , sp j,k , d j,k , dp j,k )}k=1 , where n j session image. The combined operation is shown in Figure 3
represents the number of packets in the j-th flow. for the case of n = 4 and m = 256.
 In the ATVITSC scheme, we mainly focus on a bidirectional flow called a session. The source IP, the destination
IP, the source port, and the destination port in a session B. Packet Vision Transformer
can be interchangeable. Therefore, the session contains more This subsection proposes a global feature extraction method
interactive information than a unidirectional flow. According called packet vision transformer (PVT), which is inspired by
to the timestamps of the bidirectional flows in chronological vision transformer (ViT) [27]. PVT contains a session embedorder, combine the bidirectional flows to generate a session ding layer and applies a multi-head self-attention mechanism.
flow Ssession , i.e., Ssession = SSr c→Dst ∪ S Dst→Sr c , where In a session embedding layer, PVT decomposes session images
SSr c→Dst represents the flow of packets with the source IP as into a sequence of multiple packet images to perform embed-
Src, the destination IP as Dst and the source port as SrcPort, ding processing. Then, using the multi-head self-attention
and S Dst→Sr c represents the flow of packets with the source IP mechanism, PVT captures the interaction information among
as Dst, the destination IP as Src and the source port as SrcPort. all packets and extracts global features from the session flows.
The symbol ∪ denotes the combined operation. During the 1) Embedding Operations:
combining process, the packets are arranged by the timestamps
 a) Packet embedding: During the embedding process, the
in chronological order.
 session image is divided into multiple packet images, and
 After extracting the sessions, remove those packets irreleeach is projected into a d-dimensional space. Specifically,
vant to encrypted traffic classification to eliminate the dataset’s
 we perform a two-dimensional convolution operation on the
noise and redundancy. The protocol fields below the applisession image. The convolution operation has a stride of s p ,
cation layer contain almost no useful information. They are
 a kernel size of s p ×s p , and a channel size of d. Subsequently,
mainly used for network transmission rather than network
 we obtain the embedding ei ∈ Rd for each packet.
recognition. Additionally, IP addresses should not be used
 b) Position embedding: Due to the use of self-attention
for classification learning because they may cause the model
 mechanisms, PVT cannot capture the sequential informato focus on packet sources too much. Therefore, only the
 tion directly. However, since the packets in the session are
application layer’s data packets of each session flow should be
 chronological, we can embed the position of each packet
retained. Fixed-step sampling is used for data augmentation,
 to preserve their orders and position information. In the
i.e., a fixed number of packets are sampled in the session to
 ATVITSC scheme, PVT combines sine and cosine functions
increase the dataset’s richness and the model’s robustness [26].
 to obtain sequential details on data packets and better capture
 At the final stage of preprocessing, ATVITSC proposes
 their intrinsic dependencies. Specifically, let pi ∈ Rd represent
a novel method of constructing packet-level session images,
 the position embedding of the i-th data packet in the session,
effectively alleviating the confusion of packet information.
 which can be expressed as:
The process of converting the payload of each packet into
a grayscale image is shown in Figure 2. Precisely, for a posi posi
 pi,2 j = sin( ), pi,2 j+1 = cos( )
given session flow SSession , we extract the first m bytes of 100002 j/d 100002 j/d
9378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

where j represents the j-th dimension of the positional embedding and posi denotes the position of the i-th data packet in
the session flow. This formula is derived from the absolute
positional embeddings used in Transformers [28].
 c) Length embedding: After converting the packets into
images, the information on the length of packets is lost. Introducing the length embeddings for the packets could mitigate
this deficiency. Since the length of each packet is a discrete
value, we convert it into a one-hot vector and then generate
a length embedding by using a linear layer. Let len i denote
the length of the i-th packet, which can be transformed into a
one-hot vector lvi ∈ Rmax_len as follows:
 (
 1, j = leni
 lvi, j =
 0, j ̸ = leni

 By using learnable parameter Wlen ∈ Rd×max_len , we can
compute the length embedding li ∈ Rd by li = Wlenlvi .
 Let max_len be 1500 due to the Ethernet standard’s maximum transmission unit (MTU) of the data link layer frame
being set to 1500 bytes [29]. Finally, find the sum of the
packet embeddings ei , position embeddings pi and length
embeddings li to obtain the final embeddings h i ∈ Rd for
each packet: h i = ei + pi + li , i = 1, 2, . . . , n.
 Similarly, inspired by BERT [30], a learnable embedding
Vs ∈ Rd is added at the beginning of these embeddings to
represent the global features of the session. The output after
feeding the session into the embedding layer is computed Fig. 4. Packet Vision Transformer encoder.
by E s = [Vs ; h 1 ; h 2 ; . . . ; h n ], where [a; b] denotes the new
 layer by applying a linear projection: M H S A(E s ) =
vector obtained by concatenating vectors a and b along the
 [S A1 , S A2 , . . . , S Ak ]Wmhsa , where k represents the number
time dimension.
 of heads, [·] denotes concatenation along the last dimension
 2) Packet Vision Transformer: The encoder of PVT uses the
 and Wmhsa ∈ Rk·dh ×d is a learned weight matrix.
multi-head self-attention mechanism to capture global depen-
 Algorithm 1 demonstrates the process of the packet vision
dencies and process features through a feed-forward neural
 transformer. The PVT encoder consists of multiple subnetwork, enabling efficient modeling and feature extraction
 modules, each of which includes a multi-head self-attention
of packet image sequences. The encoder of PVT, as shown
 mechanism (MHSA) and a fully connected layer (FC) with
in Figure 4, follows a similar structure to the Transformer’s
 a LeakyRELU [32] activation function. Layer normalization
encoder. The k-head self-attention mechanism projects queries,
 (LN) [33] and residual connections [34] are utilized in each
keys, and values into k subspaces based on the self-attention
 sub-layer as well.
mechanism and performs separate self-attention operations
 This architecture design enables the encoder to conduct
in each subspace. Specifically, for the i-th head, the query
 multi-level transformations and generate representations of
matrix(Q i ), key matrix(K i ) and value matrix(Vi ) are calcuinput sequences, thereby enhancing the ability of PVT to
lated by the linear projection as follows:
 capture the semantic and contextual information embedded in
 Q
 Q i = E s Wi , K i = E s WiK , Vi = E s WiV the input sequences. It can be formalized as:
 Q
where Wi ∈ Rd×dh , WiK ∈ Rd×dh and WiV ∈ Rd×dv are O ′(llayer ) = MHSA(L N (E s (llayer ) )) + E s (llayer −1)
learned weight matrices, dh is typically set to d/k. O (llayer ) = FC(L N (O ′(llayer ) )) + O ′(llayer )
 Next, we use the scaled dot-product attention mechanism [31] to compute the self-attention weight matrix: where L is the number of layers of the PVT encoder, and
 llayer ∈ [0, L] is the llayer -th layer.
 Qi K T To obtain this global feature, we extract the first vector
 Ai = so f tmax( √ i ), S Ai = Ai Vi
 dh from the output sequence O L of the final layer in the PVT
 encoder, which is regarded as the global feature of the session:
where √Ai denotes the attention weight matrix for the i-th
 Fglobal = O0L .
head, dh represents the scaling factor used to solve the
problem of gradient explosion, and S Ai denotes the output
of the self-attention mechanism of the i-th head. C. Spatiotemporal Feature Extractor Module
 After concatenating the outputs of all attention heads, The spatiotemporal feature extraction(STFE) module conwe obtain the final output of the multi-head self-attention sists of two core components: the residual Attention
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9379

Algorithm 1 The Workflow of PVT
Input: the normalized network session image Sn , the session
 length sequence L n , the global feature dimension dmodel ,
 the number of transformer encoder nlayer s .
Output: The global feature Oglobal ;
 1: P K E = PaketEmbedding(Sn ,Conv2d(s p ,s p ));
 2: L E = LengthEmbedding(L n ,Embedding(1500,dmodel )
 3: P E = PositionEmbedding(Sn )
 4: I E = Addition(P K E,L E,P E)
 5: for i = 1 to n layer s do
 6: L Nie = LayerNorm(I E);
 7: Wmhsa = MultiHeadSelfAttention(L Nie ,dmodel );
 8: RC= Addition(Wmhsa ,I E)
 9: I E = FeedForward(RC,dmodel )
10: end for
11: Fglobal = I E
 return Fglobal ;

Algorithm 2 The Workflow of STFE
Input: Normalized network session image Sn , Temporal feature dimension dt , Spatial feature dimension ds , The
 number of AttetionConvResNet n c .
Output: The spatiotemporal feature Fst ;
 1: Split Sn into a sequence of packet images Ps ;
 2: T = Length(Ps )
 3: t = 1 Fig. 5. Residual Attention Convolution.
 4: for X in Ps do
 5: Fm = BN(Conv2d(X ));
 6: Wspatial = ConvAttention(GAP(Fm ),GMP(Fm ),ds ); The session image is segmented into packet images, and
 7: Fspatial = MatMul(Fm ,Wspatial ); convolutional operations are performed on each packet to
 8: Fm′ = Addition(Shortcut(Fspatial ),Fm ); generate a set of feature maps Fm . By applying global max
 9: Fs(t) =Flatten(Conv1×1 (Fm′ )); pooling (GMP) and global average pooling (GAP) on Fm , each
10: t = t + 1; feature map is compressed into a scalar [37] which still retains
11: end for the important information of Fm , and Fm will be compressed
12: h f , h b = BiLSTM(Fs(1) , Fs(2) , Fs(3) , . . . , Fs(T ) ); into two vectors (the dimension is equal to the number of
13: Fst = FC(Concat(h f,n , h b,n ),ds ); channels of Fm ) which will be fed to the fully connected
 return Fst ; (FC) layer with an S-shaped Activation function. Next, the
 feature map is weighted by using the attention values of each
 channel. This weight will focus on feature maps with more
Convolutional layer (ResAtConv) with residual connections significant contributions while suppressing unimportant feature
and the attention mechanism and the Bidirectional LSTM layer maps. Finally, a 1 × 1 convolutional kernel is applied to adjust
(Bi-LSTM). ResAtConv extracts high-level spatial features of the features at different positions. Similar to PVT, we also
each packet and solves the problem of temporal information apply batch normalization (BN) [38] and residual connections
disorder while convolving the entire session image. Then, [34] in this module. This process can be formalized as:
these spatial features with temporal features are fed into Bi- 
LSTM [35] to capture the spatiotemporal features of a session  Fm = B N (Conv(X ))
 
further. Algorithm 2 shows the process of the spatiotemporal Fm′ = FC(FC(G A P(Fm )) + FC(G M P(Fm )))Fm + Fm
 Fm = Conv1×1 (Fm′ )
feature extraction module.  ′′
 
 1) Residual Attention Convolution Layer: Inspired by
SeNet [36], we propose a Residual Attention Convolutional Due to the small size of individual data packet images,
Module. This module primarily consists of a convolutional multiple ResAtConv operations may lead to overfitting. Thus
layer and an attention layer. Its structure is shown in Figure 5. ATVITSC only uses one ResAtConv operation for each packet
The convolutional layer is responsible for the feature extrac- image, which can learn the weights of each channel, allowing
tion of the packet images. Because the contribution of each the model to focus on more critical feature maps during the
channel’s feature map is different, the ATVITSC scheme convolution process. Finally, 1×1 convolution is used to adjust
presents an attention layer to determine the weights of each the information of different positional features in the weighted
channel. feature map to highlight critical spatial features. The output of
9380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 exp(ξ1 /τ ) exp(ξ2 /τ )
the last layer of ResAtConv is flattened to obtain the spatial αg = , αs =
features Fs of a packet: Fs = Flatten(Fm′′ ). exp(ξ1 /τ ) + exp(ξ2 /τ ) exp(ξ1 /τ ) + exp(ξ2 /τ )
 2) Bidirectional LSTM: After obtaining spatial features where Wg,s , bg,s , Wz and bz are learnable parameters, tanh(·)
of each packet through ResAtConv, these features are then represents the hyperbolic tangent function, exp(·) represents
sequentially fed into the Bi-LSTM. The nature of Bi-LSTM the exponential function, ξ ∈ R2 is a unnormalized weight
allows it to simultaneously capture the forward and backward for the feature, and ξ1 ∈ R2 and ξ2 ∈ R2 are separate
information of the packet sequence, which can enhance the unnormalized weights for the global and local features. The
modeling ability of ATVITSC to capture the correlations temperature parameter τ is a hyperparameter that balances the
among packets. Each packet’s spatial features Fs(t) is fed into attention of FFC to different features and alleviates extreme
the LSTM cell in both temporal order and reverse temporal cases of weight coefficients when normalizing them. How to
order to capture the temporal dependencies of the spatial select τ will be discussed in section IV.
features Fs(t) . After computing the normalized weights for different features, the fusion vector v can be represented as: v = αg ·
 h f,t = LSTM(Fs(t) , h f,t−1 ), h b,t = LSTM(Fs(t) , h b,t+1 ) Fglobal + αs · Fst . Finally, v is fed into two fully connected
where h f,t represents the forward hidden state of the LSTM layers, and a non-linear transformation is applied to the hidden
at time step t and h b,t represents the backward hidden state layer to obtain a higher-level representation. The softmax
of the LSTM at time step t. Concatenate the last hidden states function, i.e., y = softmax(FC(LeakyRELU(FC(v)))), is used
from both the forward and backward hidden state sequences to determine the category of the encrypted traffic.
to obtain the spatiotemporal features of the session. Subsequently, these concatenated hidden states undergo a nonlinear IV. E XPERIMENTAL
transformation by using a fully connected layer (FC) with In this section, we evaluate the performance of ATVITSC
the LeakyRELU activation function: Fst = FC([h f,n , h b,n ]), on four different scenarios of encrypted traffic: Virtual Private
where n represents the maximum value of the time step, i.e., Networks (VPN), Tor (the Onion Router), malicious traffic,
the length of the packet sequence. and Android mobile traffic. The implementation configurations
 of the experiments are shown in Table I. Among these param-
D. Feature Fusion Classification Layer eters, ATVITSC selects a standard batch size and learning
 rate in deep learning classification tasks to strike a balance
 Traditional methods, such as simple concatenation or fixed between its training speed and its performance. Additionweighted fusion, cannot fully utilize the correlations between ally, it employs the cross-entropy as the loss function due
these two features and cannot adaptively adjust the weights. to the cross-entropy demonstrating the efficacy of previous
In the ATVITSC scheme, we propose a dynamic weighting classification tasks, which effectively quantifies the disparity
mechanism in the Feature Fusion Classification layer (FFC) to between model predictions and the truth labels [40]. The
compute the weight coefficients of the global feature Fglobal selection of the Adam optimizer is due to its favorable converand the spatiotemporal feature Fst . After the weighted fusion gence properties during the training process, adaptive learning
of Fglobal and Fst , the fused feature is fed into two fully rate adjustments, and ability to handle sparse gradients [41].
connected layers (FC) and the softmax function to generate PyTorch is chosen as the deep learning framework to support
the classification probability distribution. The Algorithm 3 the model’s design and training processes in our experiments.
describes the workflow of FFC. We compare ATVITSC with ten state-of-the-art traffic classification methods and further investigate the roles of its
Algorithm 3 The Workflow of FFC
 sub-modules through an ablation study. These experiments
Input: Global feature of session Fglobal , Spatiotemporal feaaim to demonstrate the generalization and effectiveness of
 ture of session Fst .
 ATVITSC in various encryption environments.
Output: Result of classification;
 1: Fg,s = Concat(Fglobal ,Fst );
 2: αg , αs = DynamicWeight(Fg,s ); A. Datasets
 3: v = Matmul&Addition(αg , αs , Fglobal , Fst ); We select four widely used datasets to study the perfor-
 4: y = Softmax(FeedForwad(v)); mance of ATVITSC. These datasets are listed in the following:
 5: Class Result = ArgMax(y); • USTC-TFS2016 dataset [16]: This dataset contains sam-
 6: return Class Result; ples of encrypted network traffic from 10 categories of
 benign traffic and ten categories of malicious traffic.
 • Tor-nonTor dataset (ISCXTor2016) [42]: This dataset is
 The dynamic weighting mechanism assigns different
weights for Fglobal and Fst of different sessions. Moreover, designed to classify encrypted applications on Tor, which
we also introduce a temperature parameter τ to control the contains samples from 16 different applications.
 • VPN-nonVPN dataset (ISCXVPN2016) [43]: This dataset
balance of weights among different feature extraction modules
and to prevent the feature extraction module from failing focuses on encrypted traffic classification on virtual
during the training process [39]. It can be formalized as: private networks (VPNs), which comprises both VPN
 and non-VPN traffic samples from 6 communication
 z = tanh(Wg,s · [Fglobal ; Fst ] + bg,s ), ξ = Wz z + bz applications.
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9381

 TABLE I where Nc represents the number of classes, F1i , Recalli
 E XPERIMENTAL C ONFIGURATION and Pr ecision i are the F1-score, the Recall score and the
 Precision score for class i.

 C. Exploration of Hyperparameters
 We explore three important hyperparameters: the number
 of chosen data packets (denoted by Packet Number), the
 first m bytes selected from each data packet (denoted by
 ByteNum), and the temperature coefficient of ATVITSC in the
 ISCX VPN dataset to determine how to select the appropriate
 hyperparameters.
 1) Packet Number and ByteNum: We do a series of experiments to explain the selections of two parameters, i.e., Packet
 Number and ByteNum. First, to select the appropriate number
 of data packets, we consult previous research, especially
 Kumano’s results, which show that selecting 10 data packets
 during the visualization process can achieve relatively good
 classification results [22]. To maximize the search space,
 we choose the number of data packets to be 4, 9, 16, 25,
 36, and 49. Second, since Wang have demonstrated that the
 traffic after 300 bytes of the payload has little significance for
 improving the traffic classification [19], we choose ByteNum
 • Cross Platform (US Mobile APP) [44]: This dataset being 16, 36, 64, 100, 169, 256, 324, and 400. For all combiprovides a large amount of mobile traffic for analysis nations of selected parameters, the accuracy of the ATVITSC
 and evaluation, which contains 59 Android traffic from in the test set is shown in Figure 6. The results show that the
 the United States for specific classification tasks. performance of ATVITSC tends to stabilize when the Packet
 These datasets provide abundant samples and features, Number is more than 9, and the accuracy of ATVITSC is high
allowing us to verify the validation of ATVITSC and evaluate when ByteNum is between 100 and 300 bytes. Finally, after
its performance in real-world scenarios. By studying and careful analysis, the accuracy of ATVITSC reaches its optimal
analyzing these datasets, we enhance the understanding of value of 0.9436 when the Packet Number is 16 and ByteNum
encrypted traffic classification in various encryption environ- is 256.
ments. 2) Temperature Parameter: We study the selection of the
 temperature parameter τ in the feature fusion classification
 layer (FFC). This parameter τ depends on a dynamic weight-
B. Metrics ing mechanism that adjusts the weight distribution between
 global and spatiotemporal features to achieve adaptive fusion
 To evaluate the performance of the ATVITSC, we use
 of different features. Randomly select 500 samples from each
four metrics: Accuracy, Macro-F1, Macro-Recall, and Macrocategory in four different datasets for training. During the
Precision. Accuracy is a standard metric in classification
 training process, τ is set from 1 to 800 in step 20. After
schemes, representing the ratio of correctly classified sam-
 20 rounds of training, Figure 7 shows the change of accuracy
ples to total samples [45]. Macro-F1, Macro-Recall, and
 under different values of τ . The accuracy of ATVITSC sig-
Macro-Precision are evaluation metrics designed for multinificantly improves at larger values of τ . Conversely, when τ
classification problems [46]. These metrics can be expressed
 is set to a small value, the weight distribution between global
using the following formula:
 features and spatiotemporal features may not be reasonable,
 TP +TN TP resulting in a decrease in the performance of ATVITSC. In par-
Accuracy = , Recall = ticular, when τ is more than 400, the classification accuracy
 T P + FP + T N + FN T P + FN
 TP pr ecision · r ecall tends to stabilize. By reasonably selecting the value of τ ,
Pr ecision = , F1 = 2 · we can effectively improve the performance of the ATVITSC
 T P + FP pr ecision + r ecall
 and avoid unreasonable weight distribution during the initial
where T P, T N , F P, and F N represent true positive, true stage of training. In a word, the temperature parameter τ ,
negative, false positive, and false negative. which plays a crucial role in the FFC module, is of great
 N N
 significance for achieving feature fusion and improving the
 c c
 1 X 1 X performance of ATVITSC.
 F1macr o = F1i , Rcmacr o = Recalli
 Nc Nc
 i=1 i=1
 Nc D. Comparison With Other Methods
 1 X
 Prmacr o = Pr ecision i We compare ATVITSC with other state-of-the-art traf-
 Nc
 i=1 fic classification schemes on the USTC-TFS, ISCX-Tor,
9382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 6. Accuracy under different combinations of the number of data packets and the first m bytes of each packet.

 used autoencoder and convolutional neural network structure,
 HAN combined the attention mechanism and recurrent neural network for encrypted traffic classification. Flow-GNN
 uses geometric deep learning that simultaneously considers
 raw bytes of packets, metadata features, and the relations
 among packets for classification. These schemes cover various popular neural network structures and algorithms in the
 current field of deep learning, which makes us comprehensively compare the performances and effectiveness of different
 advanced encrypted traffic classification schemes based on
 deep learning.
 1) Malicious Traffic Classification: According to the experimental results provided in Table II, ATVITSC achieves the
 Fig. 7. Accuracy variation curves under different values of τ .
 best result in terms of Rcmacr o and F1macr o . However, four
 other methods, such as DeepPacket, TSCRNN, CMTSNN,
ISCX-VPN and Cross-Platform (US Android APP) datasets, and Flow-GNN, also show considerable performance on the
including some classic schemes based on machine learning UTSC-TFC dataset because the UTSC-TFC dataset contains
such as AppScanner [11] and BIND [12], and some advanced plaintexts in the application layer of malicious traffic. These
schemes based on deep learning such as FS-Net [13], Graph- plaintexts make it easier for the models to learn patterns
DApp [17], FlowPic [14], HAN [21], TSCRNN [23] and of different categories from unencrypted data and achieve
DeepPacket [20], CMTSNN [24], Flow-GNN [18]. These accurate classification. Table III shows the experimental results
schemes based on deep learning cover almost all neural on a 20-classification task of USTC-TFC.
network structures. For example, FS-Net used a structure 2) Tor Traffic Classification: In Table IV, ATVITSC
with recurrent neural networks to classify temporal features, achieves an accuracy of 98.79%, which is 3.79% higher than
FlowPic converted statistical features into images and used the previously best result, TSCRNN, because TSCRNN fails
convolutional neural networks for classification, GraphDApp to fully capture the relationships among packets and only
used graph neural network structure for encrypted traffic extracts spatiotemporal features by using a cascaded structure.
classification, TSCRNN and CMTSNN combined recurrent In contrast, ATVITSC designs the Packet Vision Transformer
and convolutional neural network architecture, DeepPacket to extract global features and a dynamic weighting mechanism
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9383

 TABLE II TABLE V
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N USTC-TFC C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF ISCX T OR

 TABLE III
 C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF USTC-TFC

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N ISCX VPN

 TABLE VII
 C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF ISCX VPN

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N ISCX T OR

 the F1macr o of ATVITSC is more than Flow-GNN’s by
 3.05%. In fact, ISCX VPN is an imbalanced dataset. In this
 dataset, TSCRNN uses random sampling to enhance data
to fuse global and spatiotemporal features for classifica- diversity, DeepPacket uses undersampling to mitigate the data
tion. Meanwhile, the accuracy of ATVITSC also surpasses imbalance, and CMTSNN, designed only for encrypted traf-
DeepPacket’s by 24.30%, because DeepPacket has a weaker fic classification in IoT, adopts the cost penalty matrix and
generalization ability. Table V shows the experimental results improved cross-entropy loss function without the attention
of a 16-classification task on Tor2016. mechanism. In contrast, ATVITSC uses the attention mech-
 3) VPN Traffic Classification: Table VI demonstrates all anism for each module to explore the interactive relationship
experimental results on the dataset ISCX VPN. We find that among packets in ISCX VPN fully. Please refer to Table VII
the accuracy of ATVITSC is about 97.89%, which is more for more detailed experimental results on twelve classification
than the accuracy of Flow-GNN, CMTSNN, DeepPacket, tasks performed on VPN2016.
and TSCRNN by 0.33%, 4.59%, 4.6%, and 6.19%, respec- 4) Mobile Traffic Classification: We also perform
tively. Although Flow-GNN can achieve similar accuracy, ATVITSC and other ten schemes on Cross-Platform (US
9384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VIII the three datasets, mainly due to the insufficient applicability
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS O N C ROSS -P LATFORM of encrypted traffic classification methods based on statistical
 features in different datasets. It is necessary to redesign the
 features for each type of traffic. FS-Net uses packet sizes
 as features and then applies recurrent neural networks for
 computing. However, such features are too simplistic and
 make it difficult to accurately reflect the encrypted network
 traffic features. GraphDAPP constructs a TIG for encrypted
 traffic based on the packet length and direction. Then it
 applies a graph neural network for classification. However, the
 constructed graph structure may not capture the key features of
 encrypted traffic. Meanwhile, when the fingerprint of the application changes, the accuracy will correspondingly decrease.
 DeepPacket chooses the IP header and the first 1480 bytes of
Android APP). Table VIII gives comparison results. From each packet to form a 1500-byte input, which contains the data
Table VIII, ATVITSC demonstrates superior performance below the application layer. However, this selection will result
across four key metrics again. Specifically, its F1macr o in excessive computation and data redundancy. In addition,
score surpasses those of HAN, CMTSNN and Flow-GNN the CNN model fails to effectively extract the relationship
by 7.05%, 7.18% and 3.52%, respectively. Although HAN between temporal features and data packets, resulting in lower
also uses attention mechanisms, it has certain limitations accuracy. FlowPic converts packet size and arrival time into
in extracting temporal features. CMTSNN only extracts images and uses CNN for classification. Using simplistic
features at the spatiotemporal dimension level. Flow-GNN features as input makes it difficult to accurately extract traffic
achieves suboptimal classification results by utilizing features. TSCRNN and CMTSNN combine CNN and LSTM
statistical features and constructing a graph of the order in a cascaded structure to extract spatiotemporal features from
among the original data packets. In contrast, ATVITSC network flows but do not consider the interaction among data
not only captures the interactions among data packets but packets. HAN combines LSTM with the attention mechanism,
also extracts spatiotemporal features from network flows, but it can only extract packet features from the temporal
resulting in more accurate classification. The classification dimension, which is not comprehensive enough. Flow-GNN
report for 59 categories of U.S. Android app traffic in the utilizes the sequential relationship among data packets, raw
Cross-platform is listed in Table IX. traffic and meta features as network inputs, which can fully
 5) Comparison of Inference Speed: We list the inference extract traffic features for classification. However, due to
time of 9 different deep learning methods in Table X when its lack of attention mechanism, its ability to extract global
the batch size is 16. Since AppScanner and BIND are based features may be weak in certain scenarios.
on machine learning, we do not analyze them. First, FS-Net ATVITSC achieves an F1 value of over 97% in datasets
has the fastest inference speed of 18.67ms because FS-Net such as USTC, VPN, and Tor, and the F1 value on the
only accepts simple sequence features as input. However, Android Mobile traffic dataset also reaches 94.9%. Clearly,
simple sequence features also affect its classification accuracy. it demonstrates stable performance in various application
Second, FlowPic uses a simple CNN structure, but its input environments. This advantage mainly stems from ATVITSC’s
matrix (1500×1500) is too large, resulting in its inference time comprehensive use of the PVT and STFE modules, augmented
of 71.52ms. Although the model structure of ATVITSC is rel- by various feature extraction methods, such as the attention
atively complex, its input size is relatively small. For example, mechanism, feedforward neural network, residual attention
when Packet Number is 16 and ByteNum is 256 bytes, the size convolution module, and bidirectional LSTM. These methods
of input received by ATVITSC is only 80 × 80. So ATVITSC collectively extract the spatiotemporal and spatial features of
can achieve an inference speed of 32.54ms. traffic data. In addition, the PVT module of ATVITSC first
 In summary, the inference speed of different models is embeds each data packet in the traffic image to obtain the
influenced by the complexity of input features and model initial vector of the packet. It uses an attention mechanism to
structure. FS-Net has advantages in speed, but its classification learn the interaction relationship among the packets and uses
accuracy is relatively low. ATVITSC achieves a good balance a feedforward neural network to extract the global features
between inference speed and classification accuracy. of the entire flow. Compared with traditional visualization
 6) Analysis and Discussion: According to the above exper- methods, our proposed traffic visualization method can avoid
imental results, ATVITSC shows significant performance the problem of temporal information distortion caused by
advantages over other state-of-the-art traffic classification convolution operations in network traffic.
methods on multiple datasets, while the performances of other After obtaining the spatial features of the data packet,
methods are not stable enough on different datasets. The F1 bidirectional LSTM is used to accurately extract spatiotemvalue of TSCRNN in the USTC dataset is 98.70%, while it poral features, and the dynamic weighting mechanism can
is 92.70% in the VPN dataset. The F1 value of DeepPacket dynamically adjust the weights of global and spatiotemporal
in the USTC dataset is 96.50%, but it drops to 75.49% in features for feature fusion based on the features of the data.
the Tor dataset. AppScanner and Bind perform the worst in Compared to previous methods with fixed weights in advance,
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9385

 TABLE IX
 C LASSIFICATION R EPORT OF C ROSS -P LATFORM (U.S. A NDROID APP)

 TABLE X
C LASSIFICATION T IME FOR D IFFERENT M ODELS W HEN BATCHSIZE I S 16

ATVITSC is more flexible and could enhance the applicability
of the model in different environments. In contrast, other
methods have limitations in feature extraction and model
design, resulting in unstable or unsatisfactory performance.
Meanwhile, they could not consider the interaction among data
packets.
 Fig. 8. Attention Visualization.

E. Interaction of Packets
 In this experiment, let the number of packets be 16 and which further proves that ATVITSC can capture the interaction
the payload size be 256 bytes while keeping other parameters of different packets and extract global features adequately.
unchanged. Our main objective is to observe the dependencies
among packets by visualizing the attention in the PVT. To sim- F. Dynamic Weighting Mechanism
plify the analysis, we train ATVITSC on the VPN dataset and We analyze the role of the dynamic weighting mechanism
randomly select a sample. The attention matrix computed by on the ISCX-Tor dataset. In the training process, without using
PVT is then mapped onto a session image. Figure 8 illustrates the temperature parameter τ , significant fluctuations in the
the attention distributions of different packets within the same weight of the STFE and PVT modules lead to an unstable
session (for display purposes, only four packets are chosen). training process, as seen in Figure 9. After 400 steps of
Different colors represent the attention level of the model training, the model encounters an extreme weight distribution
towards different parts, with darker colors indicating greater problem where the weights of the STFE approach 0. During
attention. The red box represents a packet. Obviously, for the initial stage of training, if there is a significant difference in
different data packets, the model focuses on different parts, contribution between the two feature extraction modules, the
9386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 11. Training accuracy on ISCX Tor with/without dynamic weighting
 Fig. 9. Weight changes in training without τ .
 mechanism.

 TABLE XI
 E VALUATION OF D IFFERENT P REPROCESS M ETHODS

 weighting mechanism can improve the convergence speed and
 accuracy of training. This result is attributed to the adaptive
 adjustment of the importance of different features during the
 training process, leading to a stable and effective model.

 G. Comparison of Preprocess Methods
 Fig. 10. Weight changes in training.
 To validate the superiority of the proposed preprocess
 method in this paper, we compare it with a traditional approach
 of generating session-level images (using the first 1600 bytes
weight of one of the modules may approach 0. In this case, the
 of each session). Due to the incompatibility of the traditional
weight of the PVT approaches 1, while the weight of the STFE
 method with the ATVITSC model, a widely used 1D-CNN
module approaches 0. Consequently, the STFE is ignored
 model [15] is applied for performance comparison in this
after 400 steps, rendering it unable to continue learning.
 experiment. In the VPN dataset, 1000 sessions are randomly
Therefore, without using the temperature parameter τ , the
 selected for each class. To ensure similar image sizes between
two sub-modules of ATVITSC cannot sufficiently complete
 the two methods, our preprocess approach uses the first
the training.
 256 bytes of the payload and selects the first four packets
 With the temperature parameter τ , ATVITSC can achieve
 of each session for image generation, which is compared
more balanced attention between the STFE and PVT modules.
 with the traditional preprocess method based on session-level
This adjustment makes both sub-modules effectively learn
 images. Table XI demonstrates that our method performs betrather than directly disregard the weaker one. Thus ATVITSC
 ter. Generating images on the packet level allows the processed
allows the initially lower-weighted module to actively particdata to retain their temporal features and effectively prevent
ipate in feature extraction and classification processes. In our
 temporal information distortion from convolutional operations.
experiment, let τ be 500, which is a more reasonable change
 Additionally, length embeddings are introduced to maintain the
in the weights of the two modules. The weight changes of the
 packets’ length information. Conversely, simply extracting the
two modules are depicted in Figure 10. Introducing τ alleviates
 first z bytes at the session level can lead to confusion and loss
the problem of extreme weight coefficient distributions. Both
 of information.
sub-modules effectively accomplish learning, and the fusion
classification layer assigns corresponding weights to the global
and spatiotemporal features of different sessions to complete H. Ablation Study
traffic classification. Module ablation experiments and independent validation
 Compare the simple concatenation of global and spatiotem- experiments need to be conducted on all modules to evaluate
poral features with a dynamic weighting mechanism to those the performance of each module in the ATVITSC system. The
without a dynamic weighting mechanism. The accuracy vari- ablation analysis of ATVITSC is performed on the ISCX-Tor
ations of the two methods during the training process are dataset and the results are shown in Table XII. PVT exhibits
shown in Figure 11. The results indicate that the dynamic the best performance, followed closely by STFE. Obviously,
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9387

 TABLE XII
 E VALUATION OF D IFFERENT M ODULES

 Fig. 12. Classification results of PVT in a single packet dataset. Fig. 13. Classification results of STFE in a single packet dataset.

the STFE’s performance is relatively weaker than PVT’s. where W Q ∈ R d×dh , W K ∈ R d×dh , WV ∈ R d×dv are the
When the PVT and STFE modules are combined, the network weight matrices of Query, Key and Value, respectively, dh and
traffic features in both global and spatiotemporal dimensions dv represent the dimensions of Key and Value.
can be considered comprehensively, leading to improved iden- According to the calculation formula of the self-attention
tification accuracy. Furthermore, more accurate classification mechanism, the unnormalized score S ∈ R 1×1 is obtained by
performance is achieved by introducing the dynamic weighting the values of Q and K :
mechanism to fuse the features extracted by the two modules.
 QK T x1 W Q W KT x1T
In a word, the dynamic weighting mechanism is better suited S= √ = √
for combining different types of features. dh dh
 We study the performances of PVT and STFE in sessions For a sequence S = [S1 ] that contains only one packet, the
that only contain a single packet. A sample containing one attention weights a can be obtained by the softmax function:
packet is selected from six categories in the UTSC dataset:
 exp(s1 )
BitTorrent, Facetime, Gmail, MySQL, Outlook and Skype. a = so f tmax (S) V = P1 (x1 WV )
The confusion matrices of the PVT and STFE are shown j=1 exp(s j )
in Figure 12 and Figure 13. In this case, the accuracy of exp(s1 )
 = (x1 WV ) = x1 WV
STFE is superior to that of PVT. With only one packet, exp(s1 )
there is no information to interact across locations, degrad-
 Based on the above formula, we can find that the
ing the self-attention mechanism to a fully connected layer.
 self-attention mechanism is similar to the fully connected
Specifically, if the packet sequence contains only one packet,
 layer in this scenario, which causes PVT to be unable to
denoted as x1 , its embedding vector representation can be
 capture critical information. However, STFE can still extract
expressed as x1 ∈ R1×d , the query vector Q ∈ R1×dh , the
 important temporal and spatial features from a single packet,
key vector K ∈ R1×dh and the value vector V ∈ R1×dv in the
 making STFE more efficient in this case. For longer sequences,
following:
 the self-attention mechanism within the PVT module can use
 Q = X W Q = x1 W Q , more context information to generate a stronger representation.
 Given the unique advantages of PVT and STFE, it is essential
 K = X W K = x1 W K ,
 to use a dynamic weighting mechanism to effectively combine
 V = X WV = x1 WV global and spatiotemporal features.
9388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 V. C ONCLUSION [11] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 This paper proposes a new encrypted traffic classification Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
scheme called the ATVITSC. ATVITSC first presents a method [12] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with
to generate network flow images at the packet level, which bi-directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput.
 Secur. Appl., New York, NY, USA, Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188, doi:
preserves the original sequential nature of different packets 10.1145/2991079.2991123.
after the image generation. Second, the ATVITSC splits the [13] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
session image into multiple packet image sequences and network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
extracts global and spatiotemporal features by using a multi-
 [14] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
head self-attention mechanism and spatiotemporal feature encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
extraction method. Next, ATVITSC applies a dynamic weight- Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
ing mechanism to fuse these features to classify encrypted [15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
traffic effectively. Our scheme shows higher accuracy and networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI),
generalization ability than existing methods in the tasks of Jul. 2017, pp. 43–48.
encrypted malicious traffic classification, VPN encrypted traf- [16] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
fic classification, Tor encrypted application classification, and learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
mobile traffic classification. [17] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen-
 However, ATVITSC also faces certain challenges. For tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
example, it is still being determined whether ATVITSC can graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
classify the encrypted traffic for dynamic datasets effectively. [18] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
The encryption algorithms are updated constantly and the traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
emergence of new algorithms may decrease the accuracy of Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jul. 2023.
 [19] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,”
ATVITSC in encrypted traffic classification. In the future, BlackHat USA, Las Vegas, LV, USA, Tech. Rep., 2015, pp. 1–10.
we will explore incremental learning methods to make the [Online]. Available: https://www.blackhat.com/us-15/briefings.html#the-
ATVITSC maintain good reusability in dynamic network envi- applications-of-deep-learning-on-traffic-identification
ronments. Meanwhile, we will introduce the latest multi-scale [20] M. Lotfollahi, R. S. H. Zade, M. J. Siavoshani, and M. Saberian,
 “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
retention mechanism in the ATVITSC, which aims to speed up deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020, doi:
the time for classification and optimize its performance from 10.1007/s00500-019-04030-2.
the view of accuracy and efficiency. [21] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
 R EFERENCES [22] Y. Kumano, S. Ata, N. Nakamura, Y. Nakahira, and I. Oka, “Towards
 [1] J. Xiang, N. Fulton, and S. Chong, “Relational analysis of sensor attacks real-time processing for application identification of encrypted traffic,”
 on cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Comput. Secur. Found. in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Feb. 2014,
 Symp. (CSF), Jun. 2021, pp. 1–16. pp. 136–140.
 [2] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized data- [23] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification
 gram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic scheme of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal
 classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2022, features for efficient management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw.,
 pp. 633–642, doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512217. vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. 107974. [Online]. Available:
 [3] R. Liu and X. Yu, “A survey on encrypted traffic identification,” in Proc. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128621001067
 Int. Conf. Cyberspace Innov. Adv. Technol., New York, NY, USA, 2021, [24] S. Zhu, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMTSNN: A deep learning model
 pp. 159–163, doi: 10.1145/3444370.3444564. for multiclassification of abnormal and encrypted traffic of Internet of
 [4] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, and C. Williamson, “Identifying and Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11773–11791,
 discriminating between web and peer-to-peer traffic in the network core,” Jul. 2023.
 in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web. New York, NY, USA, 2007, [25] A. Dainotti, A. Pescape, and K. C. Claffy, “Issues and future directions
 pp. 883–892, doi: 10.1145/1242572.1242692. in traffic classification,” IEEE Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 35–40, Jan. 2012.
 [5] R. T. Elmaghraby, N. M. A. Aziem, M. A. Sobh, and [26] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
 A. M. Bahaa-Eldin, “Encrypted network traffic classification just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
 based on machine learning,” Ain Shams Eng. J., vol. 15, 2018, arXiv:1812.09761.
 no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 102361. [Online]. Available: [27] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090447923002502 for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
 [6] Z. Okonkwo, E. Foo, Q. Li, and Z. Hou, “A CNN based encrypted net- [28] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS. Red Hook,
 work traffic classifier,” in Proc. Australas. Comput. Sci. Week. New York, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
 NY, USA: ACM, Feb. 2022, pp. 74–83, doi: 10.1145/3511616.3513101. [29] T. Völker, M. Tüxen, and E. P. Rathgeb, “The search of the path MTU
 [7] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classifica- with QUIC,” in Proc. Workshop Evol., Perform. Interoperability (QUIC),
 tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, vol. 802. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
 May 2019. Dec. 2021, pp. 22–28, doi: 10.1145/3488660.3493805.
 [8] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, and T. Geng, “DarknetSec: [30] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 A novel self-attentive deep learning method for darknet traf- of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
 fic classification and application identification,” Comput. Secur., arXiv:1810.04805.
 vol. 116, May 2022, Art. no. 102663. [Online]. Available: https://www. [31] S. Chaudhari, V. Mithal, G. Polatkan, and R. Ramanath, “An attentive
 sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404822000621 survey of attention models,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 12,
 [9] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret, “Net- no. 5, pp. 1–32, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1145/3465055.
 work traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural networks [32] A. L. Maas. (2013). Rectifier Nonlinearities Improve Neural
 for Internet of Things,”IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050, 2017. Network Acoustic Models. [Online]. Available: https://api.
[10] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques for semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16489696
 mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” IEEE [33] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016,
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 54024–54033, 2019. arXiv:1607.06450.
LIU et al.: ATVITSC: A NOVEL ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION METHOD BASED ON DEEP LEARNING 9389

[34] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for Xiao Wang received the B.S. degree in engineering
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. from the Huanghe University of Science and Tech-
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. nology in 2021 and the M.S. degree in engineering
[35] A. Graves, Long Short-Term Memory. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012, from the University of Shanghai for Science and
 pp. 37–45, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24797-2_4. Technology in 2024. His research interests include
[36] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in encrypted traffic classification.
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
 pp. 7132–7141.
[37] M. Lin, Q. Chen, and S. Yan, “Network in network,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2014.
[38] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
 network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[39] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[40] Z. Zhang and M. Sabuncu, “Generalized cross entropy loss for
 training deep neural networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
 K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 31.
 Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2018. [Online]. Available:
 https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2018/file/f2925f97bc13
 ad2852a7a551802feea0-Paper.pdf
[41] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 2014, arXiv:1412.6980. Bo Qu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
[42] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, information security and computer science from
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, in 2009 and
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017, pp. 253–262. 2012, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in intelligent systems from Delft University of Technol-
[43] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 ogy, The Netherlands, in 2017. Before joining
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 Guangdong University of Science and Technology,
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
 he worked with the Peng Cheng Laboratory as
 pp. 407–414.
 a Research Associate. He was also with Tencent
[44] T. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on
 Technology as a Researcher in applied research
 encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 of network security. His research interests include
 Jan. 2020, pp. 1–18.
 network security by network analysis and network representation learning.
[45] C. Catal, “Performance evaluation metrics for software fault prediction
 studies,” Acta Polytechnica Hungarica, vol. 9, pp. 193–206, Jan. 2012.
[46] C. Liu, W. Wang, M. Wang, F. Lv, and M. Konan, “An efficient
 instance selection algorithm to reconstruct training set for support
 vector machine,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 116, pp. 58–73,
 Jan. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S0950705116304257

 Ya Liu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Fengyu Zhao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 Mathematics Department, Anhui Normal University, in computer engineering from Nanjing University
 in 2004 and 2007, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1984 and 1989,
 in computer system architecture from Shanghai Jiao respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer soft-
 Tong University in 2013. She is currently an Asso- ware and theory from Fudan University in 2010.
 ciate Professor with the Department of Computer From 1998 to 1999, he was a Visiting Scholar with
 Science and Engineering, University of Shanghai Linköping University, Sweden. He is currently a
 for Science and Technology. Her research interests Professor with the Department of Information and
 include cryptology, federated learning, the scalability Intelligence Engineering, Shanghai Publishing and
 and privacy protection of blockchain, and network Printing College. His research interests include the
 security by network analysis. She serves as a mem- design and analysis of software systems. He serves
ber for IACR, CACR, and CCF. as a member for the Software Engineering Professional Committee of CCF.