15372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Auto-Updating Intrusion Detection System for
 Vehicular Network: A Deep Learning Approach
 Based on Cloud-Edge-Vehicle Collaboration
Chunyang Fan , Jie Cui , Senior Member, IEEE, Hulin Jin , Hong Zhong , Member, IEEE, Irina Bolodurina ,
 and Debiao He , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Intrusion detection systems play a crucial role in ensuring the safety of vehicle driving. Traditional intrusion detection
systems face challenges in efficiently extracting key features from
network traffic, resulting in inefficiency. To obtain better detection
performance, many researchers adopted deep learning to build
intrusion detection systems for vehicular network. However, these
systems can only identify learned network attacks, while failing
to identify the unknown attacks present in open scenarios. In this
paper, we propose a deep learning-based auto-updating intrusion
detection system for vehicular network, which uses a two-layer
filter to effectively sense unknown attacks in open scenarios and Fig. 1. The process of recognizing attacks by intrusion detection system.
proactively updates the attack recognizer to enable it with the
ability to identify unknown attacks. In addition, we design a cloudedge-vehicle collaborative model updating approach, where the has transitioned into an era of intelligent transportation [1].
updating task of the attack recognizer is deployed on a cloud server Smart vehicles are equipped with an increasing number of safety
to reduce the computational load of the vehicle. The comprehensive
experiments on three open scenarios show that the updated attack and entertainment applications, such as road prediction, assisted
recognizer can accurately identify both known and unknown at- driving, and audio/video streaming downloads [2]. However,
tacks. while vehicle users enjoy the services of vehicular applications,
 Index Terms—Vehicular network, intrusion detection system,
 malicious attackers may launch network attacks on vehicles
deep learning, unknown attack. and cause serious traffic accidents [3], [4], [5]. In particular,
 vehicular networks operate in open scenarios, and malicious
 attackers will constantly create new types of attacks to attack
 I. INTRODUCTION vehicular networks. Since this new type of attack is unknown
 ITH the application of sensor and wireless communica- to the intrusion detection system, it is difficult for the detection
W tion technologies in transportation systems, the world system to recognize the new unknown attack accurately, and the
 vehicle is more vulnerable to the attack. Therefore, to ensure the
 security of vehicular network, the development of an efficient
 Manuscript received 16 October 2023; revised 20 March 2024; accepted and reliable intrusion detection system for vehicular network
30 April 2024. Date of publication 10 May 2024; date of current version
17 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural becomes increasingly important [6]. Traditional intrusion de-
Science Foundation of China under Grant U23A20308, Grant 62202008, Grant tection methods mostly use fixed rules and features as the basis
62302008 and Grant 62325209, in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for for network attack detection [7], [8]. However, in large-scale
the Central Universities under Grant 2042023KF0203, in part by the Natural
Science Foundation of Anhui Province, China under Grant 2208085QF196, and and complex vehicular network environments, these methods
in part by the University Synergy Innovation Program of Anhui Province under prove ineffective as extracting useful features from network flow
Grant GXXT-2022-049. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. becomes challenging [9], [10]. In recent years, the application
Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding author: Jie Cui.)
 Chunyang Fan, Jie Cui, Hulin Jin, and Hong Zhong are with the Key of deep learning in image recognition and natural language pro-
Laboratory of Intelligent Computing and Signal Processing of Ministry of cessing has led researchers to explore its potential in constructing
Education, School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, intrusion detection systems for vehicular network, yielding im-
Hefei 230039, China, and also with the Anhui Engineering Laboratory of
IoT Security Technologies, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China (e-mail: proved results [11]. Despite these advancements, most existing
cuijie@mail.ustc.edu.cn). vehicular network intrusion detection methods can only identify
 Irina Bolodurina is with the Faculty of Mathematics and Information learned network attacks and cannot detect possible unknown
Technologies, Orenburg State University, 460018 Orenburg, Russia (e-mail:
prmat@mail.osu.ru). attacks [12]. Since the types and number of network attacks are
 Debiao He is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan not constant in the real world, there will always be unknown
University, Wuhan 430072, China, and also with the Shanghai Key Laboratory attacks that have not been learned by the intrusion detection
of Privacy-Preserving Computation, MatrixElements Technologies, Shanghai
201204, China (e-mail: hedebiao@163.com). system. As shown in Fig. 1, a malicious attacker launches three
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3399219 types of network attacks on a target vehicle. Since the intrusion
 0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15373

detection system has learned the data features of two types of II. RELATED WORK
known attacks, the network flows of the known attacks are easily
 Recently, there has been a proliferation of research on intrurecognized and defended by the detection system. However, the sion detection systems. In this section, we will discuss four main
third type of attack is an unknown attack that has not been learned
 categories of intrusion detection systems.
by the intrusion detection system, which makes it difficult for
the detection system to recognize this attack.
 In particular, many researchers utilize datasets consisting of A. Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
fixed types of attacks to train intrusion detection systems, leading Anomaly-based intrusion detection system is a popular
to the system’s outputs being confined within a limited range, method for detecting unknown attacks, which utilizes the feawhile unknown attacks do not fall within this range. Therefore, tures of normal traffic to build an attack recognizer for detecting
when faced with an unknown attack, the intrusion detection the presence of anomalous attack traffic in the network. Zhang
system produces two possible results [13]. The first result is et al. [15] proposed an anomaly detection method for unknown
that the unknown attack is judged as normal traffic, resulting in attacks, which uses Kmeans and isolated forests to detect the
the vehicle being victimized directly. The second result is that presence of anomalous traffic in mixed traffic. To avoid botnet
the unknown attack is judged to be a known attack, leading the attacks on network devices, Sriram et al. in [16] proposed a
vehicle to deal with the unknown attack using methods that de- botnet attack detection framework based on a multilayer perfend against known attacks. However, the defenses employed by ception, which identifies malicious traffic based on statistical
the vehicle may be ineffective due to the different characteristics features of network flows. Considering that the training data may
of the different attacks [14]. contain privacy information of users, Shi et al. [17] proposed a
 To address the above problem, we propose an auto-updating hybrid intrusion detection system based on differential privacy
intrusion detection system for vehicular network, which period- and machine learning, which uses one class support vector
ically updates the attack recognizer to identify known/unknown machine and local outlier factor algorithm for network traffic
network attacks present in open scenarios. The basic idea of the detection. To reduce the false alarm rate of network anomalies,
proposed system is mainly 1) filtering out the network flows of Li et al. [18] propose an anomalous traffic detection method
unknown attacks from the mixed traffic, 2) since there may be based on a bidirectional gated recurrent unit and an attention
more than one kind of unknown attack, the obtained unknown mechanism, which uses a stacked sparse auto-encoder to extract
attack flows need to be classified, 3) based on the network useful features of network traffic, so as to improve the accuracy
flows of unknown attacks and the initial dataset, a new dataset of detection. The above-mentioned anomaly-based intrusion
containing normal flows, known/unknown attacks is formed and detection methods all achieve good results in terms of detection
the attack recognizer is updated using this dataset. 4) the updated accuracy. However, these methods can only determine whether
attack recognizer has the ability to recognize known/unknown the network contains anomalous traffic, and cannot construct
attacks. Moreover, it is important to note that the update of the suitable defenses for such anomalous traffic.
attack recognizer cannot be performed on the vehicle due to its
limited computing and storage capacity. As a result, we design a
cloud-edge-vehicle cooperative model update method to avoid B. Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods
the vehicle computation task overload problem. In summary, the To formulate appropriate defense strategies against different
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: types of network attacks, many researchers have conducted
 r We propose a deep learning-based auto-updating intru- fine-grained analyses for network anomalies (i.e., categorizing
 sion detection system for vehicular network, which can anomalous network traffic). In this subsection, we focus on
 effectively detect unknown attack flows present in open machine learning-based intrusion detection methods, while in
 scenarios and proactively update the attack recognizer to the next subsection, we will discuss deep learning-based intruimprove the ability to recognize unknown attacks. sion detection methods. Alani et al. [19] propose a two-layer
 r We propose a cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration-based intrusion detection method for malicious attacks in networks,
 model updating approach, which deploys the attack rec- which uses multiple machine learning algorithms for packetognizer updating task on cloud servers to reduce the com- level data and flow-level data. Yang et al. [20] proposed a
 putational and storage load of vehicles. multi-layer hybrid intrusion detection method that uses decision
 r The comprehensive experiments on three open scenarios trees, random forests, and other algorithms as base classifiers to
 show that the proposed intrusion detection system for identify both inside and outside vehicle anomalous messages. To
 vehicular network can effectively identify both known avoid distributed denial of service attacks on vehicles, Anyanwu
 and unknown attacks, and outperform the state-of-the-art et al. [21] proposed a vehicular network intrusion detection
 methods in terms of precision, recall and F1-score. method based on the RBF-SVM kernel, which uses a grid search
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The cross-validation algorithm to select the hyperparameters of the
related work is described in Section II. The preliminaries are de- model. Jin et al. [22] proposed an intrusion detection method
scribed in Section III. In Section IV, we introduce the proposed based on outlier detection, oversampling and metric learning
auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network. for achieving fast detection of malicious attacks in a vehicular
In Section V, we evaluate the performance of the proposed network environment. These aforementioned schemes achieve
system. Finally, we summarize our work in Section VI. the fine-grained classification of network attacks. However, the
15374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

accuracy of machine learning algorithms is relatively low due detect and localize malicious attacks and can adaptively adjust
to their weak learning ability on large-scale datasets. Moreover, the detection model according to the surrounding environment.
machine learning algorithms rely on manual feature selection, In summary, many researchers have proposed a large numwhich increases the training cost. ber of intrusion detection schemes to secure the network of
 vehicles. However, most vehicular intrusion detection systems
C. Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Methods rarely consider the detection of new unknown attacks, resulting
 in vehicles being vulnerable to potential attack threats. In this
 To improve the accuracy of identifying network attacks at a
 paper, we propose an auto-updating vehicular intrusion detection
fine-grained level, more and more researchers have used deep
 system based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration. The prolearning to train intrusion detection models. Deep learning can
 posed scheme can effectively sense unknown attacks present
use multilayer neural networks to perform automatic feature
 in open vehicular network scenarios and improve the detection
extraction on large-scale data and obtain high accuracy rates. To
 capability by continuously updating the attack recognizer. In
detect false message attacks in vehicular networks, Yu et al. [23]
 addition, the updating process of the attack recognizer is comproposed an intrusion detection system based on long and shortpleted by a cloud server, which greatly reduces the computation
term memory networks, which uses vehicle message sequences
 and storage overhead of the vehicle.
as input to determine emergency message classes. Shu et al. [24]
proposed a GAN distributed training-based intrusion detection
method for the biased flow problem in vehicular networks, which
 III. PRELIMINARIES
increases the robustness of the model by collecting network
traffic from multiple regions. Tian et al. [25] proposed an intru- In this section, we formulate the problem of identifying
sion detection method based on residual convolutional neural network attacks in open scenarios and then present the main
networks, which uses a distributed deep learning system to components of the proposed attack recognizer.
improve the accuracy of the classification model. These intrusion
detection schemes mentioned above can achieve accurate and
fine-grained identification of network attacks. However, since A. Problem Formulation
the models of these solutions usually do not have the ability Let Dt = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xi , yi ), . . . , (xn , yn )} be a
to sense unknown attacks, they cannot effectively identify un- labeled training dataset that contains M known network attacks,
known attacks in open scenarios. where t denotes the current time. Define xi as the i-th sample
 in dataset Dt and yi as the label corresponding to xi . Define
D. Physical Signal-Based Intrusion Detection Methods the current known attack set as C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cj , . . . , cM }
 To realize timely detection of network attacks, many re- and cj corresponds to the j-th known network attack. Using
searchers have proposed physical signal-based detection meth- dataset Dt to train an initial attack recognizer F t that can
ods for vehicular network attacks. Deng et al. [26] proposed identify the known M network attacks. Assume that at time
an in-vehicle intrusion detection system called IdentifierIDS, t + 1, the attacker launches a novel network attack cM +1 and
which detects both periodic and non-periodic malicious frames the existing attack recognizer F t cannot effectively identify the
by establishing a voltage fingerprint for each CAN identifier unknown attack cM +1 . To prevent the vehicular network against
(ID) and does not consume the limited bandwidth of the CAN attackers, we need to update the attack recognizer F t → F t+1
bus. It is worth noting that IdentifierIDS does not rely on ECU to effectively identify the M + 1 attacks present in the current
and ID mapping knowledge, which greatly enhances utility. Qin scenario. The update of recognizer F t → F t+1 relies on the new
et al. [27] proposed a collaborative cloud-vehicle intrusion de- dataset Dt+1 , which contains samples with unknown attacks and
tection system based on multidimensional features, which solves the corresponding labels. Therefore, the core challenge of conthe data heterogeneity problem by abstracting different vehicle structing an intrusion detection system for vehicular network in
data into the same feature space. Comprehensive experiments open scenarios is to efficiently detect unknown attack flows and
on three real vehicles show that the scheme can effectively form a dataset containing unknown attacks. The identification
detect potential attacks and greatly improve the robustness of of network attacks in the open scenario can be divided into four
the detection system. To reduce the consumption of CAN bus subproblems as follows:
bandwidth resources by the intrusion detection system, Xun 1) To identify existing known attacks, we need to train a
et al. [28] proposed an intrusion detection system based on known attack recognizer with high accuracy.
vehicle voltage signals, which utilizes the side channel infor- 2) Design an unknown attack filter to identify whether an
mation of the vehicle ECU to detect malicious messages and attack is known or unknown.
attack sources. It is worth mentioning that the experiments of 3) To determine how many kinds of unknown attacks exist in
this system on real vehicles have high detection accuracy and it the open scenario, an efficient unknown attack classifier
takes only 0.537 ms to detect a data frame, which means that the needs to be designed.
system can accurately recognize malicious attacks in a shorter 4) Generate a labeled dataset Dt+1 containing known attack
time. To detect malicious spoofing attacks on the CAN bus, Levy flows and unknown attack flows based on the unknown
et al. [29] proposed a spoofing attack detection scheme based attack filter and unknown attack classifier, and use Dt+1
on voltage signals, which utilizes the physical side channel to to update the attack recognizer.
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15375

B. Composition of Attack Recognizer Note that the O is the output of a single-head attention mecha-
 The proposed attack recognizer mainly consists of convolu- nism, and single-head attention suffers from the drawback of
tional neural network (CNN) and self-attention mechanism. The over-focusing attention on a certain location. Therefore, we
CNN is used to extract useful information about the network avoid the over-focusing problem by training multi-groups of
flow, and the self-attention mechanism correlates these infor- different parameter matrices to generate a series of O . Then,
mation with each other to form a global information representa- the output sequence O of the multi-headed attention mechanism
tion [30], [31], [32]. It is worth mentioning that CNNs are further can be calculated by (6)
divided into 1D-CNN, 2D-CNN, and 3D-CNN to handle data of 
 O = (O1 ⊕ O2 ⊕ · · · OH ) · WO (6)
different dimensions (for example, 1D-CNN is commonly used
to handle text data). Since network flow is a kind of text data, where W O is a learnable weight matrix, H is the number of
we use 1D-CNN and self-attention mechanism to build an attack heads of the attention mechanism.
recognizer.
 1) 1D-CNN: A classical 1D-CNN model usually consists of IV. AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR
multiple convolutional layers and pooling layers. The convolu- VEHICULAR NETWORK
tional layer is mainly used to extract the features of the network
flow. The specific convolution process is as follows: The proposed auto-updating intrusion detection system for ve-
 ⎛ ⎞ hicular network consists of four components: attack recognizer,
 m−1
  unknown attack filter, unknown attack classifier, and update
 hi = σ ⎝ wj xi+j + b⎠ (1) attack recognizer. The overview of the system is shown in
 j=0 Fig. 2. Note that the four parts of the proposed system correspond
 to each of the four subproblems in the problem formulation.
where σ is the activation function, m is the size of the convolution
kernel, wj is the j-th weight of the convolution kernel, b is the
offset, xi+j is the (i + j)-th element of the input sequence, and hi A. Attack Recognizer
is the output value of the convolution operation. To obtain better To enable the defense against network attacks, we need to
performance, we use multi-layer 1D-CNN for feature extraction design attack recognizer with high accuracy to identify the atof network traffic. The final convolution result C res needs to be tacks present in the vehicular network. As declared in subsection
input to the pooling layer for dimensionality reduction to reduce B of the preliminaries, the attack classifier mainly consists of
the risk of model overfitting and increase the training speed. The a 1D-CNN and a multi-headed attention mechanism. Initially,
specific pooling process is as follows: the attack recognizer extracts the key features of the network
 flow using 1D convolution and uses maximum pooling to reduce
 Z = M axP ooling(C res ) (2) the risk of model overfitting. Subsequently, the pooled feature
 2) Self-Attention Mechanism: Generally, the self-attention vectors are fed to the multi-headed attention mechanism to
mechanism uses three matrixes of “query”, “key” and “value” capture the correlation between features. Then, we obtain a
to construct the relational features between vectors. For conve- hidden vector O containing the key information of the network
nience, “query”, “key” and “value” are denoted as Q, K and V , flow. Finally, the vector O is flattened and fed into a linear layer
respectively, and their values are calculated as follows: with a Sof tmax activation function. Note that the Sof tmax
 ⎧ activation function is often used for classification tasks, and its
 ⎨Q = Z · W Q output is the predicted probability of each category. The output
 K = Z · WK (3) of the linear layer and the Softmax activation function are shown
 ⎩
 V = Z · WV in (7) and (8)

where W Q , W K , and W V are learnable weight matrices. y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yM , yM +1 ] = (W T · O) + bf (7)
 According to the matrix Q and the matrix K, the value of the
 exp(yj )
attention matrix A can be calculated by (4) pj = M +1
 (8)
 i=1 exp(yi )
 Q · KT
 A = Sof tmax √ (4) where W T is the weight matrix, bf is the offset, y is the
 dk
 output of linear layer, pj is the predicted probability of the
where the Sof tmax is a activation function, and dk is the j-th class, and M + 1 denotes normal traffic and M types of
dimension of K. Note that the matrix A contains the relationship known attacks. According to (8), we can obtain the probability
between any two elements of the pooling result Z. Then, we p = [p1 , p2 , . . . , pM +1 ] that a flow belongs to normal traffic and
 M +1
use the attention matrix A to extract the key information from each of the known attacks, where i=1 pi = 1 and pi ≤ 1. The
the matrix V and generate a sequence O that can reflect the type of the network flow is determined by the maximum value
relationship between the elements. The value of O can be in p, which is denoted as p∗ = Max(p).
calculated by the (5) To sum up, the attack recognizer has been built. However,
 the initial attack recognizer can only identify M known attacks
 O = Attention(Q, K, V ) = A · V (5) and cannot identify unknown attacks that may exist in open
15376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2. Overview of auto-updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network.

scenarios. Inspired by Sun et al. [33] and our experimental vali-
 Algorithm 1: Unknown Attack Filter.
dation, we find that unknown and known attacks show different
distributions on the probability. More specifically, the p∗ value Input: Dataset Dt and Dataset xu
of a known attack is slightly less than 1, while the p∗ value of Output: Unknown Attack Dataset Du
an unknown attack is much less than 1. Therefore, we define a 1 Define Dnt as the normal flow in the dataset Dt ;
threshold θ to determine whether a network flow belongs to a 2 Define Dkt as the known attack flows in the dataset Dt ;
known class or not. When p∗ > θ, the flow is determined to be 3 Building OCSVM-based first layer filters using Dnt ;
a known class, otherwise it belongs to an uncertain class (i.e., it 4 Φn = OCSV M (Dnt );
may be either a known or an unknown class). We set the flows 5 Building OCSVM-based second layer filters using Dkt ;
with p∗ > θ as xk , and the flows with p∗ ≤ θ as xu . 6 Φk = OCSV M (Dkt );
 7 Φn and Φk are used to implement filtering of normal
 flows and known attack flows;
 8 xu1 = Φn (xu );
B. Unknown Attack Filter 9 Du = Φk (xu1 );
 To further determine whether a network flow is an unknown 10 return Du ;
attack flow, we need to design a filter to eliminate the normal
flows and known attack flows in xu .
 Let Dt be the training dataset with labels at the initial time t, It is worth mentioning that the two-layer filter is built based
and Dt contains both normal traffic samples and known attack on one-class support vector mechanism (OCSVM) [34], [35].
samples. Since we do not know any useful information about The OCSVM is a commonly used anomaly detection algorithm
the unknown attack at the initial time t, a discriminator for the that builds a decision boundary in a high-dimensional space
unknown attack is difficult to construct. However, the dataset by features of training data. The decision boundary can cover
Dt contains information about both normal flows and known most of the normal data and separate out the abnormal data. The
attack flows. Therefore, a feasible approach is to build a two- objective function of the decision boundary is as follows:
layer filter to sequentially filter out the normal flows and known n
 
 1 1 
attack flows in xu based on the features of normal and known Minw,ζi ,ρ 2
 ||w|| + ζi − ρ (9)
attack flows. Then, the remaining network flows are the unknown 2 vn i=1
attack flows. Note that the first layer of the two-layer filter is used 
 (w · φ(xi )) ≥ ρ − ζi
to identify whether a network flow is normal or not, while the s.t.
 ζi ≥ 0
second layer of the two-layer filter is used to detect unknown
attack traffic. The reason for this is to avoid some normal flows where w is the normal vector of the hyperplane, v is a hyperpabeing incorrectly recognized as attack flows. rameter to adjust the slack degree, n is the number of samples,
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15377

ζi is the slack variable, ρ is the offset, and φ(xi ) is the radial
 Algorithm 2: Unknown Attack Classification.
basis kernel function. The detailed filter construction is shown
in Algorithm 1, and based on the unknown attack filter, we can
obtain Du containing the unknown attack flows.

C. Unknown Attack Classifier
 Although the dataset Du containing unknown attacks is obtained after the two-layer filter, we do not know how many
unknown attacks are contained in Du . Therefore, to further
determine the number of unknown attack types in Du , we need to
perform clustering operation for Du . The process of clustering is
to divide Du into a number of clusters, and the network flows in
each cluster have some similarity to each other. To improve the
accuracy of the clustering results and reduce the computational
complexity, we use principal component analysis (PCA) to
perform dimensionality reduction for dataset Du . PCA is a classical data dimensionality reduction algorithm that reduces the
correlation between features by changing the coordinate system
to find the main features in the data [36], [37]. Specifically, PCA
first normalizes the data so that each feature with mean of 0 and
variance of 1. The data normalization process is as follows:
 q−μ
 T = (10)
 τ
where q is the feature value, μ and τ are the mean and the
standard deviation of the feature value set respectively, and
T represents the normalization result. Then, we calculate the
covariance matrix to find a feature space that minimizes the
correlation between the features. The covariance matrix is calculated as shown in (11)
 G T
 i=1 (xi − x)(xi − x)
 CM = (11)
 G−1
where G is the number of samples, xi is the eigenvector of
the i-th sample in Du , and x is the mean vector of samples.
According to the matrix CM , we can calculate its corresponding
eigenvector V and eigenvalue λ. The size of the eigenvalue
reflects the importance of the feature vector. Therefore, we sort
the eigenvector V in descending order by eigenvalue λ and select where cj denotes the j-th clustering center. Since the initial clusthe first k eigenvectors to realize data dimensionality reduction. tering centers are chosen randomly, there exists the possibility
The dataset after dimensionality reduction is denoted as follows: that they are not real centroids. Therefore, the clustering centers
 need to be updated continuously, and the updating process can
 Dpca = XV k (12)
 be represented by (14).
where X is the original data matrix and V k is a matrix consisting 1 
of the first k eigenvectors. cj = si (14)
 |Nj |
 Subsequently, we use the Kmeans clustering algorithm to si ∈Nj

analyze how many unknown attacks are contained in Dpca . where Nj is the sample point in the j-th class and si is the
Kmeans is a distance-based clustering algorithm that divides coordinate of the sample point. Finally, the Kmeans algorithm
a set of data into κ classes by continuous iterations, where κ is a generates κ data clusters by continuous iterations and each
hyperparameter. In the initial time, Kmeans selects κ clustering cluster is an unknown attack. Since we do not know how many
centers. Then, the distance from sample point s to each cluster unknown attacks are present in the open scenario, the value of
center is calculated according to (13), and the minimum distance κ is set to [2, κmax ]. The number of unknown attacks in the
is chosen to determine the class to which the sample point open scenario is determined based on the best clustering results
belongs. (i.e., the silhouette coefficient score). Note that the reason for
  not choosing 1 as κ is that the data in Dpca is unlikely to be of
 dj = (s − cj )2 (13) one class. In addition, we consider the case that the unknown
15378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

attack has only one class when κ = 2. The detailed unknown
attack classification process is shown in Algorithm 2. Note that
in Algorithm 2, we design a score threshold η, and determine
that the clustering result is valid only if S max > η. The reason
is to ensure that the unknown attack dataset C u is valid and
accurate.
 To improve the sample quality of the unknown attack, we
need to process the obtained C u = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dκ }, where d
denotes a sample cluster. It is well known that the closer sample
points are to the cluster center, the lower the probability of them
becoming outliers. Therefore, the basic idea of improving data
quality is to select samples that are closer to the center of the
cluster. Let D = {dis1 , dis2 , . . . , disi , . . . , disn } be the set of
distances of a sample cluster, where disi denotes the distance
from the i-th sample to the center of the cluster. The average
distance in D is calculated as follows:
 n
 i=1 disi
 disavg = (15)
 n
Then, we use disavg as a threshold to filter the sample points
closer to the cluster center, i.e., if disi < disavg , retain this sam- Fig. 3. A model updating method based on cloud-edge-vehicle collaboration.
ple point, otherwise discard it. Similarly, we deal with the sample
clusters in C u based on this idea to improve the sample quality
of unknown attacks, and the processed C u = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dκ }.
Finally, a new dataset Dt+1 is formed based on the obtained C u Algorithm 3: Attack Recognizer Update.
and the initial dataset Dt , and the attack recognizer is updated
by utilizing Dt+1 . Input: Dataset Dt+1
 Outuput: New attack recognizer F t+1
D. Update of Attack Recognizer Based on Cloud-Edge-Vehicle 1 Divide the dataset Dt+1 into a training set, a validation
Collaboration set and a test set;
 2 Resize the number of output SoftMax layers;
 In this subsection, we describe how the proposed attack 3 Train the new attack recognizer using the training and
recognizer enables auto-updating in cloud-edge-vehicle envi- validation sets;
ronments. 4 Test the new attack recognizer using the test set;
 The vehicle is not suitable for performing the recognizer 5 Save the model of the attack recognizer;
update task due to limited computational and storage capacity. 6 The cloud server sends updated model to each vehicle;
To alleviate the computational load on vehicles, we propose a 7 Install the updated attack recognizer in each vehicle;
cloud-edge-vehicle collaborative model updating method, and
the specific updating architecture is shown in Fig. 3. As shown in
Fig. 3, the attack recognizer is deployed on the vehicle, while the
unknown attack filter and unknown attack classifier are deployed V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
on the cloud server. First, the initial attack recognizer on the
vehicle forwards network flows of undeterminable type to the In this section, we describe the dataset used for the expericonnected edge base station (i.e. network flows for p∗ ≤ θ). The ments, the experimental settings, and the performance analysis
edge base station forwards these flows to the cloud server and of the proposed auto-updating intrusion detection system for
forms the dataset xu . Then, the cloud server inputs xu into the vehicular network. Specifically, we will discuss five research
unknown attack filter and unknown classifier in turn and obtains questions.
the dataset C u . C u contains unknown attack features present in
 r Q1: How is the overall performance of the proposed autothe current scenario and the initial dataset Dt contains normal updating intrusion detection system for vehicular network?
traffic and known attack features. Based on datasets Dt and C u
 r Q2: Whether the proposed two-layer unknown attack filter
we can generate a new dataset Dt+1 , which contains samples can effectively extract the unknown attacks?
and labels of normal traffic, known attacks and unknown attacks.
 r Q3: Can the unknown attack classifier effectively classify
The cloud server updates the attack recognizer using the dataset unknown attacks?
Dt+1 to ensure that the updated recognizer can identify unknown
 r Q4: Whether attack recognizer based on 1D-CNN and
attacks present in open scenarios. It is worth mentioning that the multi-head attention mechanisms have higher accuracy
cross-entropy loss function is used for model training to compute compared to other algorithms?
the losses and the Adam optimizer to update the parameters. The
 r Q5: Why are vehicles not suitable for training attack recdetailed attack recognizer update is shown in Algorithm 3. ognizers?
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15379

 TABLE I
 DIVIDE KNOWN AND UNKNOWN ATTACKS FROM THREE DATASETS

 library to build the proposed auto-updating intrusion detection
 system for vehicular network.
 2) Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the
 proposed vehicular network attack recognizer to identify known
 or unknown network attacks, we calculated the number of true
 positives (TP), false positives (FP), true negatives (TN), and
 false negatives (FN) predicted by the model. Based on these
 definitions, we can calculate the precision, recall, and F1 score
 by (16), (17), and (18), respectively.
 TP
 P recision = (16)
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall = (17)
 TP + FN
 P recision · Recall
Fig. 4. Baidu apollo auto-driving car. F 1 − score = 2 · (18)
 P recision + Recall

A. Dataset C. Overall Performance of the Proposed System (Q1)

 We use open datasets VeReMi [38], ToN-IOT [39] and EDGE- To answer Q1, we use the confusion matrix to evaluate the
IIOT [40] to train an intrusion detection system for vehicular net- overall performance of the proposed system, and the results of
work. The VeReMi dataset is a dataset for evaluating malicious the confusion matrix are shown in Fig. 5. The Fig. 5(a)–(c) shows
vehicle misbehavior in vehicular network that includes DoS, the performance of the initial attack recognizer in detecting
false location, message replay, and other attacks. ToN-IOT and known attacks, while Fig. 5(d)–(f) shows the performance of
EDGE-IIOT are datasets commonly used in intrusion detection the updated attack recognizer in detecting known attacks and
systems in recent years. The ToN-IoT dataset consists of 21,000+ unknown attacks. We can observe that the proposed vehicular
network flows and contains attacks such as DoS, DDoS, XSS, network intrusion detection system can efficiently identify both
etc. EDGE is a larger intrusion detection dataset that consists of known attacks at the initial time and unknown attacks after
millions of network flows and includes attacks such as SQL auto-updating. In addition, we note that the updated model has a
injection, port scanning, password, etc. To simulate network reduced detection accuracy for some known attacks. The reason
attacks in open scenarios, we further divide each dataset into for this phenomenon is that a small amount of known attack
known attacks and unknown attacks as shown in Table I. It is data is incorrectly identified as unknown attacks. However, the
important to mention that the training data of the initial attack updated model can still identify most of the known attacks
recognizer does not contain unknown attacks. with over 90% accuracy. It is also worth noting that the attack
 recognizer performs best on the TON-IOT dataset. The reason
 for this phenomenon is the relatively simple feature distribution
B. Experimental Settings of the data samples in the TON-IOT dataset. Some existing
 intrusion detection schemes [39], [41], [42] have also achieved
 1) Experimental Environment: The attack recognizer update
 good experimental results on the ToN-IoT dataset.
task was deployed on an Xeon(R) Platinum 8336 C cloud server
with 228 G of RAM and an NVIDIA A100 GPU. We use a
high-performance computer as the host for the edge base station, D. Unknown Attack Detection Performance (Q2)
which is equipped with an Intel(R) Core i9-11900 K CPU, 64 G In open scenarios, constructing efficient filters for unknown
of RAM, and an RTX 3090 GPU. The trained attack recognizer attacks is the basis for reconfiguring attack recognizers. In this
was deployed in the Baidu Apollo auto-driving car shown in subsection, we will discuss the performance of the proposed
Fig. 4. Moreover, we use the TensorFlow 2.9.0 deep learning two-layer filter. Fig. 6 represents the accuracy of the first layer
algorithm library and the Sklearn machine learning algorithm filter in identifying normal flows and abnormal flows. Fig. 7
15380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 5. Performance of the attack recognizer at initial and after update on three datasets. (a) The initial confusion matrix of VeReMi. (b) The initial confusion
matrix of ToN-IoT. (c) The initial confusion matrix of EDGE-IIoT. (d) The updated confusion matrix of VeReMi (e) The updated confusion matrix of ToN-IoT. (f)
The updated confusion matrix of EDGE-IIoT.

Fig. 6. Performance analysis of the first layer of filters. Fig. 7. Performance analysis of the second layer of filters.

 we use the true labels of unknown attacks to accurately evaluate
 the performance of the two-layer filter.
represents the accuracy of the second layer filter in identifying
known attacks and unknown attacks. We can observe that the
first layer filter is effective in identifying anomalous flows from E. Unknown Attack Clustering Results Analysis (Q3)
mixed flows, and the second layer filter is able to filter out To answer Q3, we analyze the clustering results of unknown
unknown attacks from mixed attacks. In addition, the two-layer attacks in this subsection. Assume that there are at maximum
filter is more sensitive to anomalous data on ToN-IoT datasets. 10 unknown attacks in the open scenario, i.e., set κ to 10.
The reason for this phenomenon is that ToN-IoT is a smaller Then, according to the description in Algorithm 2, we perform
dataset and has low data complexity, thus the filters generated clustering from 2 to 10 on the obtained unknown attack data and
on the dataset perform better. Finally, it is important to note that select the best clustering model by silhouette coefficients. The
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15381

 TABLE II
 UNKNOWN ATTACK CLUSTERING ACCURACY

 r NIDT [44]: To improve the accuracy of the intrusion
 detection model and reduce the false alarm rate, an intrusion detection method based on CNN and BiGRU
 is proposed, which uses CNN to extract the spatial
 features of the network traffic, and then uses BiGRU
 to extract the time series information of the network
 traffic.
 The comparison results are shown in Table III, we can observe that the proposed method achieves a high performance
 and outperforms these compared methods. The reason for this
 result is that 1D-CNN and the multi-head attention mechanism
 can effectively extract the features of network traffic and the
 correlation between the features. In addition, we further analyze
 the shortcomings of the compared methods. (1) The TLOC [43]
Fig. 8. Silhouette coefficient scores for the number of unknown attack types builds an intrusion detection system by integrating five advanced
from 2 to 10.
 CNN models, but this simple integration may result in overall
 performance degradation due to the poor performance of one
 of the base learners. (2) LIDS [23] utilizes the powerful timesilhouette coefficient scores for the three datasets are shown in series processing capability of LSTM to detect network attacks
Fig. 8. We can observe that VeReMi and ToN-IoT obtain the on vehicles, but LSTM suffers from gradient vanishing when
highest silhouette coefficients when the number of unknown processing longer sequences, resulting in poor performance. (3)
attack types is set to 2, while EDGE-IIoT obtains the highest Similarly, the reason for the poor performance of NIDT [44] is
silhouette coefficients when the number of unknown attack types that BiGRU has difficulty in capturing long-term dependencies
is set to 3. It corresponds exactly to the number of unknown in longer sequences. Compared with these methods, the proattack types set in Table I. posed attack recognizer with 1D-CNN + multi-head attention
 Furthermore, we analyze the accuracy of clustering and the mechanism can achieve more flexible and efficient detection
results are shown in Table II. We observe that the clustering for network traffic. Specifically, 1D-CNN can effectively exaccuracy for each unknown attack is higher than 89%. It should tract local features of network traffic, and multi-head attention
be mentioned that the higher the clustering accuracy, the higher utilizes these local features to form a global information reprethe accuracy of the updated model to identify unknown attacks. sentation, which enhances the long-range dependency between
Similarly, we used the true labels of the unknown attack data to different locations and improves detection accuracy. In addition,
evaluate the unknown attack classifier. it is important to note that our proposed intrusion detection
 system is composed of multiple modules, and each module
F. Comparison With Other Methods (Q4) works individually. This implies that the detection system is
 highly scalable (e.g., the attack recognizer based on 1D-CNN +
 To answer Q4, we compare the proposed attack recognizer multiple-attention mechanism can be flexibly replaced with an
with some existing methods [23], [43], [44] in terms of precision, LSTM-based attack recognizer).
recall, and F1-score. The main features of the compared schemes
are as follows:
 r TLOC [43]: To detect both in-vehicle network attacks G. Comparison of Vehicle and Server Efficiency on Training
 and out-of-vehicle network attacks faced by vehicles, the Models (Q5)
 scheme proposes an intrusion detection method based on We explain why vehicles are not suitable for training attack
 five advanced CNN models such as VGG16, VGG19, recognizers by comparing the efficiency of vehicle and cloud
 Xception, Inception, and InceptionResnet, and optimizes server training models. The comparison results are shown in
 the hyper-parameters using particle swarm. Fig. 9. We can clearly observe that as the data scale increases,
 r LIDS [23]: To detect the presence of false message attacks the time consumed to train the model on the vehicle increases
 in vehicular network, an LSTM-based intrusion detection significantly, while the time consumed on the cloud server is
 method is proposed, which utilizes the strong processing relatively low. When the computational resources of a vehicle are
 capability of LSTM on time series to detect whether a occupied for a long time due to updating the attack recognizer,
 message sequence is abnormal or not. it is likely to affect the operation of normal safety applications,
15382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON WITH OTHER METHODS

 is used to determine how many unknown attacks are present in
 the open scenario. Finally, the attack recognizer is updated using
 the known attack data and the unknown attack data. The updated
 attack recognizer is able to identify more network attacks. In addition, we devise a cloud-edge-vehicle model updating method
 that makes the vehicle not responsible for attack recognizer
 updating tasks, thus reducing the computational and storage load
 on the vehicles. Our comprehensive experiments on three open
 scenarios demonstrate that the proposed auto-updating vehicular
 network intrusion detection system can effectively identify both
 known and unknown attacks.
 In the future, we will study a federated learning-based intrusion detection system for vehicles that enables joint training
 of multi-area detection models, as well as the ability to detect
Fig. 9. Comparison of vehicle and cloud servers in terms of model training
 unknown attacks in multiple areas. Vehicular ad hoc networks
efficiency. are large distributed networks, and an intrusion detection system
 trained solely on network traffic in one region is prone to the
 biased flow problem, resulting in a small detection range of
 the model. In addition, most existing federated learning-based
leading to an elevated probability of traffic accidents. In addiintrusion detection models for vehicles rarely consider the idention, the vehicle requires a large amount of data to complete
 tification of unknown attacks, leading to poor robustness of the
the update of the attack recognizer. However, the vehicle has
 models. Therefore, building an open federated learning-based
limited storage capacity and this training data is not important
 vehicular intrusion detection system is the direction of our future
for the usual operation of the vehicle. Therefore, vehicles are
 work.
not suitable for the task of updating attack recognizers in terms
of both computation and storage, whereas cloud servers have
more powerful computation and storage capabilities, and model REFERENCES
updating is more efficient and independent of the surrounding [1] F. Zhu, Y. Lv, Y. Chen, X. Wang, G. Xiong, and F.-Y. Wang, “Parallel
environment. transportation systems: Toward IoT-enabled smart urban traffic control
 and management,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 10,
 pp. 4063–4071, Oct. 2020.
 VI. CONCLUSION [2] Z. Zhang, Y. Cao, Z. Cui, W. Zhang, and J. Chen, “A many-objective
 optimization based intelligent intrusion detection algorithm for enhancing
 In this paper, we propose an auto-updating intrusion detec- security of vehicular networks in 6G,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
 no. 6, pp. 5234–5243, Jun. 2021.
tion system for vehicular network, which can detect known [3] T. Alladi, B. Gera, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and F. R. Yu,
attacks and unknown attacks present in open scenarios. More “DeepADV: A deep neural network framework for anomaly detection in
specifically, the system mainly consists of an attack recognizer, VANETs,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 12013–12023,
 Nov. 2021.
an unknown attack filter, an unknown attack classifier, and an [4] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Event-triggered interval-based
update attack recognizer. The initial attack recognizer based anomaly detection and attack identification methods for an in-vehicle
on 1D-CNN and multi-headed attention mechanism is able network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2941–2956,
 2021.
to accurately identify known attacks in open scenarios. The [5] M. Zang and Y. Yan, “Machine learning-based intrusion detection system
unknown attack filter is used to filter the unknown attack data for Big Data analytics in VANET,” in Proc. IEEE 93rd Veh. Technol. Conf.,
present in the open scenario. Then, the unknown attack classifier 2021, pp. 1–5.
FAN et al.: AUTO-UPDATING INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR VEHICULAR NETWORK: A DEEP LEARNING APPROACH 15383

 [6] X. Li et al., “CAN bus messages abnormal detection using improved [29] E. Levy, A. Shabtai, B. Groza, P.-S. Murvay, and Y. Elovici, “CAN-LOC:
 SVDD in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5, Spoofing detection and physical intrusion localization on an in-vehicle
 pp. 3359–3371, Mar. 2022. CAN bus based on deep features of voltage signals,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 [7] I. Butun, S. D. Morgera, and R. Sankar, “A survey of intrusion detection Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 4800–4814, 2023.
 systems in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 16, [30] R. Hu and S. Xiang, “Reversible data hiding by using CNN prediction and
 no. 1, pp. 266–282, Firstquarter 2014. adaptive embedding,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44,
 [8] E. Benkhelifa, T. Welsh, and W. Hamouda, “A critical review of practices no. 12, pp. 10196–10208, Dec. 2022.
 and challenges in intrusion detection systems for IoT: Toward univer- [31] S. Mohine, B. S. Bansod, R. Bhalla, and A. Basra, “Acoustic modality
 sal and resilient systems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, based hybrid deep 1D CNN-BiLSTM algorithm for moving vehicle classipp. 3496–3509, Fourthquarter 2018. fication,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16206–16216,
 [9] W. Li, W. Meng, and L. F. Kwok, “Surveying trust-based collaborative Sep. 2022.
 intrusion detection: State-of-the-art, challenges and future directions,” [32] H. Tan, X. Liu, B. Yin, and X. Li, “MHSA-Net: Multihead self-attention
 IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 280–305, First Quarter 2022. network for occluded person re-identification,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
[10] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, K. Ahmed, and R. Islam, “De- Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 8210–8224, Nov. 2023.
 pendable intrusion detection system for IoT: A deep transfer learning [33] X. Sun, Z. Yang, C. Zhang, K.-V. Ling, and G. Peng, “Conditional Gaussian
 based approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1006–1017, distribution learning for open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Jan. 2023. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 13480–13489.
[11] M. F. Murk, N. Zahid, A. H. Sodhro, and B. Zahid, “Decentralized [34] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
 smart grid system:a survey on machine learning-based intrusion detection “Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure
 approaches,” in Proc. IEEE 96th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–5. and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
[12] R. Ramachandra, A Survey on Unknown Presentation Attack Detection for no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022.
 Fingerprint, vol. 1382, Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2021, pp. 189–202. [35] S. Fong and S. Narasimhan, “An unsupervised bayesian OC-SVM ap-
[13] E. M. Rudd, A. Rozsa, M. Günther, and T. E. Boult, “A survey of stealth proach for early degradation detection, thresholding, and fault prediction
 malware attacks, mitigation measures, and steps toward autonomous open in machinery monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–11,
 world solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1172, 2022.
 Secondquarter 2017. [36] D. Paul, S. Chakraborty, and S. Das, “Robust principal component analy-
[14] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detec- sis: A median of means approach,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198, early access, Aug. 07, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3298011.
 pp. 175–185, 2022. [37] Z. Li, F. Nie, J. Bian, D. Wu, and X. Li, “Sparse PCA via, p-norm
[15] Y.-L. Zhang, L. Li, J. Zhou, X. Li, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Anomaly detection regularization for unsupervised feature selection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 with partially observed anomalies,” in Proc. Companion Proc. Web Conf., Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 5322–5328, Apr. 2023.
 2018, pp. 639–646. [38] J. Kamel et al., “VeReMi extension: A dataset for comparable evaluation
[16] S. Sriram, R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, and S. KP, “Network flow based of misbehavior detection in VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.,
 IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. 2020, pp. 1–6.
 Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2020, pp. 189–194. [39] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and F. T. den Hartog,
[17] J. Shi, Y. Lin, Z. Zhang, and S. Yu, “A hybrid intrusion detection system “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need for standardization of
 based on machine learning under differential privacy protection,” in Proc. features and attack types in IoT network intrusion data sets,” IEEE Internet
 IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6. Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022 .
[18] H. Li, E. He, C. Kuang, X. Yang, X. Wu, and Z. Jia, “An abnormal traffic [40] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke, “Edgedetection based on attention-guided bidirectional GRU,” in Proc. IEEE IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of IoT and
 22nd Int. Conf. Commun. Technol., 2022, pp. 1300–1305. IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE Access,
[19] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “An intelligent two-layer intrusion detection vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
 system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, [41] A. Oseni et al., “An explainable deep learning framework for resilient
 no. 1, pp. 683–692, Jan. 2023. intrusion detection in IoT-enabled transportation networks,” IEEE Trans.
[20] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1000–1014, Jan. 2023.
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things [42] P. Kumar et al., “PPSF: A privacy-preserving and secure framework using
 J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. blockchain-based machine-learning for IoT-driven smart cities,” IEEE
[21] G. O. Anyanwu, C. I. Nwakanma, J.-M. Lee, and D.-S. Kim, “RBF-SVM Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 2326–2341, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
 kernel-based model for detecting DDoS attacks in SDN integrated vehic- [43] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based
 ular network,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 140, 2023, Art. no. 103026. intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
[22] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion de- Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779.
 tection on Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling, [44] B. Cao, C. Li, Y. Song, and X. Fan, “Network intrusion detection technoloutlier detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831, ogy based on convolutional neural network and BiGRU,” Comput. Intell.
 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ Neurosci., vol. 2022, 2022 .
 pii/S0020025521008021
[23] Y. Yu, X. Zeng, X. Xue, and J. Ma, “LSTM-based intrusion detection system for VANETs: A time series classification approach to false
 message detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12,
 pp. 23906–23918, Dec. 2022.
[24] J. Shu, L. Zhou, W. Zhang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Collaborative intrusion
 detection for VANETs: A deep learning-based distributed SDN approach,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4519–4530, Jul. 2021.
[25] Z. Tian, C. Luo, J. Qiu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A distributed deep
 learning system for web attack detection on edge devices,” IEEE Trans. Chunyang Fan is currently working toward the Ph.D.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1963–1971, Mar. 2020. degree with the School of Computer Science and
[26] Z. Deng, J. Liu, Y. Xun, and J. Qin, “IdentifierIDS: A practical voltage- Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. His rebased intrusion detection system for real in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. search interests include vehicular network intrusion
 Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 661–676, 2024. detection and mobility management of the software
[27] J. Qin, Y. Xun, and J. Liu, “CVMIDS: Cloud–vehicle collaborative intru- defined vehicular networks.
 sion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 321–332, Jan. 2024.
[28] Y. Xun, Z. Deng, J. Liu, and Y. Zhao, “Side channel analysis: A novel
 intrusion detection system based on vehicle voltage signals,” IEEE Trans.
 Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 7240–7250, Jun. 2023.
15384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

 Jie Cui (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in Henan Irina Bolodurina received the Ph.D. degree from
 Province, China, in 1980. He received the Ph.D. de- South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk, Russia. She
 gree from the University of Science and Technology is currently a Professor and Head of the Department
 of China, Hefei, China, in 2012. He is currently a of Applied Mathematics, Orenburg State University,
 Professor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of Orenburg, Russia. She has more than 60 scientific
 Computer Science and Technology, Anhui Univer- publications in academic journals and international
 sity, Hefei. He has more than 150 scientific publi- conferences which indexing in Scopus and WoS. She
 cations in reputable journals, such as IEEE TRANS- has participated in more than 20 scientific projects
 ACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, supported by the RFBR and other Russian scientific
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS programs. Her research interests include theory of
 AND SECURITY, IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AR- optimal control, mathematical modeling, information
EAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, analysis software, control of social and economic systems, decision support
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANS- systems, data integration, and processing.
ACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOL-
OGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, IEEE TRANSAC-
TIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL
ELECTRONICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, and IEEE TRANS-
ACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, academic books and international conferences. His
research interests include applied cryptography, IoT security, vehicular ad hoc
network, cloud computing security, and software-defined networking (SDN). Debiao He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in applied mathematics from the School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
 China, in 2009. He is currently a Professor with the
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan
 University, Wuhan, and the Shanghai Key Laboratory
 of Privacy Preserving Computation, MatrixElements
 Technologies, Shanghai, China. He has authored or
 Hulin Jin was born in Jilin Province, China, in 1977. coauthored more than 100 research papers in refereed
 He received the Ph.D. degree from Sejong University, international journals and conferences, such as IEEE
 Seoul, South Korea, in 2013. He is currently a Profes- TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMsor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of Big Data, PUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY,
 Anhui University, Hefei, China. He has more than 100 and Usenix Security Symposium. His main research interests include cryptogscientific publications. His research interests include raphy and information security, in particular, cryptographic protocols. He was
 Big Data, computer vision, cloud networks, and cloud the recipient of the 2018 IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL Best Paper Award and the
 computing. 2019 IET Information Security Best Paper Award. His work has been cited
 more than 10000 times at Google Scholar. He is in the Editorial Board of several
 international journals, such as Journal of Information Security and Applications,
 Frontiers of Computer Science, and Human-centric Computing & Information
 Sciences.

 Hong Zhong (Member, IEEE) was born in Anhui
 Province, China, in 1965. She received the Ph.D.
 degree in computer science from the University of
 Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in
 2005. She is currently a Professor and Ph.D. supervisor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei. She has more than
 200 scientific publications in reputable journals, such
 as IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COM-
 MUNICATIONS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL
 AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE
COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECU-
RITY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECH-
NOLOGY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT,
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IN-
DUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS,
AND IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, academic books and international
conferences. Her research interests include applied cryptography, IoT security,
vehicular ad hoc network, cloud computing security, and software-defined
networking (SDN).