IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 2715

 AutoML4ETC: Automated Neural Architecture
 Search for Real-World Encrypted
 Traffic Classification
 Navid Malekghaini , Elham Akbari, Mohammad A. Salahuddin , Member, IEEE,
 Noura Limam , Member, IEEE, Raouf Boutaba , Fellow, IEEE, Bertrand Mathieu ,
 Stéphanie Moteau, and Stéphane Tuffin

 Abstract—Deep learning (DL) has been successfully applied e.g., prioritizing certain types of traffic over others. Moreover,
to encrypted network traffic classification in experimental set- it could be used to guarantee service and resources to critical
tings. However, in production use, it has been shown that a business services that are associated with a specific type of
DL classifier’s performance inevitably decays over time. Retraining the model on newer datasets has been shown to only traffic. Another example would be the use of TC in Intrusion
partially improve its performance. Manually re-tuning the model Detection Systems (IDS); with TC, an IDS could distinguish
architecture to meet the performance expectations on newer unknown network traffic from other types of traffic and take
datasets is time-consuming and requires domain expertise. We appropriate actions, such as blocking them. This example is an
propose AutoML4ETC, a novel tool to automatically design effi- application of TC for anomaly detection. Due to the pervasive
cient and high-performing neural architectures for encrypted
traffic classification. We define a novel, powerful search space use of encryption nowadays, the bulk of Web-based applicatailored specifically for the early classification of encrypted traf- tions communicate using Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
fic using packet header bytes. We show that with different search (HTTPS), which relies on Transport Layer Security (TLS) to
strategies over our search space, AutoML4ETC generates neu- encrypt the application message, making TC a difficult task.
ral architectures that outperform the state-of-the-art encrypted Deep learning (DL) has been widely employed for
traffic classifiers on several datasets, including public benchmark
datasets and real-world TLS and QUIC traffic collected from encrypted traffic classification (ETC) with performance
the Orange mobile network. In addition to being more accurate, exceeding traditional machine learning (ML) methods [1], [2],
AutoML4ETC’s architectures are significantly more efficient and [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. However, the classification performance
lighter in terms of the number of parameters. Finally, we make is known to vary based on the model architecture and the tar-
AutoML4ETC publicly available for future research. get dataset. The effect of the dataset on model performance, in
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, neural architec- particular the distribution of data across classes, is especially
ture search, AutoML, HTTP/2, TLS, QUIC. important, as some distributions are easier to learn than others. For real-world ETC datasets, the data collection process,
 I. I NTRODUCTION e.g., location of monitoring sensors in the network, duration
 RAFFIC classification (TC) is an important task for of traffic capture, and employed filters, can affect the data dis-
T the operation and management of computer networks.
It is essential for traffic analysis and can be used for effectribution. For example, a dataset collected from a local area
 network is expected to have a different distribution from an
tive network planning, resource provisioning and allocation, ISP-level network dataset, as the larger the number of users
providing differentiated Quality-of-Service (QoS), improving in a network, the more diverse the generated traffic.
customer Quality of Experience (QoE), monitoring network In 2020, we designed UWOrange [8], a DL-based servicesecurity, etc. For instance, the Internet service provider (ISP) and application-level encrypted traffic classifier with a novel
can use TC to identify different types of traffic in the tripartite architecture that out-performed state-of-the-art classinetwork and to differentiate the services provided to them, fiers on Orange mobile traffic data as well as existing, publicly
 available datasets. However, as time went by, we observed that
 Manuscript received 19 June 2023; revised 26 September 2023; accepted 6 the performance of UWOrange on our ISP partner’s newer
October 2023. Date of publication 17 October 2023; date of current version
12 July 2024. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and traffic data was decaying. We thoroughly investigated this
approving it for publication was N. Zincir-Heywood. (Corresponding author: issue and reported in [9], [10] how in a production setting,
Noura Limam.) even when the data collection process is the same, state-of-
 Navid Malekghaini, Elham Akbari, Mohammad A. Salahuddin, Noura
Limam, and Raouf Boutaba are with the David R. Cheriton School of the-art DL encrypted traffic classifiers (including UWOrange)
Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada are prone to performance decay. We highlighted the stark
(e-mail: nmalekgh@uwaterloo.ca; eakbaria@uwaterloo.ca; mohammad. differences in state-of-the-art DL model performance across
salahuddin@uwaterloo.ca; noura.limam@uwaterloo.ca; rboutaba@
uwaterloo.ca). datasets, which was partly attributed to a change in the prop-
 Bertrand Mathieu, Stéphanie Moteau, and Stéphane Tuffin are with erties and statistical distribution of data over time, also known
the Networks/WNI, Orange Labs, Orange Labs, 22300 Lannion, France in the ML community as data drift.
(e-mail: bertrand2.mathieu@orange.com; stephanie.moteau@orange.com;
stephane.tuffin@orange.com). Our findings suggested that in production, periodic model
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3324936 re-training over newer datasets was inevitable to alleviate the
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

effect of data drift. However, re-training UWOrange on newer the first three Transport Layer Security (TLS) handshake
datasets did not prevent performance loss, which was particu- packets and, for the first time in ETC literature, from the
larly significant on specific datasets [9], [10]. The decreasing singleton ClientHello packet of the Quick UDP Internet
performance of the re-trained classifier on newer datasets Connection (QUIC) protocol. This makes these classifiers
led us to assert that the architecture of UWOrange, initially suitable for early traffic classification.
designed to perform particularly well on baseline datasets, • We validate AutoML4ETC by extensively experimentwas no longer suitable for newer datasets. It became clear ing with real-world encrypted network traffic collected
that in production, the hyper-parameters of the DL classi- on the Orange mobile network. AutoML4ETC’s architecfier, e.g., learning rate, had to be re-tuned and the model tures show superior performance both on QUIC and TLS
architecture adapted by a domain expert on a regular basis, traffic, with service-level and application-level classificaboth of which are time-consuming and primarily based on tion alike. We further experiment with publicly available
trial-and-error. datasets for the reproducibility of results and make the
 When experimenting with UWOrange on Orange network tool publicly available1 to advance the state of the art.
data, it also became apparent that the use cases of interest The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
required a more efficient, light-weight model architecture, Section II describes the background and discusses related
capable of classifying traffic with just a few initial pack- literature works. Section III provides an exposition of the
ets per flow (i.e., early classification) with high accuracy. core components of AutoML4ETC. Section IV evaluates
These requirements, in addition to the challenges posed by AutoML4ETC’s search space, search algorithms, and training
data drift, i.e., constant, manual re-tuning or re-tweaking of strategies. It showcases the efficacy of the AutoML4ETCthe model architecture, motivated the need for an automated generated architectures over public and real-world datasets,
tool to design neural network architectures that are: (i) capable and demonstrates their superior performance in comparison to
of classifying an encrypted flow with high accuracy from the state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classifiers. Finally, Section V
first few packets, and (ii) lighter and more resource-effective concludes the paper and instigates future directions.
models with comparable or better performance than the state of
the art. Such a tool can be used to automatically produce new
 II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORKS
architectures adapted to newer datasets instead of manually
re-tuning older ones. A. Neural Architecture Search
 Automating the process of finding the right architecture with NAS [14] leverages a controller Recurrent Neural Network
the right hyper-parameters is a problem known to DL. In meta- (RNN) to generate neural network architectures. Figure 1
learning, it was previously suggested to use a supervisory shows an architecture generated by NAS that consists of conneural network to learn the hyper-parameters of a subordi- volutional layers only, where a layer in the Convolutional
nate neural network [11], [12]. Recently, Neural Architecture Neural Network (CNN) is described by a sequence of tokens.
Search (NAS) [13], [14], a sub-field of Automated Machine Each token determines a separate characteristic of the con-
Learning (AutoML) [15], was introduced to automatically volutional layer, such as filter size and stride. The different
learn the best neural network architecture given a particular compositions and permutations of the sequences determine the
dataset. NAS arose from the extensive architectural engineer- model architectures that can be generated, which represents the
ing effort needed every time a new image classification dataset search space.
emerges. This closely aligns with the practical challenges per- In NAS, a controller RNN is trained using Reinforcement
taining to ETC. However, NAS requires choosing the building Learning (RL), where the actions are the choice of tokens
blocks of the architecture search space, which is not trivial while the reward signal is the validation accuracy of the model,
and requires domain expertise. i.e., the sequence of tokens. RL consists of a series of trials,
 In this regard, our main contributions are as follows: where a child model is created by sampling the parameter
 • We propose AutoML4ETC, a novel resource-effective values generated by the RNN at the end of each trial. As
 tool to automatically design efficient and high-performing shown in Figure 2, a sampled model is trained and evaluated
 neural network architectures for ETC, given a target on a dataset per trial to compute the reward, which makes
 dataset. We show that in addition to being more accu- NAS computationally expensive.
 rate, the AutoML4ETC’s architectures are significantly The RL algorithm described above operates within a space
 more efficient and lighter than state-of-the-art encrypted of possible sequences. This space is decided by the set of
 traffic classifiers in terms of the number of parameters. possible tokens that the controller RNN can generate at each
 • We define a novel, powerful architecture search space tai- time step. It is up to the domain expert to determine the set of
 lored specifically for producing efficient encrypted traffic possible tokens for RNN, which is similar to the set of words
 classifiers that leverage packet raw bytes. The building in the dictionary of a language generator. Researchers in [14]
 blocks of the search space were carefully selected after proposed two different search spaces for creating both CNNs
 we exhaustively studied state-of-the-art architectures for and RNNs. The authors increased the complexity of the con-
 ETC and extensively experimented with different archi- volutional models by introducing anchor points (cf. Figure 1)
 tectures on real-world encrypted network traffic collected into the search space, which determines the probability of
 on the Orange mobile network. We show that the produced models achieve high classification accuracies from 1 https://github.com/OrangeUW/AutoML4ETC
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2717

Fig. 1. Example CNN model descriptions and skip connections for each layer [14].

 computational complexity of NAS. The authors leveraged a
 transfer learning approach to speed up child model training
 and promote transferability.
 Both previous approaches suffer from high computational
 complexity. To address this problem, [20] improved NAS’s
 time complexity by a factor of 1000 and achieved an error
 rate of within 0.3% of NAS. To make this happen, the authors
 employed parameter sharing among all child models, which
 is inspired by transfer learning [18] and multi-task learn-
Fig. 2. Overview of NAS with RL [14]. ing [21]. The authors named their approach Efficient Neural
 Architecture Search (ENAS). ENAS uses a more restrictive
 search space, where only the child models that can be represented by a directed acyclic graph are considered. Moreover,
having skip connections between a layer and its previous lay- their micro search space is without non-separable convoers. This allowed the architecture to contain branching or skip lutional blocks. The results of the micro search space are
connections similar to the ones in ResNet [16]. Their results then compared to those of the search space in NAS. Our
showed that the generated CNN models perform within an proposed novel search space is inspired by the search space
error rate of 1% from the state-of-the-art image classifiers on in ENAS.
the CIFAR-10 dataset [17]. The high performance is attributed The choice of the search algorithm has also been explored
to training 12,800 architectures using 800 GPUs for concurrent in NAS, where some works leveraged RL while others resorted
training, which makes their approach very resource-intensive. to Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs). Outside the realm of
 Authors in [18] enhanced the set of tokens, i.e., architec- NAS, [22] proposed Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) that
ture building blocks that the RNN generates in [14]. Their extended the well-known Multi-armed Bandit technique in RL
enhancement is based on the observation that state-of-the-art to tree-structured search spaces. This inspired an interesting
image classifier architectures have repeated network motifs, approach in [23] that improved the controller by using MCTS
i.e., small building blocks in the architecture’s graph that are to find the best architecture hyper-parameters. Using MCTS
replicated. Their proposed search space consists of a sequence with Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees (UCT) is
of Normal and Reduction cells, in which only the Reduction known to balance exploitation and exploration in the searchcells reduce the size of the feature map. Between different ing process and overcome possible sub-optimal solutions.
architectures in the search space there is variation in the The main idea is to use MCTS to find the model’s hyperinterior structure of the Normal and Reduction cells. Each parameters in a layer-by-layer fashion in the child model
cell is made up of a constant number of network motifs, descriptions. Selection, Expansion, Playout with simulation,
where each motif consists of two inputs fed into two blocks and Backpropagation are the main steps of MCTS. To relithat are aggregated. The types of blocks (e.g., separable ably estimate the search directions in MCTS, the child models
convolution, identity, 1x1 convolution) and the aggregation are trained multiple times. The authors suggested using simfunction (e.g., add, concatenate) are determined by the con- ulation to estimate the child model’s accuracy, such that the
troller RNN along with the connections between the motifs. child model is trained only once on the dataset, as opposed
Their method performed slightly better than the best recorded to multiple times, which saves on training time. The model’s
performance on CIFAR-10, with the added benefit of being accuracy is then estimated by aggregating the training and
transferable to the larger ImageNet dataset [19] despite the simulation results.
2718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 EAs are an alternate to RL for searching the neural archi- from [37]’s experiments with XGBoost, and focus on findtecture search space [24], [25]. Authors in [24] evolved an ing the best hyper-parameters and architecture for a CNN.
initial population of strings representing neural architectures Following our previous work, [9], in which we highlight the
by using a tournament selection algorithm, where after each challenges in manually adapting a successful deep architecpairwise comparison the worse individual dies and the better ture to new traffic traces, in this work, we explore a way to
one mutates. The fitness of each string is determined by the automate the manual process, given a dataset and a space of
respective architecture’s validation accuracy after being trained hyper-parameters.
on a dataset. Similar to [20], researchers in [25] used an EA AutoML was recently employed for TC in [38], [39].
to search the NASNet search space. The authors used a tour- Both [38] and [39] focus on designing traffic representations
nament selection algorithm similar to [24] and introduced the for efficient classification. While [38] proposed a normalconcept of aging to individuals. Comparing their algorithm ized packet-level representation, [39] proposed a process
to the RL baseline, they showed that their EA achieves a for extracting flow-level features from sequences of packet
higher accuracy faster than the RL-based method, however, size and directions. They both used the publicly available
both methods converged to the same accuracy asymptote. The AutoGluon tool [40]. AutoGluon’s approach to AutoML is
authors argued that the EA-based method is more relevant in different from NAS. Rather than opting to find the best model
larger search spaces where reaching the optimal solution may hyperparameters, it creates ensembles of several models by
be resource intensive. We compare the EA algorithm in [25] to stacking them in layers. It is designed to be fast and simother search algorithms over our search space in Section IV. ple to use by non-experts. Its base models include classical
 and deep models. For example, [38] used six types of base
 models including tree-based methods, deep neural networks,
 and neighbors-based classifiers. A similar ensemble-based
B. AutoML for Encrypted Traffic Classification method is employed in Mljar [41], a python AutoML package
 A plethora of ML models have been suggested for TC since employed in [42] for malware detection. However, Mljar only
the early 2000s. Numerous classical ML models including includes classical ML models as base models, hence, [42] is
Naive Bayes, Bayesian Networks, k-Nearest Neighbor, and further from our work than the former two.
Random Forests [26], [27] were shown to effectively classify
traffic datasets, including encrypted TOR traffic. A survey of
these classical models can be found in [28]. The use of time- III. AUTO ML4ETC
series features including packet size and direction sequences, In this section, we describe and discuss the major compofirst suggested in [26] as a side channel to attack TOR, was nents of AutoML4ETC, namely: (i) the search space, (ii) the
shown to be especially effective across models. search algorithm, and (iii) the child model training strategy.
 With the widespread adoption of deep neural networks, These components are independent of one another, allowing
numerous deep architectures were employed for ETC includ- flexibility in the choice of each component.
ing Multi-Layer Perceptron, Convolutional Neural Networks,
Long Short-Term Memory networks, Gated Recurrent Units,
Stacked AutoEncoders, and Transformers [2], [3], [4], [8], A. Search Space
[29], [30], [31], [32], which have shown to be effective The search space in AutoML4ETC consists of a variety of
on private datasets [1], [8], [33] as well as open research operations (e.g., add, concatenate), connections (i.e., input,
datasets [34], [35], [36]. By and large, some works such as [4], output) and their ordering, and the number of supported layers
[30], [32] primarily focused on designing representations of (e.g., convolution layers). These are the building blocks for
traffic data for well-known architectures, while others like [2], the controller (i.e., search algorithm) to choose from and
[3], [8], [29], [31] focused on designing deep architectures tai- interconnect to create the neural network architectures of child
lored for well-known network traffic data representations. This models. The output of any generated child model is connected
paper focuses on automating the latter, more precisely, auto- to a Softmax layer to produce the final classification.
matically designing an optimized architecture for a specific As depicted in Figure 3, the overall architecture of a child
traffic data representation and a particular dataset. neural network includes a single Normal cell and a single
 In an attempt to obtain a more realistic evaluation of the Reduction cell, which are composed of the building blocks in
proposed ETC models in the literature, including classical and the search space. In comparison to complex sequential archideep models, [1], [37] performed comparative studies of exist- tectures, this lightweight structure allows us to learn simpler
ing model performances on real-world datasets. Reference [1] and more generalizable models (cf. Section IV-G). The cell
shows that the performances of deep and classical models are input goes through a hyper-layer before entering a cell, as
close, with 1D-CNN and MLP winning over Random Forest shown in Figure 3. The hyper-layer is either a Filter Alignment
by a small margin. Reference [37] highlighted the importance or a Factorized Reduction layer depending on the cell type.
of parameter tuning and showed that by simply tuning the • Filter Alignment hyper-layer: A Normal cell is preceded
maximum tree depth, XGBoost can significantly outperform by a Filter Alignment layer, which consists of sequential
CNN methods. ReLU, convolution, and batch normalization. This layer
 The importance of hyper-parameter tuning is a driving fac- introduces filters at the beginning of the cell (i.e., 64
tor in this work, although we take the opposite direction initial filters, which is configurable).
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2719

Fig. 3. AutoML4ETC search space.

Fig. 4. Factorized Reduction hyper-layer modules.

 • Factorized Reduction hyper-layer: A Reduction Cell is
 preceded by a Factorized Reduction layer, depicted in
 Figure 4, which is necessary to process and reduce the
 input size in half.
 We compare the novel search space proposed for
AutoML4ETC against state-of-the-art search spaces
(cf. Section IV-D).

B. Search Algorithms
 Given a search space, the search algorithm (i.e., the controller) describes the child neural network architecture. To
 Fig. 5. Example cell components.
accomplish this, as discussed, the search algorithm composes
a single Normal cell and a single Reduction cell from the
search space. Each cell consists of a number of nodes (i.e., ETC models [2], [8], [33], and has been shown to achieve
4, which is empirically deduced and configurable), as shown high classification accuracy.
in Figure 5. For each node, the search algorithm makes the Importantly, the search algorithm may not choose the output
following decisions: from a node as an input to other nodes in the same cell. We call
 1) Choose Input 1 and Input 2 from the output of the these unused outputs Loose Ends. Because Loose Ends may
 previous nodes. If it is the first node, choose from the contain useful information, they are fed to the add operation
 inputs of the cell. in the output of the last node of the cell.
 2) Choose the operation for Input 1 and Input 2 from: Numerous state-of-the-art search algorithms have been
 (i) identity, (ii) separable convolution hyper-layer with proposed and evaluated in a setting with abundant resources
 kernel size 3 or 5, and (iii) average or max pooling with (e.g., in excess of 400 GPUs [14], [18], [25]) and, or minikernel size 3. These choices are inspired from [18]. mal to no time constraint (e.g., up to 50,000 trials [18], 310
 3) Add output of the two operations and return as the output epochs for architecture search [20]). Indeed, in a resource- or
 of the node. time-constrained environment, these algorithms may not con-
 A separable convolution hyper-layer consists of sequen- verge to their optimal performance. Moreover, simple Random
tially connected layers of ReLU, separable convolution, batch Search (RS) has proven very competitive against its more comnormalization, and dropout. We found that using a high-rate plex counterparts. In [23], the authors compared a variation of
dropout layer (e.g., 0.4) during search alleviates overfitting EA and MCTS to RS with the spectrum of measured accuracy
to training data, leading to a more generalizable model. ranging between 94.1% and 94.2%. Similarly, authors in [14],
Furthermore, similar to [18], we employ two sequentially [20], [25] showed RS performance to be within 1% of other
connected separable convolution hyper-layers every time the search algorithms.
search algorithm chooses this operation. Such a structure for The modularity of AutoML4ETC allows to choose any
convolution layers has also been extensively used for deep search algorithm independently from the search space.
2720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 6. Overall AutoML4ETC framework.

Therefore, we investigate different state-of-the-art neural smaller number of epochs, and only the best-performing child
architecture search algorithms, and evaluate their impact on model is trained for additional epochs, as needed.
the performance and complexity of the best child model. For example, the child models in the partial training strategy
Specifically, in AutoML4ETC, we experiment with RL [20], could be trained for 25% of the full training epochs, with the
MCTS [23], and EA [25], and compare them against the base- best performing child model trained further for the remainline RS algorithm. With the exception of RS, these search ing 75% epochs. This could significantly reduce NAS time.
algorithms were developed and evaluated on the NASNet or However, the best child model from partial training is only
ENAS Micro search spaces, which were an inspiration for an estimate of the global best child model. Therefore, there is
our novel search space in AutoML4ETC. Therefore, compar- an interesting trade-off to consider between the two training
ing these searching algorithms in AutoML4ETC is particularly strategies in AutoML4ETC (cf. Section IV-F).
relevant (cf. Section IV-E).

C. Child Model Training Strategies IV. E VALUATION
 NAS is inherently time consuming and includes the fol- We start by presenting the overall settings and methodollowing steps: (i) search algorithm, (ii) child architecture ogy for evaluating AutoML4ETC. The high-level workflow
composition, and (iii) training of child models. In our experi- of the AutoML4ETC framework, including all of its compoments, we estimated the time taken for the first two steps to be nents, is depicted in Figure 6. In Section IV-A, we describe
around a 100 milliseconds, which is negligible in comparison the baseline state-of-the-art ETC models used for comparing
to the time in training child models. Indeed, every time a child the performance of the AutoML4ETC-generated models. In
architecture is composed, it is trained over several epochs and Section IV-B, we present the performance criteria and metthen evaluated for performance. The performance is a reward rics used in our evaluation. We describe the pre-processing
signal for a child model, and helps the search algorithm to and labeling process of TLS and QUIC raw packet capconverge to better child neural networks in future trials. Our tures (i.e., PCAP files) as well as the datasets used in our
goal is to reduce the child model training time (i.e., number experiments in Section IV-C.
of epochs) without compromising NAS performance. Our evaluation study is four-fold. We evaluate the search
 We investigate two types of child model training strategies space of AutoML4ETC and compare it against a baseline
in AutoML4ETC, namely full training and partial training. search space in Section IV-D. We evaluate the performance
Full training pertains to training child models on as many of different search algorithms and child-model training
epochs as needed to generate the best possible architecture. In strategies in Section IV-E and Section IV-F, respectively.
contrast, in partial training, the child models are trained on a Finally, in Section IV-G, we compare the performance of
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2721

AutoML4ETC-generated architectures against the baseline
state-of-the-art ETC models on various datasets.

A. State-of-the-Art ETC Models
 We use four baseline state-of-the-art ETC models that have
shown superior performance on the input features employed
in this work.
 The UWOrange [8] model consists of three different Fig. 7. Pre-processing procedure for real-world datasets.
branches each tailored to a specific type of input feature type.
The outputs of the three parts are concatenated and further
 TP + TN
processed by dense layers followed by a Softmax layer. One Accuracy = × 100
branch of the model consists of convolutional layers that pro- TP + TN + FP + FN
cess packet raw bytes. We call this branch the UWOrange-H In this work, we aim to use AutoML4ETC to generate
model, and use it as a baseline for comparison. multi-label encrypted network traffic classifiers. As such, we
 The UCDavis CNN [33] model is designed to operate on evaluate the performance of a generated model in terms of
packet raw bytes. It differs from the UWOrange-H model in its weighted average recall, weighted average precision, and
terms of the number of units in the last dense layers, and weighted average F1-score, by averaging the recall, precision,
it does not use dropout layers. However, the essential part and F1-score of the classifier across all classes weighted by
of the UCDavis CNN and the UWOrange-H models, i.e., the the fraction of flows belonging to each class in the dataset.
CNN layers, are similar. Another difference between the two We also evaluate the accuracy of the model as the fraction of
models is in their input. The raw packet data in UCDavis CNN correctly classified flows.
includes the first six packets of a flow, while the input data in Each child network is trained with an initial learning rate of
UWOrange-H consists of the first 600 bytes of the first three 0.001. Furthermore, while the child models are being trained,
TLS handshake packets of the flow. we cut the learning rate in half every 10 epochs. We found this
 The DeepPacket CNN [2] is a high-performing DL model to be a more effective solution than a fixed learning rate, as
designed specifically for packet raw bytes. This CNN model it increases the resolution of the gradient descent’s search as
receives a 1,500-dimensional vector as input and comprises the search progresses. Moreover, we use the Adam optimizer
two 1D convolutional layers placed one after the other, fol- and the sparse categorical cross-entropy loss function to train
lowed by a max-pooling layer. The vector is flattened and fed the child networks. Further details can be found in the source
through four fully connected layers, with the final layer serving code (cf. Footnote 1).
as the Softmax classifier. Our software stack for neural architecture design and pre-
 E2E CNN [29] is the first encrypted traffic classifier that processing consists of Tensorflow 2.2 [43] with Keras [44]
employs 1D-CNNs. It was shown to outperform traditional ML and PySpark 2.4.4 [45], and a custom version of Hypernets
methods. This model inspired many other CNN architectures 0.2.3 [46] with custom HyperKeras.
including all the state-of-the-art baseline models considered in
this paper. Furthermore, this CNN-based model is also tailored C. Datasets and Pre-Processing
for packet raw bytes, making it a valid baseline to com-
 The overall procedure for pre-processing and labeling raw
pare the performance of AutoML4ETC. E2E CNN receives
 packet captures (i.e., PCAP files) into ML-usable datasets
a 768-dimensional vector as input and comprises one 1D conis shown in Figure 7. The first pre-processing step consists
volutional layer, followed by a max-pooling layer. The same
 of removing the packet payloads beyond the TLS or QUIC
structure is repeated and finally, the vector is flattened and fed
 header. The resulting PCAP files are broken into flows, where
to two fully-connected layers with the final layer serving as
 each flow consists of packets close in time that share source
the Softmax classifier.
 IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and protocol.
 The detailed model architectures implemented in our exper-
 From each flow, the headers of the first three TLS handshake
iments are depicted in Figure 12.
 packets are extracted. The TLS Server Name Indication (SNI)
 header is used for labeling the flow and is obfuscated next,
B. Metrics and Settings and so is the TLS cipher information header field. The IP
 A binary classification task may result in True Positives addresses are also masked. For the QUIC flows, only the first
(TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN), and False ClientHello packet in the handshake phase is extracted. The
Negatives (FN). The precision, recall, F1-score and accuracy SNI header is used for labeling the flow and is obfuscated
of such a classifier are derived as follows: next, and so is the TLS cipher information header. We do not
 TP include more than one packet for QUIC flows as the latter
 Precision = × 100
 TP + FP packets are encrypted and do not have any information useful
 TP to the classifier.
 Recall = × 100 The real-world datasets were labeled based on the SNI field
 TP + FN
 2 × Precision × Recall in each flow, which is one reason why we obfuscate the SNI
 F 1 − score = × 100 value in preprocessing. Not all flows contain a readable SNI
 Precision + Recall
2722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE I
 S ERVICE -L EVEL DATASETS P ROPERTIES

 TABLE II
 A PPLICATION -L EVEL DATASETS P ROPERTIES

value. Moreover, the utilization of clear SNI is likely to decline a higher connection speed than HTTP over TLS; therefore,
in favor of the proposed Encrypted SNI (ESNI) extension [47]. time-sensitive services such as resources adopt it to enhance
Hence, we need traffic classifiers that learn the intrinsic char- the loading time of their clients’ websites. However, it is less
acteristics of the flows rather than a mapping from SNI to frequently adopted by services such as mail or file download,
traffic classes. where loading time is not crucial.
 We used an approximate labeling function to extract labels We evaluate AutoML4ETC on six real-world datasets and
from SNIs. We developed a look-up table by visiting top web- three public benchmark datasets of network traffic generated
sites in each service class and extracting regular expressions either synthetically or in controlled environments [36], [48].
from their domain names, which are matched with the SNI Five of the real-world datasets consist of TLS flows and the
value to map each SNI to a label. Because not all flows contain sixth consists of QUIC flows. The real-world datasets were
an SNI value, we also label adjacent flows (i.e., flows with the generated by pre-processing and labeling traffic traces captured
same TLS session-id or close-enough start time) based on the on the Orange mobile network, and named after their year
main flow that has an SNI to increase the number of labeled and month of capture. Table I highlights the properties of the
flows. datasets labeled at the service level. We also experiment with
 The labeling module was initially designed for the TLS application-level classification. The application-level labels are
datasets and then adapted to the QUIC dataset. We observed listed in Table II and differ from the service-level labels. In
from the SNIs in the QUIC dataset that some of the TLS each dataset, we reserve 80% of the labeled data samples for
dataset classes did not have any instances in the QUIC dataset. training and the remaining 20% for evaluation. For the real-
Similarly, some of the classes are unique to QUIC, such as world datasets we use a 600-byte cut-off as suggested in [8].
resources and e-commerce. For the other datasets, we use the pre-processed version made
 The Resources class contains flows that add material to available by the original authors.
the webpage, such as Javascript, CSS, and HTML libraries,
and often have one end in some major hosting service,
e.g., Cloudflare. On the other hand, flows that belong D. Evaluation of the Search Space
to third-party advertisement services are categorized under In order to show how the AutoML4ETC search space sure-commerce. passes the performance of current state-of-the-art ETC, we
 We categorize QUIC and TLS using different sets of classes build another search space based on the state-of-the-art ETC
for two reasons: (i) QUIC is still a relatively new protocol architectures, which we name CNN + MLP. We then compare
and is not yet as widely adopted as TLS, and (ii) QUIC offers the performance of the best model found in this search space
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2723

 TABLE III
 CNN S EARCH S PACE PARAMETERS , VALUES , AND T YPES

 TABLE IV
 MLP S EARCH S PACE PARAMETERS , VALUES , AND T YPES

Fig. 8. Overview of CNN search space.

 Fig. 10. Comparison of average accuracy of top-N child models using
 different search algorithms.

Fig. 9. Overview of MLP search space.

 TABLE V
 PACKET R AW B YTES S EARCH S PACES C OMPARISON

 Fig. 11. Accuracy of top-10 child models with different training epochs; the
 × mark is the average for each epoch.

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE OF PARTIAL T RAINING OF C HILD M ODELS ( I . E ., 10
 E POCHS ) VS . F ULL T RAINING S TRATEGY ( I . E ., 40 E POCHS )
with that of the best model found in AutoML4ETC. The best
models are found using the same RS algorithm.
 CNN + MLP: The CNN + MLP search spaces are inspired
by the ETC state of the art [2], [4], [8], [33], [36] and covers
their architecture. The overall structure of the CNN (i.e., 2D
CNNs or 1D CNNs) search space is depicted in Figure 8.
Each CONV-Pool Block is a sequence of one or more CONV
Blocks connected to a pooling layer. The number of CONV- [4], [8], [33], [36]. Also, the number of filters is cut in half
Pool Blocks in the sequence is determined by the CONV-Pool in the following repetitions of CONV Block, i.e., after the
Block Repeat parameter. Moreover, the inner CONV Block first two CONV-Pool Blocks. The parameters for this search
is also sequentially repeated CONV Block Repeat number of space are summarized in Table III. Choice means that the
times, where the two repeat parameters are independent of one search algorithm chooses a value from a range of values for
another. Additionally, for the first two CONV-Pool Blocks, we that parameter; Optional means that this layer is optional;
set the CONV Block Repeat to two repetitions. Thereafter, Permutation only organizes the best permutation of values;
CONV Block Repeat can be from a range of 3 to 5, which Reduce factor defines the sequential amount of reduction in
is a number of convolutional layers often used in ETC [2], dense units.
2724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE VII
 AUTO ML4ETC V ERSUS THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS IN S ERVICE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION

 We connect CNN search space to the MLP search space to to one another in 2D for no reason. Evidently, on the CNNconstruct the CNN + MLP search space. For the MLP search 1D + MLP search space, it is possible to obtain a child model
space, we use a sequence of dense layers and a permutation that achieves 78.75% accuracy with almost half the number
of dropout, batch norm, and activation layers between every of parameters after the same number of trials.
two dense layers, as shown in Figure 9. We repeat this Dense RS on the ENAS Micro search space can find a much
Block several times, which is specified by the Dense Block lighter model (i.e., 120.6 thousand parameters) that achieves
Repeat parameter. These blocks are connected and the number higher accuracy (i.e., 80.4%), after 200 trials as well. However,
of units in the dense layer is reduced in the next block by the with the AutoML4ETC search space, it is possible to gener-
Reduce factor parameter. The parameters of the MLP search ate a classifier that is not only more accurate (i.e., 82.86%
space are summarized in Table IV. classification accuracy) but also lighter (i.e., 111.5 thousand
 Performance Comparison: We showcase the performance parameters) than any of the above classifiers after only half of
of AutoML4ETC against CNN + MLP by comparing the per- those trials (i.e., 100 trials). Hence our AutoML4ETC search
formances of the best model found in each search space. The space outperforms state-of-the-art search spaces both in terms
same RS algorithm is used to search all search spaces, as our of accuracy and complexity of the best child model on this
goal is to evaluate the search space, not the search algorithm. dataset.
Table V shows the best model’s performance on the May 2021
TLS dataset, when the child model is trained for 40 epochs.
We use the May 2021 TLS dataset as it is the smallest of E. Comparison of Search Algorithms
our TLS datasets for timing purposes. We will justify the 40 We discuss and compare the performances of different
epochs and report results with different numbers of epochs search algorithms in this section after briefly describing the
and other datasets in later sections. algorithms.
 The best child model generated from the CNN-2D + MLP RL: Based on the RNN controller in [20], and uses
search space after 200 trials, achieves a 77.55% accuracy and REINFORCE with baseline and Adam as the optimizer. The
has almost 22 million parameters. The input to the models in RNN controller is a single-layer Long Short-term Memory
this search space is transformed into two-dimensional images (LSTM) with 100 units applied to the controller logits.
(i.e., [4] with NAS). However, turning raw bytes into 1D vec- Baseline decay is set to 0.999, while the norm of gradients
tors and using 1D CNNs can boost the performance of the is clipped at 5.0. The learning rate for the Adam optimizer
model. We speculate that the arbitrary arrangement of sequen- is 1e-3.
tial packet bytes in 2D possibly confuses the model, as it MCTS: Based on [23] and uses UCT [49]. The maximum
considers learning patterns between bytes that are put next node expansion is set to 10. When rolling out, the sample size
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2725

 TABLE VIII
 AUTO ML4ETC V ERSUS THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ODELS IN A PPLICATION -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION

for the simulation network to assess potential pathways is set to equally well-performing best child models; the standard
to 10. The simulation network is LightGBM [50] with default deviation of the accuracy distribution across the best child
parameters. models is only 0.25%. This result highlights, in particular, the
 EA: Based on [25], where the population size is set to 20. power of our search space, where the simplest search algorithm
The number of parent candidates selected per evolution cycle (i.e., RS) can perform as well as much more complex search
is set to 5. algorithms at the cost of a few more parameters (i.e., 206.53,
 RS: Makes random decisions at each step. It does not 231.62, 242.12, and 258.24 thousand for RL, MCTS, EA, and
maintain a state to update itself based on previous decisions. RS, respectively).
 For a fair comparison, we fix the other parameters of Another interesting observation is that as N increases, the
AutoML4ETC as follows. We set the number of child model gap between the mean accuracies of the top-N child models
training epochs to 10 for faster training and set the total num- grows. While the MCTS algorithm is the top performer for
ber of trials to 100. We will discuss the effectiveness of the N=5,..,30, RL performs the worst. Moreover, in this same
10 epochs of child model training in the next section. range, the EA and RS algorithms perform almost identically
 We compare the mean accuracy of the top-N child models and score in between MCTS and RL. This suggests that MCTS
found by each of the search algorithms for N=1, 5, 10, 20, can build more top-performing models with fewer trials and
and 30. This is because we are not only interested in compar- child model training epochs.
ing the performance of the global best child models, but also All of these findings and observations suggest that designwant to compare the overall ability of each search algorithm ing a good search space is more important than the search
to find reasonably good (i.e., reasonably accurate) child mod- algorithm itself when using fewer trials and epochs for child
els throughout the search process. As an example, top-5 child model training. A good search space is when most of the
models are the 5 child models that achieve the best validation architecture combinations result in reasonably good accuracy,
accuracy sorted in descending order. and this applies to our search space. Therefore, in the state
 Performance evaluation results are depicted in Figure 10. of the art versus AutoML4ETC section, for the sake of effi-
Several interesting observations can be made here. First, ciency in the number of parameters with the best accuracy, we
concerning the global best child models (i.e., top-1 child choose to use RL as our search algorithm. RL showed the best
models), it is evident that all of the search algorithms lead performance for the top-1 child model and also found the best
2726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 12. The state-of-the-art ETC baseline model architectures used in this paper.

child model with the least number of parameters. However, the Table VI further shows the trade-off between the accuracy
search spaces in AutoML4ETC can be combined with another and complexity of the top child model. We can see that with a
search algorithm to realize any other desiderata. 10-epoch partial training strategy, the top child model achieves
 79.71% accuracy. However, with the full training strategy,
 i.e., training over 40 epochs, the top child model can achieve
F. Evaluation of Child Model Training Strategies
 a higher accuracy of 82.86%. Additionally, the number of
 We start by searching for an upper bound for the number parameters of the top child model resulting from the full
of training epochs needed to find the best child model. To training approach is less than half of its counterpart. Therefore,
find this number, we conduct a set of experiments where we the trade-off can be diluted down to a loss of ∼3% in accuincrease the number of training epochs starting from 10 and racy with twice as many parameters for a ∼75% lower time
validate every 10 epochs on the testing dataset. Figure 11 is complexity (i.e., search time).
the mean validation accuracy of the top-10 child models for a Since the AutoML4ETC models are light in general with
varying number of training epochs. We can see that the average both strategies (i.e., number of parameters) and the difference
accuracy of the top-10 child models (i.e., black line curve) in accuracy is noticeable, a 40-epoch full training strategy
flattens beyond 40 epochs. Therefore, 40 epochs can be set as seems to be a better option for this particular search space.
our upper bound for the full training of child models.
 From another perspective, if we partially train the child
models over 10 epochs only, we can save approximately 75% G. AutoML4ETC Versus State of the Art
of the total NAS time. With this method we just use 10 epochs In the previous sections, we concluded that using RL as
for training child models, then extract the top child model and the search algorithm, 40 epochs for child model training,
train it for an extra 30 epochs. However, the best child model and 100 trials would be our choices for AutoML4ETC. We
resulting from partial training is an estimate of the global best now compare the AutoML4ETC-generated model to other
child model. state-of-the-art architectures for ETC (cf. Section IV-A). We
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2727

Fig. 13. AutoML4ETC-generated DNN architecture that achieves 100% accuracy on the QUIC - UCDavis dataset [36].

use the same batch size for all models and also use the input Table VII presents the performance of the AutoML4ETC
features suggested in [8] (i.e., TLS handshake header) for approach compared with other state-of-the-art ETC models
AutoML4ETC. in service-level classification. It is evident that AutoML4ETC
2728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

outperforms the state-of-the-art models across all the datasets. [7] N. Malekghaini, H. Tsang, M. A. Salahuddin, N. Limam, and
In fact, the AutoML4ETC-generated model is ∼1 to 60.1% R. Boutaba, “FSTC: Dynamic category adaptation for encrypted network
 traffic classification,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (IFIP Netw.), 2023,
more accurate than the state of the art. Moreover, it is sim- pp. 1–9.
pler and lighter, with over 50 times fewer parameters than [8] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
the state-of-the-art models on average. Table VIII presents the increasingly encrypted Web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.,
 vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2021.
same results for application-level classification. [9] N. Malekghaini et al., “Data drift in DL: Lessons learned from encrypted
 Interestingly, on the synthetic QUIC - UCDavis dataset [36], traffic classification,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–9.
AutoML4ETC achieves 100% accuracy recording the highest [10] N. Malekghaini et al., “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification
 in the face of data drift: An empirical study,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225,
achievable accuracy with around 100 times fewer parameters Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109648.
than the state-of-the-art models. The detailed architecture is [11] T. Schaul and J. Schmidhuber, “Metalearning,” Scholarpedia, vol. 5,
depicted in Figure 13 as an example. The architecture found no. 6, p. 4650, 2010.
 [12] S. Hochreiter, A. S. Younger, and P. R. Conwell, “Learning to learn
by AutoML4ETC is totally different from the hand-crafted using gradient descent,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2001,
state-of-the-art models, which further reinforces the benefit of pp. 87–94.
AutoML4ETC. [13] T. Elsken, J. H. Metzen, and F. Hutter, “Neural architecture search: A
 survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1997–2017, 2019.
 [14] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
 V. C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORKS learning,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–16.
 [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1Ue8Hcxg
 In this paper, we introduce AutoML4ETC a novel and fully [15] M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and
automated neural architecture search tool for the early clas- F. Hutter, “Efficient and robust automated machine learning,” in Proc.
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 2962–2970.
sification of encrypted traffic. AutoML4ETC is comprised of [16] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
a powerful neural architecture search space tailored for raw recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
packet byte-based classification, whose building blocks were pp. 770–778.
 [17] A. Krizhevsky and G. Hinton, “Learning multiple layers of features
carefully selected based on an exhaustive literature review from tiny images,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON,
along with our experience in designing and experimenting Canada, Rep., 2009.
with a state-of-the-art encrypted traffic classifier. The neural [18] B. Zoph, V. Vasudevan, J. Shlens, and Q. V. Le, “Learning transferable architectures for scalable image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
architecture search space is supplemented with efficient search Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 8697–8710.
algorithms and training strategies, whose evaluation is reported [19] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “ImageNet:
on several public benchmark and Orange mobile network A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2009, pp. 248–255.
traffic datasets. We showcase that AutoML4ETC-generated [20] H. Pham, M. Guan, B. Zoph, Q. Le, and J. Dean, “Efficient neural
architectures are significantly more light-weight, more effec- architecture search via parameters sharing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
tive, and better performing than state-of-the-art ETC models Learn., 2018, pp. 4095–4104.
 [21] S. Ruder. “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks.”
on diverse datasets. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05098.
 In recent years, Attention Networks [51] and Transformer- [22] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári, “Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning,” in
based [52] architectures have shown good performance in Proc. Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006, pp. 282–293.
ETC. However, their unique architectures with no obvious [23] L. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Jinnai, Y. Tian, and R. Fonseca, “Neural architecture search using deep neural networks and monte carlo tree search,” in
repetitive structure, pose challenges for AutoML. In the future, Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, 2020, pp. 9983–9991.
we will investigate the possibility of including Attention [24] E. Real et al., “Large-scale evolution of image classifiers,” in Proc. Int.
Networks and Transformers in the NAS search space. We will Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 2902–2911.
 [25] E. Real, A. Aggarwal, Y. Huang, and Q. V. Le, “Regularized evolualso investigate more efficient ways for searching better per- tion for image classifier architecture search,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
forming neural architectures, for example, by using one-shot Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 4780–4789.
approaches [53]. [26] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting:
 Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial
 naíve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Security,
 R EFERENCES 2009, pp. 31–42.
 [27] N. Williams, S. Zander, and G. Armitage, “A preliminary performance
 [1] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted comparison of five machine learning algorithms for practical IP traffic
 traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation, flow classification,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 36,
 lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., no. 5, pp. 5–16, 2006.
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019. [28] R. Boutaba et al., “A comprehensive survey on machine learning
 [2] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. Hossein Zade, and M. Saberian, for networking: Evolution, applications and research opportunities,” J.
 “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using Internet Services Appl., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–99, 2018.
 deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. [29] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 [3] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neu-
 “FS-Net: A flow sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Inform. (ISI),
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), 2019, pp. 1171– 2017, pp. 43–48.
 1179. [30] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classifi-
 [4] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequence-to-image cation is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 based approach towards IP traffic classification using convolutional neu- Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2017, pp. 1271–1276. [31] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
 [5] I. Akbari et al., “Traffic classification in an increasingly encrypted encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
 Web,” Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 75–83, Sep. 2022. [Online]. Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3559439 [32] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT:
 [6] A. Khajehpour, F. Zandi, N. Malekghaini, M. Hemmatyar, N. Omidvar, A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transand M. J. Siavoshani, “Deep inside Tor: Exploring website fingerprinting formers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web
 attacks on Tor traffic in realistic settings,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
 Knowl. Eng., 2022, pp. 148–156. 3485447.3512217
MALEKGHAINI et al.: AutoML4ETC: AUTOMATED NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH 2729

[33] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app iden- Elham Akbari received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees
 tification using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, from the Sharif University of Technology. She is cur-
 2019. rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the University
[34] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, of Waterloo. Her work concerns network traffic
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” classification and the application of few-shot and
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, meta-learning algorithms in encrypted network data
 pp. 407–414. analysis.
[35] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, vol. 2, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[36] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
 just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
 2018, arXiv:1812.09761.
[37] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and zero-day
 traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-grade dataset,” Mohammad A. Salahuddin (Member, IEEE)
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4103–4118, received the Ph.D. degree in computer science
 Dec. 2021. from Western Michigan University in 2014. He
[38] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions is currently a Research Assistant Professor of
 in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Computer Science with the University of Waterloo.
 Commun. Security, 2021, pp. 3366–3383. His research interests include the Internet of Things,
[39] J. Piet, D. Nwoji, and V. Paxson, “GGFAST: Automating generation content delivery networks, network softwarization,
 of flexible network traffic classifiers,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., network security, and cognitive network manage-
 2023, pp. 850–866. ment. His coauthored research publications have
[40] N. Erickson et al., “AutoGluon-Tabular: Robust and accurate automl for received numerous awards, including the ACM
 structured data,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06505. SIGMETRICS Best Student Paper, the IEEE/IFIP
[41] A. Płońska and P. Płoński, “MLJAR: State-of-the-art automated NOMS Best Papers, and the IEEE CNOM Best Paper. He serves on the
 machine learning framework for tabular data. Version 0.10.3,” MLJAR, TPC for international conferences and is a reviewer for various peer-reviewed
 Łapy, Poland, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mljar/mljar- journals, magazines, and conferences.
 supervised
[42] D. F. Isingizwe, M. Wang, W. Liu, D. Wang, T. Wu, and J. Li, “Analyzing
 learning-based encrypted Malware traffic classification with AutoML,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol. (ICCT), 2021, pp. 313–322.
[43] “TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems.” Noura Limam (Member, IEEE) received the
 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.tensorflow.org/ M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
[44] F. Chollet et al. “Keras.” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io the University Pierre and Marie Curie (currently
[45] M. Zaharia et al., “Apache spark: A unified engine for big data process- Sorbonne University), France, in 2002 and 2007,
 ing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 56–65, Oct. 2016. [Online]. respectively. She is a Research Assistant Professor of
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2934664 Computer Science with the University of Waterloo,
[46] D. IO. “Hypernets.” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ Canada. She is an active researcher and a contributor
 DataCanvasIO/Hypernets in the area of network and service management. Her
[47] E. Rescorla, K. Oku, N. Sullivan, and C. A. Wood, “TLS current interests revolve around network automaencrypted client hello,” Internet Eng. Task Force, Fremont, CA, tion and cognitive network management. She is the
 USA, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/ Chair of the IEEE ComSoc Network Operations
 html/draft-ietf-tls-esni-14 and Management Technical Committee, an Associate Editor of the IEEE
[48] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. Islam Mamun, and Communications Magazine, and a Guest Editor of the IEEE Communications
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using Magazine Network Softwarization and Management Series.
 time-related features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy,
 2016, pp. 407–414.
[49] P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and P. Fischer, “Finite-time analysis of the
 multiarmed bandit problem,” Mach. Learn., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 235–256, Raouf Boutaba (Fellow, IEEE) received the M.Sc.
 2002. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
[50] G. Ke et al., “LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision Sorbonne University in 1990 and 1994, respectree,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 3146–3154. tively. He is currently a University Chair Professor
[51] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. and the Director of the David R. Cheriton School
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008. of Computer Science, University of Waterloo,
[52] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT- Canada. He is the founding Editor-in-Chief of
 FlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND
 classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT from 2007 to 2010 and
 Min., 2022, pp. 2576–2584. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ served as the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE J OURNAL
 3534678.3539314 ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS from
[53] G. Bender, P.-J. Kindermans, B. Zoph, V. Vasudevan, and Q. V. Le, 2018 to 2021. He is a Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada, the
 “Understanding and simplifying one-shot architecture search,” in Proc. Canadian Academy of Engineering, and the Royal Society of Canada.
 ICML, 2018, pp. 549–558.

 Navid Malekghaini received the B.Sc. degree in
 computer engineering from Sharif University and Bertrand Mathieu received the M.Sc. degree from
 the master’s degree in computer science from the the University of Marseille, the Ph.D. degree from
 University of Waterloo. After his Master’s, he con- Sorbonne University, Paris, and the Habilitation à
 tinued as a Senior ML Researcher and a Consultant Diriger des Recherches degree from the University
 with the University of Waterloo, Canada, in collabo- of Rennes. He is a Senior Researcher with Orange
 ration with Orange Labs R&D, France. His research Innovation. He contributed to 14 national/European
 revolves around the intersection of machine learning, projects and published over 80 papers in internetwork security, network management, and cloud national conferences, journals, and books. He is
 computing with a focus on automation and scalabil- working on programmable networks, QoS and QoE,
 ity. He is also a reviewer for peer-reviewed journals and new network solutions. He is a member of
 and conferences. several conferences’ TPC.
2730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Stéphanie Moteau is a Research and Development Stéphane Tuffin is a Research and Development
 Engineer with Orange Labs for 18 years recog- Engineer with Orange Labs for 20 years recognized
 nized as an Orange Expert on Future Networks. as an Orange Expert on Future Networks. He has
 She works on the IP metrology domain for vari- been deeply involved in the transition from circuitous purposes: security, quality of service and quality switched voice to IP and spent several years preparof experience, content delivery network, and traffic ing and supporting IMS deployments in Orange
 classification. She participated in many collaborative countries. In 2013, he took the lead of a research
 projects (French and European ones) as a contributor project in the field of Web real-time communicaand a project leader for Orange. Two years ago, she tions which gave birth to a “no backend” offer. Since
 became a Data Scientist. This gives her new methods 2017, he has been leading a research program on
 to perform her research activity. end-to-end network quality which covers network
 planning, traffic classification, monitoring-troubleshooting the performance of
 Internet applications, and adapting networks to the need of interactive services.
 His own research interests are the monitoring of encrypted traffic and lowlatency networking. These last years, he has been refocusing research efforts
 on integrating environmental limits in network management.