IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024 7661

 Blockchain-Enabled Federated Learning for
 Enhanced Collaborative Intrusion Detection
 in Vehicular Edge Computing
 Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
 Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE, and Lyes Khoukhi , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs) are trans- of the current transportation systems. These systems include
forming the global monitoring of road safety. These systems, a variety of technologies, such as traffic signal synchronizaincluding vehicular networks and transportation infrastructure, tion, Electronic toll collection (ETC), and real-time public
are vulnerable to several security issues, which could disrupt
services and potentially cause harm to the users. It is crucial to transportation information. These systems, including vehicestablish robust security measures to protect against evolving ular networks and transportation infrastructure, are complex
attacks and ensure the safe and reliable operation of ITS. and require careful management to ensure their efficient
Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based Intrusion Detection Systems operation. Vehicular networks, also known as Vehicle-to-
(IDS) are mainly used to enhance the security of ITS. The Everything (V2X) communication, refer to the communication
adoption of AI-based techniques to secure ITS against new
emerging threats has been limited due to a lack of realistic and technologies used to connect vehicles with other vehicles,
recent data on these types of attacks (i.e., zero-day attacks). infrastructure, and pedestrians. These technologies enable
In this context, we introduce a novel Edge-based Framework vehicles to exchange information, such as location, speed, and
that uses Federated Learning (FL) and blockchain to secure traffic conditions, in real-time. Both vehicular networks and
ITS against new emerging threats. In particular, our proposed ITS have the potential to greatly improve transportation, but
framework consists of (1) a novel distributed Edge-based architecture that allows multiple Edge nodes to securely collaborate they also raise security and privacy concerns. Additionally,
while preserving their privacy; and (2) a decentralized and secure the collection and storage of sensitive information, such as
reputation system based on blockchain technology to maintain location data, by ITS, may raise privacy concerns for indithe reliability and trustworthiness of the FL process within the viduals. It is crucial to establish robust security measures
ITS; This system manages reputation data for individual nodes to protect against evolving attacks and ensure the safe and
(such as vehicles), guaranteeing the integrity of the FL training
process. Experiment results using the UNSW-NB15 dataset show reliable operation of ITS. To address these security and privacy
that our proposed framework achieves high accuracy and F1 concerns while still promoting sustainability, it is important to
score (99%) in detecting new threats while ensuring the privacy prioritize privacy-aware secure collaborative learning methods.
and reliability of the whole ITS. These results demonstrate the Artificial intelligence (AI)-based intrusion detection systems
effectiveness of our proposed framework in securing ITS. (IDS) are mainly investigated to enhance the security of ITS.
 Index Terms— Sustainable intelligent transportation systems, IDSs are largely used to enhance the security of ITS. An IDS
green vehicular networks, intrusion detection systems, edge is a type of security software that monitors network traffic
computing, federated learning(FL), blockchain. and identifies potential threats or unauthorized activity. There
 are two main types of IDS: (1) Network-based IDS which
 I. I NTRODUCTION monitors network traffic and looks for patterns or anomalies

I NTELLIGENT Transportation Systems (ITS) are a form of
 transportation management that utilizes new emergent technologies to improve the efficiency, safety, and sustainability
 that may indicate a security threat; and (2) Host-based IDS,
 on the other hand, which monitors the activity on a specific
 computer or device and looks for signs of an intrusion. In the
 context of sustainable ITS, an IDS can be used to detect and
 Manuscript received 30 December 2022; revised 20 May 2023 and
2 November 2023; accepted 23 December 2023. Date of publication prevent cyber attacks on the network or specific devices within
25 January 2024; date of current version 2 July 2024. The Associate Editor the ITS. For example, an IDS could detect and prevent a
for this article was Z. Lyu. (Corresponding author: Zakaria Abou El Houda.) hacker from accessing traffic control systems or altering traffic
 Zakaria Abou El Houda is with Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique Centre Énergie Matériaux et Télécommunications (INRS-EMT), patterns. In addition to an IDS, other security measures can
Varennes, QC J3X 1S2, Canada (e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca). be implemented to protect sustainable ITS, such as encryption,
 Hajar Moudoud is with L@bISEN, ISEN Yncrea Ouest, 29200 Brest, France regular software updates, and access controls. By implement-
(e-mail: hajar.moudoud@usherbrooke.ca).
 Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of Com- ing a combination of these measures, we can ensure the safe
puting and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates and secure operation of sustainable ITS solutions.
(e-mail: bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae). The adoption of AI-based techniques to secure ITS against
 Lyes Khoukhi is with GREYC CNRS, ENSICAEN, Normandie University,
76000 Rouen, France (e-mail: lyes.khoukhi@ensicaen.fr). emerging threats has been limited due to a lack of realistic and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3351699 recent data on these types of attacks. Without this data, it is
 1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

difficult for AI algorithms to accurately identify and mitigate reduced delays and preserved privacy. These results demonnew threats (i.e., zero-day attacks) as they arise. To build strate the potential of decentralized learning to enhance the
robust AI-based models for ITS infrastructure, it is essential security of ITS and other IoT systems, while also protecting
for organizations to collaborate in a privacy-aware manner. the privacy of individuals (e.g., vehicle).
With the increasing amount of personal data being collected The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
and processed by ITS, organizations need to prioritize the pri- follows:
vacy of individuals and ensure that their personal information • We design a novel distributed Edge-based architecture
is being handled responsibly [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], that allows multiple Edge nodes to securely collaborate to
[9], [10], [11], [12]. secure ITS while preserving their privacy. This architec-
 Federated Learning (FL) is a distributed machine learning ture allows Edge nodes to securely collaborate and share
approach in which multiple parties collaborate to build a model information and knowledge, ensuring the integrity and
without exchanging their sensitive data. Instead of sending reliability of the ITS while preserving the privacy of each
data to a central server to train a model, each party/agent node.
trains a model locally on its own data and sends only the • We propose a decentralized and secure reputation system
model parameters to the server. The server then combines based on blockchain technology to maintain the reliability
the model parameters from all parties to produce a global and trustworthiness of the FL process within the ITS.
model. One potential application of FL in ITS is to improve This system manages reputation data for individual nodes
traffic prediction and control. For example, traffic data from (such as vehicles), guaranteeing the integrity of the FL
multiple sources, such as sensors on roads, traffic cameras, training process.
and GPS data from vehicles, could be used to train a global • We evaluate our proposed framework in terms of
model for traffic prediction. The model could then be used to accuracy, F1-score, precision, detection rate, and comoptimize traffic flow and reduce congestion. Blockchain tech- putational complexity. The UNSW-NB15 dataset, which
nology could potentially be used to secure ITS by providing includes well-known attacks and malware, was used to
a tamper-proof record of transactions and data. For example, conduct in-depth experiments to evaluate the effectiveblockchain could be used to track the movement of vehicles ness of our proposed framework in detecting zero-day
and ensure that only authorized vehicles have access to certain attacks. The obtained results show a significant accuareas. Blockchain can also be used to store data related to racy (99%) and detection rate (99%), outperforming
maintenance and repairs, helping to ensure that vehicles are centralized machine learning and deep learning models.
properly maintained and safe to operate. In addition to their superior performance, our proposed
 In this context, we propose a novel Edge-Enabled Frame- framework demonstrates its ability to effectively achieve
work that uses Federated Learning and blockchain to secure trustworthiness, efficiency, security, and privacy.
the ITS network against emerging threats (i.e., zero-day This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents
attacks). The use of Edge computing, blockchain, and FL related work. Section III presents our system model.
can enhance the security and privacy of ITS. Edge computing Section IV discusses our blockchain-based reputation sysbrings security mechanisms closer to end devices, reducing tem. Section V presents the experimental setup and results.
delays in communication and improving the overall security Section VI evaluates the performance of our proposed frameof the system. FL, on the other hand, enables privacy-aware work and compares it with recent AI schemes. Finally,
collaborative learning between vehicles while preserving their Section VII concludes the paper and outlines future work.
privacy. While Blockchain ensures the trustworthiness and
reliability of the FL training process. By leveraging these II. R ELATED W ORK
technologies, we build secure and privacy-aware ITS-based AI techniques have been largely discussed in the literature
models that benefit both individuals and the overall transporta- to detect intrusions in vehicular systems. One approach is
tion network. In particular, our proposed ITS-based framework to use supervised learning algorithms to classify normal and
consists of (1) a novel distributed Edge-based architecture abnormal behavior in the vehicle’s system. In this context,
that allows multiple Edge nodes to securely collaborate to Singh et al. [13] proposed an AI model that can be used to
secure the ITS while preserving their privacy; and (2) a identify false position information transmitted by misbehaving
blockchain-based reputation system that ensures the trustwor- vehicles. The model was constructed using two different
thiness and reliability of the FL training process in ITS by classifiers, i.e., logistic regression and support vector machine.
managing the reputation data for each node (e.g., vehicle) Ghaled et al. [14] a new method for detecting security threats
participating in the learning process in a decentralized and in Vehicular networks by combining shared knowledge and
secure manner. The UNSW-NB15 dataset, which includes Ensemble Learning (EL) techniques. They proposed generatwell-known attacks and malware, was used to conduct in-depth ing weighted random forest classifiers for each vehicle and
experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of decentralized combining them through a reliable voting method. Additionmachine learning models in detecting these threats. The results ally, each vehicle trains local classifiers using a random forest
of these experiments showed a significant accuracy (99%) algorithm and leverages the collective knowledge of multiple
and detection rate (99%), outperforming centralized machine vehicles. Gyawali et al. [15] proposed a novel mechanism
learning and deep learning models. In addition to their supe- to prevent internal attacks on vehicular systems. Their prorior performance, our proposed framework also significantly posed mechanism combines AI techniques with a reputation
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FL FOR ENHANCED COLLABORATIVE INTRUSION DETECTION 7663

mechanism to detect attacks and ensure the dependability of integrity of the shared data. Liu et al. [20] proposed the
vehicles. The reputation mechanism is used to evaluate the integration of blockchain and federated learning to improve
trustworthiness of vehicles and their actions, while the AI collaborative intrusion detection in vehicular edge computcomponent is used to analyze and interpret data to identify ing. Their proposed work explores the use of blockchain
attacks or other issues that may affect the reliability of the technology to enhance the security and privacy of the datavehicles. Tariq et al. [16] proposed a transfer learning-based sharing process. To secure the aggregation model, the authors
approach for intrusion detection on a Controller Area Network proposed using blockchain to store and share the train-
(CAN). The authors employed a Convolutional LSTM network ing models. Otoum et al. [21] focused on securing critical
and leveraged pre-trained models from other domains to IoT infrastructures. The authors proposed a solution that
enhance the intrusion detection performance. Their approach combines blockchain and federated learning techniques to
showed promising results in accurately detecting intrusions enhance the security and privacy of IoT systems. The use of
at the CAN network, outperforming existing methods. Their blockchain technology ensures data integrity and immutability,
proposed model is fine-tuned using one-shot transfer learning. while federated learning enables collaborative learning without
 FL is a promising approach that can be used to improve exposing sensitive data to a central authority. Trusted end
the security and privacy of ITS. FL involves training local devices are included in the blockchain to ensure the accuracy
networks based on weights obtained from a central model. of the consensus algorithm. Kang et al. [22] examined the issue
By training local networks on individual vehicles and aggre- of reliable federated learning in mobile networks. The authors
gating their results at the central model, FL can enable vehicles proposed a solution that improves the reliability and efficiency
to learn from each other and improve their performance of federated learning in the context of mobile networks. The
while preserving their privacy. In this context, Lu et al. study investigated various strategies to optimize the learning
[17] developed a privacy-aware data protection mechanism process and enhance the overall performance of federated
for Vehicular cyber-physical systems (VCPS) that relies on learning systems.
FL. This approach involves (1) data transformation; and After a careful review of the research literature, we identi-
(2) collaborative data leakage detection. In the data trans- fied several limitations. Some solutions were computationally
formation phase, data collected from individual vehicles expensive and were be suitable for resource-constrained enviis protected through techniques such as encryption and ronments. In addition, many of these solutions were trained
anonymization. The collaborative data leakage detection phase on outdated datasets, which can lead to inaccurate and inefinvolves training models on the transformed data using FL, and ficient AI-based intrusion detection models when it comes to
then aggregating the results to detect any potential data leaks. detecting zero-day attacks in vehicular networks. One of the
This approach allows vehicles to share data and collaborate on main problems is the lack of up-to-date datasets containing a
tasks while still safeguarding the privacy of the data and pro- sufficient number of new attack records, as large institutions
tecting against potential threats. The scheme allows vehicles to are often reluctant to share sensitive data with the research
locally train models while ensuring the privacy of their data. community due to privacy concerns. In light of these issues,
Kong et al. [18] presented an FL-based navigation scheme we propose a secure collaborative Edge-based attack detecthat utilizes a homomorphic encryption scheme along with the tion framework that uses FL and blockchain-based solutions
bounded Laplace mechanism to protect local model updates. to collaboratively and securely mitigate attacks in vehicular
Despite its advantages, FL is still at risk of certain types of networks while preserving privacy and ensuring reliability.
attacks, including backdoor attacks. To protect against this type
of attack, it is important to implement measures such as strong III. S YSTEM M ODEL
encryption and secure communication protocols, as well as to In this section, we describe our system model; it outlines
continually monitor and assess the performance and behavior how the proposed framework ensures privacy-aware learning
of the models. Ensuring the reliability of participating nodes using FL and blockchain. In collaborative learning, as prois crucial in order to prevent these types of attacks. posed by McMahan et al. [23], the objective is to find a global
 From another point of view, the integration of blockchain optimum solution through the collaboration and cooperation
technology with FL to improve privacy protection in the of multiple independent agents/systems without sharing their
ITS is of paramount importance. Lu et al. [19] proposed a data. This can be thought of as a decentralized optimization
blockchain-based approach to enhance secure data sharing in problem, in which each agent/system has its own data and
the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). Their proposed scheme used computational resources, and must work together to find a
asynchronous federated learning, where data from multiple solution that is optimal for the group as a whole.
vehicles is aggregated and analyzed without sharing the raw Federated optimization algorithms aim to coordinate the
data. By employing blockchain technology, the scheme ensures actions of these agents or systems in order to find an optimal
data integrity, transparency, and immutability. To efficiently solution in a distributed manner, without the need for a
select nodes, the framework employs a deep reinforcement central authority or coordinator. Fig. 1 shows our proposed
learning (DRL)-adopted asynchronous FL approach. The pro- architecture which includes three tiers. In our three-tier fedposed framework also includes learning models that enhance erated learning system, the first tier consists of nodes in a
the reliability of data shared between a Roadside Unit (RSU) vehicular network, such as vehicles equipped with sensors or
and vehicles. This is achieved through a two-step verification communication devices. These nodes collect data and perform
process, adding an extra layer of security and ensuring the some initial processing, using local resources such as onboard
7664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 1. System architecture.

processors or Edge computing nodes. The second tier, the Edge approach allows the system to quickly identify and classify
computing layer, consists of intermediate processing nodes attacks occurring in the vehicular network, using the resources
located closer to the edge of the network, such as at traffic available at each tier to perform the necessary processing and
intersections or on-road infrastructure. These nodes perform analysis.
more complex tasks, such as binary classification, using more In this process, the Edge organization is responsible for initipowerful resources such as high-performance processors or ating and managing the collaborative learning effort for an ITS.
GPUs. The third tier, the cloud tier, consists of centralized This involves initializing the parameters of a shared FL learnresources such as data centers or cloud servers, which are ing model with an initial set of weights and selecting a group
used to perform the most computationally intensive tasks such of N authenticated and reputable Edge-based participants to
as multi-class classification. The three tiers work together to contribute to the learning process. The Edge organization may
analyze and classify data collected from the vehicular network, use various criteria to select these participants, such as their
using the resources available at each tier to perform the reputation or their ability to contribute high-quality data or
necessary processing and analysis. The goal is to find an computational resources to the learning process. Once the
optimal solution for the overall system, taking into account participants have been selected, the Edge organization can
the constraints and capabilities of each tier. This approach begin the federated learning process, coordinating the actions
allows the system to scale and adapt to changing conditions, of the participants in order to find an optimal solution for the
such as changes in the data being collected or changes in the overall system (see Fig. 2). In the context of an ITS, the Edge
computational resources available at each tier. In our proposed organization is responsible for coordinating the collaborative
architecture, the Edge layer serves as an intermediary between learning process among a group of authenticated Edge-based
the first tier (consisting of nodes in a vehicular network) participants. To do this, the organization first sends the shared
and the third tier (consisting of centralized resources such as model to each participant. Each participant then uses their own
data centers or cloud servers). The Edge layer aggregates the local ITS-based training data to perform local updates on the
local model updates sent from each node in the vehicular net- model, using techniques such as gradient descent or stochastic
work and uses them to perform real-time, low-latency attack gradient descent. After the local updates have been completed,
detection using a binary classifier. Meanwhile, the cloud layer each Edge node encrypts its updated model and divides it
investigates the specific type of attack that has been detected, into multiple shares. These encrypted model updates are then
using a multi-class classifier to classify the attack into one of sent to a secure aggregator, which combines (aggregates) the
several categories (such as DDoS, worms, or fuzzers). This updates from all of the participants and sends them back to
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FL FOR ENHANCED COLLABORATIVE INTRUSION DETECTION 7665

the Edge organization. The Edge organization then decrypts A. Trusted Vehicle Opinions
the aggregated model and sends the resulting global model Subjective logic serves as a valuable framework for managback to each Edge node, which can be used as the starting ing uncertainties and subjective opinions within multi-agent
point for a new learning cycle. This process can be repeated systems. In this context, the local opinion vector, denoted
iteratively, with the Edge organization coordinating the actions j
 as Oi = {bi , di , u i , a}, plays a pivotal role in capturing
of the participants in order to find an optimal solution for the the nuanced dynamics of trust and belief between individual
overall system [24], [25], [26], [27]. vehicles. Here, bi signifies the confidence or belief that vehicle
 In this work, we aim to optimize the objective function K i places in the information relayed by vehicle K j , while
of a non-convex neural network. Specifically, we define the di reflects the corresponding level of doubt or disbelief.
optimization problem as follows: Complementing these, the parameter u i denotes the degree
 N of uncertainty that vehicle K i associates with the transmitted
 1 X
 min ϕ(wr ) where ϕ(wr ) = ϕn (wr ) (1) data. Together, these components provide a comprehensive
 wr ∈R d N representation of the intricate nature of trust and belief within
 n=1
 the vehicular network. Finally, the parameter a assumes sigwhere N is the number of Edge participants. nificance as the base rate, influencing the calculation of the
 The purpose of local learning is to find a set of parameters expectation value of the probability of opinion, denoted as
wr that minimize the loss function, which can be expressed E(Oi ) = bi + au i . By incorporating these elements, the local
as follows: opinion vector facilitates a structured and systematic approach
 n J to managing trust relationships, enabling vehicles to make
 1 X well-informed decisions in the face of uncertainties. This is
 ∀n, ϕn (wr ) = ϕ jn (wr ; x jn , y jn ) (2)
 Jn calculated as follows:
 jn =1
  αi→ j
 At the start of each round r in the collaborative learning
  bi→ j =
 αi→ j + βi→ j
 
 
 
  di→ j = βi→ j + 2a − 2
process, each Edge node calculates the mean gradient on its
 
 
 
local ITS-based data using the current model parameters wr .
 
 αi→ j + βi→ j (5)
This calculation is performed using a batch or local mini-batch  2
 u i→ j =
 
of data and may involve one or several local epochs e. The
 
 αi→ j + βi→ j
 
 
 
process can be described as follows:
 
 
  a = base rate

 grn = ∇ϕn (Wr ; br ) (3) j
 The local opinion vector u i contains α positive events and
 To perform local gradient descent on the shared FL model, β negative events with uncertainty represented by a. The
each Edge collaborator will need to have access to the current extent of uncertainty within the vector is intricately tied to the
model parameters and the local gradient that it calculated using efficacy of communication established between vehicles i and
its own local ITS-based data, as follows: j. This communication quality, represented as 1−bi→ j −di→ j ,
 serves as a metric for evaluating the likelihood of successful
 ∀n, Wrn ← Wr − η∇ϕn (Wr ; br ) (4) data packet transmission during the exchange of information
 for data sharing requests.
 Subjective logic encompasses various types of opinions,
 IV. S UBJECTIVE L OGIC including hyper opinions, multinomial opinions, and binomial
 opinions. Within the scope of this article, we concentrate on
 We are developing a novel blockchain-based reputation
 uncertain binomial opinions (UBO) concerning binary events,
system for our data-sharing network, harnessing the power
 particularly those associated with valid or invalid data transof subjective logic. Subjective logic is a probabilistic informission. This selection is informed by the inherent uncertainty
mation fusion framework that enables the representation
 prevalent in updates or data transmissions among vehicles
and combination of subjective beliefs using opinions. Our
 within the transportation system, always bounded from zero
approach integrates the principles of subjective logic, allow- local can be
 on-wards. As a result, the local reputation Ti→ j
ing for the seamless representation and fusion of subjective
 defined as follows:
beliefs and opinions on the blockchain. By incorporating this
advanced methodology, our system accommodates a spectrum
 j = bi→ j + γ u i→ j
 local local local
 Ti→ (6)
of positive, negative, and uncertain statements, enabling a
comprehensive understanding of each participant’s trustwor- where γ ∈ [0, 1] denotes the level of uncertainty that impacts
thiness. With the incorporation of logical operators, we are the reputation of vehicles.
establishing a sophisticated mechanism to correlate and analyze diverse opinions, thus fostering a robust and transparent
evaluation of participants’ interactions. This blockchain-based B. Multi-Weighted Local Opinions
model ensures the seamless integration of subjective beliefs, Multi-weight subjective logic is an evolution of traditional
paving the way for a secure and trustworthy environment SL that involves weighting operations. In our framework,
within our data-sharing network. different weights are used to formulate local opinions. In this
7666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 2. System process.

context, the following factors are taken into consideration and the weights of past events, respectively, as follows:
when calculating the reputation of a vehicle: t
 αi = w1tcurr (σ αitcurr + τ αi pas )
 (
 1) Vehicle Interaction: A higher frequency of interaction (8)
 t
 indicates that the vehicle data requestor (ki ) has more βi = w2tcurr (σβitcurr + τβi pas )
 pre-existing information about the vehicle data provider
 t
 (k j ), thereby facilitating a more precise and dependable where αitcurr and αi pas represent the number of current
 calculation of reputation. Vehicles can either interact positive events and past positive events, respectively.
 honestly or dishonestly. Honest interactions increase the In this context, a vehicle interaction can be formulated
 trust of the vehicle and result in an increase in reward, as follows:
 while dishonest interactions have the opposite effect.
 We can define a vehicle interaction V I as the ratio of Ii→ j =
 the number of interactions between the data requestor t t
 w1tcurr (σ αitcurr + τ αi pas ) + w2tcurr (σβitcurr + τβi pas )
 and the data provider during a time window, as follows: V
 k∈V αi→k + βi→k
 P
 possesses more pre-existing information about the data
 provider (k j ), thereby facilitating a more precise and (9)
 dependable calculation of reputation.
 3) Trajectory Similarity: In transportation systems, data
 αi→ j + βi→ j collected by vehicles is considered to be relevant only
 Ii→ j = V P (7)
 k∈V αi→k + βi→k to the vehicles that collected it, and is limited in
 2) Event Updates: In our framework, the trustworthiness scope to the specific location where it was collected.
 and reliability of a vehicle can change over time. The To improve the relevance of the data and enable location
 reputation of a data provider (k j ) from the perspective awareness, the trajectory similarity of the vehicles is
 of a data requestor (ki ) is affected by both recent and taken into consideration when calculating reputation
 past events, with the former having a larger impact on during data sharing among vehicles. A high trajectory
 the local opinion. Typically, recent events are considered similarity indicates that the data being shared from the
 within a one-week timeframe, and negative events carry data provider is more relevant and likely to be of high
 greater weight in shaping local opinions than positive quality, accuracy, and reliability. This consideration of
 ones. This facilitates the generation of a reputation trajectory similarity is intended to help ensure that data
 calculation that is more precise and dependable. sharing among vehicles results in the most useful and
 Event updates reflect the effect of time on reputation, relevant information being shared.
 in this context, the weight of positive events is repre- Our framework introduces a trajectory similarity measure that
 sented by w1tcurr , while the weight of negative events is builds upon a modified version of the Hausdorff distance.
 represented by w2tcurr . It is stated that w1+w2 = 1, and This measure is designed to capture the similarity between
 that w1 ≤ w2, implying that negative events are given two trajectories and can be used to compare and analyze
 more weight than positive events. Additionally, σ and τ the movements of objects or individuals over time. Given a
 where σ + τ = 1, represents the weights of recent event universal set T and Hansdroff distance d : T x T → R between
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FL FOR ENHANCED COLLABORATIVE INTRUSION DETECTION 7667

V ∈ T and W ∈ T , as follows: The Hausdorff distance is now represented by α, w, where
 α and w are the specified parameters. It should be understood
 h(V, W ) = max{ sup d(v, W ), sup d(V, w)} (10)
 v∈W w∈V that the arc-length parameterization is used for the correspondence in N W and C V,W , and w is used as the neighborhood
where h(V, W ) ̸ = h(W, V ). As an extension we can define
 size. We can express the similarity as follows:
h(V, W ) = max{h(V, W ), h(W, V )}.
 The Hausdorff distance is a measure of similarity between d 2 (v, w)
 sim(v, w) = exp{− } (20)
sets of points, but it has limitations when used to compare 2α
sets with outlier points or time series data. It is affected by where d(v, w) is the squared distance between v and w. The
the presence of outlier points and is not designed to consider overall weight of reputation for local opinions is:
the order of points in a series. In order to improve the accuracy
and reliability of the matching process, we take two actions: σi→ j = γ1 Ii→ j + γ2 sim(i, j) (21)
rejecting a certain proportion of the worst matches identified
 where γ1 + γ2 = 1, and 0 ≤ γ1 ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ γ2 ≤ 1.
under the maximum specified in the equation, and restricting
the set over which the minimum is calculated to a subset
of the second set. These actions aim to reduce the impact C. Recommended Opinions
of poor-quality matches and focus the matching process on In the context of blockchain networks, the consideration of
a specific subset of the second set, improving the overall reputation opinions is crucial. Miners, who play a significant
performance of the process, as follows: role in maintaining the integrity of the blockchain, rely on
 α various sources of information to make informed decisions.
 h α,N ,C (V, W ) = or dv∈V { min d(v, w)} (11)
 w∈N W (Cv ,W (v)) Apart from local reputation opinions, they also delve into
where C V,W : V → W maps each point v ∈ V to a the blockchain to gather direct reputation opinions of selected
corresponding point w ∈ W and N W : W → V (W ) maps workers, updated by other nodes. This process enables them
each point w, which represents the neighborhood of that point to obtain recommended reputation opinions. Let’s assume that
v. The functions N W and C V,W work together to create a miner m receives a set of recommended opinions about worker
structure within which the matching process is performed. The
 r ec := br ec , d r ec , u r ec , as follows:
 wi→ j i→ j i→ j i→ j
operator or d α f (x) refers to the value in the set f (x), i.e., the
 →w + dr →w )
 bi→r (brlocal local
image of the set x under the function f , that is grater than α wr = P (22)
 r ∈X (br →w + dr →w )
 local
times the number of values in f (x), Here:
 0
 or dv∈V { f (v)} = min f (v) (12) where r ∈ X is the recommender and dr →w + dr →w is the
 v∈V familiarity value between recommender r and worker w and.
 0.5
 or dv∈V { f (v)} = f (v)
 ˇ (13) This value represents the similarity or relatedness between the
 two recommenders or items, with a higher value indicating
 1
 or dv∈V { f (v)} = max f (v) (14)
 v∈V a higher level of familiarity. In our framework, the set of
Our aim is to identify the spatial patterns within the blockchain workers 8(W ) provide a set of recommendation
trajectories. To achieve this, we’ve opted for arc-length param- 8(r ), we can express:
eterization. We define the length of a specific trajectory t as |8(Wi ) ∩ 8(r )|
follows: bi→r = (23)
 |8(Wi ) ∪ 8(r )|
 X
 |T | = ∥ti − ti−1 ∥2 (15) Finally,the recommended opinion is a composite of subi∈V jective opinions from various sources, such as neighboring
Additionally, we define the subsequent formed by the first k vehicles. These opinions are integrated and weighted to prok . We also define the relative
vehicle/points as Tk = {ti }i=1 duce a single opinion, as:
position of the n th vehicle/point in T as:
  X
 
  b r ec
 i→w = wr bi→w
 r ec
 |Tn |
 
  rX
 ∈X
 πt (tn ) =
 
 (16) 
 wr di→w
  r ec r ec
 |T | di→w = (24)
To express the correspondence structure C V,W , we define the
 
  rX
 ∈X
  u r ec = wr u ri→w
 ec
 
reverse transformation as follows:  i→w
 
 
 r ∈X
 |Tn |
 r T (x) = T (arg min |a − |) (17)
 n≤V |T |
 D. Integrating Local Opinions With Recommended Opinions
 C V,W (v) = W (r W (πv (v))) (18)
 After acquiring shared data from multiple data providers,
The neighborhood structure N W is defined as: a data requestor might construct a subjective perception of
 each provider, influenced by their past interactions. To ensure
 N W (w0 ) = {w ∈ Q∥πW (w0 ) − πW (w)| ≤ w/2} (19)
 the integrity of the process, it is essential to integrate these
where w is the parameter relative to the size of the individual viewpoints while shaping the ultimate, unified opinneighborhood. ion. The combined reputation opinion of vi from worker w is
7668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 com = bcom , d com , u com and can be defined as
denoted as Ri→w TABLE I
 i→w i→w i→w
follows: UNSW-NB15 L ABELS
 
 local u r ec + br ec u local
 bi→w
  com
  bi→w i→w i→w i→w
 
  = local + u r ec − u r ec u local
 
 
  u i→w i→w i→w i→w
 
 
  d local u com + d r ec u local
 com i→w i→w i→w i→w
 di→w = local r ec − u r ec u local
 (25)
 
 
  u i→w + u i→w i→w i→w
 u local r ec
 
 i→w u i→w
 
 
 com
  u i→w = local
 
 
 u i→w + u ri→w ec − u r ec u local
 
 i→w i→w

 Similarly, the composite reputation is:

 j = bi→ j + γ u i→ j
 com com com
 Ti→ (26)
 In this study, we have defined two different scenarios to
 test the effectiveness of our proposed framework: one for
 V. I MPLEMENTATION multi-class classification and one for binary classification.
 In the multi-class classification scenario, the model must
 In this section, we present the steps taken to implement
 predict the correct class label from a set of multiple class
and evaluate our proposed framework. We begin by outlining
 labels. In the binary classification scenario, the model must
the experimental environment in which the framework was
 predict between two class labels, typically represented as 0
tested. Next, we present the experimental results and provide
 (Normal) and 1 (Attack). We divide the UNSW-NB15 dataset
an analysis of the performance of our proposed framework.
 in order to give each participant a subset of the data and
This includes well-known metrics to measure the effectiveness
 also to deal with issues with non-i.i.d (as in “non-independent
of AI models. Finally, we evaluate the effectiveness of the
 and identically distributed data”). To evaluate the performance
framework based on the experimental results. This includes a
 of our framework, we tested a range of combinations of the
summary of the key findings from the experiments, as well as
 number of training rounds (varying from 10 to 50) and local
any recommendations or next steps that we believe would be
 epochs (varying from 1 to 5). We used four participants (A, B,
beneficial for improving the framework in the future.
 C, and D, as shown in Fig. 1) in each scenario, each working
 with their local data. To begin, we randomly initialized the
A. Experimental Results parameters of the global model and sent it to each participant.
 We have implemented our proposed framework using Pysyft Each participant then trained the model using their local data,
[28] to easily build and train deep learning models in a fed- and the global model was tested on the test set. This process
erated setting, leveraging the powerful capabilities of PyTorch allowed us to evaluate the performance of the model across all
to build and train our models. To simulate the ITS-based of the participant’s data, including in the case of an imbalanced
environment test, we use Mininet [29], a virtual environment dataset.
for testing and simulating the behavior of vehicular networks. Fig. 3 shows the learning curves of the tested models in dif-
Mininet allows users to create a virtual networks, consisting of ferent scenarios, as represented by the negative log-likelihood
virtual hosts, switches, and links, and to test how the network loss values, the x-axis represents the number of training
behaves under different conditions. Mininet can be used to iterations or epochs, while the y-axis represents the negative
simulate a variety of network scenarios, including those related log loss. The curve shows the negative log loss decreasing over
to vehicular networks. In our tested scenario, Mininet was used time as the model is trained. As the FL model becomes more
to create a virtual environment that includes virtual vehicles accurate, the negative log loss decreases, eventually reaching
equipped with sensors or communication devices, as well as a minimum value where the FL model is most accurate. This
virtual infrastructures such as traffic lights or road signs. shows that the trained models used to detect zero-day attacks
 In order to evaluate the efficacy and practicality of our in the ITS setting are able to learn from each other without
proposed framework, we carried out experiments utilizing sharing their local data. This is achieved through the use of our
the UNSW-NB15 dataset, specifically focusing on attacks proposed framework, in a decentralized privacy-aware manner.
within ITS. This dataset, renowned for its substantial volume
of data samples, served as an ideal resource for evaluating VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
the framework’s performance; it includes 100 GB of attack To evaluate the performance of our proposed framework,
traffic, such as backdoors, exploits, and shellcodes, which are we used a variety of metrics, including accuracy, precision,
common types of attacks in ITS. By using the UNSW-NB15 recall, F1-score, and the area under the receiver operating
dataset to evaluate our framework, we were able to assess characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). These metrics allow us to
its performance in detecting different types of attacks and measure the effectiveness of the framework in different ways,
identify any potential issues in ITS-based networks. This including its ability to classify instances accurately, identify
dataset provided a realistic and representative testbed for true positives and negatives, and distinguish between different
evaluating the effectiveness of our proposed framework in an classes. The area under the ROC curve (AUC): This metric
ITS setting. measures the performance of the model in distinguishing
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FL FOR ENHANCED COLLABORATIVE INTRUSION DETECTION 7669

Fig. 3. Learning curves for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrices for Binary classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 5. Confusion matrices for Multi-class Classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

 Pr ecision ∗ Recall
between positive and negative instances, calculated as the area F1 = 2 ∗ (30)
under the ROC curve. A model with a higher AUC score Pr ecision + Recall
is considered to be more effective at distinguishing between FP
 FPR = (31)
positive and negative instances. These metrics are defined as T N + FP
follows:
 Figs. 4 and 5 show the confusion matrices on the UNSW-
 TP +TN NB15 test dataset for binary (Edge-based training) and
 Accuracy = (27)
 T P + T N + FP + FN multi-class (cloud-based training) classification, respectively.
 TP These obtained results show that our proposed framework has
 Pr ecision = (28)
 T P + FP achieved high performance in detecting the new attacks in
 TP ITS, as indicated by the high values of accuracy, precision,
 Recall = D R = T P R = (29)
 T P + FN recall, and F1 score. The obtained accuracy, precision, recall,
7670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 6. ROC Curves for Binary classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 7. ROC Curves for Multi-class Classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

and F1-score of 99%, respectively, in the Edge-based training TABLE II
step (binary classification) and the cloud-based step (multi- C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS
class classification) shows that the proposed framework is
able to correctly classify a large proportion of the ITS-based
attacks of the UNSW-NB15 dataset. Thus, the results obtained
in Figs. 4 and 5 show that the proposed framework is highly
effective at detecting ITS-based attacks with high accuracy and
privacy.
 Figs. 6 and 7 show the confusion matrices on the
UNSW-NB15 test dataset for binary (Edge-based training) and
multi-class (cloud-based training) classification, respectively.
In both scenarios, our proposed framework achieves an AUC
of 99%. These results demonstrate that our proposed frame- framework with centralized AI-based schemes. The results
work is highly effective at detecting ITS-based attacks with show that our proposed framework has the highest accuracy of
high AUC in both scenarios while preserving participants’ data 99% and the highest F1-score of 99%. These results demonprivacy. strate the effectiveness of our proposed framework in detecting
 attacks while preserving the privacy of the participants.
A. Comparative Analysis
 In this section, we evaluate the performance of our pro- VII. C ONCLUSION
posed framework with centralized AI-based schemes, using In this paper, we introduced a novel framework for securthe UNSW-NB15 dataset. To compare the performance of ing ITS against emerging threats using FL and blockchain
these approaches, we use various evaluation metrics, including technology. Our proposed framework includes a distributed
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Edge-based architecture that allows multiple Edge nodes to
 In this study, we compare the performance of our proposed collaborate in securing the ITS while preserving their privacy.
framework with several recent centralized AI-based schemes, Then, we have introduced a decentralized and secure repincluding: SVM [30], StackEns [31], MultiStacking [32], utation system based on blockchain technology to maintain
HybridML [33], LSTM [34], OnlineEns [35], TSE [36], Stack- the reliability and trustworthiness of the FL process within
Extra [37], and IDS-OGM [38]. Table II presents a comparison the ITS. This system manages reputation data for individual
of the accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score of our proposed nodes (such as vehicles), guaranteeing the integrity of the FL
ABOU EL HOUDA et al.: BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED FL FOR ENHANCED COLLABORATIVE INTRUSION DETECTION 7671

training process. Evaluation of the proposed framework using [16] S. Tariq, S. Lee, and S. S. Woo, “CANTransfer: Transfer learning based
the UNSW-NB15 dataset, which contains well-known attacks intrusion detection on a controller area network using convolutional
 LSTM network,” in Proc. 35th Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput.,
and malware, showed that our proposed framework achieved Mar. 2020, pp. 1048–1055.
high accuracy and F1 score of 99%, respectively, in detecting [17] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Federated learning
ITS-related threats while preserving privacy and reliability. for data privacy preservation in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” IEEE
 Netw., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 50–56, May 2020.
These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed [18] Q. Kong et al., “Privacy-preserving aggregation for federated learningframework in securing ITS. For future work, we intend to based navigation in vehicular fog,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17,
develop AI models that offer explanations, thereby increasing no. 12, pp. 8453–8463, Dec. 2021.
 [19] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
the transparency of the FL training process and facilitating the empowered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing
identification and prevention of backdoor attacks. Furthermore, in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 4,
we aim to expand and enhance the scalability of the reputation pp. 4298–4311, Apr. 2020.
 [20] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative
process. Lastly, we will extend the application of our frame- intrusion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
work to other datasets to ensure comprehensive testing and Technol., vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021.
validation. [21] S. Otoum, I. A. Ridhawi, and H. Mouftah, “Securing critical IoT infrastructures with blockchain-supported federated learning,” IEEE Internet
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2592–2601, Feb. 2022.
 R EFERENCES [22] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Y. Zou, Y. Zhang, and M. Guizani, “Reli-
 [1] Z. A. El Houda, “Security enforcement through software defined able federated learning for mobile networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
 networks (SDN),” Ph.D. dissertation, Département d’informatique et vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 72–80, Apr. 2020.
 de Recherche Opérationnelle, Université à Montréal, Montreal, QC, [23] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. Y. Arcas,
 Canada, 2021. “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 [2] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, data,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
 and O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based [24] B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and M. Bouaziz, “Federated learning for UAVssmart transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, enabled wireless networks: Use cases, challenges, and open problems,”
 no. 3, pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022. IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 53841–53849, 2020.
 [3] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Ensemble learning for [25] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “MiTFed: A priintrusion detection in SDN-based zero touch smart grid systems,” vacy preserving collaborative network attack mitigation framework
 in Proc. IEEE 47th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), Sep. 2022, based on federated learning using SDN and blockchain,” IEEE Trans.
 pp. 149–156. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1985–2001, Jul./Aug. 2023, doi:
 [4] J. Zhao, X. Chang, Y. Feng, C. H. Liu, and N. Liu, “Participant selection 10.1109/TNSE.2023.3237367.
 for federated learning with heterogeneous data in intelligent transport [26] H. Moudoud, S. Cherkaoui, and L. Khoukhi, “Towards a secure and
 system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1106–1115, reliable federated learning using blockchain,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 Jan. 2023. Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–6.
 [5] Z. A. E. Houda, A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Blockchain meets AMI: [27] Z. A. El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Securing feder-
 Towards secure advanced metering infrastructures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. ated learning through blockchain and explainable AI for robust intrusion
 Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6. detection in IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput.
 [6] S. Liu, J. Yu, X. Deng, and S. Wan, “FedCPF: An efficient- Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), May 2023, pp. 1–6.
 communication federated learning approach for vehicular edge comput- [28] Pysyft. Accessed: 2022. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
 ing in 6G communication networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., OpenMined/PySyft
 vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1616–1629, Feb. 2022. [29] MiniNet. Accessed: 2022. [Online]. Available: http://mininet.org
 [7] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, L. Khoukhi, and B. Brik, “When [30] N. Marir, H. Wang, G. Feng, B. Li, and M. Jia, “Distributed abnormal
 collaborative federated learning meets blockchain to preserve pri- behavior detection approach based on deep belief network and ensemble
 vacy in healthcare,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, SVM using spark,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 59657–59671, 2018.
 pp. 2455–2465, Sep./Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2022.3211192. [31] S. Rajagopal, P. P. Kundapur, and K. S. Hareesha, “A stacking ensemble
 [8] Y. Li, Y. Guo, M. Alazab, S. Chen, C. Shen, and K. Yu, “Joint optimal for network intrusion detection using heterogeneous datasets,” Secur.
 quantization and aggregation of federated learning scheme in VANETs,” Commun. Netw., vol. 2020, pp. 1–9, Jan. 2020.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19852–19863, [32] H. Zhang, J.-L. Li, X.-M. Liu, and C. Dong, “Multi-dimensional
 Oct. 2022. feature fusion and stacking ensemble mechanism for network
 [9] Z. A. El Houda, L. Khoukhi, and B. Brik, “A low-latency fog-based
 intrusion detection,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 122,
 framework to secure IoT applications using collaborative federated
 pp. 130–143, Sep. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE 47th Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN),
 com/science/article/pii/S0167739X2100114X
 Sep. 2022, pp. 343–346.
 [33] Z. Chkirbene, S. Eltanbouly, M. Bashendy, N. AlNaimi, and A. Erbad,
[10] X. Ma, Q. Jiang, M. Shojafar, M. Alazab, S. Kumar, and S. Kumari,
 “Hybrid machine learning for network anomaly intrusion detection,”
 “DisBezant: Secure and robust federated learning against Byzantine
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Informat., IoT, Enabling Technol. (ICIoT),
 attack in IoT-enabled MTS,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
 Feb. 2020, pp. 163–170.
 no. 2, pp. 2492–2502, Feb. 2023.
[11] Z. A. E. Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, L. Khoukhi, and M. Guizani, [34] Y. Yan, L. Qi, J. Wang, Y. Lin, and L. Chen, “A network intrusion
 “When federated learning meets game theory: A cooperative framework detection method based on stacked autoencoder and LSTM,” in Proc.
 to secure IIoT applications on edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7988–7997, Nov. 2022. [35] Y.-F. Hsu, Z. He, Y. Tarutani, and M. Matsuoka, “Toward an online
[12] R. Zhu, M. Li, H. Liu, L. Liu, and M. Ma, “Federated deep reinforcement network intrusion detection system based on ensemble learning,” in
 learning-based spectrum access algorithm with warranty contract in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. (CLOUD), Jul. 2019,
 intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 174–178.
 vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1178–1190, Jan. 2023. [36] B. A. Tama, M. Comuzzi, and K.-H. Rhee, “TSE-IDS: A two-stage
[13] P. K. Singh, S. Gupta, R. Vashistha, S. K. Nandi, and S. Nandi, “Machine classifier ensemble for intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection
 learning based approach to detect position falsification attack in vanets,” system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 94497–94507, 2019.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Secur. Privacy. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, [37] M. H. Kabir, M. S. Rajib, A. S. M. T. Rahman, Md. M. Rahman, and
 pp. 166–178. S. K. Dey, “Network intrusion detection using UNSW-NB15 dataset:
[14] F. A. Ghaleb et al., “Misbehavior-aware on-demand collaborative intru- Stacking machine learning based approach,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Advancesion detection system using distributed ensemble learning for VANET,” ment Electr. Electron. Eng. (ICAEEE), Feb. 2022, pp. 1–6.
 Electronics, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 1411, Sep. 2020. [38] N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier Gaussian mix-
[15] S. Gyawali, Y. Qian, and R. Q. Hu, “Machine learning and reputation ture technique based on automated association features for simulating
 based misbehavior detection in vehicular communication networks,” and detecting web application attacks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput.,
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8871–8885, Aug. 2020. vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 245–256, Apr. 2021.
7672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the the Engineering degree (Hons.) in computer science
 University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, and and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Laghouat
 the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from University, Algeria, in 2010, 2013, and 2017, respecthe University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes, tively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
 France, in 2021. He is currently a Professor with the the Computer Science Department of Computing
 Energy, Materials, and Telecommunications Center, and Informatics College, Sharjah University, United
 National Institute of Scientific Research (INRS), Arab Emirates. Before joining Sharjah University,
 Canada. He is also a member of the INRS-UQO he was an Assistant Professor with the DRIVE
 Joint Research Unit in Cybersecurity. Prior to join- Department, Bourgogne University, France. He was
 ing INRS, he was a Research Scientist in various a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the CESI School,
institutions, contributing to significant research projects on the application of University of Troyes, and Eurecom Research Institute, France. He has
machine learning for intrusion detection systems, and studying the explain- been (still) working on resources management and security challenges of
ability and robustness of these systems. His current research interests include 5G network slicing in the context of H2020 European projects, including
applied AI for intrusion detection systems, security in distributed/federated MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD, and 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests include
machine learning, and blockchain for network security. 5G and beyond networks, explainable AI, and machine/deep learning for
 wireless networks. He is an active member in many conferences organizing
 committees, such as Globecom, WCNC, ICC, GIIS, EAI, and EAI CICom.
 He actively organized different special issues in prestigious journals and
 conference workshops.

 Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the Lyes Khoukhi (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engi-
 Mohammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco, neering from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada,
 in 2018, the Ph.D. degree in computer engineer- in 2006. From 2007 to 2008, he was a Post-Doctoral
 ing from the University of Sherbrooke, Canada, Researcher with the Department of Computer
 and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering Science and Operations Research, University of
 from the University of Technology of Troyes, Montreal. Currently, he is a Full Professor with
 France, in 2022. Her research interests include GREYC CNRS, ENSICAEN, Normandie Univerthe security of the Internet of Things, applied sity. His current research topics are in the field
 machine/deep learning for intrusion detection sys- of cybersecurity, attack detection, and performance
 tems, and leveraging blockchain to enhance the evaluation in advanced networks, such as cloud
security of next-generation networks (5G and beyond/6G). networking, 5G/SDN, the IoT/V2X, and CPS.