IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024 461

 CaCo: Attributed Network Anomaly Detection
 via Canonical Correlation Analysis
 Ruidong Wang , Fengbin Zhang , Xunhua Huang , Chongrui Tian, Liang Xi ,
 and Haoyi Fan , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Capturing the complex interaction between have focused on graph analysis, such as node classification,
the node attribute and the network structure is important link prediction, and anomaly detection [1], [3], [4]. Among
for attributed network embedding and anomaly detection. them, attributed network anomaly detection is an important
However, there are few methods to explicitly model the
correlation between these two views of the node attribute problem worth studying, which aims to detect nodes whose
and the network structure. In this article, we propose an behavior is different from the majority of nodes. However, in
attributed network anomaly detection (CaCo) method based attributed networks, anomalies are diverse owing to the complex
on the canonical correlation analysis, which assumes that interaction of network structure and node attributes. Due to
there should be a strong correlation between the attribute
 the impact of network structure and node attributes of graph
and structure features of normal nodes, and a weak correlation one between those abnormal nodes, in the attributed learning, traditional anomaly detection methods [5], [6] are
networks. Consequently, a joint learning mechanism is de- unable to capture the complete information of the graph for
signed in CaCo to explicitly measure the correlation be- attributed network anomaly detection.
tween two views in the latent space. Specifically, the back- Recently, various methods of attributed network anomaly
bone of a weight-sharing graph convolutional network is detection have been proposed. Most of them focus on learnemployed to encode the node feature from two views of
attribute and structure in the latent space, respectively. ing the node representation in the latent space, and detecting
Then, a Kullback–Leibler divergence regularization is used the anomalous nodes by the reconstruction error or traditional
to align the distributions of the two views. Finally, the pa- anomaly detection methods [7], [8]. Shallow methods [9], [10]
rameters of CaCo are optimized by maximizing the corre- utilize shallow mechanisms to capture the interactions between
lation between attribute and structure features of normal network structure and node attributes, which cannot fully adnodes in the training phase, and anomalies can be detected by measuring the correlation between two views in dress the challenges of high-dimensional feature computation.
the testing phase. Extensive experiments on six real-world Graph neural networks (GNNs)-based methods [11], [12], [13],
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed [14] leverage the advantages of the graph convolutional neural
method compared to the state-of-the-art techniques. network on graph data to extract the low-dimensional node
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, attributed network em- embedding and detect the anomalous nodes by one-class methbedding, canonical correlation analysis (CCA), graph neu- ods or reconstruction errors. Besides, some methods based on
ral networks (GNNs). self-supervised learning (SSL) [15], [16], [17] learn data representations by maximizing the information from the two data
 I. INTRODUCTION
 augmentations of the inputs and using the data representations
 TTRIBUTED networks are typical graph data whose
A nodes represent entities and links indicate the relationship
between entities [1], [2]. In recent years, a lot of researchers
 for downstream tasks.
 Although existing methods have achieved considerable performance in attributed network anomaly detection, they still
 have some limitations. Some methods such as two-step-based
 Manuscript received 31 January 2023; accepted 28 March 2023. Date methods [18] and graph autoencoder-based methods [11], [12]
of publication 11 April 2023; date of current version 11 December 2023.
This work was supported in part by the Key Project of Colleges and are designed to learn the graph embedding rather than detect-
Universities of Henan Province under Grant 23A52002 and in part by the ing anomalous nodes, which is not the target of the anomaly
Science and Technology Innovation 2030-“New Generation of Artificial detection task. Some methods focus on capturing the interac-
Intelligence” Major Project under Grant 2021ZD0111000. Paper no. TII-
23-0324. (Corresponding authors: Fengbin Zhang; Haoyi Fan.) tions between network structures and node attributes in two
 Ruidong Wang, Fengbin Zhang, Xunhua Huang, Chongrui Tian, and different latent spaces, rather than mining abnormal patterns in
Liang Xi are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, the attributed networks [10], [13]. Moreover, some SSL-based
Harbin University of Science and Technology, Harbin 150080, China (email: iswangrd@gmail.com; zhangfengbin@hrbust.edu.cn; 1820410060 methods capture local and global relationships through data
@stu.hrbust.edu.cn; 191040004@stu.hrbust.edu.cn; xiliang@hrbust. augmentation, which ignores the correlations between network
edu.cn). structures and node attributes in the latent space [15], [17].
 Haoyi Fan is with the School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: fan- To overcome the abovementioned limitations, in this artihaoyi@zzu.edu.cn). cle, we propose a canonical correlation analysis (CCA)-based
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at method for attributed network anomaly detection (CaCo). The
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3266406.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3266406 motivation of CaCo is shown in Fig. 1. We assume that there

 1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 are defined as outliers. Typical methods such as OC-SVM and
 SVDD [6] try to fit a hyperplane or hypersphere to separate the
 normal and abnormal data points. Second, the reconstructionbased approach assumes that anomaly data cannot be effectively
 reconstructed from a compressed low-dimensional vector space.
 For example, autoencoder-based methods [4], [7], [19] utilize
 the reconstruction error to detect the outliers. Although these
 methods have been successfully applied in anomaly detection,
Fig. 1. Motivation of the proposed method. There should be a strong they do not generalize well to non-Euclidean graph data, which
correlation between the attribute and structure feature for normal nodes, leaves the problem of anomaly detection on attributed networks
and weak correlation ones for abnormal nodes, in the attributed network.
 still an open problem.

should be a strong correlation between the attribute and structure B. Attributed Network Anomaly Detection
features of normal nodes, and a weak correlation between those
 Attributed network anomaly detection aims to find nodes
of abnormal nodes, in the attributed network. Therefore, CaCo is
 whose patterns are significantly different from others. Existing
designed to learn a correlation measurement function between
 graph anomaly detection methods can be divided into three
network structure distribution and node attribute distribution,
 categories [13]: 1) only structure- or attribute-based methods,
and the abnormal nodes are detected based on the measured
 2) residual-analysis-based methods, and 3) GNN-based methcorrelation scores. Specifically, in CaCo, the backbone of a
 ods. The only structure- or attribute-based methods [18], [20]
weight-sharing graph convolutional network is employed to
 detect anomaly nodes by considering the structure information
encode the node feature from two views of attribute and structure
 or node attribute information. These methods ignore the inforin the latent space, respectively. Then, a Kullback–Leibler (KL)
 mation of graphs, which makes them unable to achieve excellent
divergence regularization is used to align the distributions of
 performance. The residual-analysis-based methods [9], [10] utithe two views. Finally, the parameters of CaCo are optimized
 lize shallow mechanisms to capture the interaction between the
by maximizing the correlation between attribute and structure
 network structure and node attributes to the local community.
features of normal nodes in the training phase, and anomalies can
 That make cannot capture the complete information of attributed
be detected by measuring the correlation between two views in
 networks. The GNN-based methods [13], [21], [22], [23] conthe testing phase. Experimental results on six real-world datasets
 struct a graph autoencoder that uses both structure information
show that CaCo outperforms state-of-the-art techniques, which
 and node attribute information by simultaneously reconstructing
demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method.
 the attribute and structure and detects anomalies by one-class
 The main contributions of this article are outlined as follows.
 methods [6] or reconstruction errors. Besides, graph SSL-based
 1) We redefine anomaly detection on attributed networks as
 methods [15], [24] transform graph data such as randomly
 a correlation metric problem between the attribute and
 masking certain information or randomly sampling subgraphs
 structure of nodes and propose a framework of CCAto generate input data and utilize GNNs to learn the graph
 based attributed network anomaly detection, which exembedding for anomaly detection. Although these methods have
 plicitly models the correlation between these two views
 achieved significant applications in attributed network anomaly
 of node attribute and network structure.
 detection, they cannot achieve better performance by ignoring
 2) We propose a correlation measurement method of the
 the correlation between network structure and node attributes or
 attribute and structure on attributed networks for anomaly
 ignoring the effect of noise in the graph data.
 detection, which aligns the distribution of attribute features and structure features of normal nodes in the latent
 C. Canonical Correlation Analysis
 space.
 3) We conduct extensive experiments on multiple real-world CCA [25], [26] is a method that aims to find the linear
 datasets, and the results show that the proposed method transformation for measuring the relationship between two
 achieves state of the art in the anomaly detection task of vectors. Give two vectors X1 and X2 , the correlation ρ =
 T
 attributed networks. √ T a ΣX√ 1 X2
 T
 b
 is maximized by optimizing the objeca ΣX 1 X 1 a b ΣX 2 X 2 b
 tive
 II. RELATED WORKS
 max aT ΣX1 X2 b, s.t. aT ΣX1 X1 a = bT ΣX2 X2 b = I. (1)
A. Traditional Anomaly Detection a,b

 Traditional anomaly detection is the task of detecting outliers The standard CCA and its variants are widely used for mulfor Euclidean structural data, such as tabular data or images. tiview learning [26], which uses linear projections to learn the
The existing methods can be divided into two main categories. feature embedding and utilizes the CCA objective to learn the
First, one-class-classification-based methods [5], [6] attempt to correlation between different views. However, these models are
learn a compact hyperplane or hypersphere to wrap the normal linear in the sense. For learning the nonlinear embedding, Deepdata, and data located outside the hyperplane or the hypersphere CCA [25], [27] presents the use of deep neural networks to learn
WANG et al.: CACO: ATTRIBUTED NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CANONICAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS 463

Fig. 2. Illustration of the proposed framework CaCo.

the nonlinear projections of different views. The use of exact with a strong correlation between two views will be defined as
decorrelation operations in those methods makes them achieve a normal node.
suboptimal optimization. Unlike these methods, Soft-CCA [28]
considers the decorrelation constraint as a term of loss and A. Weight-Sharing Encoder
optimizes it jointly with other terms, and the objective of Soft
 The weight-sharing encoder is designed to learn the corre-
CCA is
   lation distribution of the network structure and node attributes.
 max T r PθT1 (X1 ) Pθ2 (X2 ) Specifically, CaCo has two different inputs: 1) the original graph
 θ1,θ2
 G = {A, X} and 2) the identity graph G  = {A, I}, which are
 s.t. PθT1 (X1 ) Pθ1 (X1 ) = PθT2 (X2 ) Pθ2 (X2 ) = I (2) utilized for learning the distribution of the network structure and
 node attributes.
where I is the identity matrix, and (2) can be rewritten as To learn the structure information, the original graph G =
 min ||Pθ1 (X1 ) − Pθ2 (X2 ) ||2F {A, X} is input to the weight-sharing encoder to learn the
 θ1,θ2 network structure information of the attributed network
  
 + λ (LSDL (Pθ1 (X1 )) + LSDL (Pθ2 (X2 ))) (3) GCN (H, A|W ) = ϕ (D)− 2 A(D)− 2 HW
 1 1
 (4)
where Pθ1 and Pθ2 are the neural networks used to learn the
 where D is the diagonal degree matrix of the network G, H =
representations of the two views. ||Pθ1 (X1 ) − Pθ2 (X2 )||2F is
 X is the node attributes, and A is the adjacency matrix of the
used to maximize the correlation between the two views, and
 attributed network.
LSDL is used to minimize the distance between Pθi (Xi ) and the
 To extract node semantic information, identity aggregation
identity matrix.
 is designed to learn node attribute information. We utilize the
 identity graph G  = {A, I} input to the weight-sharing encoder
 III. METHOD
 In this section, we describe the proposed CaCo method, as GCN (X, I|W ) = ϕ (IXW ) (5)
shown in Fig. 2. CaCo consists of three parts: 1) a weight-sharing where I is the identity graph, which makes the semantic infor-
GCN, 2) a distribution alignment objective, and 3) a CCA-based mation and network structure information of each node more
objective. At first, in order to learn the distribution of the network similar by transferring the learned semantic information to all
structure and node attributes of attributed networks, we input the node features. W in (4) and (5) is the trainable shared weight.
original graph G = {A, X} and the identity graph G  = {A, I} ϕ is the activation function, such as RELU(•) = max(0, •).
into the weight-sharing GCN, and output the mean and variance
vectors of the network structure and node attributes. After that,
 B. Distribution Alignment
to align the distributions of the network structure and node
attributes, we use the KL divergence to pull the distributions of After the weight-sharing GCN, the network structure distrithe two views to the same prior distribution. Finally, we sample bution q(Zh |H, A) and node attribute distribution q(Zf |X, I)
the network structure embedding and node embedding from are learned by
the learned distribution and maximize the correlation of normal N
 
nodes on the network structure distribution and node attribute q (Z|X, A) = q (zi |X, A) (6)
distribution by using the CCA-based objective. Specifically, the i=0
anomaly scores of each node are defined as the correlations   
between network structure and node attributes, and the node q (zi |X, A) = N zi |μi , diag σ 2 (7)
464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

where μ is the mean vectors and σ is the variance vectors. Z is
 Algorithm 1: CaCo.
the embedding sampled from the distributions of the two views.
 Require:
For the network structure distribution, μh and σ h are the mean
 Attributed network G = {A, X}; Identity graph
and variance vectors of the structure, respectively, and Zh is the
 G = {A, I}; weight-sharing encoder f ; the prior
network embedding
 distribution p and the hyperparameter λ of CCA-based
 μ = GCNμ (H, A|W ) (8) objective.
 1: for epoch = 1 to T do
 σ = GCNσ (H, A|W ) (9)
 2: Generate the network structure distribution
μh and σ h are the mean and variance vectors of the network q(Zh |H, A) via (4) and (6) and generate the node
structure distribution, respectively. Similarly, μf and σ f are the attribute distribution q(Zf |X, I) via (5) and (6).
mean and variance vectors of the node attributes, respectively. 3: Align the distribution of network structure and node
 Then, we align the learned distributions of the two views on attribute via (10).
attributed networks. Since it is difficult to align the two distri- 4: Sample the network structure embedding Zh and node
butions directly, in this section, we utilize the KL divergence embedding Zf from the distribution of network
to pull the distribution q(Zh |X, A) and q(Zf |X, I) to the prior structure q(Zh |H, A) and node attributes q(Zf |X, I).
distribution p 5: Normalize the network structure embedding Zh and
 node embedding Zf by (11).
Lkl = −KL [q(Zh |X, A)||p(Zh )] − KL [q(Zf |X, I)||p(Zf )] .
 6: Input the normalized network structure embedding Zh
 (10)
 and node attribute embedding Zf into CCA-objective,
In this article, we use the Gaussian distribution as the prior
 and update the CaCo with its stochastic gradient by
distribution p [22], [23].
 (15).
 7: end for
C. CCA-Based Objective 8: Compute the correlation between network structure
 The CCA-based objective aims to learn the correlation be- embedding Zh and node embedding Zf via (12) and
tween network structure distribution and node attribute distri- detect the anomaly by it.
bution. First, we sample the structure embedding Zh and the 9: return f .
node attribute embedding Zf from the distribution of network
structure q(Zh |X, A) and the distribution of node attributes
q(Zf |X, I), and normalize the node embedding of the two views and node attribute distribution
as follows:
 L = LCCA + LKL . (15)
 Zh − μ (Zh )
 Zh = 1 Unlike other methods, the anomaly score of CaCo is defined
 σ (Zh ) ∗ N 2
 as the correlation of two views. A strong correlation between
 Zf − μ (Zf ) the network structure and the node attribute is determined as
 Zf = 1 . (11)
 σ (Zf ) ∗ N 2 normal; otherwise, it is determined as abnormal. The algorithm
 of CaCo is described as follows.
Then, from (3), CaCo maximizes the correlation between the two
view distributions by minimizing the invariance of the network
 IV. EXPERIMENTS
structure embedding Zh and the node attribute embedding Zf .
The invariance loss Linv is defined as A. Datasets
 Linv = ||Zh − Zf ||2F . (12) To evaluate the effectiveness of CaCo, we tested the CaCo
 methods on six public datasets, including four citation bench-
 To avoid collapsed solutions, the following decorrelation Ldco mark datasets (Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed, and ACM) and two
loss is proposed to ensure that the individual dimensions of the social benchmark datasets (Flickr, BlogCatalog). Table I shows
features are uncorrelated the statistics of these datasets. The details of these datasets are
  
 Ldco = ||ZhT Zh − I||2F + ||ZfT Zf − I||2F . (13) as follows.
 1) Citation Networks: Cora, Citeseer, Pubmed,1 and ACM
 The CCA-based objective is defined as follows: are four publicly used citation network benchmark
 LCCA = Linv + λ ∗ Ldco (14) datasets with scientific publications as nodes and the citation links between these scientific publications as edges.
where λ is the tradeoff between the two terms. 2) Social Networks: BlogCatalog and Flickr2 are two typical
 social network benchmark datasets, where users of social
D. Loss Function and Anomaly Score
 The training objective of CaCo is to optimize the CCA-based 1 [Online]. Available: http://linqs.cs.umd.edu/projects/projects/lbc

loss and the KL divergence of the network structure distribution 2 [Online]. Available: http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/pages/datasets
WANG et al.: CACO: ATTRIBUTED NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CANONICAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS 465

 TABLE I are evaluated under five different random seeds and the mean
 STATISTICS OF SIX DATASETS
 performance and the mean variance were reported as the final
 results. In the experiments, CaCo is implemented using Pytorch3
 and Deep Graph Library.4 All experiments were conducted on an
 Ubuntu 16.04 Server with 128 GB of RAM, Intel(R)-Xeon(R)-
 Gold-5220R(2.20 GHz), and a GeForce RTX 3090 Graphics
 Card with 24 GB of RAM.

 C. Experimental Results
 The performance of the proposed model was evaluated quantitatively by comparing it with the state-of-the-art methods. The
 results of all methods on six datasets are shown in Table II, and
 the results of each method on six datasets by treating each class
 websites are represented as nodes and the following rela- as a normal class are shown in Fig. 3.
 tionships between users are represented as edges. In the experimental results, our proposed framework CaCo
 Based on previous studies on these datasets [13], [14], we achieves the best performance on six datasets. CaCo obtains a
chose one of the classes as the normal class and the remaining significant improvement of 5.90% on AUC and 6.43% on AP
classes as the anomalous class. In our experiments, we randomly compared to the best results in the baseline. The main reason
sampled only 60% of the normal nodes for training, and the is that CaCo captures the distributional relationships on node
remaining 15% and 25% randomly selected the same number of attribute and network structure. In comparison with the tradianomalous nodes for validation and testing, respectively. tional anomaly detection methods, OCSVM and Deep-SVDD
 perform worse than the other methods. The reason is that they
B. Experimental Settings cannot simultaneously capture the information of node attributes
 and complex network structures. The performance of graph-
 In this section, we introduce the settings of our experiments
 embedding-based methods is not satisfactory, because they efincluding baselines, experimental design, and metrics.
 fectively measure the anomaly via a single aspect (reconstruction
 1) Baseline: We compared the proposed model CaCo
 error). For the method ComGA, it uses the community-aware
with four types of baselines. First, the traditional one-class
 method to learn the node embedding, which can be more easily
classification-based methods include OC-SVM [5] and Deepseparated in the latent space. However, it uses reconstruction
SVDD [8], which detect the anomaly by a learned hypererror as anomaly score, which makes it impossible to detect
sphere containing normal data. In this article, we learn the
 abnormal nodes similar to normal nodes. The one-class GNNhypersphere on the network structure and node attributes, rebased methods, such as OC-GCN and Dual-SVDAE, do not
spectively. Second, graph-embedding-based methods such as
 show competitive performance, even though they are designed
DeepWalk [20], GAE [21], ARGA [22], Dominant [11], and
 for graph structure feature extraction and hypersphere learning
ComGA [29] employ graph learning methods to extract graph
 for anomaly detection. This lies in the inability of the one-class
information and use the reconstruction errors to detect the
 method to measure abnormal nodes whose latent space is similar
anomaly. Third, one-class GNN-based methods include OCto the normal nodes. Graph self-supervised methods, such as
GNN [13] (OC-GCN, OC-SAGE) and Dual-SVDAE [14],
 Conad, perform worse than CaCo, due to the fact that it learns
which combine the powerful representation capabilities of
 the graph embedding using prior human knowledge for data
GNNs along with the classical one-class objective to conaugmentation and cannot include all exception patterns. This
duct anomaly detection on graph structure data. Fourth, graph
 makes it unable to detect anomaly nodes that have similar
SSL-based methods include CCA-SSG [15], which utilizes
 patterns to normal nodes. Unlike other baselines, CaCo aims
CCA to optimize the feature-level objective and Conad [30],
 to capture the correlations between network structure and node
which integrates the anomaly knowledge into the Siamese GNN
 attributes, and when a node is abnormal, the network embedding
encoder by contrastive loss and detects anomaly nodes via
 will be different from the node attribute embedding while other
reconstruction errors.
 baselines aim to learn the representation of nodes in the latent
 2) Experimental Design and Metric: In the experiments,
 space, ignoring the relationship between network structure and
CaCo is trained with 500 iterations on all datasets and optinode attributes. This is the core idea of CaCo, and the results
mized by Adam with a learning rate of 0.001. The embedding
 proved it. Besides, the distribution alignment makes CaCo capdimension is set to 64 and the layers of GNN are set to 2 for all
 ture the different information between network structure and
datasets. The hyperparameter λ is set to 1 for all datasets. For the
 node attributes, and we can obtain the same conclusion in the
baseline methods, we use the publicly available implementations
 ablation study.
from the original papers and set the parameters by grid search.
To measure the performance of CaCo with baselines, similar to
the previous studies [13], [14], in this article, we employ the 3 [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.org/

widely used AUC score and AP score as metrics. All methods 4 [Online]. Available: https://www.dgl.ai/
466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE

 Fig. 3 shows the AUC scores of all methods by considering helps CaCo to capture the complete semantic information of
each node class as a normal class on the six datasets. From the normal data. Besides, the correlation of two views as anomaly
results, we find that CaCo performs more effectively and robustly scores helps CaCo to effectively distinguish normal classes from
than the other baselines. This is due to the CaCo capturing other classes.
network structure and node attribute information jointly by
aggregating node identities using identity graphs, weight sharing
 D. Parameter Study
GCN to map network structure and node attribute information
to the same distribution. In particular, the performance of the In this section, we study the impact of different dimenbaseline methods is worse than that of the other classes in sions of node embedding, and the number of layers of the
the “7” class of Cora, the “1” class of Citeseer, and the “5” weight-sharing encoder, with the results being run on the Cora
class of BlogCatalog datasets. The main reason behind this may dataset, as shown in Fig. 4. We can notice that CaCo performs
be the relatively small size of these classes in these datasets, stably at the different dimensions of node embedding. This
respectively. The “7” class of Cora is only 12.96%, the “1” class is due to the fact that CaCo captures key information about
of Citeseer is only 7.35%, and the “2” class of BlogCatalog the network structure and node attributes used for anomaly
is only 14.95%, which makes these methods unable to have detection. We also see that the performance of CaCo is stable
enough training for those classes to distinguish them from others. as the number of layers increases due to the weight-sharing
Unlike the baseline methods, CaCo has the weight-sharing GCN encoder using the identity graph as inputs, which enables
encoder and identity graph for learning the information about CaCo to retain more node information in the feature learning
the network structure and node attribute of normal nodes, which process.
WANG et al.: CACO: ATTRIBUTED NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CANONICAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS 467

Fig. 3. Evaluation performance of CaCo and baselines by taking each class of nodes as a normal class on six datasets. The abscissa represents
the classes and the ordinate represents the AUC score.

 TABLE III
 ABLATION STUDY OF CACO

Fig. 4. Impact of different dimensions of embedding and the number
of layers for weight sharing encoder on the Cora dataset.

E. Ablation Study
 In this section, we compare CaCo with three variants on six
datasets to study the different modules of CaCo used for anomaly
detection. The variants are defined as follows.
 1) wo-dis: This variant replaces distribution learning with
 feature learning to learn the correlation between network
 structure and node attributes.
 2) wo-Linv : This variant studies the effectiveness of the
 invariant term by removing it from the loss function.
 3) wo-Ldco : Similar to wo-Linv , this variant studies the effectiveness of the decorrelation term by removing it from
 the loss function.
 The results of the ablation study are shown in Table III. We can For wo-Linv , we found that using only the decorrelation term
see that wo-dis performs worse than the others because learning does not yield good results on Flickr and BlogCatalog, but
the correlation between attribute distribution and structure dis- has good performance on the first four datasets, as shown in
tribution captures information about nodes that are not present in Fig. 5. Specifically, for the first four datasets, the distribution
the training set while the distribution learning module captures of anomaly scores have a clear dividing line, which means that
key information for anomaly detection. those datasets are themselves strongly correlated with normal
468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE IV
 COMPUTATION ANALYSIS FOR CACO WITH OTHER METHODS

Fig. 5. Correlation score of wo-Linv on six datasets.

 number of parameters and FLOPs of CaCo with other baselines.
 We can find that the number of parameters and FLOPs is smaller
 than most baselines. The reason is that CaCo uses only l-layers
 GCN as an encoder, a light-weighted network for graph data,
 which is simpler and more effective to operate compared to other
 networks such as GraphSAGE. For ComGA, it first learns the
 node embedding of the community, which makes it necessary
 to design more modules and greatly increases the number of
 parameters. In addition, for GAE, dominant, and dual-SVDAE,
Fig. 6. Result of different values of tradeoff hyperparameter λ.
 the dual-encoder or decoder also requires a new network module,
 which makes them require more parameters and computations.
points and weakly correlated with abnormal points after opti- CCA-SSG and Conad are similar to CaCo, except that they use
mization with the decorrelation term, but this is not the case l-layers GCN to capture the information of attributed networks,
for the Flickr and BlogCatalog datasets. Thus, for the first four which makes them reduce the number of parameters and comdatasets, CaCo can also perform well without the invariant term. putations.
For the Flickr and BlogCatalog datasets, CaCo needs to further
optimize the invariant term.
 For wo-Ldco , it performs worse than the other algorithms, be- G. Visualization
cause, without decorrelation terms, CaCo will achieve collapsed In this section, we visualize the embedding and correlation
solutions [15]. As shown in Fig. 6, we also study the impact of the scores class “1” of six datasets. Fig. 7 visualizes the node
decorrelation term on anomaly detection by setting the tradeoff embedding of the test nodes learned by ARGA, Dual-SVDAE,
hyperparameter λ from 10−5 to 100. We discovered that when and CaCo, respectively, with blue points representing normal
λ is too small, the decorrelation term does not work, allowing nodes and orange points representing the abnormal nodes. We
CaCo to get collapsed solutions. When the value of λ is too large, can see that CaCo, which separates normal nodes from abwe notice that the performance of CaCo is degraded, especially normal nodes, is better than the above methods. The reason
on Flickr and BlogCatalog. This is because the invariant term is that CaCo aligns the distribution of network structures and
will be neglected. Therefore, the value of the hyperparameter λ node attributes in the latent space and utilizes the correlation
is associated with the correlation between network embedding between the distributions of two views as an objective to detect
and node embedding. From Fig. 6, a value of the hyperparameter the anomaly. Furthermore, we notice that the distribution of
λ in [0.1,1] can achieve the optimal performance. This means nodes in the latent space is not as tight as other methods,
that the performance of CaCo benefits from the invariance term. which is due to the fact that CaCo focuses on the separation
In contrast to wo-Ldco , CaCo utilizes the decorrelation term to of normal and abnormal nodes, rather than methods such as
prevent solution collapse. Above all, the results demonstrate that OC-GNN and Dual-SVDAE that focus on learning a compact
the modules of CaCo can be used for attributed network anomaly hypersphere of normal nodes to separate normal nodes from
detection. abnormal nodes. Fig. 8 shows the correlation scores of the
 six datasets, we can find that the anomaly nodes have smaller
F. Computational Analysis
 correlation values while the normal nodes have larger correlation
 In this section, we compare the complexity of CaCo with values. The results indicate the effectiveness of the proposed
other baselines, as shown in Table IV. We have compared the CaCo.
WANG et al.: CACO: ATTRIBUTED NETWORK ANOMALY DETECTION VIA CANONICAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS 469

Fig. 7. T-SNE visualization of node embedding derived by different models on six datasets. Blue points represent the normal nodes and orange
points represent the abnormal nodes respectively. (a) ARGA. (b) Dual-SVDAE. (c) CaCo.

 datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method
 compared to the state-of-the-art techniques. In the future, we
 will focus on the correlation between the global and the local
 nodes to detect the anomaly points.

 REFERENCES
 [1] C. Zhang, X. Wu, W. Yan, L. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Attribute-aware graph
 recurrent networks for scholarly friend recommendation based on internet
 of scholars in scholarly Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16,
 no. 4, pp. 2707–2715, Apr. 2020.
 [2] Y. Wang, H. Sun, Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, and S. Zhu, “A heterogeneous
 graph embedding framework for location-based social network analysis
 in smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2747–2755,
 Apr. 2020.
 [3] L. Rui, Y. Zhu, Z. Gao, and X. Qiu, “CLPM: A cooperative link prediction
Fig. 8. Correlation score of CaCo on six datasets. model for industrial Internet of Things using partitioned stacked denoising
 autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3620–3629,
 May 2021.
 [4] H. Fan, F. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Xi, and Z. Li, “Correlation-aware deep
 V. CONCLUSION generative model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Pacific-
 Asia Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 688–700.
 In this article, we propose a CCA-based method for attributed [5] P. Nader, P. Honeine, and P. Beauseroy, “lp -norms in one-class classinetwork anomaly detection (CaCo), which captures the cor- fication for intrusion detection in SCADA systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Informat., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2308–2317, Nov. 2014.
relation between node attributes and the network structure of [6] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
attributed networks for anomaly detection. Specifically, CaCo Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
designs weight-sharing GCN as an encoder to learn the distri- [7] C. Zhou and R. C. Paffenroth, “Anomaly detection with robust deep
 autoencoders,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
bution network structure and node attributes, and we align them Data Mining, 2017, pp. 665–674.
to a sharing latent space via KL divergence. Then, the CCA [8] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning of
objective is designed to maximize the correlation of normal social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2014, pp. 701–710.
nodes in terms of network structure and node attributes, and the [9] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
anomaly score is defined as the correlation of two views to detect detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
the anomaly points. Extensive experiments on six real-world 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

[10] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “Anomalous: A joint Fengbin Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in
 modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. computer application from Harbin Engineering
 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 3513–3519. University, Harbin, China, in 2005.
[11] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on He is currently a Supervisor and a Professor
 attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 594– with the Harbin University of Science and Tech-
 602. nology, Harbin. His current research interests in-
[12] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Anomalydae: Dual autoencoder for anomaly clude network and information security, firewall
 detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, technology, and intrusion detection technology.
 Signal Process., 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
[13] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph neural
 networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural Comput.
 Appl., vol. 33, pp. 12073–12085, 2021.
[14] F. Zhang, H. Fan, R. Wang, Z. Li, and T. Liang, “Deep dual support vector
 data description for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” Int. J.
 Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 1509–1528, 2022.
[15] H. Zhang, Q. Wu, J. Yan, D. Wipf, and P. S. Yu, “From canonical
 correlation analysis to self-supervised graph neural networks,” Adv. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 76–89, 2021. Xunhua Huang is currently working toward the
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Sci-
[16] X. Liu, F. Zhang, H. Liu, and H. Fan, “iTimes: Investigating semience and Technology, Harbin University of Scisupervised time series classification via irregular time sampling,” IEEE
 ence and Technology, Harbin, China.
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 6930–6938, May 2023.
 During the doctoral study, his research sub-
[17] W. Lu, H. Fan, K. Zeng, Z. Li, and J. Chen, “Self-supervised domain
 ject area is time series analysis. His current readaptation for cross-domain fault diagnosis,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., vol. 37,
 search interests include graph data mining, time
 no. 12, pp. 10903–10923, 2022.
[18] D. Lai, S. Wang, Z. Chong, W. Wu, and C. Nardini, “Task-oriented at- series analysis, and anomaly detection.
 tributed network embedding by multi-view features,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
 vol. 232, 2021, Art. no. 107448.
[19] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, 2017.
[20] B. Perozzi, L. Akoglu, P. I. Sánchez, and E. Müller, “Focused clustering
 and outlier detection in large attributed graphs,” in Proc. 20th ACM
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2014, pp. 1346–1355.
[21] D. Zhu, Y. Ma, and Y. Liu, “Anomaly detection with deep graph autoencoders on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., Chongrui Tian is currently working toward the
 2020, pp. 1–6. Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer
[22] S. Pan, R. Hu, G. Long, J. Jiang, L. Yao, and C. Zhang, “Adversarially Science and Technology, Harbin University of
 regularized graph autoencoder for graph embedding,” in Proc. Int. Joint Science and Technology, Harbin, China.
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 2609–2615. He is currently an Associate Professor with
[23] H. Fan et al., “Heterogeneous hypergraph variational autoencoder for the East University of Heilongjiang, Harbin. Durlink prediction,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, ing the doctoral study, his research subject area
 pp. 4125–4138, Aug. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059313. is intrusion detection technology. His current re-
[24] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly search interests include network and informadetection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,” tion security, and intrusion detection technology.
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
 Jun. 2022.
[25] G. Andrew, R. Arora, J. Bilmes, and K. Livescu, “Deep canonical correlation analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2013, pp. 1247–1255.
[26] Z. Chen et al., “A just-in-time-learning-aided canonical correlation analysis method for multimode process monitoring and fault detection,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 5259–5270, Jun. 2021. Liang Xi received the Ph.D. degree in computer
[27] X. Xiu, Z. Miao, Y. Yang, and W. Liu, “Deep canonical correlation analysis applied technology from the Harbin University
 using sparsity constrained optimization for nonlinear process monitoring,” of Science and Technology, Harbin, China, in
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 6690–6699, Oct. 2022. 2012.
[28] X. Chang, T. Xiang, and T. M. Hospedales, “Scalable and effective deep He is currently a Professor with the Harbin
 CCA via soft decorrelation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern University of Science and Technology, Harbin.
 Recognit., 2018, pp. 1488–1497. His current research interests include artificial
[29] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly intelligence, network security, machine learning,
 detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, etc.
 pp. 657–665.
[30] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Proc. Pacific-Asian
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 444–457.

 Ruidong Wang is currently working toward Haoyi Fan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer degree in computer application technology from
 Science and Technology, Harbin University of the Harbin University of Science and Technol-
 Science and Technology, Harbin, China. ogy, Harbin, China, in 2021.
 During the doctoral study, his research sub- He is currently an Associate Research Felject is graph anomaly detection. His current re- low with the School of Computer and Artificial
 search interests include graph data mining, time Intelligence, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou.
 series analysis, and anomaly detection. His current research interests include pattern
 recognition, data mining, and deep learning.