IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024 5723

Calibrated One-Class Classification for Unsupervised
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Hongzuo Xu , Yijie Wang , Songlei Jian , Qing Liao , Yongjun Wang , and Guansong Pang

 Abstract—Time series anomaly detection is instrumental in I. INTRODUCTION
maintaining system availability in various domains. Current work
 VER recent decades, with the burgeoning of informain this research line mainly focuses on learning data normality
deeply and comprehensively by devising advanced neural network
structures and new reconstruction/prediction learning objectives.
 O tization, a substantial amount of time series data have
 been created. As the functioning status of various target sys-
However, their one-class learning process can be misled by latent tems such as large-scale data centers, cloud servers, and space
anomalies in training data (i.e., anomaly contamination) under the
unsupervised paradigm. Their learning process also lacks knowlcrafts, these time series data are a source where we can monitor
edge about the anomalies. Consequently, they often learn a biased, and alarm potential faults, threats, and risks of target systems
inaccurate normality boundary. To tackle these problems, this by identifying their unusual states (i.e., anomalies). Anomaly
paper proposes calibrated one-class classification for anomaly de- detection, an important field in data mining and analytics, is
tection, realizing contamination-tolerant, anomaly-informed learn- to find exceptional data observations that deviate significantly
ing of data normality via uncertainty modeling-based calibration
and native anomaly-based calibration. Specifically, our approach
 from the majority [1], which plays a critical role in achieving
adaptively penalizes uncertain predictions to restrain irregular this goal. Due to the cost and difficulty of labeling work in these
samples in anomaly contamination during optimization, while si- real-world applications, time series anomaly detection is often
multaneously encouraging confident predictions on regular sam- formulated as an unsupervised task with unlabeled training data.
ples to ensure effective normality learning. This largely alleviates Challenges. Without any guidance of supervisory signals,
the negative impact of anomaly contamination. Our approach also
creates native anomaly examples via perturbation to simulate time
 unsupervised time series anomaly detection generally relies on
series abnormal behaviors. Through discriminating these dummy modeling data normality via one-class learning because most
anomalies, our one-class learning is further calibrated to form training samples are normal. However, this learning process still
a more precise normality boundary. Extensive experiments on faces two key challenges: (1) the presence of anomalies in trainten real-world datasets show that our model achieves substantial ing sets, and (2) the absence of knowledge about the anomalies.
improvement over sixteen state-of-the-art contenders.
 Specifically, as has been done in mainstream methods like [2],
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, one-class classification, time [3], [4], [5], the whole training set is often directly fed into
series, anomaly contamination, native anomalies. learning models by assuming all training samples are normal.
 However, this assumption does not always hold. The training set
 Manuscript received 12 October 2022; revised 5 February 2024; accepted might not be pure but contaminated by a small part of anomalies.
21 April 2024. Date of publication 26 April 2024; date of current version 27
September 2024. The work of Hongzuo Xu, Yijie Wang, Songlei Jian, Qing Liao,
 Anomaly contamination can greatly disturb the learning process,
and Yongjun Wang was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program thus leading to severe overfitting problems. Besides, the learning
of China under Grant 2022ZD0115302, in part by the National Natural Science process, without any knowledge about anomalies, may find an
Foundation of China under Grant 62002371, Grant 62076079, Grant U19A2067,
Grant 61379052, and Grant 61472439, in part by the Science Foundation of
 inaccurate normality boundary, since it is hard to define the range
Ministry of Education of China under Grant 2018A02002, in part by the Natural of normal behaviors in such cases. As shown in Fig. 1(a), due to
Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of Hunan Province under these two problems, canonical one-class classification methods
Grant 14JJ1026, in part by the Foundation of National University of Defense
Technology under Grant ZK21-17. The work of Guansong Pang was supported
 typically learn a suboptimal normality model.
in part by the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund Prior Art. Most unsupervised time series anomaly detectors
(AcRF) Tier 1 under Grant 21SISSMU031. Recommended for acceptance by use generative models in one-class learning to restore input
W. Ku. (Corresponding author: Yijie Wang.)
 Hongzuo Xu is with Intelligent Game and Decision Lab (IGDL), Beijing
 data [3], [4], [6], [7] or forecast future data [2], [8], [9]. Data
100091, China (e-mail: hongzuoxu@126.com). normality is implicitly learned behind the rationale of recon-
 Yijie Wang is with the National Key Laboratory of Parallel and Distributed struction or prediction. The abnormal degrees of observations in
Computing, College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China (e-mail: wangyijie@nudt.edu.cn).
 time series can be measured according to loss values. To achieve
 Songlei Jian and Yongjun Wang are with the College of Computer, National a comprehensive delineation of data normality (e.g., deeper
University of Defense Technology, Changsha, Hunan 410073, China (e-mail: inter-metric correlations, longer-term temporal dependence, and
jiansonglei@nudt.edu.cn; wangyongjun@nudt.edu.cn).
 Qing Liao is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
 more diverse patterns), these methods design advanced network
Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China structures (e.g., using variational Autoencoders [7], [10], graph
(e-mail: liaoqing@hit.edu.cn). neural networks [2], [9], and Transformer [3], [5]) and new
 Guansong Pang is with the School of Computing and Information
Systems, Singapore Management University, Singapore 178902 (e-mail:
 reconstruction/prediction learning objectives (e.g., adding adgspang@smu.edu.sg). versarial training [4], [11], [12], ensemble learning [6], [13], and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3393996 meta-learning [3]). However, these current methods generally
 1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 discriminate these harmful anomalies in learning data normality,
 thus masking the notorious anomaly contamination problem
 during network optimization.
 To address the second facet, we are motivated by selfsupervised learning that creates supervisory signals from the
 data itself. Current self-supervised anomaly detection methods
 design various supervised proxy tasks, e.g., geometric transformation prediction [17], masking prediction [18], and continuity
 identification [19], but these tasks mainly contribute to learning clearer semantics of the input data rather than introducing
 information related to anomalies. Since time series anomalies
 are well characterized and defined as point, contextual, and
 collective anomalies [20], we aim to utilize these definitions
 and characterizations to simulate abnormal behaviors by tailored
 data perturbation operations upon original time series data. This
Fig. 1. Demonstration of our key insights. (a) Broadly-used canonical one- process can offer reliable primitive anomaly examples, or at
class classification may learn an inaccurate, biased normality boundary due to least data samples with abnormal semantics, to the one-class
the anomaly contamination problem and the absence of knowledge about anomalies. (b) By contrast, the two proposed calibration methods, UMC and NAC, learning process. As shown in Fig. 1(d), these native anomaly
respectively address these two issues, and our calibrated one-class classifier can examples (“native” indicates that they are generated based on
produce a more accurate, clearer normality boundary. (c) UMC helps weaken original data) can further help calibrate the discriminability of
contaminated data during optimization based on model uncertainty scores, while
(d) NAC helps ground the normality boundary by calibrating the normality with the learned normality.
native anomaly examples. The Proposed Approach. Based on the above motivation
 and insights, this paper proposes a novel Calibrated Oneclass classification-based Unsupervised Time series Anomaly
do not have components to deal with the anomaly contami- detection method (COUTA for short). The approach fulfills
nation issue. There are a few attempts to address this prob- contamination-tolerant, anomaly-informed normality learning
lem, e.g., using pseudo-labels via self-training [14], [15], [16] by two novel normality calibration methods, including unceror an extra pre-positive one-class classification model [12] to tainty modeling-based calibration (UMC) and native anomalyremove plausible anomalies in the training set. Nonetheless, based calibration (NAC). In UMC, a novel calibrated one-class
these additional components themselves might be biased by the loss function is proposed, in which a prior (i.e., Gaussian)
anomaly contamination, leading to high errors in the pseudo distribution is imposed on the one-class distances and utilized
labeling or anomaly removal. They may also wrongly discard to capture the prediction uncertainties. It calibrates one-class
some normal samples of the boundary that are informative representations by adaptively penalizing uncertain predictions
and vital in learning data normality. On the other hand, these while at the same time emphasizing confident predictions. This
methods do not consider information related to the anomaly prior is theoretically motivated by the probability density funcclass when performing their normality learning process. It is tion of Gaussian distribution. In NAC, we propose three simple
difficult to learn accurate normality without knowing what the but effective data perturbation operations to generate native
abnormalities are. anomaly examples based on original time series sub-sequences.
 New Insights. To address these challenges, this paper in- A new supervised training branch is devised to further calibrate
vestigates an intriguing question: Can we calibrate one-class the learned normality to be discriminative w.r.t. these anomalyclassification from two facets, i.e., alleviating the negative informed samples. By jointly optimizing these two components,
impact of anomaly contamination and introducing knowledge our calibrated one-class classification model COUTA is enabout anomalies, to learn a contamination-tolerant, anomaly- forced to be robust to anomaly contamination and discriminative
informed data normality? to primeval anomalous behaviors, thus producing a more accu-
 As for the first facet, the essence is to eliminate the contribu- rate data normality boundary, as depicted in Fig. 1(b).
tion of these noisy samples in the learning process. We resort As an example, we use the Omi-4 server data of the real-world
to model uncertainty to tackle this problem. These anomalies Application Server Dataset (ASD) [7] to have a straightforward
are typically accompanied by rare and inconsistent behaviors, demonstration of the benefit of each calibration to our model in
and as a result, the one-class learning model tends to make Fig. 2, where Fig. 2(a) visualizes the time series data (five reprepredictions unconfidently. As shown in Fig. 1(c), we aim to use sentative dimensions out of the original nineteen dimensions are
this type of uncertainty to weaken the contribution of anomaly selected) while Fig. 2(b) displays the new feature spaces learned
contamination, thereby calibrating the one-class model w.r.t. by four different one-class classification models. It is clear that
the contaminated training data. Particularly, we can design a the canonical one-class classification (i.e., COUTA without calnew learning objective embedded with the uncertainty concept. ibration) fails to identify two anomalies (Anom1 and Anom2),
It adaptively penalizes uncertain predictions, while simulta- and the hypersphere formed by normal data is also biased. By
neously encouraging more confident predictions to ensure ef- contrast, adding either NAC or UMC all effectively calibrates
fective learning of hard samples. Therefore, this process can the normality of the data, resulting in better discrimination of
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5725

Fig. 2. (a) Time series data with three anomaly segments; (b) Learned feature space of canonical (non-calibrated) one-class classification and the proposed methods
by using NAC/UMC separately and two calibration methods simultaneously (i.e., COUTA). Normal data is expected to be enclosed in a compact hypersphere, and
anomalies can be successfully identified if they are distant from the center.

real anomalies from normal data. As a result, by adding both anomaly detection can be found in [21], and we also recommend
calibrations, COUTA can easily differentiate all three anomalies some comprehensive time series anomaly detection benchmark
of diverse abnormal behaviors. studies on univariate data [22], multivariate data [23], and ex-
 The contributions are summarized as follows. plainability [24].
 r We propose the calibrated one-class classification method Deep learning fuels many deep time series anomaly detection
 COUTA, which calibrates one-class learning using predic- methods. They use generative one-class learning models to
 tion uncertainties and native anomalies. These two calibra- restore input data or predict future data as precisely as possitions result in a contamination-tolerant, anomaly-informed ble. Prior work generally categorizes these current studies into
 COUTA. reconstruction- and prediction-based methods. As the training
 r We propose the uncertainty modeling-based calibration, set is dominated by normal data, reconstruction/prediction errors
 UMC. It restrains irregular noisy training data, while at the can indicate abnormal degrees. The core insight of these methods
 same time encouraging confident predictions on regular is to implicitly model normal patterns and behaviors via the
 samples to ensure an effective normality learning process. rationale behind restoring or forecasting. The pioneer in this
 This largely alleviates the negative impact of anomaly research line [25] uses the Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM)
 contamination. network in an encoder-decoder structure. In recent years, the data
 r We propose the native anomaly-based calibration, NAC. It mining community has made tremendous efforts to successfully
 generates different types of anomaly examples and wields enhance the performance of this pipeline by devising various
 them to calibrate one-class representations for learning a advanced network structures and new reconstruction/prediction
 more precise abstraction of normality and a clearer nor- learning objectives. A number of studies focus on capturing
 mality boundary. more comprehensive temporal and inter-variate dependencies by
 Extensive experiments show that: (1) COUTA substantially using graph neural networks [2], [9], convolutional kernels [6],
outperforms 15 state-of-the-art competing methods on 10 real- [26], and variational Autoencoders [7], [10]. Besides, adaptive
world datasets and averagely achieves over 11% improvement; memory network [27] and hierarchical structure-based multiand (2) COUTA is also with several desired properties including resolution learning [26], [28], [29] are used to better handle
generalization capability in identifying different anomaly types, diverse normal patterns. Some other methods use adversarial
favorable robustness to anomaly contamination, and good scal- training in Autoencoder [4], [11], [12] or generative adversarability w.r.t. both length and dimensionality of time series. ial network [11], [14], [30] that introduce regularization into
 the learning process to alleviate the overfitting problem. Ad-
 II. RELATED WORK ditionally, ensemble learning is also explored in [6], [13]. A
 very recent work [3] employs Transformer [31] to effectively
A. Anomaly Detection in Time Series model long-term trends in time series data, and several tools are
 Time series anomaly detection is an old discipline. There is used as building blocks to further enhance the detection model,
a long list of traditional methods in the literature using various including adversarial training to amplify reconstruction errors,
techniques like decomposition, clustering, distance, and pattern self-conditioning for better training stability and generalization,
mining. Besides, traditional time series prediction models such model agnostic meta-learning to handle the circumstance that
as moving average, autoregressive, and their multiple variants only limited data are available. It is noteworthy that some studies
are adapted to detect anomalies by comparing the predicted propose new anomaly scoring strategies to replace reconstrucvalues and the real ones. Reviews of traditional time series tion or prediction errors. A Transformer-based method [5] uses
5726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

association variance as a novel criterion to measure abnormality, fundamentally different from [37]. We create dummy anomaly
and the literature [32] employs the Bayesian filtering algorithm examples by performing data perturbation on original data
for anomaly scoring. Various advanced techniques are equipped instead of taking data samples from a supplementary nature
in this pipeline, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Never- dataset. A concurrent study [38] also works on perturbation
theless, these methods may still considerably suffer from the learning for anomaly detection in images, which constructs a
presence of anomaly contamination and the absence of knowl- perturbator and a classifier to perturb data with minimum efforts
edge about anomalies. We below review techniques related to and correctly classify the normal data and perturbed data into
solving these two key problems. two classes. Besides, DROCC [39] also adaptively generates
 anomalous points while training via a gradient ascent phase
B. Anomaly Contamination and Label-Noise Learning reminiscent of adversarial training. Different from these studies,
 we propose tailored perturbation methods for time-series data by
 A few anomaly detection methods consider the anomaly fully considering the unique characteristics and clear definitions
contamination problem. The literature [14], [15], [16] filters of anomalies in time series.
possible anomalous samples via self-training. An additional
Autoencoder is used in [12] to obtain a clean set of time series
data before the training process. A recent work [33] jointly III. THE PROPOSED METHOD: COUTA
infers binary labels to each sample (normal versus anomalous) A. Problem Formulation
while updating the model parameters. This work applies two
coupled losses that are respectively designed for normal and Let X = x1 , x2 , . . . , xN  be a time series dataset, and X is
anomalous data. These methods attempt to use the abnormality an ordered sequence of N observations. Each observation in X is
derived from the original/additional one-class learning compo- a vector described by D dimensions (i.e., xt ∈ RD , ∀xt ∈ X ).
nent to filter these noises. However, these filtering processes Dataset X is termed as multivariate time series when D > 1,
also suffer from the anomaly contamination problem, and these and the dataset is reduced to the univariate setting if D = 1.
methods may also wrongly filter some hard normal samples Unsupervised time series anomaly detection f is to measure
which are important to the network training. This problem is the abnormal degree of each observation and give anomaly
also related to label-noise learning or inaccurate supervision scores without accessing any label information, i.e., f : X → R.
because these hidden anomalies are essentially training data Higher anomaly scores indicate a higher likelihood to be anomawith wrong labels. This topic is under the big umbrella of lies.
the weakly-supervised paradigm. A survey [34] categorizes the We consider a local contextual window of each observation to
methodology of this research line into three perspectives, i.e., model their temporal dependence. Specifically, a sliding window
data, learning objective, and optimization policy. The proposed with length l and stride r is used to transform the training set
uncertainty modeling-based calibration in the one-class learning into a collection of sub-sequences S = {s1 , s1+r , · · · }, where
objective also contributes a novel solution to this research line. st = xt , xt+1 , . . . , xt+l−1 . This is a common practice in most
 deep time-series anomaly detection methods [3], [6], [7], [10].
 During the inference stage, the testing set is also split into sub-
C. Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection sequences using the same window length l, and the sliding stride
 Creating supervisory signals from the data itself is an essen- is set to 1. The anomaly detection model evaluates the abnormal
tial idea in self-supervised learning. Inspired by a number of degree of each sub-sequence, and the anomaly score is assigned
self-supervised methods in image anomaly detection [35], some to the last timestamp of each sub-sequence.
recent studies are designed for time series data. They assign
class labels to different augmentation operations (e.g., adding B. Overall Framework
noise, reversing, scaling, and smoothing) [27], neural transformations [36], contiguous and separate time segments [19], or The overall framework COUTA is shown in Fig. 3. A temporal
different time resolutions [28]. However, although these proxy modeling network φ is used to model time-axis dependency and
tasks can help to better learn data characteristics, these tasks still inter-variate interactions. We opt for Temporal Convolutional
fail to provide information related to anomalies. They may ne- Network (TCN) [40] as the temporal modeling network φ in
glect that it is also possible to reliably simulate abnormal behav- COUTA. TCN is more time-efficient than traditional RNNiors in time series via simple data perturbation. We explore this based structures, and it can better capture local time dependirection in our proposed method, showing that these dummy dency due to the usage of convolutional kernels. We further
anomaly examples can greatly benefit the learning process. use a lightweight projection head ψ to map data into an Hdimensional feature space F ⊂ RH . The multi-layer perceptron
 network structure is employed in ψ. The whole representation
D. Anomaly Exposure process can be denoted as ψ(φ(·)). We aim to map the training
 Providing extra anomaly information is a direct solution to ad- sample s into a compact hypersphere with center c upon the
dress the absence of knowledge about anomalies. This idea is ini- feature space F. We devise the Uncertainty Modeling-based
tially proposed by a work named outlier/anomaly exposure [37]. Calibration (UMC) in COUTA. Specifically, a prior probability
This study employs data from an auxiliary natural dataset as distribution is imposed on the one-class distance. We set a
manually introduced out-of-distribution examples. Our work is bypass in ψ by using an additional layer, producing an extra
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5727

Fig. 3. The framework of COUTA.

prediction ψ (φ(s)). Two distance values (i.e., d and d) ˜ are φ and ψ, the canonical one-class loss function can be defined as
used to obtain the mean and the variance of the prior distri-  2 
bution. Our one-class learning objective LUMC is calibrated to Lcanonical = Es∼S ψ (φ(s)) − c , (2)
adaptively penalize uncertain predictions and simultaneously
encourage confident predictions, thus accomplishing the mask- where c ∈ RH is the hypersphere center upon the feature space
ing of anomaly contamination in the training set. Besides, we F.
propose Native Anomaly-based Calibration (NAC) to introduce Anomaly contamination of the training set is essentially noisy
knowledge about time series anomalies to the one-class learning data that have very rare abnormal behaviors and inconsistent
process. Native anomaly example is created based on original patterns, and thus the one-class classification model tends to
time series data via tailored data perturbation operations. A new output unconfident predictions on these noisy data. Therefore,
supervised training branch with a classification head ψc is added to address the anomaly contamination problem, we can give
to empower COUTA to discriminate abnormal behaviors in time a relatively mild penalty to predictions that are with high
series via loss function LNAC . We also employ the multi-layer model uncertainty, thus masking anomaly contamination in a
perceptron structure in ψc . soft manner. On the other hand, to ensure effective optimiza-
 The final loss function is computed by assembling: tion of hard normal samples, the one-class classification model
 should also be encouraged to output confident predictions. The
 L = LUMC + αLNAC , (1) learning objective in (2) is basically defined according to the
 distance to the hypersphere center. Therefore, the core idea is to
where α is a parameter to adjust the weight of the native impose a prior (i.e., Gaussian) distribution Ns (μ, σ 2 ) to the
anomaly-based classification branch. single distance value ds = ψ(φ(s)) − c 2 , and the variance σ 2
 The learnable parameters within the neural network are jointly of the distribution can represent the model uncertainty. Hence,
trained by loss function L. During the inference stage, the to fulfill uncertainty modeling-based calibration, we need to antesting set is also pre-processed to sub-sequences, and COUTA swer two questions, i.e., how to design a new learning objective
measures abnormal degrees of input sub-sequences according that can handle distance distribution and how to extend the single
to their deviation from the learned normality model (i.e., the distance value to its prior distribution.
hypersphere). We first consider the design of our new one-class loss function.
 Given a prior distribution of the one-class distance, we need to
C. Calibrated One-Class Classification maximize the probability of the distance being zero, instead of
 1) UMC for Contamination-Tolerant One-Class Learning: simply minimizing a single distance value. Based on the proba-
COUTA aims at learning a hypersphere with the minimum radius bility density function of the Gaussian distribution, the learning
that can well enclose the training data upon the feature space objective of the distance distribution Ns (μ, σ 2 ) of sub-sequence
F. Therefore, the data normality can be explicitly defined as s can be defined to maximize the following function:
this hypersphere, and the distance to the hypersphere center can 1 1 μ 2
faithfully indicate the degree of data abnormality. This basic goal J=√ e− 2 ( σ ) . (3)
 2πσ 2
is the same as SVDD [41] (a popular technique in one-class
classification). The traditional SVDD algorithm relies on the We can further derive the following function:
kernel trick. As has been done in a recent extension [42], after 1 2 1
mapping original data to a new feature space via neural network log J = − μ − log 2πσ 2 . (4)
 2σ 2 2
5728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 with high uncertainty and concurrently impels more confident
 predictions.
 Note that our method is fundamentally different from the
 existing work based on Gaussian processes [43]. This work
 transfers the one-class classification problem to Gaussian Process Regression and approximates Gaussian Process classification with Laplace approximation or expectation propagation.
 Differently, our work imposes a Gaussian distribution to the
 one-class distance value, thus modeling the uncertainty during
 the one-class learning process.
 2) NAC for Anomaly-Informed One-Class Learning: To introduce knowledge about anomalies, we propose to offer dummy
Fig. 4. Loss values in LUMC w.r.t. ds + d˜s and (ds − d˜s )2 . As indicated by
 anomaly examples to the one-class classification model. We
the yellow line, the penalty of a fixed ds + d˜s is first adjusted to more mild
levels with the increase of the uncertainty (ds − d˜s )2 , while the loss function introduce several tailored perturbation operations to generate
further penalizes heavily when the uncertainty reaches a high value. native anomaly examples based on original time series data.
 Data perturbation δ modifies the input time series subsequence s via a specific operation to obtain a new sub-sequence
 We omit 2π and use ζ to indicate log σ 2 , and the learning s , such that s contains realistic abnormal behaviors of time
objective of the Gaussian distribution Ns (μ, σ 2 ) is equivalent series. s and s are with the same shape. According to the defito minimize the following loss value: nitions and characterizations of three basic time series anomaly
 types (i.e., point, contextual, and collective anomalies), we
 1 −ζ 2 1 define the following data perturbation operations.
 (s) = e μ + ζ. (5) r δ(I,γ) (s): Data perturbation is performed on the last ob-
 2 2
 We then address how to extend the single output of a distance servation of the input sub-sequence s. Data values of a
value to a Gaussian distribution. One direct solution is to employ group of randomly selected dimensions of the last obserthe ensemble method to obtain a group of predictions, thus esti- vation are replaced with a global extreme value γ. A new
 sub-sequence with a point anomaly can be created.
mating the mean and the variance of the distribution. However, r δ(II,γ) (s): Data perturbation is also applied to randomly
the GPU memory consumption and the computational effort
might be costly when there are many ensemble members. The selected dimensions of the last observation of the input
essence of the Gaussian distribution is to find the variance, that sub-sequence s. We use an offset γ based on the mean of
is, the ensemble process does not need a heavy computational the previous k values to pad these selected places. This
overhead. Recall that a lightweight projection head ψ is used perturbation method produces contextual anomalies. We
 use k = 10 by default.
after the temporal modeling network φ, we can set a bypass r δ(III,γ) (s): We also randomly choose a group of dimenhidden layer in ψ, yielding an additional projection output
(denoted by ψ (φ(s))). We calculate one-class distance values sions, but this perturbation operation acts on a segment
of ψ(φ(s)) and ψ (φ(s)) as of the input sub-sequence s. The right side is fixed as
 the last observation, and the segment length is randomly
 ds = ψ(φ(s)) − c 2 , d˜s = ψ (φ(s)) − c 2 . (6) sampled from the range [1, w]. These values are replaced
 with an outlier value γ. This perturbation process produces
 We further employ ds + d˜s and (ds − d˜s )2 to delegate μ2 collective anomalies. We use w = 0.5 l by default.
and ζ, respectively. Therefore, the loss function of one-class In practice, each of the above operations is deployed with
classification with uncertainty modeling-based calibration can two γ values to simulate anomalies at two extremes. As time
be further derived as follows: series data is first preprocessed via data normalization to [0, 1],
   we use γ = +2, −2 in δI , γ = +0.5, −0.5 in δII , γ = 1, 0 in
 1 −(ds −d˜s )2 ˜ 1 ˜ 2
 LUMC = Es∼S e (ds + ds ) + (ds − ds ) . (7) δIII . We define a pool Ω containing these six data perturbation
 2 2
 functions, i.e.,
 Our loss function in (7) can mask anomaly contamination
  
and weaken their contribution by assigning mild penalties. The Ω = δ(I,+2) , δ(I,−2) , δ(II,+0.5) , δ(II,−0.5) , δ(III,0) , δ(III,1) . (8)
one-class classification model tends to output inconsistent predictions on these hidden anomalies, i.e., (ds − d˜s )2 is high. These six perturbation functions can simulate abnormal be-
Therefore, the loss value ds + d˜s is adjusted to a lower level haviors in time series data. Fig. 5 presents a base time series
 ˜ 2
by its coefficient e−(ds −ds ) . On the other hand, the second sub-sequence s and corresponding native anomaly examples
term also penalizes high uncertainty, which encourages more generated via these six data perturbation operations within Ω.
confident predictions to ensure the effective optimization of hard A new set of dummy anomaly examples S with size β|S| is
samples. Fig. 4 visualizes LUMC of (7) by presenting how loss generated, which is denoted as follows.
values change w.r.t. ds + d˜s and (ds − d˜s )2 . As expected, this
loss function adaptively adjusts the loss value of the data sample S = {δ(s)|s ∼ S, δ ∼ Ω} , (9)
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5729

 D. Anomaly Scoring
 The learned hypersphere upon the feature space F can explicitly represent the data normality, and data abnormality can
 be simply defined as the euclidean distance to the hypersphere
 center c. As each distance value is extended to a Gaussian distribution to express model uncertainty in our calibrated one-class
 classification model, we employ two distance values to define
 the abnormal degree. Given the optimized network including
 the temporal modeling network φ∗ and the projection heads ψ ∗
 and ψ ∗ , the anomaly score of a sub-sequence s is calculated as
 follows.

 f (s) = ds + d˜s
Fig. 5. Native anomaly examples generated from a time series sub-sequence
s by six perturbation functions in Ω.
 = ψ ∗ (φ∗ (s)) − c + ψ ∗ (φ∗ (s)) − c . (11)

where original sub-sequence s and function δ are randomly
 E. Discussion
sampled from the training set S and the operation pool Ω.
 We then set a new supervised training branch to calibrate This section further discusses our considerations and imple-
COUTA such that our one-class classifier can discriminate prim- mentation details.
itive anomalies in S . We use an extra lightweight classification Discriminative versus Generative. COUTA is in a discrimihead ψc following the temporal modeling network φ to transfer native manner instead of using mainstream reconstruction- or
each data sample to a score. ψc also uses the multi-layer per- prediction-based generative models. Compared to the autoenceptron structure. Mean squared error is employed to regress coder structure that is composed of an encoder phase and a
the output of sub-sequences of the original set to y− and the decoder phase, COUTA does not need to reconstruct the encoded
output of those anomaly examples to y+ . The loss function of feature back to the original shape, which is more time efficient.
this branch is defined as: Moreover, COUTA learns a compact hypersphere, which is an
  explicit way to model data normality. That is, the optimization
 LNAC = Es∼S∪S 1s∈S (ψc (φ(s)) − y− )2 + is directly related to anomaly detection rather than implicitly
  behind the rationale of data reconstruction or forecasting.
 2
 1s∈S (ψ (φ(s)) − y+ ) , (10) The Choice of Hypersphere Center. Arguably, including c as
 an optimization variable will lead to a trivial solution, i.e., all
where y+ = 1 and y− = −1 are used in our implementation. learnable parameters in network φ and ψ are zero [42]. Hence,
 Although these manually defined perturbation operations following [42], we use the initialized network to perform a
seem to be old-school compared to deep generation methods, forward pass on all training data, and c is set as the averaged
 1
this way is simple enough to generate dummy anomaly examples representation, i.e., c = |S| s∈S ψ0 (φ0 (s)), where φ0 and ψ0
with abnormal behaviors of time series. Exposing these native are initialized neural networks before gradient optimization. It is
anomaly examples to the one-class classification model via this an empirically good strategy, which makes the optimization protraining branch can lead to a more precise abstraction of data cess converge quickly and also avoids the above “hypersphere
normality and a clearer boundary of the normality hypersphere. collapse” problem.
 It is noteworthy that COUTA also contributes to better detec- Anomaly Types in Native Anomaly Generation. We define six
tion performance when there is no overlap between these simu- perturbation functions with fixed parameters in Ω. This comlated anomalies and the specific anomaly type in target datasets. ponent is also a good handle to embed readily accessible prior
NAC can be seen as a self-supervised learning process, which knowledge into the learning process. Some specific real-world
can effectively strengthen one-class learning. Self-supervised applications may have their own definitions of anomalies. For
learning defines various transformations and designs pretext example, IT operations in data centers focus on collective (pattasks to classify or compare these transformations. Similarly, tern) anomalies and often omit point anomalies. These collective
COUTA employs tailored anomaly-aware transformations for anomalies may indicate real severe faults, possible downtime
time series data and trains neural networks to discriminate of running services, and unreasonable increase of system overtransformed data from original data. By harnessing pretext head, but point anomalies are often noises induced by many
tasks, self-supervised learning can embed data semantics into possible factors of system instability. Thus, data perturbation
representations. Likewise, COUTA also better learns temporal can be designed to generate corresponding anomalies of real
patterns and inter-variant dependency within input time-series interests. Note that it is also a limitation of this calibration
data, which poses a positive effect on the one-class learning pro- method. These data perturbation methods are designed based on
cess. Besides, we define tailored anomaly-aware transformations general anomaly definitions. They may bring negative effects
for time series data, i.e., NAC can achieve anomaly-informed if these generated dummy anomalies are essentially normal in
learning that better suits the downstream anomaly detection task. target systems. Nevertheless, we empirically prove that these
5730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

data perturbation methods are effective in the vast majority of TABLE I
 DATASET INFORMATION
real-world datasets from different domains.
 Anomaly Scoring Strategy. The anomaly scoring function
does not use the prediction results reported by the classification
head ψc . This branch is used to assist the optimization of the
temporal modeling network φ by providing knowledge about
anomalies. We simply treat all training data as a normal class
in this branch, which means this learning task might also be
misled by the anomaly contamination problem. Besides, these
dummy anomaly examples might not always be reliable due to
the limitation analyzed above. Simply adding the output of this
branch may downgrade the detection performance, and it is also
challenging to devise a good ensemble method to integrate the
outputs of two branches. Therefore, we leverage the one-class
learning results calibrated by both UMC and NAC, i.e., the
distance to the hypersphere center, to measure data abnormality
in our anomaly scoring function.

 IV. EXPERIMENTS
 In this section, we first introduce the experimental setup, and
then we conduct experiments to answer the following questions.
 r Effectiveness: How accurate are the anomaly detection
 results computed by COUTA and current state-of-the-art
 methods on real-world datasets?
 r Generalization ability: Can COUTA generalize to different Fig. 6. Anomaly segments in ten real-world datasets.
 types of time series anomalies?
 r Robustness: How does the robustness of COUTA w.r.t.
 are ECG data, respectively containing supraventricular beats and
 various anomaly contamination levels of the training set?
 r Scalability: Is COUTA more time-efficient compared to ventricular beats. We report their statistics in Table I, and Fig. 6
 shows representative anomaly segments of each dataset.
 existing methods?
 r Sensitivity: How do hyper-parameters of COUTA influence These datasets are selected due to the following considerations: (i) These data are from various real-world applications;
 the detection performance?
 r Ablation study: Do the proposed calibration methods con- (ii) They are of different lengths, dimensionality, and anomaly
 ratios; (iii) Anomalies in these datasets can be categorized into
 tribute to sufficiently better detection performance?
 different types; (iv) These datasets are frequently used in the
 literature. ASD, SMD and SWaT are benchmark datasets in this
A. Experimental Setup research line [2], [3], [6], [7], [10], [11]. WaQ is included in a
 1) Datasets and Preprocessing Methods: Ten publicly avail- benchmark paper [20]. Epilepsy and DSADS are datasets taken
able datasets are used in our experiments, including six multi- from the time series classification task by treating semantically
variate datasets and four univariate datasets. Application Server abnormal class(es) as anomalies, as has been done in many prior
Dataset (ASD) and Server Machine Dataset (SMD) are data anomaly detection studies [27], [36], [44], [45]. UCR datasets
of IT operations, in which each variate denotes the status are from the latest time series anomaly archive [46].
and resource utilization of servers in a cluster. Secure Water ASD, SMD, SWaT, WaQ, and UCR datasets have pre-defined
Treatment dataset (SWaT) and Water Quality dataset (WaQ) are training-testing split. In terms of Epilepsy and DSADS, we use
industrial data. The dimensions of SWaT are different sensors 60% data as the training set and the remaining 40% as the
and actuators, and WaQ is to identify undesirable variations in testing set while maintaining the original anomaly proportion.
the water according to a group of chemistry and physical metrics. Following [47], the minimum and maximum values per di-
Epilepsy seizure dataset (Epilepsy) and Daily and Sports Activ- mension of the training set are obtained to conduct min-max
ities Dataset (DSADS) are motion sensor data. Epilepsy is to normalization, and the data values in the testing set are clipped to
detect epilepsy seizures from three activities including walking, [min −4, max +4] to prevent excessively large values skewing
running, and sawing. Following [27], anomalies in DSADS are anomaly scoring process. Deep anomaly detectors generally
rare and intense activities, while the remaining activities are use a sliding window to divide time series datasets into small
defined as normal data. UCR-Fault and UCR-Gait come from a sub-sequences. A sliding window with a fixed size of 100 is
biomechanics lab, recording the gait of someone walking on a used for ASD, SMD, SWaT, WaQ, and four UCR datasets. We
force plate. Anomalies in UCR-Fault are faults in the left foot take 1 as the sliding stride for ASD, SMD and respectively use
sensor, and anomalies in UCR-Gait are the gait of the individual 100 and 5 for large-scale datasets SWaT and WaQ. As for the
who has Huntington’s disease. UCR-ECG-s and UCR-ECG-v remaining two datasets, Epilepsy and DSADS, the original data
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5731

format is collections of divided time sequences, and thus sliding 4) Parameter Settings and Implementations: In COUTA, the
window is not required. temporal modeling network φ is with one hidden layer, and the
 2) Competing Methods: COUTA is compared with six- kernel size uses 2. The projection head ψ and the classification
teen anomaly detection methods including ARMA [48], head ψc are two-layer multi-layer perceptron networks with
OCSVM [49], GOAD [50], ECOD [51], DAGMM [52], LSTM- LeakyReLU activation. The hidden layer of φ and ψ has 16
ED [25], LSTM-Pr [8], Tcn-ED [47], DSVDD [42], MS- neural units by default, and the dimension of the feature space
CRED [26], Omni [10], USAD [4], GDN [2], NeuTraL [36], F is also 16. We respectively use 32 and 64 in complicated
TranAD [3], and AnomTran [5]. These competing methods datasets ASD and DSADS to enhance the representation power
include both traditional and deep approaches. Also, these com- of the neural network. Adam optimizer is employed, where the
peting methods employ different learning strategies (prediction, learning rate is set to 10−4 . The weight factor α of the supervised
reconstruction, and discriminative one-class/self-supervised classification branch in the loss function uses 0.1 by default. The
learning) and various network structures (MLP, LSTM, GRU, factor β that controls the size of generated anomaly examples
TCN, Transformer, convolutional net, and graph neural net- is set to 0.2. As for the competing methods, we use the default
work). The above competitor list can well represent the state-of- or recommended hyper-parameter settings in their respective
the-art performance of the research line of time series anomaly original papers.
detection. These anomaly detectors are implemented in Python. We
 3) Evaluation Metrics and Computing Infrastructure: Many use the implementations of OCSVM and ECOD from pyod,
anomalies in time series data are consecutive, and they can a python library of anomaly detection approaches. The source
be viewed as multiple anomaly segments. In many practical code of GOAD, DSVDD, USAD, GDN, NeuTraL, and TranAD
applications, an anomaly segment can be properly handled are released by their original authors. In terms of LSTM-ED,
if detection models can trigger an alert at any timestamp Tcn-ED, MSCRED, and Omni, we use the implementations
within this segment. Therefore, the vast majority of previous from an evaluation study [47]. The source code of COUTA is
studies [2], [3], [4], [5], [7], [10], [11] employ point-adjust available at https://github.com/xuhongzuo/couta.
strategy in their experiment protocols. Specifically, the scores
of observations in each anomaly segment are adjusted to the
highest value within this segment, which simulates the above B. Effectiveness in Real-World Datasets
assumption (a single alert is sufficient to take action). Other This experiment evaluates the effectiveness of COUTA. We
points outside anomaly segments are treated as usual. For perform COUTA and its competing methods on ten real-world
the sake of consistency with the current literature, we also time series datasets. These models are trained on training sets,
employ this adjustment strategy before computing evaluation and we report their detection performance on testing sets.
metrics. Ground-truth labels in testing sets are strictly unknown in the
 Precision P and recall R of the anomaly class can directly training stage.
indicate the costs and benefits of finding anomalies in real-world Tables II and III respectively illustrate the F1 score and
applications, which can intuitively reflect model performance. AUC-PR of anomaly detectors on six multivariate datasets
F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which and four univariate datasets. ARMA cannot obtain results in
takes both precision and recall into account. These detection three days on SMD, SWaT, and DSADS. MSCRED runs out
models output continuous anomaly scores, but there is often no of memory on the large-scale dataset SWaT due to the high
specific way to determine a decision threshold when calculating computational cost of the deep convolutional network structure
precision and recall. Therefore, following prior work in this used in MSCRED. It is noteworthy that OCSVM, GOAD,
research line [3], [4], [6], [7], [10], [11], we use the best F1 ECOD, and DAGMM are not originally designed for time
score and the Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUC-PR), series data. MSCRED and GDN learn interactions between
considering simplicity and fairness. These two metrics can avoid different varieties, i.e., they cannot perform single-dimensional
possible bias brought by fixed thresholds or threshold calculation data. Thus, we report COUTA and the remaining nine commethods. The best F1 score represents the optimal case, while petitors in Table III. COUTA obtains the best F1 performance
AUC-PR is in an average case that is less optimal. Specifically, on all datasets. In terms of AUC-PR, COUTA outperforms
we enumerate all possible thresholds (i.e., scores of each times- all of its state-of-the-art competing methods on nine datasets
tamp) and compute corresponding precision and recall scores. with a 0.015 disparity to the best performer on the remaining
The best F1 can then be obtained, and AUC-PR is computed by dataset. Averagely, COUTA achieves 11% - 49% F1 improveemploying the average precision score. In the following exper- ment and 11% - 68 % AUC-PR enhancement over various
iments, F1 , P , and R denote the best F1 and its corresponding competitors.
precision and recall score. The above performance evaluation According to the comparison results, COUTA successfully
metrics range from 0 to 1, and a higher value indicates better achieves state-of-the-art performance by addressing two key
performance. limitations in the current one-class learning pipeline. The su-
 All the experiments are executed at a workstation with an periority of COUTA can be attributed to the synergy of our
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210R CPU @ 2.4 GHz, an NVIDIA two novel one-class calibration components, which achieves
TITAN RTX GPU, and 64 GB RAM. contamination-tolerant, anomaly-informed learning of data normality. The canonical one-class learning process used in these
5732 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 TABLE II
 F1 SCORE AND AUC-PR ± STANDARD DEVIATION OF COUTA AND ITS COMPETITORS ON SIX MULTIVARIATE DATASETS

 TABLE III
 F1 SCORE AND AUC-PR ON FOUR UNIVARIATE DATASETS

 Fig. 7. Performance of COUTA in handling (a) point-wise (global and contextual) anomalies, (b) pattern-wise (seasonal and shapelet) anomalies, and
 (c) anomalies with different lengths.

 C. Generalization Ability to Different Types of Time Series
 Anomalies
 We investigate whether COUTA can handle different anomaly
 types in time series data. Following a fine-grained taxonomy of
 time series anomalies in [20], three synthetic datasets are created.
 These datasets contain 1000 observations, which are described
 in two dimensions. The first 400 points are used for training,
 and the remaining data are treated as testing sets. We demonstrate the testing data of three cases in Fig. 7, where (a), (b),
 and (c) contain point-wise anomalies, pattern-wise anomalies,
competing methods suffers from the anomaly contamination and pattern-wise anomalies with different lengths, respectively.
problem, and they may also learn an inaccurate range of nor- Point-wise anomalies include both global and contextual forms,
mal behaviors due to the lack of guidance about the anomaly and pattern-wise anomalies are caused by basic shapelet and
class. It is noteworthy that, on dataset SWaT, a pure train- seasonality changes.
ing set with only normal observations is ensured (water treat- The bottom panel of Fig. 7 shows the anomaly scores proment attack is only launched in the testing set), and thus duced by our method COUTA. COUTA successfully identifies
competing methods can obtain relatively good performance. all of these anomaly cases with distinguishably higher scores
AnomTran, TranAD, and GDN achieve better performance on true anomalies and consistently lower scores on normal mocompared to other competitors. AnomTran and TranAD em- ments. We use three pre-defined fixed operations in creating naploy the advanced Transformer structure and several training tive anomaly examples. These native anomaly examples are used
tricks, and GDN models inter-variate correlations with the to calibrate the normality boundary. COUTA can still generalize
help of the powerful capability of graph neural networks in to different anomaly types even if some anomaly types may not
exploring high-order interactions among graph nodes. How- strictly correspond to the generated native anomalies. It is mainly
ever, TranAD may suffer from the overfitting problem because because COUTA is essentially a one-class classification model,
its learning process contains several complicated components, and by definition, it can alarm all the observations that deviate
and thus it fails to produce effective detection results on sim- from the learned normality according to one-class distances. The
ple datasets like SMD and SWaT. In contrast, detectors with data normality is modeled based on the majority of the training
plain encoder-decoder structures (e.g., LSTM-ED) obtain better data instead of these created native anomalies. Therefore, the
performance. generalization ability of our method COUTA is not limited by
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5733

 Fig. 9. Scalability test results w.r.t. dimensionality and length of time series.
 TranAD, USAD, and MSCRED run out of memory when handling time series
 data with high dimensionality.

 E. Scalability Test
Fig. 8. Robustness w.r.t. anomaly contamination.
 This experiment investigates the scalability of COUTA compared to its competing methods. Time efficiency w.r.t. both time
the pre-defined operations in NAC, i.e., COUTA can also identify series length T and dimensionality D are recorded. As for the
novel anomalies that are not covered in the NAC process. scalability test w.r.t. dimensionality, a group of seven time-series
 datasets with a fixed length (i.e., 2,000) and various dimensions
 (i.e., from 8 to 512 with 2 as the magnification factor) is gener-
D. Robustness w.r.t. Anomaly Contamination ated. We synthesize another group of nine datasets containing
 different lengths (i.e., range from 1,000 to 256,000) and a fixed
 This experiment is to quantitatively measure the interference
 dimension (i.e., 8) for the scale-up test w.r.t. length. As these
of anomaly contamination to time series anomaly detectors,
 deep anomaly detectors are deployed with different numbers of
that is, we test the robustness of each anomaly detector w.r.t.
 training epochs, we report the execution time of one training
different anomaly contamination ratios in the training set. Due
 epoch by taking 128 as a unified size of training mini-batches.
to the continuity of time series data, we cannot directly remove
 Fig. 9 presents the execution time of COUTA and its ten
or inject anomalies like other robustness testing experiments in
 competing state-of-the-art methods on time series datasets with
prior work on tabular data [45], [53]. It is hard to precisely adjust
 various sizes. Note that this experiment excludes three general
ratios of abnormal timestamps in the training set. Therefore,
 anomaly detectors (i.e., OCSVM, ECOD, and GOAD) that
we employ Epilepsy and DSADS in this experiment because
 are not originally designed for time series data. COUTA has
these datasets are collections of divided small sequences with
 good scalability compared to most of these existing methods,
sequence-level labels. We treat small sequences as data objects
 which shows its potential capability of being applied in practical
and generate a group of datasets with different anomaly conscenarios where time series data are with large volumes and high
tamination levels of the training set. We first randomly remove
 dimensions.
anomaly sequences in the training set to meet the requirements of
specific contamination ratios. The removed anomalies are then
 F. Sensitivity Test
added to the testing set. The original sequence-level anomaly
contamination rate in Epilepsy and DSADS are 24% and 16%, This experiment shows the impact of different parameter
respectively. A wide range of contamination levels is used for settings on detection performance. First, we only use a single
each dataset by starting from a pure training set and taking 4% kind of perturbation (δI , δII , or δIII ) to solely generate point, conas the increasing step. textual, or collective anomalies in NAC. Besides, we investigate
 Fig. 8 presents the F1 score and the AUC-PR performance several key hyper-parameters of COUTA including α, β, H, and
of COUTA and its competing methods on datasets with dif- l. α is the weight of loss LNAC in (1), β is the ratio that controls
ferent anomaly contamination ratios. The performance of all the size of generated anomaly examples, H is the dimensionality
anomaly detectors downgrades with the increase of anomaly of the feature space F, and l is the sliding window length. Each
contamination. COUTA shows better robustness compared to parameter is sampled from a wide range.
its contenders, especially on datasets with a large contamination Fig. 10 shows the F1 performance of COUTA by taking differrate. It owes to the novel one-class classification loss func- ent parameter settings, and AUC-PR performance also shows the
tion, which successfully masks these noisy data via uncertainty same trend, which is omitted here. COUTA shows better performodeling-based adaptive penalty. By contrast, these competing mance when a full perturbation operation pool Ω is employed in
methods simply view these hidden anomalies as normal data, and NAC (especially on the ASD dataset). A single type of generated
the learned normality model may mistakenly overfit these noises. anomaly example may provide fragmentary knowledge about
This experiment validates the contribution of the proposed un- the anomaly class, thus leading to less optimal performance. In
certainty modeling-based calibration method. This experiment terms of α, β, and l, these parameters do not largely influence
also shows superior applicability of COUTA in some real-world the performance, and COUTA performs stably with different
applications that are with complicated noisy circumstances. hyper-parameters. Some parameter selection methods can be
5734 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 8%, 2%, and 7%, respectively. Particularly, UMC conduces to
 11% improvement in F1 score and 14% gain in AUC-PR on the
 Epilepsy dataset, where the training set is severely contaminated
 by unknown anomalies, and NAC can bring approximate 8 %
 enhancement in both F1 and AUC-PR on the ASD dataset.

 V. CONCLUSION
 This paper introduces COUTA, an unsupervised time series anomaly detection method based on calibrated one-class
 classification. We address two key challenges in the current
 one-class learning pipeline, i.e., the presence of anomaly contamination and the absence of knowledge about anomalies.
Fig. 10. Sensitivity test results (F1 performance w.r.t. different parameter
settings). Epilepsy and DSADS have default lengths of sub-sequences, and thus COUTA achieves this goal through two novel calibration meththe detection performance w.r.t. l on these two datasets is omitted. ods – uncertainty modeling-based calibration (UMC) and native
 anomaly-based calibration (NAC). In UMC, we obtain model
 uncertainty by imposing a prior distribution to the one-class
 distance value, and a theoretically motivated novel learning
 objective is devised to restrain noisy data that are with high
 uncertainty, while simultaneously encouraging confident predictions to ensure effective learning of hard normal samples. In
 NAC, we design tailored data perturbation operations to produce
 native anomaly examples based on original time series data,
 which provides one-class classification with valuable knowledge
 about primeval anomalous behaviors. These calibration methods
 enable COUTA to learn data normality in a noise-tolerant,
 anomaly-informed manner. Extensive experiments show that
 COUTA achieves state-of-the-art performance in time series
Fig. 11. Ablation study results. anomaly detection by substantially outperforming sixteen competitors. We also validate several desired properties of COUTA,
 including outstanding generalization ability to different anomaly
employed. There might be some unreliable generated anomaly
 types, superior robustness to anomaly contamination, and good
examples that fall into the normal distribution, and thus we
 scalability.
use α = 0.1, β = 0.2 by default. In terms of l, we employ a
 Similar to many one-class classification methods, our apfrequently-used sliding window length (i.e., l = 100). COUTA
 proach also assumes that normal data share similarities and
shows fluctuation trends w.r.t. the dimensionality of the feature
 belong to one prototype. Our approach is adept at handling time
space H. It might be because these time series datasets are with
 series data that are seasonal and have many repetitive patterns,
various numbers of dimensions. Generally, a larger H might be
 whereas our approach may fail when there are concept drifts
preferable when handling high-dimensional time series datasets
 happening in time series.
(e.g., DSADS with 47 dimensions) because the representation
 In the future, we plan to investigate new strategies to estimate
capability can be ensured, while low-dimensional datasets can
 the mean and variance of the prior one-class distance distribube well processed by using smaller H (e.g., Epilepsy with 5
 tion. Also, in producing native anomalies, tailored perturbation
dimensions).
 methods can be extended to a heuristic generation process.
G. Ablation Study
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 This experiment further validates the contribution of two key
components in COUTA. Three ablated variants are used. Two The authors would like to thank Prof. Eamonn Keogh and his
calibration methods, i.e., uncertainty modeling-based calibra- students for creating the UCR time series anomaly archive that
tion and native anomaly-based calibration, are respectively re- has been used in our experiments. The authors also thank the
moved from COUTA in two ablated variants, w/o UMC and w/o referees for their comments, which helped improve this paper
NAC. These two components are simultaneously excluded in considerably.
w/o UMC&NAC. The remaining parts of these ablated versions
remain the same as COUTA. We report the F1 and AUC-PR
 REFERENCES
performance of standard COUTA and its three ablated versions
in Fig. 11. Based on the comparison of COUTA and its variants, [1] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly
 detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
the superiority of COUTA can verify the significant contri- [2] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
bution of two calibration methods on one-class classification. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
COUTA outperforms w/o UMC, w/o, and w/o UMC&NAC by pp. 4027–4035.
XU et al.: CALIBRATED ONE-CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR UNSUPERVISED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 5735

 [3] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [27] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory networks
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022. Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 068–12 080, Dec. 2023.
 [4] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [28] D. Huang, L. Shen, Z. Yu, Z. Zheng, M. Huang, and Q. Ma, “Efficient time
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” series anomaly detection by multiresolution self-supervised discriminative
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, network,” Neurocomputing, vol. 491, pp. 261–272, 2022.
 pp. 3395–3404. [29] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal
 [5] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time series hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Syst., 2020, pp. 13 016–13 026.
 Representation, 2022. [30] Y. Zhao et al., “Outlier detection for streaming task assignment in crowd-
 [6] D. Campos et al., “Unsupervised time series outlier detection with sourcing,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1933–1943.
 diversity-driven convolutional ensembles,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, [31] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 611–623, 2021. Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 [7] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation [32] C. Feng and P. Tian, “Time series anomaly detection for cyber-physical
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. ACM systems via neural system identification and Bayesian filtering,” in
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230. Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
 [8] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, pp. 2858–2867.
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dy- [33] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent outlier
 namic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” in Proc. Int.
 Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 18 153–18 167.
 [9] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph [34] B. Han et al., “A survey of label-noise representation learning: Past, present
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, and future,” 2020, arXiv: 2011.04406.
 pp. 841–850. [35] H. Chai, W. Su, S. Tang, Y. Ding, B. Fang, and Q. Liao, “Improving
[10] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly anomaly detection with a self-supervised task based on generative adverdetection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural sarial network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2022,
 network,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, pp. 3563–3567.
 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [36] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
[11] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial recon- transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
 struction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
 pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023. [37] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, and T. Dietterich, “Deep anomaly detec-
[12] T. Kieu et al., “Robust and explainable autoencoders for unsupervised time tion with outlier exposure,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation,
 series outlier detection—Extended version,” 2022, arXiv:2204.03341. 2018.
[13] T. Kieu, B. Yang, C. Guo, and C. S. Jensen, “Outlier detection for time [38] J. Cai and J. Fan, “Perturbation learning based anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 series with recurrent autoencoder ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 14 317–14 330.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 2725–2732. [39] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain, “DROCC:
[14] B. Du, X. Sun, J. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Wang, and L. Sun, “GAN-based anomaly Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 detection for multivariate time series using polluted training set,” IEEE 2020, pp. 3711–3721.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 208–12 219, Dec. 2023. [40] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic con-
[15] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of volutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, arXiv:
 ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,” 1803.01271.
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018, [41] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn.,
 pp. 2041–2050. vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004.
[16] G. Pang, C. Yan, C. Shen, A. V. D. Hengel, and X. Bai, “Self-trained [42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 deep ordinal regression for end-to-end video anomaly detection,” in Proc. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 12 173–12 [43] M. Kemmler, E. Rodner, E.-S. Wacker, and J. Denzler, “One-class clas-
 182. sification with Gaussian processes,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 46, no. 12,
[17] I. Golan and R. El-Yaniv, “Deep anomaly detection using geometric pp. 3507–3518, 2013.
 transformations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, [44] H. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Wei, S. Jian, Y. Li, and N. Liu, “Fascinating supervisory
 pp. 9781–9791. signals and where to find them: Deep anomaly detection with scale
[18] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 38 655–38 673.
 learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [45] H. Xu, Y. Wang, G. Pang, S. Jian, N. Liu, and Y. Wang, “RoSAS:
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 9664–9674. Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection with contamination-resilient
[19] S. Deldari, D. V. Smith, H. Xue, and F. D. Salim, “Time series change point continuous supervision,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 60, no. 5, 2023,
 detection with self-supervised contrastive predictive coding,” in Proc. Web Art. no. 103459.
 Conf., 2021, pp. 3124–3135. [46] R. Wu and E. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
[20] K.-H. Lai, D. Zha, J. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, and X. Hu, “Revisiting time are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 series outlier detection: Definitions and benchmarks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021. [47] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval-
[21] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, “Outlier detection for uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
 temporal data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 9, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
 pp. 2250–2267, Sep. 2014. Jun. 2022.
[22] J. Paparrizos, Y. Kang, P. Boniol, R. S. Tsay, T. Palpanas, and M. [48] P. J. Brockwell and R. A. Davis, Time Series: Theory and Methods. Berlin,
 J. Franklin, “TSB-UAD: An end-to-end benchmark suite for univariate Germany: Springer, 1991.
 time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 8, [49] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classifipp. 1697–1711, 2022. cation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, no. Dec., pp. 139–154, 2001.
[23] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time [50] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection for
 series: A comprehensive evaluation,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, general data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, 2020.
 no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, 2022. [51] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. H. Chen, “ECOD:
[24] V. Jacob, F. Song, A. Stiegler, B. Rad, Y. Diao, and N. Tatbul, “Exathlon: Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution
 A benchmark for explainable anomaly detection over time series,” in Proc. functions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 181–12
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2613–2626, 2021. 193, Dec. 2023.
[25] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G. [52] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsu-
 Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detec- pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation,
 tion,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148. 2018.
[26] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detec- [53] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for anomaly
 tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 591–12
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416. 604, Dec. 2023.
5736 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 Hongzuo Xu received the PhD degree in computer Qing Liao received the PhD degree in computer sciscience and technology from the National University ence and engineering from the Department of Comof Defense Technology, in 2023. His research inter- puter Science and Engineering, Hong Kong Univerests include anomaly detection and its applications, sity of Science and Technology, in 2016, under the
 with first-authored publications in ICML, WWW, supervision of Prof. Qian Zhang. She is currently a
 AAAI, ICDM, CIKM, and IEEE Transactions on professor with the School of Computer Science and
 Knowledge and Data Engineering. Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. Her research interests include artificial
 intelligence and data mining.

 Yongjun Wang received the PhD degree in computer
 Yijie Wang received the PhD degree in computer
 architecture from the National University of Defense
 science and technology from the National University
 Technology, China, in 1998. He is currently a full
 of Defense Technology, in 1998. She was awarded the
 prize of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation by professor with the College of Computer, National
 University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China.
 Ministry of Education of PR China. She is currently
 His research interests include network security and
 a full professor with the National Key Laboratory of
 system security.
 Parallel and Distributed Computing, National University of Defense Technology. Her research interests
 include Big Data analysis, artificial intelligence, and
 parallel and distributed processing.

 Songlei Jian received the BSc and PhD degrees in Guansong Pang received the PhD degree from the
 computer science from the College of Computer, Na- University of Technology Sydney, in 2019. He is
 tional University of Defense Technology, Changsha, a tenure-track assistant professor of computer sci-
 China, in 2013 and 2019, respectively. She is currently ence with the School of Computing and Information
 an associate research fellow with the College of Com- Systems, Singapore Management University (SMU),
 puter, National University of Defense Technology. Singapore. Before joining SMU, he was a research
 Her research interests include representation learning, fellow with the Australian Institute for Machine
 graph learning, multimodal learning, and anomaly Learning (AIML), University of Adelaide, Australia.
 detection. His research investigates novel data mining and
 machine learning techniques and their applications.