1446 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Classify Traffic Rather Than Flow: Versatile
 Multi-Flow Encrypted Traffic Classification
 With Flow Clustering
 Zihan Chen , Member, IEEE, Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Zijun Wei, Student Member, IEEE,
 Dandan Niu, Student Member, IEEE, and Nan Fu, Student Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Encrypted Traffic Classification (ETC) can provide network management, information authentication, and network
necessary information support for network management and security of ISP as well as security enterprises. This situation
security. The state-of-the-art ETC methods take a single flow makes encrypted traffic analysis, especially Encrypted Traffic
as the unit and only use sequence features based on in-flow relationships. In an actual network, one-time access to an application Classification (ETC), which can effectively obtain the curwill generate multiple flows. Taking a single flow as the classifica- rent traffic, become a hot and essential research direction.
tion unit will produce many repeated and potentially erroneous Moreover, ETC makes up for the shortcomings of log analysis
results, which dramatically reduces the classification efficiency based on the end system and has the advantages of largeand prevents the results from being used for effective network scale, near real-time, transparent, and cross-temporal analysis.
management and security. In this paper, we propose a multi-flow
ETC method. Since multiple flows generated by an application For network management, ISPs can synchronize the analcannot be directly bound in a complex multi-application scenario, ysis of millions of users on the backbone border gateway
we first cluster the encrypted traffic to acquire flow bunches through ETC to achieve billion-level traffic acceleration to
through the proposed Time Sequential Hierarchical Clustering ensure user Quality of Experience (QoE). For network secuwith Sliding Windows (TSHC-SW) algorithm. Then, based on rity, ETC can identify and block network attacks even before
the flow bunches, we propose five different multi-flow classification schemas that can realize multi-flow classification effectively they occur. ETC refers to classifying encrypted traffic into
with model-independent. Open-world experiments show that our specified known services or applications by extracting features
method is versatile in that it can pursue classification accuracy, not covered by the encryption. As the smallest independent
speed, or sample covering rate, respectively, according to the unit for users to interact on the Internet, the application is
actual demand and network environment constraints. In flow highly bound to the enterprise. Therefore, the application clasclustering, we achieve 95% adjusted Rand Index and 98% purity.
In the multi-flow classification, we have over 99% F1-score, 79% sification of encrypted traffic can enable ISPs to secure the
prediction time saving, and 5% sample covering rate increas- transmission of specific applications of specific enterprises,
ing, which is far superior to the state-of-the-art single-flow thus obtaining numerous benefits. This process is also the basis
methods. for fine-grained application behavior auditing (ISPs must first
 Index Terms—Multi-flow encrypted traffic classification, inter- know which application the traffic belongs to before further
flow relationship, flow clustering and flow bunch, TSHC-SW, analyzing it).
open-world environment. Initially, academia and industry tended to use residual plaintext information, such as TLS SNI or plaintext DNS on ETC.
 Although encrypted DNS (e.g., DoH, DoT) is not widely
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 deployed, and ESNI or ECH is far from being adopted, these
 NCRYPTED traffic has become the main form of data
E transmission under the Internet of Everything. Currently,
more than 95% of the traffic is encrypted traffic [1]. Encryption
 technologies, as well as the TLS-1.3 protocol, will completely
 invalidate such methods. The complete absence of deterministic residual plaintext information makes Artificial Intelligence
covers the load information in the original plaintext traffic, (AI) methods widely used in ETC. As a typical supervised
making the matching method based on Deep Packet Inspection learning problem, AI methods applied include traditional
(DPI) invalid [2]. The unavailability of information related machine learning [3], [4], [5], ensemble learning [6], [7] and
to traffic on the network side brings significant challenges to deep learning [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. The existing
 ETC methods mostly take the flow [14] or the packet sequence
 Manuscript received 22 February 2023; revised 6 July 2023 and in the flow as the classification unit and extract the statistical
7 September 2023; accepted 1 October 2023. Date of publication
9 October 2023; date of current version 15 April 2024. This work is sup- features [3], the residual plaintext features [4], the interported by the General Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of arrival time sequence features [15] and the length sequence
China under Grant No. 62172093 and the Joint Funds of the National Natural features [13] for classification. These methods are mainly
Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U22B2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was divided into two research paths, encrypted traffic classifier
T. Inoue. (Corresponding author: Guang Cheng.) optimization [16] or encrypted traffic feature engineering [17].
 The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, In addition, there is also some research on the clustering
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: chengguang@
seu.edu.cn; gcheng@njnet.edu.cn). of encrypted traffic. Unknown applications or services are
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3322861 mainly discovered through feature clustering [18]. However,
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1447

 Therefore, this paper focuses on classifying encrypted traffic for multiple flows generated by one-time access to network
 applications or services. Our method is fundamentally different from the existing classification based on multiple flows in
 a session. First, we discuss in depth the pattern of network
 application or service data transmission to further embody the
 significance of multi-flow classification. Then, based on the
 theory of information entropy and information disclosure, we
 analyze the in-flow and inter-flow relationships contained in
 the one-time access. It provides a theoretical basis for multiflow classification. Afterward, we put forward the concept of
 flow bunch and formalized the flow clustering and multi-flow
 classification of encrypted traffic problems. On this basis, aim-
Fig. 1. Multi-resource request diagram of Over-The-Top (OTT) applications.
 ing at the problem of construct flow bunch, which is the basis
 of multi-flow classification, we propose the Time Sequential
 Hierarchical Clustering with Sliding Windows (TSHC-SW)
it is worth noting that since the flow is the atomized efficient algorithm to realize the clustering of encrypted traffic. Further,
unit in network management and analysis, the existing research we propose five demand-oriented multi-flow classification
on encrypted traffic clustering also takes flow as the basic unit. schemas for encrypted traffic, and they are based on three
 However, the above methods ignore an essential phe- training modes. In order to measure different schemas, we
nomenon of network application transmission – an application propose the Sample Covering Rate (SCR) metric, which repreor Web page providing services, or even some system control sents the proportion of flow bunch results that can be classified
behavior, will generate multiple flows in the process of one- in an actual network environment. Different multi-flow clastime access [19], as shown in Figure 1. Existing research on sification schemas can be selected in pursuit of classification
ETC or feature clustering takes a single flow as the processing efficiency, accuracy, or applicability. We finally achieved verunit. However, multiple network flows from a single access are satility for multi-flow ETC combined with the choosing mode
correlated with each other [2]. Hence, in the actual network for flow.
environment, if each flow is classified, the following problems Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
may exist: (1) Multiple flows generated by one application, • We introduce multi-flow classification into ETC for the
even in one-time access, have different importance and signif- first time and deeply study the generation relationship
icance. The classification results of each flow may be different during one-time access of an application. Based on
in terms of category and confidence, leading to a consequen- this, the in-flow and inter-flow relationships are formally
tial error or even unavailability of the results. (2) The number analyzed, laying a theoretical foundation for multi-flow
of flows generated by the access is enormous, but multiple classification.
flows all point to the same application. The repeated classifi- • We aimed at the problem that the packets cannot be
cation wastes computing resources greatly, and the throughput directly formed to all the flows in one-time access of
is reduced exponentially. (3) The information of a single flow an application. To solve this problem, we put forward
generated by the application may be limited, and the clas- the concept of a flow bunch and propose the TSHC-SW
sification results with high confidence cannot be obtained. clustering method to realize the binding of multiple flows.
(4) Application of the external hyperlink and reusing the same • We propose five kinds of demand-oriented multi-flow
function or open Web service of a vendor will result in a partial classification optimization schemas for encrypted trafdiversion of reference or mutual confusion, leading to misclas- fic. It consists of three different training modes, which
sification. Due to the above problems, the current research on are model-independent. We propose a new classification
ETC is still challenging to apply to the actual network envi- metric, SCR, which can effectively describe the actual
ronment, especially with poor effects in the open-world online network applicability of the schemas. Each schema has
scenario. its own specialties.
 A few existing pieces of research also use multiple flows • We collected and published two new encrypted traffic
to encrypt traffic classification [5], [20]. It uses multiple flows datasets in the actual CERNET environment. The datasets
in a TLS/TCP session, that is, all the flows that are trans- contain two dimensions of labels, which can be used to
mitted between two communicators over a period of time study ETC and encrypted flow clustering. We conducted
(usually during the life of the session, that is, before it expires). detailed experiments in flow clustering and multi-flow
However, the behavior of multiple flows in a session is not classification with state-of-the-art models. It proves that
necessarily related, and the ubiquitous randomized flow inter- multi-flow classification is versatile and far outperforms
spersion brings noticeable conceptual drift to the classification. single-flow classification.
In addition, the traffic classification of the entire session is not The rest of the paper is shown as follows. Section II
interpretable, and it is not easy to give a normalized label to introduces the existing research on ETC and clustering. In
the traffic of the entire session. In addition, from the classifier’s Section III, we introduced encrypted application data transinput, it is still a single flow classification in essence. mission mode as well as the relationship in and between flows.
1448 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE I
 A LL THE ACRONYMS U SED IN T HIS PAPER

Then, we formally defined the research problems of this paper. deep learning method also has some defects, such as the lack
Section IV presents the flow clustering method and multi-flow of the interpretability of the model and the weakness in highclassification schemas. In Section V, we conduct experiments dimensional optimization of features [14] as well as ignoring
from three aspects to demonstrate the validity of our method. of structural features [20]. Similar to natural language, traffic
Finally, we summarize our research and discuss the future data will be cut into different PDUs due to the network protoresearch directions in Section VI. All the acronyms used in col stack, and high-dimensional features will be lost when the
this paper are shown in Table I. original traffic data is inputted in one go, which would lead to
 the suboptimal. In addition, encrypted traffic, unlike images,
 II. R ELATED W ORK is structured data containing security protocols and network
 protocol stacks, and such features will be erased when the
 Existing researches mainly fall into two categories. One is
 original traffic is directly input. Hence, there spawns a large
to classify known services or applications, which is called
 number of studies on encrypted traffic feature engineering and
ETC. The other is to discover and classify unknown services
 some interpretable artificial intelligence studies [21].
or applications, which mainly involves a clustering algorithm,
 In the research of encrypted traffic feature engineering, since
summarized as encrypted traffic clustering in this paper.
 the packet sequence is a data sequence with time intervals,
 some studies start from the time series features, such as the
A. Encrypted Traffic Classification Flowpic in the general domain [22] and time transform domain
 As a typical supervised learning problem, the two most crit- features [15].
ical elements in the supervised learning problem are feature However, more studies consider that the packet interval
and classifier. The initial research on ETC mainly focuses on is not a stable feature and will be affected by the fluctuaclassifier optimization, uses statistical features of flow gran- tion of the network environment. Therefore, more attention is
ularity, and introduces traditional machine learning methods paid to the Markov properties among packets, from TLS messuch as decision tree [3], and SVM [5]. However, the accuracy sage type state transition features [17], [23] to length sequence
of traditional machine learning classification methods needs features [16], [24], [25], [26].
to be improved, and their performance in large-scale traffic Although the packet length sequence is related to the overall
and multi-category classification could be more satisfactory. application data length, taking the packet as the granular-
Therefore, ensemble learning methods are gradually used in ity also ignores the high-dimensional feature optimization.
ETC. The most representative ones are the ensemble Markov Therefore, there are GraphDApp model [27] using graphic
chain model WENC [6] and the well-known random forest packet length sequence as features, LSCDL (our previous
model [7]. work) [13], [14] using multi-PDU length sequence as fea-
 However, both traditional machine learning and ensemble tures, and path signature features to depict packet length
learning are faced with the problem of poor generalization sequences [28]. These works are summarized as Table II.
ability and the requirement to specify features for classifi- However, all of these studies use a single flow as a unit. In
cation in advance. In deep learning, the neural network is the actual network environment, the traffic of an application
used as the classification base, which has good generaliza- or a service consists of multiple flows. Therefore, taking the
tion ability and end-to-end learning characteristics, which traffic of access as a unit for analysis will have better accuis also known as automatic feature selection. Raw data is racy [29]. In addition, in the scenario of big data, the volume of
directly input into the neural network to realize classification. traffic is large, and the efficiency of a single flow classification
Therefore, deep learning methods are widely used in ETC, cannot be guaranteed [30].
representative of which are basic models such as CNN [8], Very few studies consider the correlation between multiple
LSTM [9], Text-CNN [10], and CapsNet [11]. There are also flows and use multiple flows as the classification unit, such as
some mixed models such as STNN (LSTM + 3D-CNN) [12] using the flow triples (destination IP, destination port, protocol)
and LSCDL (bi-GRU + CapsNet/LSTM) [14]. However, the to form the Bag of Flows (BoF) for further classification [31].
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1449

 TABLE II
 R EPRESENTATIVE W ORKS ON ETC (I NCLUDING B OTH C LASSIFIER O PTIMIZATION AND F EATURE E NGINEERING , S ORTED BY Y EAR )

 TABLE III
However, in most cases, BoF is just a bag of flows of differ- C URRENT W ORKS ON E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LUSTERING
ent users or at different times accessing the same port on the
same server (and this port is likely to be a generic port, such
as 443). These flows are not correlated in behavior, and the
results are challenging to support decision-making. Another
research [32] uses target flow and its contextual flows with
the same device IP as input. Then it classifies the flows into
different applications that overlap with the target bidirectional
flow duration together. However, in the actual network environment, the existence of concurrent behavior and application
long flow (mostly the application session maintenance flow)
will cause the failure of this method in constructing context III. P RELIMINARIES
inputs. Therefore, this paper selects multiple flows in one-time A. Application Data Transmission Pattern
access as the classification unit. The complexity of applications leads to the diversification of
 resources. Taking HTTPS Web as an example, a single Web
B. Encrypted Traffic Clustering access will generate many requests and responses for data.
 The premise of multi-flow classification is that multiple That is, an application can generate multiple application data
flows belong to one access, which involves the study of transfers in its use (if two-way data is transferred simultaneencrypted traffic clustering. Encrypted traffic clustering is an ously, it can be called interaction). Data are carried by network
unsupervised process that is based on the features of encrypted traffic, and the basic unit of network traffic is the flow [16],
traffic. Most existing research on encrypted traffic clustering which is formed by the piecewise decoupling mechanism [37].
aims to classify the traffic with similar features into a ser- In most cases, single access to an application will result in
vice or application and then determine whether it belongs to multiple transfers of application data, that is, multiple flows.
a known one or a new one by other identification methods. These flows have two modes, the first is the continuation mode,
 The representative clustering methods include Levenshtein and the second is the concurrent mode. The continuation mode
distance calculation [33] in encrypted video traffic clustering, means that the subsequent flow is generated after the end of
CNN combined with K-means [34] in unknown application a flow with the same belonging. The concurrent mode means
mining from traffic, agglomerative clustering [35] as guidance that two flows do not have an explicit membership relationship
for classification, and Enhanced Rough K-Means algorithm with each other but simultaneously serve the same access.
(ERKM) [36] to aggregate flows to improve QoS mapping In terms of protocols, multiple flows may use similar or
efficiency. These works are summarized as Table III. completely different protocols. Because one access may inter-
 Aiming at the clustering of the encrypted flow, act with multiple devices, the purpose of different flows may
Mateless et al. [19], used K-means and other algorithms for be different, resulting in different protocols.
flow clustering. This proves that it is feasible and accurate to It is worth noting that the multi-flow classification in this
cluster the flow of a network entity. paper does not consider the problem that a source IP may
1450 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 2. Relative duration distribution of each flow in one representative access of eight applications: (a) Sohu, (b) Douban, (c) Bilibili, (d) Sina, (e) Netease,
(f) JD, (g) Hupu, (h) Youku.

represent multiple network entities in the NAT environment, length sequence is a structured discrete value sequence in
and the identification of multiple network entities after the which there is a Markov relationship between each value,
same IP has been discussed in existing studies [19]. which is referred to as an in-flow relationship. The flows
 We selected eight typical applications, all of which are within a single access are correlated, so there is also a certain
within the dataset proposed in this paper. According to the sta- correlation between the packet length sequences of multiple
tistical results of the captured data, it can be found that the time flows. This correlation comes from the resource correlation
distribution of multiple flows at a time is shown in Figure 2. caused by the application data transmission mode, which is
The abscissa of each subgraph is the relative arrival time con- called the inter-flow relationship.
cerning the start time of the first flow, while the ordinate is The theoretical advantage of multi-flow classification is that
the number of the flow, starting with 1. it can use the additional feature space of multi-flow to reduce
 As seen from the figure, no matter what kind of applica- uncertainty and improve the classification accuracy’s upper
tion, many flows will be generated in the process of one-time limit without changing the sample entropy and the original
access, and these flows are almost all continuous in the time feature condition entropy. Formally, suppose X is the samdistribution. The result is consistent with our analysis, and this ple space labeled by category, and Y is the feature space of
phenomenon indicates the necessity of flow clustering. The single-flow classification. It is equivalent to more than an extra
real application usage information can be obtained only by encrypted traffic feature space Z, making H(X | Y) becoming
classifying all the flows of the access. Otherwise, many same H(X | YZ) (H is the conditional entropy). The formula is:
application classification results will be obtained, which may 
 H (X |YZ ) = Pr (yz )H (X |(Y = y, Z = z ))
contain many errors. Meanwhile, there are apparent differy,z ∈Y ,Z
ences in the timestamp distribution of multiple flows generated 
by one access in different applications, which also provides = − Pr (y) Pr (z )
essential feasibility support for multi-flow classification. y,z ∈Y ,Z
 
 Pr(x |y) Pr(x |z ) log2 Pr (x |y) Pr(x |z )
 x ∈X
B. Access Level Encrypted Traffic Length Sequences
 (1)
 ETC relies on features, and better features will provide
more information disclosure, thus raising the upper limit of Therefore, we should also select encrypted traffic packet
classification effectiveness [38]. Hence, we should explore the length sequences from multiple flows and combine them to
residual features of encrypted traffic as much as possible to form new features, which is the theoretical source of feature
make the relative information gain greater to improve the the- selection for multi-flow classification.
oretical classification effect of encrypted traffic. The length
sequence feature is the most effective in ETC, so this paper C. Problem Definition
selects the packet length sequence as the basic feature. Two problems need to be considered in this paper: the clus-
 It is worth noting that information gain is the theoretical tering of encrypted traffic and the multi-flow classification
upper limit. In practice, using this feature does not mean that of encrypted traffic. The clustering of encrypted traffic is a
we can fully utilize this feature, and this upper limit needs to prerequisite for the multi-flow ETC.
be approximated by the classification model. Firstly, we formally describe the problem of encrypted flow
 Each flow has its sequence of packet lengths for multiple clustering. To realize the clustering, we propose the concept
flows generated by a single access. The encrypted traffic packet of flow bunch. A flow bunch refers to a collection of flows
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1451

formed by flow clustering with certain features around a single and UDP may be used in a single access, depending on each
device at one access. resource’s transmission requirements and configurations.
 Therefore, the encrypted flow clustering problem is a pro- Theoretically, all flows in single access belong to the same
cess of combining multiple encrypted flows to form a flow source IP address. However, in the actual network environbunch based on certain features. Assume that the encrypted ment, we find that some applications use both IPv4 and IPv6
traffic to be analyzed is E, and a total of N encrypted flow in a single access. If the source IP address is used only to
inputs are included. These flows need to be clustered. The divide access devices (In actual networks, traffic collection
actual application access to which they belong is T, and there points are targeted at multiple devices, so devices must be
are A pieces of access in total. Then, all the flows generated differentiated first), multiple flows generated simultaneously
by the i-th access are ti , ti ∈ T , i ≤ A, ∀p ∈ ti , p ∈ E . are divided into different devices. Here, we take an isometric
 However, in the real world, we do not know the real number mapping approach to map source IP addresses in the case of
of access, and we also do not know how many flows there are both IPv4 and IPv6 in the samples so they can be divided into
for each access. Assume that the k-th flow in all the N flows the same device. In addition, in the actual traffic environment,
 (k ) (k ) (k )
can be expressed as pk = [f1 , f2 , . . . , fm ], which m is the ISP can synchronize the IPv4 address and IPv6 address of
 (k ) the same device based on the ADSL number or device numthe total number of clustering features, fi on behalf of the
i-th feature. Then encrypted flow clustering’s goal is to build ber, so the interference caused by the dual-track IPs of a single
a clustering model, θ(p1 , . . . , pN ) to obtain Ã bunches which device should not be considered.
is expected to be equal to A, and each clustering produces a However, from the perspective of third-party traffic classifibunch bi = ti as far as possible the same as the ti . cation, access is a kind of information that cannot be directly
 Based on the flow bunches acquired by encrypted flow obtained in the actual network environment. We also have no
clustering, the problem of multi-flow ETC is to classify way of predicting in advance the number of flows that each
flow bunches based on in-flow length sequence features and access contains or the total amount of access in the current
inter-flow length sequence features. Suppose that there are time window.
currently M flow bunches to be classified, and there are C In order to ensure QoE, data will be transmitted as soon as
different application categories, the k-th flow bunch bk = possible during application access, so the access life cycle is
 (k ) (k ) (k ) limited. Although a flow is a finite but unbounded time series,
[x1 , x2 , . . . , xu ], and the j-th sample flow in the flow
 (j ) (j ) (j ) (j ) it can also be limited due to the finiteness of the data. In the
bunch xj = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lr ], where lq represents the actual network environment, the timeliness of ETC also makes
length of q-th packet in the flow. it necessary to truncate a flow by using the sliding window on
 Hence, this paper’s ETC goal is to build a classification timestamps.
model φ(wk ) and effectively combine the above features of Therefore, in the process of flow clustering, we do not need
multiple flows in one flow bunch to get a forecast label S k
 to consider and should not consider clustering all the flows in
which is expected to be the same as the real label Sk . a long period at one breath (or all the flows in the traffic file
 It is worth noting that since the ETC in this paper is access- in the case of an offline classification scenario). The first step
oriented, the concurrent flows of a given app must execute one is to divide the flows by time window and cluster the flow in
and only one transaction. Hence, we do not need to consider the time window. If a flow is divided into two time windows,
the problem of different flows acting on different functions, feature merging or feature truncation can be used.
as different functions that users do will be different pieces of The multi-flow clustering process should not affect the
access. subsequent classification process in the actual network environment. Hence, we use simple statistical features of the
 packet or flow granularity for flow clustering. Due to the
 IV. M ULTI -F LOW E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION immediacy of access, multiple flows in the flow bunch will
 In order to realize multi-flow classification, we first clus- also have a concentration in time. The correlation of data may
ter multiple flows generated by one access. After clustering also make the length and quantity of the packets correlated.
multiple flows, we further study the multi-flow-oriented ETC We selected 15 common statistical features. These statistical
approaches. features include four categories: general protocol features, general time-dependent features, general quantity related features,
 and general length-dependent features, as shown in Table IV.
A. Flow Clustering In protocol features, we only use ports because the bunch may
 Since this paper is focused on multi-flow classification, we contain different transport layer protocols, but there may be
first need to clarify what “multi-flow” is. similarities or increments between ports. Time-dependent pro-
 From the perspective of traffic generation, multi-flow is tocols are our focus because flows of the same flow bunch are
defined as a collection of all flows generated by an applica- time-concentrated and similar in network environments. The
tion during single access. If the same application is accessed quantity and length features are also theoretically suitable for
multiple times in a row, the flows should not belong to the flow clustering as they represent data, so we also included
same multi-flow classification unit (i.e., flow bunch). In other them in the feature significance experiment.
words, multi-flow classification is access-oriented and takes It is worth noting that our clustering goal is the current
access as the minimum unit. It is worth noting that both TCP traffic, clustering it into multiple access. Even if some access
1452 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE IV
 A LTERNATIVE S TATISTICAL F EATURES FOR F LOW C LUSTERING
 Algorithm 1 TSHC-SW
 Input: sliding window size sizew , encrypted traffic to be
 clustered E, distance threshold parameter d
 Output: bunches set B = b1 , b2 , ..., bA
 1: foreach flow p in E then
 2: pkt_ts_first_list = get_pkt_ts_first(p) //get the
 starting timestamp
 3: pkt_ts_last_list = get_pkt_ts_last(p) //get the ending timestamp
 4: end
 5: Eremain = E
 6: while Eremain = null then
 7: current_ts_first = pkt_ts_first_list[0]
 8: foreach flow p in Eremain then
 9: if Pkt_ts_first_list[p] − current_ts_first ≤ sizew
 then
 10: temp_target+ = p
 11: temp_features+ = [pkt_ts_first_list[p],
 pkt_ts_last_list[p]
 12: end
 13: else then
 14: current_ts_first = Pkt_ts_first_list[p]
 15: Eremain = Eremain [p:]
 16: windows+ = [temp_target, temp_features]
 17: break
 18: end
 19: end
 20: end
Fig. 3. Feature significance assessment chart with ARI.
 21: foreach window w in windows then
 22: foreach flow p in w then
belongs to the same application, these access units will be 23: prox _t = calculate_proximity_tensor (w ) //calseparated into different clusters. Furthermore, we evaluated the culate the correlation between each cluster
feature significance. We used standard hierarchical clustering 24: temp_B + = p
to evaluate the clustering significance of single features. We 25: end
used the average Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) as the evaluation 26: while ∃i , j , i = j , distance(tempB [i] , tempB [j ] ) < d
criteria for features. The higher it is, the more influential the then
feature is. 27: temp_B = merge_closest_clusters(temp_B )
 Firstly, we used the basic hierarchical clustering method to //clusters merging through distances
randomly select parameters to evaluate the significance of the 28: end
above features. Since the parameter gap was not considered 29: B + = temp_B
in this process, distance_threshold was set as 2, the linkage 30: end
was set as the ward, and the time window was set as 300 sec- 31: return B
onds. The graph of feature significance assessment is shown
in Figure 3.
 According to the evaluation results, the two features Since encrypted traffic is a kind of structured non-Euclidean
pkt_ts_first and pkt_ts_last are finally selected for clustering space discrete sequence data [39], we use a hierarchical
because they have the best feature significance. In essence, clustering algorithm to cluster multiple flows. Therefore, we
network traffic has the characteristics of sudden, so it is rea- proposed a Time Sequential Hierarchical Clustering with
sonable to use the timestamps of the flows for clustering. That Sliding Windows algorithm (TSHC-SW) based on agglomis to say, multiple flows generated by a single access will be erative hierarchical clustering. The algorithm flow of the
concentrated in a certain time interval, which is also the instant TSHC-SW is shown in Algorithm 1. The general idea of the
transmission of resources required by the application to ensure algorithm is to use the similarity between various clusters to
its QoE. condense from dispersed massive clusters step by step grad-
 In the actual clustering process, we cannot predict the total ually. Compared with the common agglomerative hierarchical
amount of flows and access in the current time window. clustering algorithm, it considers the burst characteristics of
Therefore, distance-based clustering of fixed categories (such the traffic generated by each access, divides the traffic by time
as K-means) should not be chosen. Therefore, the appropriate window, and carries on the continuous agglomeration with the
methods are density clustering and hierarchical clustering. timestamp as the feature. We did not use density clustering
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1453

because the time overlap and time interval distribution between
flows is related to the network environment, and there will
be noticeable differences in different applications, so it is not
suitable to describe directly with simple density because this
density is diverse.
 The first step of the TSHC-SW algorithm is to form flows
from the input packets. Then, the encrypted traffic is segmented according to the size of the sliding window, and each
time window contains all the flows and truncated flows within
the initial timestamp interval to obtain multiple windows
(line 1 to line 20). Furthermore, within each time window,
 Fig. 4. Example graph of SF, EF, and d-CV.
the correlation between each cluster is calculated, and if the
distance between the two clusters is less than the distance
threshold, they will be merged (line 21 to line 30). This proce- flows further, and only need to maintain the flow bunch. In
dure ends up with the output flow bunches. Density clustering addition, it is feasible to select a flow randomly, but it is
also has the property that the clustering space is an arbi- only operant when the packet length sequences of all flows
trary shape, so we use it as a control method to carry out in the flow bunch are cached. We compared the two choosing
experiments. modes in a follow-up experiment. In theory, it is a pseudo
 Note that a device may access multiple applications simul- multi-flow classification, but it can significantly improve the
taneously, and there may be cross-traffic between different efficiency of pure single-flow classification. Furthermore, it
applications, especially between background applications and contains the most fundamental advantages of multi-flow clasthe currently used foreground applications. Therefore, there sification, making ETC results more usable than single-flow
will inevitably be some tiny errors in the clustering process. ones. This schema is referred to as the Single Flow (SF)
However, in terms of time, the sudden occurrence of access schema.
will make the traffic very concentrated so that the flows can The second schema is to classify each flow in the current
be effectively clustered. Multiple accesses to an application flow bunch and carry out weighted voting on these singleare clustered into different flow bunches. flow classification results for multi-flow classification. This is
 a very time-consuming behavior, equivalent to reducing the
 multi-flow classification to multiple single-flow classifications.
B. Multi-Flow Application Classification Schemas by Flow However, because of the flow bunch, we gain the ability to syn-
Bunches thesize the results of each flow to get a real and valid result.
 After obtaining the flow bunches by clustering, we need to In this case, because each flow needs to get the classificaclassify each flow bunch further. However, it is undeniable that tion result, the classification process can be done in parallel
multi-flows are multiple single flows, and the single flow clas- with the clustering process. Therefore, this mode can theosification of encrypted traffic has already had many research retically achieve better classification effects and more usable
works. Although the results of single flow classification are classification results than simple single-flow classification. It is
challenging to be used in the actual network environment, its essentially a secondary classification of the results of multiple
classification effect has been satisfactory to a certain extent. single-flow classifications. We call this schema Each Flow
 Therefore, schemas for bunch-oriented multi-flow applica- (EF) schema.
tion classification are proposed in detail. We summarize these In the third schema, d candidate flows are selected from the
schemas into the following five schemas. current flow bunch for classification, and each is classified to
 In order to ensure the consistency of input while simul- acquire a result. Weighted voting is also performed on these d
taneously utilizing the in-flow relationship and inter-flow results. Similar to schema SF, this schema also needs to solve
relationship, the features in these five schemas are all formed the problem of which flows to choose. The most naive option
by the combination of the packet length sequences of flows. is the first-d flows, and the alternative is random-d flows. At
 The first schema is to select a flow from the current flow the same time, the value of d also needs to be considered.
bunch to directly construct the input feature for classification, This schema is between SF and EF, equivalent to balancing
which rules the classification process from multi-flow classifi- the efficiency of a single flow representing the whole flow
cation to single-flow classification and uses the classification bunch against the effect of all flows voting to get the result. A
result of the most representative flow to determine the classifi- larger d requires more classification times and cache space but
cation result of the whole flow bunch. In this schema, we need has a better effect. This schema is called d-Candidate Voting
to decide which flow to choose. Since the TSHC-SW model (d-CV) schema.
divides the time window, we can obtain the basic information Noting that in the above three schemas, the size of the
of each flow in the current time window. The most straight- packet length sequence selected by each flow for classificaforward idea is to choose the first flow because the first flow tion is the same. Examples of these three schemas are shown
is the fastest to get. For many applications, especially in Web in Figure 4.
browsing, the first flow is the core flow. After obtaining the The fourth schema is to classify the entire current flow
first flow, there is no need to store the features of subsequent bunch, which is relatively direct according to the clustering
1454 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

results. In this schema, the packet length sequence of each
flow should be selected to form a new feature for classification in theory, which is a pure multi-flow classification. It is
because this schema directly utilizes the inter-flow relationship of multiple flows in the flow bunch, unlike EF and d-CV,
which only indirectly utilize the classification results of corresponding flows. However, in the actual network environment,
we need to face two problems. The first one is the consistency
of the input size of the classifier. A trained classifier needs to
have a fixed length input or encode it into a fixed input. In
order to ensure the suitability of the classification model to
different schemas, we do not consider the reencoding process
in this paper. So we have to fix an input upper limit for the Fig. 5. Example graph of HF, and d-CT.
multi-flow classification. Another problem is that there is no
way to know how many flows a flow bunch has or how many
 we conducted in-depth experiments to determine the effect of
packets each flow has in advance. Hence, we have to fix the
 specific models.
upper limit of the number of chosen flows in advance, simi-
 It is worth noting that multi-flow classification involves
lar to d in d-CV. At the same time, to ensure the fairness of
 multiple flows, each with a different number of packets. As a
flows (it is impossible to predict which flows in the flow bunch
 result, some flows may not meet the input requirements deterare more suitable for classification), we should combine the
 mined by one of the preceding schemas. Different schemas
packet length sequence of the same size from each flow as far
 have different sample availability conditions. Even under some
as possible.
 extreme parameters, all flows in the whole flow bunch cannot
 In the above circumstances, we use each flow to provide
 form the features required.
a fixed-size packet length sequence and combine multiple
 Existing studies tend to use data preprocessing to filter
sequences of equal size to form new features for classificaflows that do not meet the requirements, but in the open-world
tion. The new feature’s total size is equal to that of a single
 actual network environment, sample skipping may be caused.
flow in SF, EF, and d-CV (that is, the size of the packet length
 In order to effectively measure this situation, we proposed the
sequence). The fixed size provided by each flow is called each
 concept of Sample Covering Rate (SCR). SCR refers to the
size. It is a variable parameter, but it needs to be divisible by
 proportion of bunch samples conforming to the input requirethe total size of the feature. This schema is called the wHole
 ments in all samples to be classified under the current schema,
Flow (HF) schema.
 which can be expressed as:
 It is worth noting that the first four schemas are feature size
independent, meaning there is no need to adjust the model’s Number of S k
structural hyper-parameters (this is especially important in SCR = (2)
 M
deep learning). Although retraining may be required under The higher the SCR, the better the adaptability to traffic
different schemas (which is not necessary, as demonstrated in in the actual network environment of the open world, the
subsequent experiments), the invariability of the model enables less sample neglect caused (which will directly cause the
hardware and rapid dynamic schema adjustments, making the loss of classification information), and the better the global
multi-flow classification more suitable for the actual network classification effect.
environment.
 The fifth schema is an extended multi-flow classification V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
schema, which combines d-CV with HF to introduce the
inter-flow relationship without sacrificing part of the in-flow In order to prove the effectiveness of multi-flow classificarelationship. It directly selects d candidate flows from the cur- tion, we conducted experiments on flow clustering, single-flow
rent flow bunch and extracts each candidate’s packet length classification baseline, and multi-flow classification.
sequence whose size is equal to the one in the SF schema for
classification. The advantage of this schema is that it can uti- A. Dataset and Experimental Settings
lize more features, but it multiplies the input, resulting in much We conducted experiments on three datasets. First, we used
overhead. Under this schema, because an inter-flow relation- the widely used ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset [3] to prove the
ship should be considered, in addition to first-d and random-d, effectiveness of the classifier under single-flow classification.
we add the practice of top-d. This choosing mode selects d The second dataset is the latest dataset based on access
flows with the largest packet counts, truncates it to feature size, (with both access label and application category label) coland then combines and classifies it. This schema is called the lected by us using the A3C system [37]. Based on this system,
d-Candidate Together (d-CT) schema. we can get the real label of every access and every flow of
 Examples of HF and d-CT schemas are shown in Figure 5. all applications directly on the end system at the same time.
 Theoretically, each of the five modes has its emphasis. The We named this dataset Cernet-Access-2022. This dataset was
diagram of the five modes is shown in Figure 6. Therefore, collected in the real network environment of CERNET, where
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1455

Fig. 6. Schematic diagram of five multi-flow classification schemas.

 TABLE V
S TATISTICS OF C ORE CERNET-ACCESS -2022 DATASET (#: N UMBER OF ) We chose a high-performance workstation as the verification
 platform for our experiments. It has an AMD 5950x CPU,
 64GB memory, and a GTX 3090 GPU. It runs CUDA version
 11.1, Pytorch version 1.8.1, and Python version 3.8.8.
 In terms of evaluation criteria, classification and clustering have different evaluation criteria. In classification, we still
 use precision rate (Pr), recall rate (Rc), and F1-Score as the
 evaluation criteria.
 Furthermore, we choose three machine learning (C4.5 [3],
 SVM [5], kNN), two ensemble learning (XGBoost, RF [7]),
 and four deep learning (CNN [8], Deep Packet [40], FSuser size and network infrastructure are similar to standard Net [16], LS-LSTM [14]) methods as control methods to be
carrier networks. We collect pure traffic on real user devices, used as classifiers in ETC for comparison.
the collection paths including user manual access and script In flow clustering, we selected a variety of common clusautomatic access, and the devices involve three Windows PCs, tering evaluation criteria and combined them with the basic
two Linux workstations, and two Android mobile devices. result statistics to describe the clustering effect in an all-round
The data is from May 2022 to November 2022 and covers way. The main criteria include average purity, average Rand
the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and the period after Index (RI), ARI, and average Adjusted Mutual Information
the outbreak has subsided. It is worth noting that, to ensure Coefficient (AMIC).
authenticity, we guarantee the time interval between each user In order to simulate the unknown and unbalanced situation
manual access action real, while the automatic access interval of some applications in the open-world scenario, we selected
of the script is smaller than the manual access interval to six applications from eight categories as known data, namely
test the robustness of the clustering. The data from PCs and our classification targets, and the other two categories as backworkstations in the dataset were all achieved by visiting the ground traffic to interfere with the classification. To make the
application’s website with a browser, while the samples on experiment more realistic, we choose Douban, Sohu, NetEase,
mobile phones originated from native applications. Bilibili, JD, and Sina as the available data, while Youku (simi-
 The details of the dataset are shown in Table V. Among lar to Bilibili) and Hupu (similar to Douban) as the background
them, since the unit of our multi-flow classification is one interference traffic. It is important to note that we do not clasaccess of the application, we strictly counted the times of sify the other two types of traffic because, in this scenario, we
application access and the total number of flows to calculate do not know that they exist.
the average number of flows per access.
 On top of this, to further test the impact of cluster- B. Experiments of Clustering Performance
ing, we captured 700 times of access from 100 applications Clustering is a process of unsupervised learning, so we do
in June 2023 in the same environment, and the add-on is not divide the training set and test set from the sub-dataset but
named CERNET-Access-2023-Aug. Due to the small sample directly cluster the whole one. In TSHC-SW, since we need
size of each category, it does not conform to the train- to define the size of the sliding window of the current traffic
ing scenarios classified in this paper, so it is only used that needs to be clustered before the experiment starts, we first
for testing clustering. The two datasets are published at need to define an interval of the size of the sliding window.
https://data.iptas.edu.cn/web/tbps. The significance of sliding windows is to ensure the clustering
1456 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF A LL C LUSTERING E FFECTS A MONG W INDOW S IZE VALUES IN F IXED D ISTANCE T HRESHOLD

effect with as few flows as possible. That is to improve the
efficiency of clustering (prevent the appearance of busy waiting and reduce the required cache space). Hence, we set the
lower limit of the sliding window to 60 (measured in seconds),
the step to 30, and the maximum to 420.
 In addition, since TSHC-SW is based on agglomerative
clustering, the distance threshold should be set to limit the
degree of agglomeration when the total number of clustering
categories is unknown. Ten values of 4, 3.5, 3, 2.5, 2, 1, 0.5,
0.1, 0.05, and 0.01 are selected as alternatives. The optimal
value of this parameter also needs to be verified by experiment.
 Furthermore, for agglomerative clustering, we have to figure
 Fig. 7. Comparison of ARI among distance threshold values in fixed window
out the linkage type to measure the two most similar clusters. size distance threshold with ward as the linkage type.
For encrypted traffic, it can be found from the dataset that there
is not a significant difference among the number of flows of
each access, so “ward” is selected as the linkage type, that is,
to minimize the variance increased in the process of cluster
merging.
 We have conducted experiments on selecting the above
parameters. First, under the condition of a fixed distance
threshold (“1” was selected as the value of fixed distance
threshold), experiments were conducted on different window
sizes, and ARI was taken as the main evaluation criterion. The
results of all evaluation criteria are shown in Table VI.
 As can be seen from the results, bigger is only sometimes
better. Although a small window will make it challenging to
contain complete real flow bunches, thus bringing obvious sys- Fig. 8. 3D histogram of TSHC-SW clustering effect under ARI.
tematic errors to clustering, a too large window will lead to the
decline of clustering accuracy. The main reason is that when the evaluation criterion is shown in Figure 8, and the results
the amount of data to be clustered is larger, the relative dis- under AMIC perform the same.
tance between each cluster will become less “far” due to the It can be seen from the results that the best one should be a
dispersion of the overall distance, leading to the mis-clustering window size of 330 and a distance threshold of 1. Therefore,
of the boundary flows. we choose these two values as parameters of TSHC-SW.
 Then, under the condition of fixed window size (300 sec- Furthermore, to prove the superiority of TSHC-SW, we
onds was selected as the size value), we conducted exper- compare it with DBSCAN, a typical algorithm of density
iments on different distance thresholds. The experimental clustering methods commonly used in non-fixed category clusresults under ARI as the evaluation criterion are shown in tering. The optimal clustering results of the two are shown
Figure 7. in Table VII (the optimal parameters of DBSCAN are also
 On this basis, we comprehensively conducted experiments obtained by multi-parameter grid search).
on all window sizes and distance thresholds and drew a It can be seen from the results that the TSHC-SW algo-
3D histogram to get the parameter selection under the best rithm outperforms the DBSCAN algorithm and shows an
clustering effect. The clustering effect diagram under ARI as excellent clustering effect in various indexes, which proves
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1457

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF C LUSTERING E FFECT B ETWEEN TSHC-SW AND DBSCAN M ETHOD

Fig. 9. Detailed clustering scatter distribution diagram under rectangular
coordinate system of TSHC-SW (15 clusters).
 Fig. 10. Clustering ARI of TSHC-SW under different numbers of
 applications on CERNET-Access-2023-Aug.

that multi-flow classification is feasible and lays an essential
foundation for multi-flow classification. C. Experiments of Classification Performance
 The clustering scatter distribution diagram formed by Based on flow clustering, we need to select an appropriate
TSHC-SW is shown in Figure 9. classifier to classify encrypted traffic. To ensure fairness, we
 In an actual network, a single user may use a huge number should use the same classifier for multi-flow and single-flow
of applications, which may run continuously in the oper- classifications. The input size should also be equal to ensure
ating system’s background. Therefore, we further consider that the theoretical upper limit of information gain contained
the influence of this situation on the clustering effect. Using in the sample is consistent.
the CERNET-Access-2023-Aug dataset, the clustering effect We test the effect of single-flow classification and take it
under different applications with limited continuous access is as the baseline. It is important to note that this process is
tested. The clustering ARI effect under different numbers of bunch independent, that is, classifying each flow purely by its
applications is shown in Figure 10. As can be seen from the application level label. It is worth noting that although deep
figure, with the increase in the number of application classes, learning classification methods are now mainstream, we still
there is no apparent relationship between the number of appli- included traditional machine learning methods as the baseline.
cation categories and the clustering effect, and ARI fluctuates Because not all analysis nodes have GPUs in the Internet of
periodically with the increase of categories. Within each fluc- Everything, in many cases, the actual network environment
tuation, the drop in ARI is caused by the inconsistency in still uses machine learning methods as classifiers. In addition,
the tightness of the timestamps of the flows for each appli- under the Deep learning model, we did not use AppScanner,
cation in the time window, which is related to the density of Deep Fingerprinting, and GraphDApp, because they had limaccess, not the number of applications. Generally, the increase ited application scenarios and rigorous input requirements.
in application categories makes the clustering effect more sig- Instead, we chose CNN, Deep Packet, FS-Net, and LS-LSTM,
nificant. Hence, the applicability of our method in large-scale which are universal.
applications is guaranteed. First, we experimented with machine-learning models. It is
 Since clustering is also time-consuming, we have conducted worth noting that training time and prediction time correspond
experiments on the time-cost performance of clustering. It to 80% sample quantity and 20% sample quantity, respectively,
is worth noting that since both clustering and classification which is consistent with the training set and test set size. The
require input reading of each flow, the clustering experiment bar chart for a comprehensive comparison of F1-score and
only needs to consider the time cost of feature reading/writing training time is shown in Figure 11.
and the core TSHC-SW algorithm. Experiments show that As can be seen from the results, C4.5, RF, and XGBoost
the throughput of clustering can reach 49,081 flows per have the best classification F1-score. Therefore, considering
second. the classification effect and training cost comprehensively, we
 We use the clustering result as the input of the subsequent will prioritize using C4.5 and RF in the subsequent multi-flow
multi-flow classification. classification.
1458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 11. Cross comparison of five machine learning and ensemble learning Fig. 13. Comprehensive comparison of four optimal methods on training
methods under F1-score and training time. time, prediction time and F1-score.

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF F OUR D EEP L EARNING M ETHODS
 ON C ERNET-ACCESS -2022 DATASET
 in classification accuracy and convergence speed. Therefore,
 FS-Net and LS-LSTM are more suitable for ETC and are
 preferred in multi-flow classification.
 However, compared with FS-Net, LS-LSTM’s advantage in
 terms of time consumption and classification effect is not free
 lunch. It has a large model size (98.67 MB), while FS-Net
 only has less than one-third of that (29.32 MB). Therefore,
 we choose two models, FS-Net and LS-LSTM, as participants
 of deep learning for subsequent multi-flow classification.
 Then we compare the above optimal machine learning
 method, optimal ensemble learning method, and state-of-theart deep learning method. The results in F1-score, training time
 and prediction time cost are shown in Figure 13.
 The above results will be used as a baseline for multi-flow
 classification.

 D. Performance Evaluation of Different Bunch Classification
 Schemas
 Based on determining the classifier of ETC, we finally need
Fig. 12. Convergence line diagram of loss and test set accuracy of four deep to evaluate the five different bunch classification schemas in
learning models. multi-flow classification.
 Because there are certain differences between the inputs
 Further, we conducted experiments on the performance of of multi-flow and single-flow classification, which are both
four deep learning methods under the dataset. It is worth reflected in the training and prediction stages, we further sumnoting that we fully respect the limitations of input fea- marized five different flow bunch classification schemas into
tures and the selection of hyperparameters in previous studies. three training modes in the training stage. They are single-flow
However, to ensure the fairness of input, we adjust CNN and training (corresponding to SF, EF, and d-CV in prediction),
Deep Packet slightly to adapt to the input of length sequence multi-flow training (corresponding to HF), and d-candidate
and keep the four models consistent in the initial input. The multi-flow training (corresponding to d-CT).
classification results are shown in Table VIII. It is worth noting that in the flow bunch, we want all flows to
 It is worth noting that epochs of CNN and Deep Packet belong to the same access as much as possible, so we use the
are 200, while those of FS-Net and LS-LSTM are 50 due flow bunch obtained after flow clustering as the classification
to the slow convergence of CNN and Deep Packet. It can be unit. However, because there are some errors between the flow
seen from the results that the two state-of-the-art deep learning bunch and the real access flows, it is necessary to consider the
methods (FS-Net and LS-LSTM) have better single-flow clas- influence of such errors on classification results.
sification performance under the Cernet-Access-2022 dataset, Purity directly reflects the number proportion of data
and the training time is also within an acceptable range. belonging to the cluster in each cluster. Therefore, we need
 The convergence curve of classification results (including to multiply purity as a constraint factor to reflect the negloss and test set accuracy) is shown in Figure 12. Results ative effect of the flow clustering process on multi-flow
show that LS-LSTM not only has the best classification accu- classification. According to the clustering experiment in
racy but also has the fastest convergence rate and the lowest the first part, the value of this constraint factor is 0.98.
initial loss, and FS-Net also has a faster convergence rate. First of all, we experiment with three multi-flow
The two methods are far better than CNN and Deep Packet classification schemas under single-flow training.
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1459

 TABLE IX
 C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH SF P REDICTION As can be seen from the results, EF schema improves
 S CHEMA (F IRST-F LOW AND R ANDOM -F LOW ) TO BASELINE classification accuracy and recall rate, and there is a nice
 IN F OUR M ETHODS
 improvement of more than 2% if we only think about classifications. However, the improvement is limited after considering
 the negative effect of clustering. Nevertheless, the prediction
 time has been dramatically raised, especially in RF, a relatively
 complex ensemble learning method. The prediction time has
 reached 300 times the baseline, which is unacceptable.
 Moreover, the classification performance in deep learning decreases compared to the baseline approach, mainly
 because the deep learning’s dropout operation to ensure gen-
 TABLE X eralization capability reduces the classification accuracy of
 C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH EF P REDICTION low-significance flows to some extent. However, the result of
 S CHEMA TO BASELINE IN F OUR M ETHODS low significance flow has the same weight as that of high significance flow in the final voting, which leads to the wrong
 final classification result of the whole flow bunch, resulting
 in the decline of the overall classification effect. Moreover,
 the complexity of the deep learning model itself leads to a
 catastrophic increase in prediction time.
 Therefore, the application of EF schema is very narrow
 1) SF Schema: The first-flow and random-flow methods in the actual network environment. It is suitable only when
are adopted in the SF schema to select the flow bunch the number of flow bunches and samples to be classified is
representation. The classification results are shown in tiny, and the computing resources are sufficient to produce.
Table IX. This schema is more suitable for traditional machine learning
 It is worth noting that, in order to level out the target num- methods.
ber of predictions and make the coverage of flows classified by 3) d-CV Schema: d-CV schema also contains the first and
the two flow-choosing modes under baseline and SF consis- random schemas and different d values ranging from 2 to 5.
tent, we adjusted the prediction time in the baseline results and The reason why 5 is the maximum value is that category disap-
SF results to make the total number of flows the same, which pearance will occur if we go higher. In other words, samples of
includes 43,853 flows and 9,026 bunches. For prediction, it is a certain category do not meet the input requirements and are
20% samples (1806 bunches). Flows that do not meet input discarded, indicating the model’s unavailability. The prediction
requirements are screened. Therefore, the number of flows par- results under d-CV are shown in Table XI.
ticipating in the classification is far less than the total number It can be seen from the results that, on the whole, the classi-
(740,743 flows). fication effect is better than that of the baseline except for the
 It can be seen from the results that compared with the FS-Net in d = 2. The results indicate that the d-CV schema
baseline, the SF schema does not bring significant improve- can effectively improve classification performance. However,
ment in classification effect and even reduces some, espe- the cost is exceptionally high in prediction time. From the
cially in deep learning methods. However, it significantly schema perspective, the main reason is that it has two more
improves prediction efficiency. When using the SF schema, processes. The first is selecting d candidates, and the secthe prediction time is reduced to more than 10% compared to ond is the multiple classification times and subsequent voting
the baseline. This prediction time saving is even more signifi- compared with SF.
cant if we include the filtering of flows that do not meet input Consistent with SF, compared with the first mode, the
requirements. However, the random-flow choosing mode con- random mode has less classification effect. It also slightly
sumes more prediction time than the first-flow because it needs increases the time consumed by prediction, proving that flows
to preselect one flow with the random machine. In addition, the generated first will have a higher significance in a single
effect is worse than that of the first mode. The reason for this access.
phenomenon may be that some randomly selected flows have Furthermore, we compare three different schemas under
insufficient feature significance, and their feature boundary is single-flow training horizontally.
in a weak position compared with the first flow in the training First, we horizontally compare the F1-score under three
process, resulting in a decline in classification F1-score. schemas in single-flow training, picking the first choosing
 Therefore, it is important to take first-flow choosing mode mode for comparison, as shown in Figure 14.
when using SF schema. In addition, first-flow is more in line It can be seen from the results that the d-CV schema has
with online classification requirements. As long as the packet the best classification effect, and with the improvement of d,
sequence of the first flow that meets the input requirements is the classification F1-score continues to improve. However, the
taken as the input, there is no need to wait for other flows, proportion of improvement has been decreasing. As d gets
which significantly saves the cache space. larger and larger, the improvement of the classification effect
 2) EF Schema: We also aligned the prediction time, and will be more and more limited. In the extreme case of EF,
the classification results are shown in Table X. the classification effect is worse than all the d-CV results.
1460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE XI
 C OMPARISON OF S INGLE -F LOW T RAINING W ITH d-CV P REDICTION
 S CHEMA TO BASELINE IN F OUR M ETHODS

 Fig. 15. Prediction time comparison of d-CV and EF schemas.

 but the actual prediction time goes down. This phenomenon
 is because although the number of candidates selected from
 each bunch is increasing exponentially, the number of flow
 bunches that can participate in the classification is decreasing.
 Some of the flow bunches that fail to select d flows to meet
 the input conditions are skipped. This situation will be further
 elaborated in the subsequent experiments on SCR.
 4) Multi-Flow Training and HF Schema: There are obvious differences between multi-flow training and single-flow
 training. It lies in that multi-flow training considers multiple
 flows and pursues the same feature space size as single-flow
 training. In other words, multi-flow and single-flow training
 have the same requirements for the packet length sequence
 input size. Hence, we need to get the packet length sequence
 from not one but multiple flows after determining which flow
 needs to be chosen.
 In the training process, since we cannot predict the number of packets of each flow in advance, we can only limit the
 number of packets of each flow to the subsequent classification, which is called each size θ (this is consistent with the
 result of selecting k flows with fix value k as the meta-input
 of multi-flow classification). To ensure a uniform input size
 and meet the fixed input requirements of the neural network,
 we better make sure that each size should be divisible by the
 input size so that the number of packets provided by each flow
 is fair.
 In the actual network environment, we cannot predict the
 total number of flows in advance, so selecting flows randomly
Fig. 14. Comparison of three schemas under single-flow training of four and extracting packets according to each size is not approprimodels on F1-score. ate. Therefore, we consider using adjacent flows for sample
 formation, and this approach is particularly beneficial in the
In addition to the reasons mentioned above for low signifi- case of open-world online classification.
cance flow, another reason is that EF does not limit the number In multi-flow classification, FS-Net would suffer model
of flows each flow bunch can acquire, which also causes the crashes, so we have modified it to forgo reconstruction loss.
number of voting results used by different flow bunch to be We selected θ = 10 and θ = 25 as options of each size
inconsistent. Many participants will vote if a bunch is large to conduct training and testing in the multi-flow training sceand many flows satisfy the input criteria. This situation will nario. The results compared with the single-flow are shown in
further magnify the influence of low significance flows in the Table XII. It is worth noting that the training data of multicase of a large flow bunch because, in d-CV, only d candidate flow classification is not subject to the purity value reduction
flows are selected even for a large flow bunch. because it is trained according to the exact flow bunch, not
 Then we compare the prediction times of d-CV and EF the flow bunch obtained by clustering.
horizontally, as shown in Figure 15. The results show that, on the whole, compared with the
 The results show that EF has the highest predictive time, single-flow, the effect of multi-flow classification is better,
which is expected because it classifies all the flows at once. mainly reflected in the precision rate, especially in ensemble
As d goes up, theoretically, the prediction time should go up, learning. When θ = 10, RF’s classification effect is greatly
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1461

 TABLE XII
 C OMPARISON OF M ULTI -F LOW T RAINING W ITH S INGLE -F LOW
 T RAINING BASELINE W ITH D IFFERENT θ

 Fig. 16. Longitudinal comparison of four models on F1-score under HF
improved. However, due to the loosing of its flow input restric- schema with baseline, θ = 10 and θ = 25.
tion, the number of available samples is greatly increased, and
the consumption of I/O is also grown so that the training time
is significantly raised. The maximum increase multiple can
be up to 17 times, which is about proportional to the square
of the number of samples. Since multi-flow and single-flow
classification has different input restrictions for prediction, the
prediction time will be compared in subsequent experiments.
 From the perspective of classification accuracy, both θ = 10
and θ = 25 can improve the effect, especially when θ = 10.
However, the cost is that in the same sample space with the
unit of flow, the number of samples in the multi-flow training mode is much larger than that in the single-flow training
(even if the samples are constructed in the way of a sliding Fig. 17. Longitudinal comparison of four models on prediction time under
window, not random). The main reason is that classification HF schema with baseline, θ = 10 and θ = 25.
under multi-flow training can give more consideration to the
relationship between flows in a bunch than single-flow clas- This result reflects the superiority of multi-flow training over
sification, even if the packet input of each flow is reduced, single-flow training. With the same input size, the introducsacrificing the expression of a part of the Markov relationship tion of features of inter-flow relationships greatly improves the
in the flow. The gains make up for the lack of it, especially classification effect. It is worth noting that this is the result
when θ is small. without purity reduction because it can only be applied to the
 θ = 10 has a better classification effect than θ = 25. whole and cannot be carried out for a specific application.
However, it is worth noting that the TLS-1.2 handshake con- Purity can only indicate the fit degree between the sample of
tains seven packets, and augmented to the TCP three-way the whole cluster and the real category but cannot represent the
handshake, it all contains ten packets. Therefore, the minimum degree of aggregation of the sample of a specific application
value of θ should be at least 10. The above phenomenon is category and its class.
consistent with the assumption that multiple flows generated Next, we conducted a longitudinal comparison of different
at one access better represent the access than a single flow, models and θ in the HF schema of multi-flow training. The
even with the same feature space. first is F1-score, as shown in Figure 16.
 Furthermore, we experimented with multi-flow classifica- It can be seen from the results that HF schema significantly
tion in HF schema, including θ = 10 and θ = 25. There is improves the classification effect, which is mainly due to the
not much difference in the number of samples with differ- feature superiority brought by multi-flow training. It directly
ent categories, each of which selects an input from each flow proves that multi-flow classification outperforms single-flow
bunch. It is worth noting that there will be sequence fragment classification.
repetition under certain circumstances (which has a certain We then compare the prediction time in the HF multiprobability of improving the classification effect very limited, flow classification model with the baseline time, as shown in
depending on the characteristics of the model). Regardless, the Figure 17.
whole sample will only be partially alike to avoid the result The results show that, under the same input size, the
invalidation caused by the consistency of the training set and prediction speed of multi-flow classification is faster than that
test set. Detailed classification results based on categories of of single-flow classification, which indicates that multi-flow
θ = 25 are shown in Table XIII, which includes the number classification, especially HF schema multi-flow classification,
of predicted samples. is more satisfactory than traditional single-flow classification
 As can be seen from the results, under the condition of in terms of prediction time and classification effect.
θ = 25, the classification result under multi-flow training is 5) d-Candidate Flow Training and d-CT Schema: Finally,
outstanding. No matter what kind of application, they all have we experimented with d-candidate flow training, another
good classification accuracy, which is the same in each model. multi-flow classification training mode. Similar to multi-flow
1462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE XIII
 D ETAILED A PPLICATION -L EVEL C OMPARISON OF F OUR M ODELS ON P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1-S CORE U NDER HF S CHEMA W ITH θ = 25

 TABLE XIV
 C OMPARISON OF d-C ANDIDATE F LOW T RAINING W ITH S INGLE -F LOW
 T RAINING BASELINE W ITH D IFFERENT d

 Fig. 18. Comparison of sample size, training time, and test set F1-score of
 LS-LSTM under d-CT schema with different d.

training, it also obtains the flow to be trained through a sliding
window. The comparison of training results with traditional
single-flow training baselines under different values of d is
shown in Table XIV.
 It can be seen from the results that d-candidate flow training,
as another form of multi-flow classification, has far better test
results than single-flow classification. The advantages of multiflow classification are further explained, and this process does
not sacrifice part of an in-flow relationship like multi-flow
training. It can be shown that the inter-flow relationship is Fig. 19. Comparison of F1-score, sample size, and prediction time under
 d-CT schema along with first choosing mode with different d.
effective for classification. However, the increase in training
time is also not negligible. Normally, with the increase of d,
the classification result of the test set should get better, but samples in the flow bunch are not enough to support
there are some exceptional cases. For FS-Net, when d = 4 classification.
and 5, the number of samples of some categories is too small, We first experimented with the first choosing mode under
which leads to the collapse of the model, and thus the overall the d-CT schema. The comparison of the F1-score, model size,
classification accuracy decreases seriously. and prediction time of four models under four different val-
 Furthermore, taking the LS-LSTM model as an example, ues of d is shown in Figure 19. The purity reduction of the
we carefully compared the relationship between sample size, F1-score was also not carried out.
training time, and test set F1-score, as shown in Figure 18. It It can be seen from the results that the number of available
should be noted that the purity reduction was not carried out samples decreases significantly with the increase of d. The
for F1-score because it was an intra-model comparison. category F1-score showed slight improvement (FS-Net’s F1-
 It can be seen from the results that the larger d is, the fewer score fluctuation was due to model collapse, consistent with
available samples are, and the training time will first increase d-candidate training). Excessive in-flow relationships will not
and then decrease. It is because SCR and feature space size bring significant improvement to classification because they
weigh each other. The slight decline of LS-LSTM classifica- are sufficient for classification, and the improvement mainly
tion F1-score is also due to the overfitting of other categories comes from inter-flow relationships. The overall prediction
caused by too few samples when d = 5. time remains mostly the same under different d, which is also
 The schema corresponding to d-candidate training is d-CT. consistent with d-candidate training. Therefore, in the process
Although there are differences in training modes, d-CT and of using d-CT schema, the impact caused by the decrease in
d-CV are similar, both facing the situation that possible available samples cannot be ignored.
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1463

Fig. 20. Comparison of F1-score under d-CT schema among first, random, Fig. 22. Comprehensive comparison of model size of four models on three
and top choosing mode with different d. training modes.

Fig. 21. Comparison of prediction time under d-CT schema among first,
random, and top choosing mode with different d. Fig. 23. Comprehensive comparison of SCR under five multi-flow schemas
 with all chosen d and θ.
 Furthermore, we compare the relationship between three
different flow selection modes under d-CT, as shown in It can be seen from the results that, among machine learn-
Figure 20. ing and ensemble learning, the multi-flow training model is the
 The results show that the random choosing mode is still the largest, mainly because there are more samples for training.
worst, while the first mode has the best classification effect The size of the d-candidate flow training model decreases with
on the whole, but for FS-Net, the top mode is better than the the increase of d, because fewer and fewer samples are availfirst mode in all d values except d = 3. It indicates that the able. For the deep learning model, due to the fixed structure of
top mode introduced in d-CT will have better performance the neural network, the model size is consistent (sample indeunder partial models, indicating the local applicability of the pendent). In multi-flow training, RF models are larger than
top mode. the huge LS-LSTM models when θ = 10. Therefore, the deep
 Then the prediction time of three different flow selection learning method will have better applicability in an open-world
modes is given, as shown in Figure 21, where 2F refers to the environment with massive data and multi-flow classification.
first choosing mode for d = 2 (R and T stand for random and Then, we comprehensively evaluated SCR under diftop, respectively). ferent schemas, including SCR baselines for single flow
 The difference in prediction time is mainly reflected in the classifications, as shown in Figure 23.
model. At the same time, different choosing modes have little The results show that the EF and SF’s SCRs are compainfluence in the case of large data volume classification, such rable to the SCR baseline of the single flow classification
as d-CT. The main influencing factor lies in the number of because they are single flow classifications with the extension
available samples and the size of d, that is, the feature input of flow bunch. The SCRs of d-CV and d-CT were similar, and
size. the higher the d, the lower the SCR because there were not
 In classification effect, d-CT and HF are the best of the enough samples in the flow bunch. HF’s SCR is higher than
five schemas. These two schemas belong to different multi- the baseline because the number of packets required per flow
flow training modes, reflecting the superiority of multi-flow has decreased. The reason why θ = 25 is higher than θ = 10
classification. However, in the actual deployment process, d is that if θ is obtained too small, it will lead to too many flows
or θ should be determined according to the actual situation. required for each flow bunch and fall into the same problem
 In addition to the classification effect, we also conducted of insufficient flows faced by d-CV and d-CT. Hence, the HF
experiments on the model size, a system resource parameter schema is the best from an SCR point of view alone.
closely related to the open-world actual network environment. SCR is a necessary but currently neglected metric in
The model size of four different models in three different the open-world actual network environment. The lower the
training modes is shown in Figure 22. SCR, the more samples will be ignored in the actual
1464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

classification, resulting in incomplete classification results. dynamically adjust the demand (pursuing classification speed
It reflects the superiority of multi-flow classification over or classification accuracy).
single-flow classification from another aspect. However, the flow clustering process comes at a cost. Its
 throughput is approximately 49,081 flows per second, while
 the LS-LSTM in the fastest HF schema has a throughput
 of approximately 46,501. In other words, if a deep learning
E. Discussion and Analysis
 model is deployed, although the throughput of flow clustering
 1) Why Are EF and d-CV Schemas’ Prediction Times So is higher than that of the classification model, the time expanse
Many Times Longer Than the Baseline, Which Should Not cannot be ignored if serial processing is used. However, in the
Be in Theory?: Although theoretically, the prediction time’s actual network environment, the deep learning classification
increase is due to the growth in the number of classifications model relies on the computing power of the GPU, while the
and the voting process. However, another external factor that clustering relies on the CPU, and the two can even be prodramatically increases the prediction time in implementing the cessed in parallel on the same device. If multiple devices are
method is the repeated loading of the model. When classi- used, the two can be fully parallelized, thus removing the time
fying with flow bunch as the unit, the model needs to be overhead effect of clustering on classification.
loaded before each voting to ensure the purity of the result to 4) In the Actual Network Environment, How to Choose a
be voted. This action is widespread in the open-world actual Schema and Balance the Impact of Low SCR?: It can be seen
network environment. However, the additional overhead of this from the experimental results that HF has the best classifiimplementation can be greatly reduced if caching and paral- cation effect, the fastest classification speed, and the highest
lel computation are used, that is, to compute and split the SCR. However, it has a potential premise: it needs to ensure
bunch simultaneously (but may result in computation wastage that each flow bunch has enough flow. This premise can be
in d-CV schema). Therefore, this results in a dramatic increase guaranteed under normal circumstances, but the effect of HF
in prediction time for RF and the two deep learning meth- may not be guaranteed under special situations like sampling
ods, which is not evident in C4.5 due to its small model or asymmetric traffic scenarios. Moreover, HF must conduct
size. multi-flow training in advance, which must also be consid-
 2) Why Is the First Choosing Mode More Effective Than ered. Although d-CT has a good effect, its low SCR makes it
the Random Choosing Mode, But the Difference Between the more suitable for the scenario of heavy flow classification. It
Two Is Insignificant in the d-Candidate, Especially When d Is focuses on the application with a long flow, such as the appli-
Large?: This phenomenon is due to the implementation pat- cation under the online video service. For SF, EF, and d-CV,
tern of applications, especially Web pages. HTML and core they can meet different needs through the external clusterresources are prioritized to ensure the user’s QoE. In this way, ing model without changing the original classification model.
even if the network is not good, it can still enable users to It can be a balance between the classification effect, speed,
access it as early as possible. Therefore, the previous flows and model size, which can be selected according to the actual
in each access are, in most cases, more significant because demand.
they are tied to the application’s core data. The subsequent
flow is likely to be irrelevant or duplicate with other applications’ aesthetic data, external link data, and even advertising. VI. C ONCLUSION
However, in the two schemas of d-candidate, the larger d is, In this paper, we first carefully excavate the drawbacks of
the more flows need to be selected in each flow bunch. When the existing single-flow ETC methods. To solve this problem,
the total number of flows in the flow bunch is certain, the we first analyze the application data transmission pattern of
random choosing mode will gradually move closer to the first encrypted traffic and determine the multi-flow classification
choosing mode because the probability of selecting the front idea based on access. Furthermore, from the perspective of
flows increases with the selection times. As a result, the larger information entropy and information disclosure, we clarified
d is, the smaller the gap between them. the representation of in-flow and inter-flow relationships under
 3) Since Simple Multi-Flow Classification (Training) the length sequence features, providing a theoretical basis for
Can Get Good Results, Is Flow Clustering Worthwhile?: multi-flow classification. Furthermore, since the flow bunch
Undeniably, the test set classification results in multi-flow can not be obtained directly, we propose the TSHC-SW algotraining are already very good, far better than single-flow rithm to obtain the flow bunch. In the end, we proposed five
classification. However, it is worth noting that the premise is different multi-flow classification schemas. Each schema has
that we already have real access-level labels and application its specialties, and the pure multi-flow classification schema
labels. Hence, the selection of flows in multi-flow training HF is superior to the traditional single-flow classification
is completely correct, and there will be no case of choos- in classification effect, efficiency, and SCR. Experimental
ing flows belonging to two different applications to classify. results show that the proposed flow clustering and multi-flow
However, in the actual network environment, it is impossible classification methods outperform the existing state-of-the-art
to know the distribution of flow bunch without flow clustering. methods. It opens up a new research field for ETC.
So clustering is not only worthwhile but also the core basis of The current multi-flow classification is not perfect, and there
multi-flow classification. On the other hand, flow clustering are some special schemas that we do not consider at present.
can also make the classification results more available than At the same time, we did not introduce the graph feature, an
single flow classification, and it can also make it possible to emerging aspect of encrypted traffic feature engineering. In the
CHEN et al.: CLASSIFY TRAFFIC RATHER THAN FLOW 1465

future, we will continue researching multi-flow classification [20] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapé,
and flow clustering to achieve an open-world ETC with better “Encrypted multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
results and more adaptive ability. [21] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
 A. Pescapè, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 R EFERENCES improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
 [1] Google. “HTTPS encryption on the Web—Google transparency report.” [22] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/ encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
 overview Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.
 [2] B. Yang and D. Liu, “Research on network traffic identification based [23] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
 on machine learning and deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
 Inf. Technol. Netw. Electron. Autom. Control Conf. (ITNEC), 2019, bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
 pp. 1887–1891. pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
 [3] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. Islam Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, [24] C. Liu, Z. Cao, Z. Li, and G. Xiong, “LaFFT: Length-aware FFT based
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” fingerprinting for encrypted network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2018, pp. 1–6.
 pp. 407–414. [25] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 [4] J. Yang, J. Narantuya, and H. Lim, “Bayesian neural network based Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probaencrypted traffic classification using initial handshake packets,” in Proc. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Qual. Service
 49th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw. Supplement. Vol. (IWQoS), 2018, pp. 1–10.
 (DSN-S), 2019, pp. 19–20. [26] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
 [5] J. Muehlstein et al., “Analyzing HTTPS encrypted traffic to identify encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 user’s operating system, browser and application,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 424–429.
 Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2017, pp. 1–6. [27] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen-
 [6] W. Pan, G. Cheng, and Y. Tang, “WENC: HTTPS encrypted traffic tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 classification using weighted ensemble learning and Markov chain,” in graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 Proc. IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, 2017, pp. 50–57. pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 [7] S. Bagui, X. Fang, E. Kalaimannan, S. C. Bagui, and J. Sheehan, [28] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
 “Comparison of machine-learning algorithms for classification of VPN Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
 network traffic flow using time-related features,” J. Cyber Security Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 Technol., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 108–126, 2017. [29] X. Ma et al., “Context-aware website fingerprinting over encrypted
 [8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end proxies,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10.
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neu- [30] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
 ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI), “A big data-enabled hierarchical framework for traffic classifica-
 2017, pp. 43–48. tion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2608–2619,
 [9] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification Oct.-Dec. 2020.
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term [31] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Xiang, and Y. Guan, “Network
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022. traffic classification using correlation information,” IEEE Trans. Parallel
[10] M. Song, J. Ran, and S. Li, “Encrypted traffic classification based on Distrib. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 104–117, Jan. 2013.
 text convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Comput. [32] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 Sci. Netw. Technol. (ICCSNT), 2019, pp. 432–436. A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
[11] S. Cui, B. Jiang, Z. Cai, Z. Lu, S. Liu, and J. Liu, “A session-packets- activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps durbased encrypted traffic classification using capsule neural networks,” ing COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022,
 in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun. Art. no. 109452. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
 IEEE 17th Int. Conf. Smart City IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst. science/article/pii/S1389128622004868
 (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), 2019, pp. 429–436. [33] L. Yang, S. Fu, Y. Luo, Y. Wang, and W. Zhao, “A clustering method
[12] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Ma, and F. Huang, “STNN: A novel of encrypted video traffic based on Levenshtein distance,” in Proc. 17th
 TLS/SSL encrypted traffic classification system based on stereo trans- Int. Conf. Mobil. Sens. Netw. (MSN), 2021, pp. 1–8.
 form neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. [34] Y. Li, Y. Lu, and S. Li, “EZAC: Encrypted zero-day applications classifi-
 Syst. (ICPADS), 2019, pp. 907–910. cation using CNN and K-means,” in Proc. IEEE 24th Int. Conf. Comput.
[13] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, B. Jiang, S. Tang, S. Guo, and Y. Zhou, “Length Support. Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD), 2021, pp. 378–383.
 matters: Fast Internet encrypted traffic service classification based on [35] H. Wu, X. Chen, G. Cheng, X. Hu, and Y. Zhuang, “BCAC: Batch
 multi-PDU lengths,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mobil. Sens. Netw. (MSN), classifier based on agglomerative clustering for traffic classification in a
 2020, pp. 531–538. backbone network,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Qual. Service
[14] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, S. Guo, Y. Zhou, and Y. Zhao, “Length mat- (IWQOS), 2021, pp. 1–10.
 ters: Scalable fast encrypted Internet traffic service classification based [36] Z. Wu, Y. Dong, W. Tian, and J. Jin, “Enhanced rough K-means
 on multiple protocol data unit length sequence with composite deep based flow aggregation for QoS mapping in heterogeneous network
 learning,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 289–302, 2022. environments,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2,
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ pp. 1197–1210, Jun. 2020.
 S2352864821000699 [37] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, K. Xu, Y. Shan, and J. Zhang, “A3C system:
[15] G. Baldini, “Analysis of encrypted traffic with time-based features One-stop automated encrypted traffic labeled sample collection, conand time frequency analysis,” in Proc. Global Internet Things Summit struction and correlation in multi-systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 22,
 (GIoTS), 2020, pp. 1–5. 2022, Art. no. 11731. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-
[16] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow -3417/12/22/11731
 sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE [38] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179. website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
[17] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, CCS, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2018,
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), pp. 1977–1992. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3243734.
 2014, pp. 781–789. 3243832
[18] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application [39] T. Huoh, Y. Luo, and T. Zhang, “Encrypted network traffic classification
 filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE using a geometric learning model,” in Proc. IFIP/IEEE Int. Symp. Integr.
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 397–405. Netw. Manag. (IM), 2021, pp. 376–383.
[19] R. Mateless, H. Zlatokrilov, L. Orevi, M. Segal, and R. Moskovitch, [40] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
 “IPvest: Clustering the IP traffic of network entities hidden behind a “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
 single IP address using machine learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
 Manag., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 3647–3661, Sep. 2021. 2020.
1466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Zihan Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. Zijun Wei (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 degree in software engineering from Central South B.S. degree in computer science from Qingdao
 University in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree in cyber University, Qingdao, China, in 2021. He is cursecurity from Southeast University in 2023, where rently pursuing the master’s degree with the
 he is currently working as a Postdoctoral Fellow Department of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. Southeast University. His major research interests
 His major research interests include cyber secu- include traffic measurement and analysis.
 rity, encrypted traffic classification, encrypted traffic
 feature engineering, and deep learning. He works
 as a Reviewer for multiple journals such as IEEE
 I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.

 Dandan Niu (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. degree in Internet of Things from Jiangnan
 University in 2021. She is currently pursuing
 the M.S. degree in cyberspace security from the
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast
 University. Her major research interests include
 cyber security and encrypted traffic analysis.

 Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
 University in 1994, the M.S. degree in computer
 Nan Fu (Student Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
 application from the Hefei University of Technology
 degree from Southeast University in 2022, where she
 in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in computer network
 is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace
 from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2003,
 security from the School of Cyber Science and
 where he is a Full Professor with the School of
 Engineering. Her major research interests include
 Cyber Science and Engineering. He has authored
 cyber security, network measurement, and behavior
 or coauthored seven monographs and more than
 analysis.
 100 technical papers, including top journals and top
 conferences. His research interests include network
security, network measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a Senior
Member of CCF.