IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024 3759

 Clients Eligibility-Based Lightweight Protocol
 in Federated Learning: An IDS Use Case
 Muhammad Asad , Member, IEEE, Safa Otoum , Member, IEEE, and Saima Shaukat

 Abstract—Federated learning (FL) enables clients to train learning models with local data and only uploads the model
models locally, enhancing privacy by avoiding data centralization. parameters instead of the raw data to the centrally located
Traditional FL assumes all clients have adequate resources, server. Upon receiving those parameters, the centralized server
an often unrealistic expectation in heterogeneous networks
with resource constraints like limited battery, memory, and aggregates those collected models and broadcasts the updated
bandwidth. These limitations can hinder performance, pro- model to all the clients for the next training round. The process
long convergence times, and lead to inaccurate models. To keeps repeating until the model reaches the desired converaddress these challenges, we introduce the Client Eligibility-based gence level [3]. Figure 1 shows an illustration of a typical
Lightweight Protocol (CELP), optimized for resource-constrained FL system. Though FL provides an advantage in terms of
environments. CELP employs a sample-based pruning mechanism and a re-parameterized FedAvg algorithm, enhancing its communication efficiency and privacy preservation, traditional
management of resource variability. It also integrates an intrusion FL performs poorly in heterogeneous and resource-constrained
detection system to safeguard against malicious activities. Our networks. In heterogeneous FL, each client produces data inderesults show that CELP significantly reduces communication pendently, which leads to uneven data distribution, reducing
overhead by up to 81.01% compared to FedAvg and up to 72.54% the effectiveness of conventional stochastic gradient descent
compared to FedProx and enhances system stability, achieving
93% accuracy on the MNIST dataset and 83% accuracy on (SGD) based algorithms. Numerous techniques have been
CIFAR-10. These improvements demonstrate CELP’s ability to proposed to overcome this challenge; however, the existing
deliver robust performance and efficiency in diverse FL scenarios. techniques either suffer from slow convergence or a lack of
 Index Terms—Federated learning, client eligibility, heteroge- resources [4].
neous network, resource-constrained, intrusion detection.

 A. Motivation
 I. I NTRODUCTION The existing research on FL considered distributed learning
 and optimization [5], [6]. However, the critical differences
 HE LATEST advancements in the Internet of Things
T (IoT) require significant amounts of data for processing applications such as industrial 4.0, autonomous driving,
 between FL and traditional distributed optimization are system
 heterogeneity and statistical heterogeneity. FL offers a novel
 approach to building a combined global model by using
and augmented reality [1]. To utilize effective deployment,
 its clients’ model parameters as a learning resource [7].
those applications require powerful Machine Learning (ML)
 The comprehensive descriptions of the FL challenges are
algorithms to exploit the generated data properly. However,
 covered by [8]. For example, heterogeneity handling can
conventional ML designs use a centrally located data server
 be done by utilizing on-device training, dealing with high
for training the data, which requires a considerable number
 communication costs, and considering low client participation.
of distributed IoT devices to upload their data to a third-party
 Federated Averaging (FedAvg), a previously developed FL
location, resulting in inefficient communication and a seritechnique [2], obtains a global model using the local models
ous privacy concern. To overcome those communication and
 of the clients through an iterative process and optimization
privacy concerns, it is essential to introduce edge-deployed,
 strategy. Even though the FedAvg algorithm has contributed
ML-based distributed algorithms such as Federated Learning
 substantially to the FL environment, several fundamental
(FL) [2]. In particular, FL allows its clients to train their local
 issues that might be seen in a heterogeneous FL scenario were
 Manuscript received 24 January 2024; revised 22 April 2024; accepted neglected.
5 May 2024. Date of publication 8 May 2024; date of current version 1) FedAvg assumes that randomly selected clients for
21 August 2024. This research was supported by the College of Technological training have uniform capabilities. However, in real-time
Innovation, Zayed University (ZU), and the Technology Innovation Institute
(TII) under grant numbers RIF-20130 & EU2205. The associate editor scenarios, the participating clients may have different
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was system configurations.
G. Han. (Corresponding author: Muhammad Asad.) 2) FedAvg drops the clients who can’t complete their task
 Muhammad Asad and Safa Otoum are with the College of
Technological Innovation, Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mail: within a certain period and does not allow clients to
Muhammad.AkmalAsad@zu.ac.ae; Safa.Otoum@zu.ac.ae). conduct partial or variable amounts of work.
 Saima Shaukat is with the School of Information Science and Technology, 3) FedAvg cannot ensure convergence if the bulk of clients
Department of Creative Informatics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-
0033, Japan (e-mail: saima@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp). is dropped or they return diverging model updates from
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3398213 the target.
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 1. The figure illustrates the typical FL system, where a set of IoT devices are connected to the cloud server. Firstly, the cloud server sends the global
model to the IoT devices; secondly, those IoT devices train the local learning models individually and then upload those trained learning models to the cloud
server. Finally, the cloud server aggregates those local models to generate a new global model for the next round.

 4) When the client carries non-IID data, the performance activities, such as DoS attacks, data manipulation, and false or
 of FedAvg varies significantly. This means FedAvg is modified updates. The IDSs can detect malicious clients and
 not suitable for non-IID environments. alert the network administrators by monitoring the network
 On the other hand, to mitigate these risks, our protocol for such activities and preventing malicious clients from
integrates an advanced Intrusion Detection System (IDS) disrupting the training process, thus ensuring the accuracy and
specifically designed for FL environments. This IDS actively robustness of the models trained.
monitors and evaluates client behavior to detect and counteract
malicious activities, such as data tampering and false updates,
which are critical threats in FL settings [9]. Malicious clients B. Our Contribution
in a network can significantly impact the performance of FL To this end, in this paper, we propose a new FL protraining, as they can disrupt or manipulate the data used for tocol, namely, Client Eligibility-based Lightweight Protocol
training and, thus, introduce undesirable biases. In particular, (CELP), that can perform efficiently in heterogeneous and
malicious clients can inject false or misleading data points into resource-constrained FL environments. In particular, to reduce
the training datasets, leading to incorrect models or models the model size, CELP uses a sample-based pruning techthat are overfitted to the malicious data. These attacks can nique. In addition, the CELP allows a partial amount
lead to a significant decrease in the performance of FL and, of tasks to resource-constrained clients by measuring the
ultimately, affect the performance of the trained models [10]. clients’ eligibility scores (CES). To effectively manage the
In this regard, our enhanced IDS within CELP not only challenges presented by heterogeneous networks, we have
identifies but also quantifies the extent of malicious activities, re-parameterized the state-of-the-art FedAvg algorithm. The
allowing for dynamic adaptation of training processes to choice of FedAvg is motivated by its proven effectivemaintain the integrity and robustness of the FL model. This ness in aggregating model updates across diverse clients,
implementation of IDS in CELP is crucial for maintaining thereby ensuring robust model convergence while mitigating
high-quality, unbiased model training, especially in scenarios the clients’ variable performance and resource constraints.
with a high risk of adversarial attacks. An IDS can help This adaptation further enhances CELP’s capability to deliver
mitigate the effects of malicious clients in an FL network. reliable and efficient learning outcomes in diverse network
An IDS is a system that monitors the network for malicious conditions. The experimental results show that the proposed
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3761

protocol outperforms the existing approaches regarding sta- direct method of multipliers (ADMM) [16] or mini-batch
bility in a highly resource-constrained environment. The gradient descent [17]) that perform significantly in federated
significant contributions of the proposed protocol are summa- environments and outperform the conventional distributed
rized below: methods. However, those techniques perform inefficiently in
 • We provide a novel lightweight protocol that enables heterogeneous networks [18], [19]. For example, to balance
 resource-constrained FL clients to train more efficiently, the computation and communication in dense networks, the
 avoid selecting unreliable and low-resource clients (i.e., distributed optimization technique permits inexact updating of
 clients with limited battery life, memory, and bandwidth), the local models that activate the limited portion of clients
 and allow different local iterations depending on the at every iteration. For instance, [20] proposes a multi-task
 client’s resources. learning framework to help FL clients train distinct but similar
 • To reduce the model size, we utilize a sample-based models using a primal-dual optimization technique. However,
 pruning method that enhances the efficiency of the FL the suggested method ensures convergence but cannot be
 network. applied to non-convex problems. To overcome the non-convex
 • The proposed CELP is integrated with a novel incen- problems, FedAvg involves averaging the clients’ local SGD
 tive mechanism that selects the most reliable clients. updates and outperforming the existing approaches. Moreover,
 Furthermore, the integration of IDS within CELP is to avoid the clients’ statistical heterogeneity in the FedAvg
 not just a security feature but a strategic component algorithm, several methods considered non-federated envithat enhances overall model reliability by ensuring the ronments, for example, [21], [22], [23] assuming the data is
 integrity of client contributions. This approach is partic- uniformly and identically distributed. However, it is unreaularly beneficial in environments where client reliability sonable to presume that each local client utilizes their local
 varies significantly. data to execute the same stochastic process in the hetero-
 • The proposed CELP allows resource-constrained clients geneous environment [24]. In addition, in [25], the authors
 to perform partial amounts of tasks, making it more developed a cooperative learning framework by considering
 robust in real-time FL scenarios. how wireless quality, such as limited bandwidth and packet
 • We conduct extensive simulation experiments to show- errors, affects model training. They design objective functions
 case the performance of CELP in terms of pruned for the optimization problem by considering client selection,
 updates, partial participation of clients, statistical hetero- resource factors, and joint learning. Moreover, in [26], the
 geneity, and accuracy in the presence of malicious clients. authors studied the same issues for optimal energy consumption during transmission and model computation of FL in
C. Paper Organization wireless networks. Despite the importance of those two factors
 (optimal energy consumption and transmission quality) in FL
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we
 environments, they are not in the area of the proposed protocol.
briefly discussed the literature review in Section II. The
 System heterogeneity is one of the considerable challenges
problem statement and motivations behind the proposed
 in the FL context; for example, different clients engaging in the
CELP are defined in Section III. We presented the system
 training may have different amounts of battery life, memory,
models in Section IV. The complete execution process of
 computing power, and bandwidth. Such variability impairs
the proposed CELP is explained in Section V. Section VI
 system functionality and worsens straggler problems. It may
describes the convergence analysis. The simulation settings are
 require more time or possibly fail to obtain the desired condiscussed in Section VII. Experiments and Results are shown
 vergence if the number of stragglers increases in the network.
in Section VIII. Section IX presents the comparative analysis,
 The possible solution is to select only resourceful clients
and we conclude the paper in Section X.
 during the training process and avoid resource-constrained
 clients. However, stopping the straggler clients can lead
 II. R ELATED W ORK to a small pool of active clients and bias in training. In
 The latest development of the Internet of Things (IoT) addition, those clients may possess essential data in higher
requires huge amounts of data, which must reconsider volume, and dropping them causes poor convergence. Beyond
how distributed optimization and learning techniques are the heterogeneity of FL clients, model update divergence
designed [11], [12]. On one end of the spectrum, IoT services or statistical heterogeneity is also a significant challenge.
are intended for convenience in terms of architecture, speed, Some relevant literature investigated theoretical and empirical
and Internet availability. On the other end of the spectrum, methods to ensure convergence for FL setup [27], [28], [29].
the latest developments in IoT edge devices (i.e., sensors, The main issue with those FL approaches is that they assume
drones, wearables, and smartphones) allow computation at the the participating clients in training are resource-efficient and
edge devices rather than sending data to the centralized server. can complete the training iterations. These assumptions are
This results in the development of a new paradigm named false when we consider them in a realistic FL environment.
FL [13]. However, this new paradigm suffers from several To resolve statistical heterogeneity, existing works propose
challenges, such as communication overhead, privacy preser- to share either the server’s proxy data or the client’s local
vation, system and statistical heterogeneity, and highly dense data [30], [31]. However, disseminating the proxy information
federated networks [14], [15]. To this end, several researchers to the clients’ or passing clients’ information to the server
developed novel optimization techniques (i.e., altering the may breach the privacy rules [32]. The framework proposed
3762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE I
 A C OMPREHENSIVE L IST OF N OTATION U SED T HROUGHOUT THE PAPER A LONG W ITH R ELEVANT A BBREVIATIONS AND T HEIR M EANINGS

in [7] can deal with statistical and system heterogeneity. it to allow partial amounts of tasks according to the client’s
They add a proximal term and perform a generalization of resources. The CELP protocol, with its focus on efficient
FedAvg to manage statistical heterogeneity and allow partial client selection and adaptability in heterogeneous environamounts of tasks. However, the framework is unsuitable for ments, shows potential for tackling federated class-incremental
realistic networks as they select the clients randomly, similar learning challenges. By dynamically adjusting to varying data
to FedAvg, where most clients might be out-of-resources distributions and resource constraints, CELP could effectively
or inactive. Moreover, the random selection of clients may manage the incremental introduction of new classes, ensuring
result in the selection of all straggler clients that could hardly sustained learning performance without significant loss in
perform a single iteration. Recently, in a rapidly evolving field accuracy or increase in computational load. To capture the
of federated class-incremental learning has become increas- malicious behavior of clients, we create a network-based IDS
ingly crucial [33]. In federated class-incremental learning, (NIDS) in CELP in the experiments to provide an extra layer
the challenge lies in efficiently integrating new classes into of security. NIDS examines incoming traffic for suspicious
the learning model without disrupting the existing knowledge patterns and behaviors and then alerts the Trusted Authority
structure [34]. (TA) when malicious activity is detected. This allows for
 In addition, the random selection of clients also creates quick identification and remediation of any threats, ensuring
a possibility of malicious clients in the network that can the security of the network and its connected clients. The
have detrimental effects on FL training [35]. For instance, experimental results prove that the proposed CELP performs
apart from directly injecting false data, these malicious clients significantly in terms of convergence, especially in resourcemight engage in sophisticated network behaviors that indi- constrained networks. For a quick reference, in Table I, we
rectly undermine the model’s integrity. Such activities could present a list of notations and terminologies used throughout
include generating anomalous network traffic to disguise data the paper.
poisoning or to interfere with the communication between
honest clients and the server [36]. This nuanced relationship
between direct data manipulation and indirect network-level III. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT
disruptions amplifies the risks in FL environments, partic- In a realistic FL scenario, the clients possess heterogeneous
ularly when dealing with non-IID data distributions [37]. capabilities to execute the assigned tasks. During the training
Malicious clients, through these combined strategies, can process, there is a high possibility that a client may upload
significantly distort the training process, leading to a model an inappropriate model, or experience a straggler effect.
that is not only poorly trained but also vulnerable to more Furthermore, these unreliable and inconsistent clients can
covert attacks [38], [39]. Moreover, this dual-threat approach, delay the training process and negatively impact the model’s
direct data poisoning coupled with malicious network traffic, accuracy [41]. This scenario often arises when the server,
can also hinder the participation of legitimate clients, further unaware of a client’s resource limitations, assigns tasks beyond
exacerbating the challenges in achieving accurate and robust their capabilities, or when the model size is too substantial for
model training [40]. a client to handle efficiently [42].
 To this end, in this paper, we propose a lightweight FL In addition to the direct risks posed by malicious clients
protocol named CELP that can perform efficiently in hetero- in FL training, such as data manipulation and communication
geneous FL environments. In particular, we divide the whole disruptions, there is also a need to recognize and address
protocol into three phases. In the first phase, we perform subtler, network-level threats that these clients can introduce.
sample-based model pruning so that clients and a server can Malicious clients can employ tactics that extend beyond simple
handle the reduced model size. In the second phase, we data breaches or corruption; they can orchestrate complex
calculate the clients’ eligibility scores (CES) to select the network behaviors to create vulnerabilities in the training
most resourceful clients (regarding battery life, memory, and process [43]. This could involve generating deceptive network
bandwidth) for training. Finally, in the third phase, we perform traffic patterns to obscure their malicious activities or interfere
a re-parameterization on the FedAvg algorithm and generalize with the model updates between honest clients and the server.
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3763

Examples of such network-level threats include Sybil attacks, where ω represents the weight vector, Fw represents the objecwhere a malicious client impersonates multiple clients to number of clients, i represents a
 tive function, X represents the 
influence the training process disproportionately or replay particular client, and Ki ≥ 0, i Ki = 1 shows
  each client’s
attacks, where old network communications are reused to impact on FL model which must satisfy i Ki = 1. We
create confusion or inconsistencies in model updates [44]. assume thatall the data samples d are available at each client
 The convergence of these direct and indirect threats sig- and d = i di is the total number of data points; hence,
nificantly jeopardizes the security and integrity of the FL Ki = ddi . The cloud server disseminates a global model to the
training process. Hence, developing robust security measures TA. Afterward, the TA announces an FL task by stating the
that encompass both data-level and network-level protection minimum resource requirements and the CES to participate in
becomes imperative to safeguard the FL training process the training. During this process, the IDS actively monitors the
against such multifaceted attacks. The integrated IDS in our data exchanges for signs of data tampering or any anomalous
protocol is designed to counteract these threats by providing behaviors that suggest a security threat, thereby ensuring that
comprehensive monitoring and response mechanisms that only genuine and secure updates are considered for model
address both aspects: aggregation. The selected clients then train their local models
 • Data-level Protection: Our IDS specifically looks for for e iterations using SGD optimization. The trained models
 anomalies in data submissions, such as sudden shifts in are then transmitted to the cloud server through TA. Here,
 data distribution or patterns indicative of data tampering IDS also checks for inconsistencies or signs of attack in the
 and poisoning. We consider label flipping and clean label model updates received. Finally, the cloud server aggregates
 attacks where labels are manipulated either overtly or and obtains a new global model for the next iteration. This
 subtly to degrade the model’s performance. process keeps repeating until the convergence level is achieved.
 • Network-level Protection: The IDS also monitors network Throughout the process, we incorporate redundancy mechatraffic for unusual patterns that could indicate a threat, nisms within the data aggregation phase to counteract potential
 such as an unusually high frequency of updates from data loss or corruption. These mechanisms are designed to
 a particular client or duplicate data packets that could detect inconsistencies or anomalies in data submissions before
 signify a replay attack. they affect the model’s accuracy. By employing a combi-
By integrating the IDS directly into the training and aggre- nation of real-time monitoring and post-process validation,
gation processes, we ensure that it acts not just as a passive CELP ensures that all client contributions are both authentic
observer but as an active defender of the network’s integrity and constructive toward the FL objectives, thereby mainand the quality of the federated model. taining the integrity and reliability of the collective learning
 process.
 IV. S YSTEM M ODEL
 This section presents the system models, which serve B. Sample-Based Pruning Model
as a foundation of the proposed Client Eligibility-based
 In a resource-constrained FL environment, the clients may
Lightweight Protocol (CELP). In particular, we first define
 have limited battery life, memory, or bandwidth, posing chalthe FL model based on the state-of-the-art FedAvg algorithm.
 lenges in training large-scale ML models [45]. Our proposed
Secondly, we present the sample-based pruning model that
 CELP leverages a model-based pruning mechanism to reduce
aims to reduce the model size. Thirdly, we explain the
 these large-scale models to smaller sizes, thus easing the
resource-aware client selection model that selects the most
 computational load on participating clients [46], [47]. This
reliable and efficient clients for training. Finally, the integrated
 pruning mechanism, applied by the cloud server, involves
IDS is detailed as it plays a crucial role in securing the
 initially gathering data samples independently or requesting
training process by monitoring and responding to data-level
 a small subset from clients. The server then uses these
and network-level threats. Lastly, we present a generalization
 samples to train a neural network, combining CNN and
model that permits users to complete only a part of the task,
 back-propagation to learn correlations between pixels and
depending on the remaining resources.
 target outputs [48]. After training, the model is pruned by
 removing weights and neurons that do not affect accuracy.
A. FL Model The process of sample-based pruning in CELP is outlined as
 In the proposed FL model, we assume a TA between follows:
the clients X = {1, 2, 3, . . . , X } and a cloud server Q. To 1) The server either independently gathers data samples
participate in the FL training, all the available clients x ∈ on its own or requests a small subset of data samples
X use their local data D of size Sn . The local training data from the participating clients from their shared data and
consists of a pair of input and output features, where the input assumes each client provides the data samples.
is the vector of data samples, and the output is the label of 2) Initially, the cloud server initializes the global model
each input vector. The target is to minimize the loss function for the first iteration. In subsequent iterations, the global
described as follows: model will be updated using local updates received from
 the clients.
 
 X
 min(Fω ) = Ki Fi (ω) (1) 3) To achieve a targeted pruning level, the server performs
 ω sample-based pruning.
 i=1
3764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 4) The achieved pruned model is broadcasted to all participating clients, where each client trains their local models
 using the pruned global model and their local data.
 5) The clients with limited resources are allowed to share
 partial amounts of tasks, where the cloud server aggregates the shared models of clients.
 The FL process begins once the desired pruned level is
achieved.

C. Resource-Aware Clients’ Selection Model
 In FL networks, the prevalent assumption is that all clients
selected at random possess adequate resources to complete
given tasks. Contrary to this, in real-world FL scenarios,
client resources are often heterogeneous, potentially leading
to situations where not all clients can complete their tasks.
 Fig. 2. The overview of clients’ eligibility score for the training of
Such heterogeneity can result in stragglers, incorrect model three different clients, where the score is added or negated based on their
submissions, or delayed responses, hindering the convergence performance.
of the learning process. It is, therefore, imperative that a
protocol assesses clients’ resources and historical performance
before task assignment. Algorithm 1: Mechanism of resource-aware clients selec-
 The CELP integrates a resource-aware client selection tion.
model, where the TA specifies task requirements, including Input : current round r, local iteration (e), client id (i),
minimum resource requirements such as bandwidth, memory, global model parameters (ωr ), and model
and battery life, alongside a Client Eligibility Score (CES) deviation (Ω);
necessary for training participation. Upon gathering resource Output: eligible clients for training
 1 Client Eligibility Score (CES):
availability data from interested clients, the TA filters and
 2 if i upload local model ω within given t then
 r
selects clients who meet the training criteria, while excluding e
those who do not. 3 add Ri = 0;
 4 append CESi = Gi + Gm ;
 5 else
CES Calculation 6 add Rie = +1;
 
 The protocol computes the CES by identifying clients 7 if e1 m i < r5 then
capable of executing the complete training process based 8 append Hie = Gm and CESi = Gi − Gm ;
on available resources. Initially, each client entering the FL 9 else
 
network is assigned a base score of Gi = +75, which also 10 if e1 m i ≥ r5 append Hi = Gh and
 e
serves as the eligibility threshold for training participation. A CESi = Gi − Gh ;
trust list L acknowledges clients with adequate resources and
 11 else if Rω − Lei > Ω then
an interest in training who are not selected for the current
 12 append CESi = Gi − Gs ;
round, granting them a motivation score of Gt = +5.
 During training, clients who fulfill their tasks are rewarded 13 Add i to trustworthy clients list T;
with Ga = +5, and those who do not are penalized with 14 Check Resource Mi = f (ν, ξ, );
Ga = − 5. Timely submission of trained models is 15 if Mi > Mreq ;
incentivized with a score of Gm = +10, whereas failure to 16 return Mi to eligible clients list EC;
submit within the deadline results in a deduction of Gm =
−5. The protocol also maintains a historical record for each
participant, imposing a penalty of Gh = −20 on clients failing
to respond in five consecutive rounds. Furthermore, to mitigate (ωr ), and the model deviation (Ω). Each client is bound to
the straggler effect, clients whose model deviates significantly return the local model parameters within a given time t, which
from the norm are prevented from joining the training by the TA sets. Once the TA passes those training parameters,
assigning a penalty score of Gs = −50. These rewards and the CELP checks whether the client i uploaded its local model
penalties are systematically added to or subtracted from the ω r within a given time (t) or not (Line 2). If the client has
total CES. The methodology for calculating the CES across uploaded the model within a given time, then the TA sets a
ten local iterations for three clients is illustrated in Figure 2, record Rie of client i in current iteration e as 0 and rewards
and the complete mechanism for client selection and CES that client Gm = +10 which is added to its Gi initial score
calculation is encapsulated in Algorithm 1. (Line 3-4). In contrast, the TA sets a record Rie of client i
 In particular, in Algorithm 1, the TA passes the training in current iteration e as +1 and checks the historical record
iteration (e), client id (i), given time (t) for sending back the of that client. If the sum of unsuccessful uploads is less than
local model, global model parameters for the current round five consecutive rounds r, then the TA punishes the client with
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3765

Fig. 3. The figure presents the three steps process of resource-aware clients’ selection model.

Gm = −5 and updates it in the historical list Hie , which is Algorithm 2: IDS Integrated Security Checks in FL
negated from the CES (Line 6-8). If the historical record of Input : Model updates {ωi,t }X i=1 , Network logs
that client is more than or equal to five consecutive rounds,
 {NetLogi,t }X
then the TA assigns a penalty of Gh = −20 to that client and i=1
 Output: Validated model updates, Security alerts
updates the CES accordingly (Line 10). If a client’s model
 1 foreach client i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , X } do
has a huge deviation from other clients’ models due to the
 2 ModelDeviationi ← ωi,t − ωprev ;
straggling effect, then the TA assigns a huge penalty to that
 3 NetAnomalyi ← AnalyzeNetLogs(NetLogi,t );
client Gs = −50 so that the client won’t be able to participate
 4 if ModelDeviationi < τ and NetAnomalyi < ρ
in the training because the client will not be able to satisfy
 then
the minimum participation eligibility score (Line 11-12). Once
 5 Update Global Model with ωi,t ;
the client is added to the trustworthy list, the TA checks the
 6 else
client’s resources (bandwidth ν, memory ξ, and battery ). If
 7 Raise Security Alert for client i;
the client’s resources are greater than the required resources
 8 Exclude ωi,t from current aggregation;
for the particular task, then the client will be added to the list
of eligible clients EC (Line 13-16). The completed process of
the proposed CELP is shown in Figure 3.

 Networki , t measures the anomalous network traffic from
D. IDS Deployment
 client i at time t, and ρ is the corresponding threshold for
 The IDS is an integral component of our CELP, designed network anomaly detection.
to ensure the integrity and security of the FL process by IDS Implementation: The IDS is implemented through a
monitoring both data-level and network-level interactions. It series of checks integrated into the data aggregation and
dynamically detects and mitigates potential security threats, model update phases of the training process. Algorithm 2
such as data poisoning and anomalous network activities, outlines the procedure of incorporating IDS into the FL cycle,
which could compromise the model’s accuracy or lead to data emphasizing how each step is validated for security and
leakage. integrity.
 IDS Functionality: The IDS operates by continuously mon- The IDS ensures that only contributions adhering to estabitoring the data traffic between clients and the central server, lished security protocols influence the global model, enhancing
analyzing patterns that deviate from expected behaviors. This the overall robustness of the FL environment.
proactive monitoring helps in the early detection of both
passive and active attacks, which include but are not limited
to label flipping, model poisoning, and Sybil attacks. The E. Generalization Model
detection process is formalized by defining a threat model and As we previously described, the participating clients may
corresponding detection criteria: experience heterogeneous resource restrictions regarding band-
  width, memory, and battery life. The device may lose the
 1 if Δ Modeli,t > τ or Networki,t > ρ
 Threati,t = (2) network connection for various reasons despite the proposed
 0 otherwise
 protocol’s resourceful client selection using available system
where Δ Modeli,t represents the deviation of the uploaded parameters. Moreover, there is also a possibility that all
model from client i at time t from the expected model update the participating clients have limited remaining resources;
norm, and τ is the threshold for acceptable model variation. therefore, selecting those clients for training would be the
3766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 Algorithm 3: The Execution Process of CELP
 1 Sample-based pruning: The cloud server receives a data
 sample from a subset of clients to perform model
 pruning.
 2 Server Execution:
 3 Initialize the pruned global model and send the task
 requirements to TA
 4 New clients send their interest in joining the training;
 5 TA assigns the Gi to all clients;

Fig. 4. The representation of four heterogeneous clients considered for partial 6 Clients receive the task requirements from the TA;
amounts of tasks. 7 initialize ω0 ;
 8 check resources of all interested clients;
 9 for each round r = {1,2,3,. . . ,n} do
 10 ECr = Check Resource f (ν, ξ, );
 11 update EC with updated CES;
only choice. To this end, we considered allowing a partial 12 for each client i ∈ X in parallel do
number of tasks in the proposed CELP according to the client’s 13 ωri +1 ← ClientUpdate (i, ωr );
resources. 14 if i updates model within given t threshold then
 To allow partial amounts of tasks to the resource-constrained 15 IDS Check: Perform security check on
clients, we perform generalization on the state-of-the-art
 ωri +1 and NetLogi ;
FedAvg algorithm and re-parameterize it to deal with the
 16 if IDS confirms ωri +1 is secure then
variable performance of clients. In particular, we use the
“Resource-aware Clients’ Selection Model” mentioned above 17 ωr +1 ← ωr +1 + iDr ωri +1 ;
and select a subset of the most resourceful clients. The server 18 else
performs sample-based model pruning using the collected data 19 Raise Security Alert for client i;
samples from those selected clients and reduces the model 20 Exclude ωri +1 from current aggregation;
size. The reduced global model is then sent to all the participating clients. Unlike FedAvg, the proposed CELP doesn’t force 21 Update CES;
the clients to uniform local iterations. Instead, the TA assigns 22 Client Update: (client i );
the local iterations to the participating clients, and the clients
 23 Client i finds a ωri +1 which is an ϑri -inexactness of
train their models to match their resource capabilities. The
 Ψi (ω; ωr ) = Fi (ω) + γ2 ω − ωr 2 to find the optimal
trained models are then sent back to the cloud server, where
 number of iterations.
the aggregation is performed asynchronously. This results in
 24 B ← (split Hi into batches of size B );
maximum participation in model training, including straggler
 25 for each iteration e do
clients. Previously, in [7], the authors considered a similar sce-
 26 for batch b ∈ B do
nario of partial participation of clients; however, their design
 27 ω ← −ηΔ (ω; b);
doesn’t perform practically in the later iterations as they had to
choose the clients with minimum resources; hence, the model 28 return ω to the cloud server;
update deviates and results in lower accuracy. In contrast, the
proposed CELP leverages the resource-aware clients’ selection
to tackle the straggler clients and further allow partial amounts
of tasks. To consider the ϑri -inexactness for the resource-aware V. E XECUTION OF CELP
participating client i at the training round r, we define as We present the complete execution procedure of the
follows: proposed CELP in Algorithm 3. The execution begins with
 Definition 1 (ϑri -inexactness): Let us consider a function the cloud server performing sample-based model pruning,
Ψi (ω; ωr ) = Fi (ω) + γ2 ω − ωr 2 , and ϑ ∈ [0, 1], we call ω ∗ using data samples received from a subset of clients (Line
is a ϑri -inexactness of minω Ψi (ω; ωr ) if ∇Ψi (ω ∗ ; ωr ) ≤ 1). The server then initializes the pruned global model and
ϑri ∇Ψi (ωr ; ωr ) where ∇Ψi (ω; ωr ) = ∇Fi (ω)+γ(ω−ωr ). communicates the task requirements to the TA (Lines 3-6).
 where ϑri is a representation of variable local iteration that The TA assesses the clients’ interest in training and assigns an
shows the required local computation for a particular client i initial score Gi to all clients, along with the task requirements
in a global round r to achieve a given FL task. In particular, and system parameters (Lines 4-8). Each round of the process
by relaxing the (ϑir − inexactness), we can achieve the checks the resources of interested clients and updates the
system heterogeneity close to the optimal solution. We use eligible clients list based on the CES (Lines 9-11).
this (ϑir − inexactness) solution because it allows for an During each round of training, the protocol ensures security
approximate solution to be obtained without the need for through an integrated IDS that performs checks on model
a computationally expensive exact solution. In Figure 4, we updates and network logs. If the IDS detects a threat, it raises
show the overview of considered clients for partial amounts an alert and the affected client’s update is excluded from
of tasks. the current aggregation (Lines 14-20). This security measure
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3767

 denotes the number of total data samples in the network, and
 ni denotes the local data samples of a client i. Under the
 bounded dissimilarity, if we have > 0, there is a possibility
 of a B , i.e., for all the data samples in the network. However,
 due to the diverse data distributions across the FL environment,
 one can easily observe B (ω) > 1, where a larger value of
 B (ω) denotes a greater degree of dissimilarity between the
 local functions of the clients.

 A. Convex Scenario
 We assume that Fi (·) is convex and ϑri = 0 for any client
 i and round r, such that all the participating clients in the
 training are able to solve their local problems exactly. The
 other assertions are satisfied in the non-convex scenario.

 B. Non-Convex Scenario
 Here, we assume non-convex and L-Lipschitz smooth for the
 local functions Fi [49]. We assume that in the local functions
 there exists L > 0, such that ∇2 Fi ≥ −Li , γ̄:γ − L > 0
 and B (ω r ) ≤ V . Now, considering the formulations from
Fig. 5. The execution flow of the proposed CELP. Algorithm 2, we obtain
  √
 1 ϑB B (1 + ϑ) 2 L, B (1 + ϑ)
 λ= − − √ −
is crucial for maintaining the integrity of the FL process. γ γ γ̄ i γ̄γ
Following security checks, clients conduct local training, split L(1 + ϑ)2 B 2 L, B 2 (1 + ϑ)2  √ 
their data into batches, and optimize using SGD (Lines 23-28). − − 2 2i + 2
 2γ̄ 2 γ̄ 2 i
The cloud server collects the local models’ parameters from
the clients and aggregates them to update the global model, (3)
ensuring that only verified and secure updates are used (Lines Considering the equation above, we observe that in the
14-21). iteration r for the local function, there is an expected loss,
 Finally, the TA updates the CES based on each client’s which is demonstrated as follows:
response to the training requirements and their timely sub-  
mission of the updated model (Line 21). The updated CES Zv f ω r +1 ≤ f (ω r ) − λ∇f (ω r )2 (4)
then informs the selection of clients for subsequent training
rounds. This comprehensive approach, encapsulated in CELP, where v denotes the subset of i devices selected in the iteration
leverages asynchronous FL to accommodate varying data sizes r. Similarly, we have the same assumptions for variable ϑ’s,
and client capabilities, optimizing resource allocation and and we again consider the formulations from Algorithm 2, and
maintaining data security across the network. The complete we obtain
  √
flow of the proposed CELP is depicted in Figure 5. 1 ϑr B B (1 + ϑr ) 2 L, B (1 + ϑr )
 r
 λ = − − √ −
 γ γ γ̄ i γ̄γ
 VI. C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS L(1 + ϑr )2 B 2 L, B 2 (1 + ϑr )2  √ 
 − − 2 2i + 2
 To prove the convergence analysis, we first measure the 2γ̄ 2 γ̄ 2 i
local batch B-dissimilarity of the proposed CELP. In particular, >0 (5)
B-dissimilarity defines a bounded dissimilarity by allowing statistical heterogeneity in independent and identical distribution Similarly, here we observe an expected loss in the global
(IID) scenarios. function in the iteration r, which is expressed as follows:
 Definition 2 (B-Dissimilarity): the local functions of the  
participating clients in FL training are B-dissimilar at ω if Zv f ω r +1 ≤ f (ω r ) − λr ∇f (ω r )2 (6)
Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ] ≤ ∇f (ω)2 B 2 . So now we can define the where v denotes the subset of i devices selected in the iteration
value of B (ω), i.e., B (ω) = 1 when Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ] = r and ϑr = maxi∈v ϑri .
∇f (ω)2 . Here, all clients’ local functions must agree on ω,
or all clients must have the same local functions, and B (ω)
 VII. S IMULATION S ETTINGS
 Zi [∇Fi (ω)2 ]
= ∇f (ω)2
 , when ∇f (ω) = 0. This section shows the implementation criteria and then
 The Z[ · ] presents the expectationon FL the participating discusses the simulation setup and dataset representation.
 N
clients with masses Si = nni and i=1 , Si = 1, where n Finally, we show the simulation results of the proposed CELP.
3768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE II
A. Implementation N ETWORK M ODEL A RCHITECTURES
 For the implementation, we use a sample-based model
pruning that helps reduce the model size. To distribute the
task, we grouped the image sample of clients as batches for
input, and then we set the TensorFlow variables to construct
the model. To make prediction and loss computations using
those variables and model parameters. A distributed function
is defined for the clients to send their local metrics to the
cloud server for aggregation. After the aggregation, we use
TensorFlow Federated [50] for model representation.

B. Network Configuration TABLE III
 H YPER -PARAMETERS
 In the network configuration, we build a resource-bounded
edge FL environment with multiple clients that can follow
the instructions. For a real-time heterogeneous environment,
we set the variant configurations of memory, processor, and
battery for each client. To keep the FL process simple, we consider similar transmission rates for all the clients. In particular,
we consider 50 clients, assuming that twenty are unreliable,
four clients have resource shortages, and four deliver lowquality models. Considering variant clients’ configuration, we
simulate the straggled and computation-capable clients with
different resource constraints. We assess the proposed CELP
framework using well-known datasets to better understand the and 64 GB of RAM. The proposed lightweight protocol is
effects of statistical heterogeneity. simulated by TensorFlow in Python.

C. Dataset and CNN Models E. Evaluation Schemes
 In the simulation experiments, we use two different To better understand the performance of the proposed
Convolution Neural Network (CNN) models, namely, LeNet, CELP, we consider the state-of-art approaches FedAvg [2]
and AlexNet. The LeNet is trained with the MNIST, a hand- and FedProx [55]. We consider the same settings while
writing dataset. The MNIST dataset contains 60,000 training executing all three approaches. In order to highlight CELP’s
samples, and each sample is based on handwritten digits distinctiveness, we emphasize its historical analysis aspect in
ranging from 0-9. The AlexNet is trained with the CIFAR- client selection, setting it apart from FedAvg and FedProx.
10, an image-based dataset. The CIFAR-10 dataset contains This historical perspective in CELP, taking into account past
50,000 training samples and 10,000 testing samples, where client interactions, ensures more informed and effective client
each sample consists of images with the size of 32 × 32 pixels. selection, enhancing the robustness and efficiency of the
In the case of IDS, we consider the UNSW-NB15 [51], and learning model. To bring fairness to the results, we use SGD
CICIDS2018 [52] datasets. The two datasets are popular tools as a local optimizer, which is also considered in both existing
for evaluating the performance of an IDS for FL networks. approaches. Moreover, we maintain the same hyper-parameters
In particular, the UNSW-NB15 dataset is used for network for all the approaches in all experiments; the details of those
security attacks and normal activities collected by the Centre hyper-parameters are shown in Table III.
for Computer Security Research of the Australian Defence
Force Academy. It contains 49 features, such as IP addresses,
 VIII. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
protocol types, packet sizes, etc. This dataset provides a benchmark for testing the accuracy of anomaly detection systems for In this section, we show the performance of the proposed
NIDS. On the other hand, the CICIDS2018 dataset is designed CELP. In particular, we first show the performance of the
by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity to capture network pruned updates and then the performance of resource-aware
traffic. It contains 81 features, such as flow duration, protocol clients’ selection. Finally, we present convergence accuracy
type, source, destination IP addresses, etc. This dataset is and the expected loss compared to the existing schemes on
useful for testing and validating FL algorithms for detecting both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.
and classifying cyber-attacks. For all these datasets, we employ
the CNNs commonly used in the relevant literature. We present A. Pruned Updates
the architecture of those CNN models in Table II. As the central aim of the proposed protocol is to support
 resource-constrained FL networks, it is crucial to develop a
D. System Environment lightweight model that prioritizes essential features to expe-
 We run all our experiments on the server with an Apple M1 dite training time. Our approach incorporates sample-based
Pro with a 10-core CPU, 16-core GPU, 16-core Neural Engine, model pruning, leveraging TensorFlow’s model-optimization
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3769

Fig. 6. Accuracy of pruned updates on variant data samples collected from
the clients for training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively. Fig. 7. Comparison of accuracy on a variant number of straggler clients for
 training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.

classes to selectively prune low-magnitude classes from
the Keras framework. The resulting model parameters are
managed through classes like PolynomialDecay and prune
low-magnitude, which facilitate efficient model updates.
 To demonstrate the efficacy of our approach, we assess
the performance of pruned model updates across different
network architectures, including LeNet and AlexNet, as shown
in Figure 6. We explore various sample sizes, i.e., 5%,
15%, 25%, 40%, and 50%, to identify the optimal balance
between model performance and resource efficiency. Our
findings reveal that smaller sample sizes often lead to less
accurate models due to the potential exclusion of some classes. Fig. 8. Comparison of loss on a variant number of straggler clients for
In contrast, larger sample sizes, such as 50%, significantly training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively.
enhance model accuracy by ensuring a more representative
sample across all classes, thereby mitigating class omission.
This strategy, although seemingly counter to the typical FL
 protocol’s performance as the number of participating clients
paradigm of minimal data usage, is justified by the need for
 increases. This is vital as the increase in client numbers
robust model accuracy in resource-constrained environments
 could potentially exacerbate the straggler effect, impacting
where each training iteration is costly. The increased sample
 the overall system’s convergence rates and accuracy. Our
size ensures that the model training is as comprehensive as
 scalability investigations help identify any potential conpossible within the fewest number of rounds, aligning with the
 straints, such as the increased coordination overhead and
ultimate goal of efficiency in FL networks.
 resource allocation challenges in larger networks, ensuring that
 CELP maintains reliable performance even as network size
B. Partial Participation of Clients expands.
 To allow partial amounts of tasks to the participating clients, In Figure 7 and Figure 8, we show the performance of the
we consider system heterogeneity to measure the performance straggler effect. In particular, we experimented with training
of the proposed CELP. When the cloud server assigns the accuracy and loss, respectively, on both LeNet and AlexNet
task, the TA measures the resource capabilities of each client by considering a variant number of straggler clients in the
and allows only resourceful clients to train using the resource- network. We consider three different scenarios of straggler
aware clients’ selection model. However, there is a possibility clients, i.e., 20, 50, and 90, where 20 means that 80% of
that we may have only resource-constrained clients in the the participated clients can perform up to E rounds, and
network; therefore, we must allow clients to perform partial 90 means that only 10% of the participated clients can
tasks. To this end, a participating client i estimates the number perform up to E rounds. From the results, we can observe
of tasks it needs to accomplish on iteration r as a function that system heterogeneity negatively impacts the convergence
of its available resource restrictions in a global round R. The performance, and a higher number of heterogeneity results
global rounds must be performed by all the clients, and the in poor convergence. Moreover, it is clear that considering
clients who cannot perform up to the E rounds, then those the straggler clients can achieve significant performance rather
clients are allowed to perform fewer iterations based on their than dropping them in the first place. This means that allowing
resource capabilities. Here, i represents the participating client, partial amounts of tasks to the straggling clients does not affect
r represents the local iteration, R denotes the single global the overall performance. The results in Figures 6-8 indicate
round, and E denotes the complete global rounds. that sample-based model pruning may result in some accuracy
 In addition to system heterogeneity, the scalability of CELP loss; however, if we choose the clients efficiently, we can still
is critically assessed to ensure its efficacy across varying obtain significant convergence while suffering from a minimal
numbers of clients. Scalability testing involves analyzing the loss.
3770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE IV
 C OMMUNICATION B ITS R EQUIRED FOR U PLOAD AND D OWNLOAD TO ACHIEVE THE TARGETED ACCURACY IN THE
 P RESENCE OF S TRAGGLER C LIENTS FOR T HREE D IFFERENT S CENARIOS , I . E ., 20, 50, AND 90

 number of iterations while ensuring robust convergence. In
 Particular, in Figure 9, we consider the same hyper-parameters
 as mentioned in Table II and measure the performance of
 the proposed CELP compared to the FedProx and FedAvg
 algorithms in terms of global accuracy and loss. It can be seen
 that the proposed CELP handles the statistical heterogeneity
 effectively, obtains higher accuracy, and faces lower expected
 loss compared to the state-of-the-art FedProx and FedAvg.

 D. Communication Costs
 In addition to evaluating CELP’s performance in terms
 of accuracy and loss, we have also examined its efficiency
 in communication costs. This is a crucial aspect, especially
 in FL environments with straggler clients. We compare the
 communication costs required to achieve targeted accuracy
 levels in CELP with those in FedAvg and FedProx. Our
 analysis, presented in Table IV, shows the upload and download communication bits required for LeNet using the MNIST
Fig. 9. Comparison of statistical heterogeneity in terms of accuracy and loss
for training on both LeNet and AlexNet, respectively. dataset and AlexNet using the CIFAR-10 dataset under different straggler scenarios (20, 50, and 90). These scenarios
 represent varying proportions of clients that can perform up
 to the complete global rounds. The results indicate that CELP
C. Statistical Heterogeneity significantly reduces the communication overhead compared
 To check whether the proposed CELP can handle the to both FedAvg and FedProx, especially as the proportion of
statistical heterogeneity or not, we eliminated the proximal straggler clients increases. This reduction in communication
term from the clients’ objective functions and performed a sim- costs is instrumental in enhancing the efficiency of FL,
ulation experiment. By allowing heterogeneity in the dataset, particularly in networks with resource-constrained clients.
the clients’ performance drops significantly. In Figure 9, we
show the statistical heterogeneity of the proposed CELP on the E. IDS-Use Case
MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. In this experiment, we didn’t In the training process of FL, the malicious clients tend
consider any system heterogeneity, and we assume that all the to launch malicious activities, and because the central server
participating clients’ have enough resources to train their mod- cannot access the local data, therefore, FL cannot control the
els up to E iterations. The authors in [2] state that tuning the poisoning attacks [56]. In such attacks, the malicious clients
number of iterations helps reach the desired convergence level. disturb the FL model and try to weaken the security protection
However, more iterations require more computational tasks of local training data by injecting poisoned traffic data. To
from the clients’ resulting in faster convergence but reducing this end, we consider two poisoning attacks, namely, label
the communication efficiency. Moreover, in a realistic FL flipping and clean label attacks, in our proposed CELP-based
network, setting up a higher number of iterations may increase IDS case. In particular, in a label-flipping attack, an adversary
the possibility that a participating client cannot perform a manipulates the training data labels, such as flipping benign
computational task. Therefore, it is crucial to set a sufficient samples to malicious labels or malicious samples to benign
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3771

labels. This can introduce noise into the training data and
lead to a misclassification of test data. On the other hand,
clean label attacks involve attacking a model by using carefully
crafted samples that are correctly labeled with the correct
labels. This may involve an adversary crafting malicious data,
which is labeled as benign, or benign data, which is labeled
as malicious. These samples will be fed into the model during
training, potentially resulting in the misclassification of both
benign and malicious data.
 In the proposed experiments, we explore two different
distributed data settings for FL-based NIDS: IID and Non-IID.
As mentioned above, we consider two datasets, UNSW-
NB15 and CICIDS2018. For the case of IID, we consider
the UNSW-NB15 dataset and conduct a binary classification
(anomaly detection) task because it allows all the clients to
collect malicious and benign traffic. For the case of Non-IID,
we consider the CICIDS2018 dataset and perform a multiclassification (intrusion detection) task that asks all clients
to collect several types of traffic data while performing the
local training. In the experiment, we considered 50 clients for Fig. 10. Comparison of poisoned model detection (PMD) accuracy with
 state-of-the-art offline detection method (VAE).
model training; among them, 20 were malicious clients who
launched poisoning attacks. We adopt the model poisoning
strategy from [57] that maximizes the success of those attacks.
 Attack Scenarios: We consider two attack scenarios: single
and multi-round. In particular, single rounds indicate that a
client injects a poisoning attack in one round, e.g., an attack
is launched in a second round, then it is represented as (Λ2 ).
In the experiment, we consider single round attack in three
different rounds Λ5 , Λ10 , and Λ20 . On the other hand, a
scenario of a multi-round attack means the poisoning attack is
launched in multiple rounds. In this scenario, we continuously
injected poisoning attacks.
 Fig. 11. Performance comparison of accuracy on multi-round attack scenario
 Benchmarks: The performance of CELP defensive mecha- with state-of-the-art FedAvg and VAE on UNSW-NB15 dataset.
nisms is compared against the state-of-the-art method, namely,
VAE [58]. VAE is based on the random selection of model
parameters and requires a pre-trained offline model on the
server side to detect and reject anomalous local models. Its
implementation is similar to that described in [58].
 Evaluation: We consider the effectiveness of NIDS in the
proposed lightweight protocol by launching the single-round
attack scenario. As the proposed model relies on the TA, which
is connected to the clients throughout the training process.
Thus, we compare it with the existing offline detection-based
method, VAE, for single-round attacks. Figure 10 shows the
detection accuracy of both methods. It is evident that the Fig. 12. Performance comparison of accuracy on multi-round attack scenario
proposed CELP outperforms VAE in both datasets, demon- with state-of-the-art FedAvg and VAE on CICIDS2018 dataset.
strating its superior capability of detecting poisoned models.
 In Figures 11 and 12, the efficacy of CELP in a NIDS
context is showcased, particularly under the strain of multi- Figure 12 depicts CELP’s performance on the CICIDS2018
round poisoning attacks. The accuracy curves presented in dataset, further illustrating its robustness against complex
Figure 11 for the UNSW-NB15 dataset indicate that CELP attack patterns. The fluctuation observed in accuracy, particumaintains higher accuracy compared to both FedAvg and VAE, larly in the presence of Non-IID data, highlights the challenge
demonstrating its resilience to label-flipping and clean label of model distribution shifts a common occurrence in realattacks. Specifically, CELP’s consistent performance across world scenarios where data across clients is not identically
multiple rounds of attacks can be attributed to the dynamic distributed. CELP’s design counters this instability through its
adaptation of its pruning and client selection mechanisms, eligibility-based client selection, which ensures that a broader
which effectively mitigate the impact of poisoned updates on and more representative set of client updates are aggregated,
the global model. thus enhancing the overall stability and accuracy of the
3772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

model. The comparison with FedAvg and VAE in this figure networks. Additionally, CELP accommodates partial task
underscores CELP’s superior defense mechanism, enabled by completion by resource-constrained clients, enabling robust
the continuous monitoring capabilities of the integrated TA. convergence even under challenging conditions. Our
Such monitoring is crucial for recognizing and neutralizing the simulation experiments demonstrate that CELP significantly
subtle and evolving strategies employed in poisoning attacks. enhances performance metrics: it achieves up to 93% accuracy
 These results collectively affirm CELP’s advanced capabil- on the MNIST dataset and 83% accuracy on CIFAR-10,
ities in maintaining model integrity and learning accuracy in markedly improving over existing approaches. Furthermore,
the face of sophisticated multi-round attacks, setting a new CELP reduces communication costs by up to 81.01%
benchmark for security in FL systems. compared to FedAvg and 72.54% compared to FedProx,
 effectively handling high proportions of straggler clients.
 IX. C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS The integration of a NIDS also plays a crucial role in
 enhancing security, effectively identifying and mitigating
 In this section, we provide a detailed comparison of
 malicious activities, and contributing to the superior accuracy
CELP with existing solutions that are also designed for
 and performance of the system. These results underscore
resource-constrained environments. The primary focus is on
 CELP’s potential to transform FL applications by ensuring
demonstrating how CELP not only meets but exceeds the
 high efficiency and robust security in diverse operational
capabilities of these alternatives through innovative features
 scenarios.
and efficient execution.
 Comparison Metrics:
 • Model Efficiency: CELP uses sample-based pruning to R EFERENCES
 reduce model size effectively, which is crucial in environ- [1] M. Asad, S. Otoum, and O. Al Fandi, “Edge computing for the
 ments with limited computational resources. We compare metaverse: Balancing security and privacy concerns,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Intell. Metaverse Technol. Appl. (iMETA), 2023, pp. 1–8.
 this with other methods that may not prioritize model [2] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
 size reduction, resulting in slower processing times and “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 higher resource consumption. data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
 [3] Z. Chen, D. Li, R. Ni, J. Zhu, and S. Zhang, “FedSeq: A hybrid federated
 • Resource Allocation: Unlike many FL protocols that learning framework based on sequential in-cluster training,” IEEE Syst.
 assume uniform resource distribution among clients, J., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 4038–4049, Sep. 2023.
 CELP uniquely incorporates a CES that assesses and [4] A. Taik, A. Abouaomar, and S. Cherkaoui, “Green federated learningbased models and protocols,” in Green Machine Learning Protocols for
 selects clients based on their actual resource availability, Future Communication Networks. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
 ensuring more efficient resource utilization. 2024, pp. 63–102.
 • System Adaptability: CELP’s re-parameterization of the [5] O. Shamir, N. Srebro, and T. Zhang, “Communication-efficient distributed optimization using an approximate Newton-type method,” in
 FedAvg algorithm allows for partial task completion, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014, pp. 1000–1008.
 which adapts to the heterogeneous capabilities of network [6] Z. Li and P. Richtárik, “A unified analysis of stochastic gradient methods
 clients more flexibly than traditional FL models. for nonconvex federated optimization,” 2020, arXiv:2006.07013.
 [7] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
 • Security Measures: With an integrated IDS, CELP “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
 enhances security and trust in the system by monitoring Learn. Syst., 2020, pp. 429–450.
 and countering potential threats, a feature that is often [8] A. Imteaj, U. Thakker, S. Wang, J. Li, and M. H. Amini, “Federated
 learning for resource-constrained IoT devices: Panoramas and state-ofoverlooked in similar protocols. the-art,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10610.
 Empirical Validation: We conducted several experiments [9] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning
to compare the performance of CELP with other leading attacks against federated learning systems,” in Proc. 25th Eur. Symp.
 Res. Comput. Secur. (ESORICS), Guildford, U.K., 2020, pp. 480–501.
solutions in this domain. The results, as illustrated in above [10] M. Asad and S. Otoum, “Integrative federated learning and zero-trust
Figures 6-12, show that CELP achieves superior convergence approach for secure wireless communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
rates and maintains high accuracy levels even under stringent vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 14–20, Apr. 2024.
 [11] S. Wang, F. Roosta, P. Xu, and M. W. Mahoney, “Giant: Globally
resource constraints. Detailed performance metrics and bench- improved approximate Newton method for distributed optimization,” in
marks are provided, highlighting areas where CELP provides Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 1–11.
significant improvements over alternatives such as FedAvg, [12] Y. Arjevani and O. Shamir, “Communication complexity of distributed
 convex learning and optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
FedProx, and VAE. This comparative analysis not only Syst., 2015, pp. 1–9.
underscores the advantages of CELP in handling resource- [13] C. Battiloro, P. Di Lorenzo, M. Merluzzi, and S. Barbarossa, “Lyapunovconstrained environments but also showcases its broader based optimization of edge resources for energy-efficient adaptive
 federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1,
applicability and effectiveness in real-world FL scenarios. pp. 265–280, Mar. 2023.
 [14] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
 Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10,
 X. C ONCLUSION no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
 This paper introduced the Client Eligibility-based [15] M. Asad, A. Moustafa, F. A. Rabhi, and M. Aslam, “THF: 3-way
 hierarchical framework for efficient client selection and resource man-
Lightweight Protocol (CELP), a novel approach tailored for agement in federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 13,
federated FL in resource-constrained environments. CELP pp. 11085–11097, Jul. 2022.
effectively integrates a re-parameterized client objective [16] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed
 optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction method
function with a model pruning mechanism and resource-aware of multipliers,” Found. Trends R Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122,
client selection, specifically designed to manage heterogeneous 2011.
ASAD et al.: CELP IN FL: AN IDS USE CASE 3773

[17] O. Dekel, R. Gilad-Bachrach, O. Shamir, and L. Xiao, “Optimal [41] M. Asad et al., “Limitations and future aspects of communication costs
 distributed online prediction using mini-batches,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., in federated learning: A survey,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 17, p. 7358, 2023.
 vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 165–202, 2012. [42] M. Gecer and B. Garbinato, “Federated learning for mobility applica-
[18] C. T. Dinh, N. Tran, and J. Nguyen, “Personalized federated learning tions,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1–28, 2024.
 with Moreau envelopes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, [43] M. Asad, S. Shaukat, E. Javanmardi, J. Nakazato, N. Bao, and
 pp. 21394–21405. M. Tsukada, “Secure and efficient blockchain-based federated learning
[19] W. Huang, M. Ye, and B. Du, “Learn from others and be yourself in approach for VANETs,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 5,
 heterogeneous federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. pp. 9047–9055, Mar. 2024.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 10143–10153. [44] M. Aslam et al., “Adaptive machine learning based distributed denial-of-
[20] V. Smith, C.-K. Chiang, M. Sanjabi, and A. S. Talwalkar, “Federated services attacks detection and mitigation system for SDN-enabled IoT,”
 multi-task learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, Sensors, vol. 22, no. 7, p. 2697, 2022.
 pp. 1–11. [45] Z. Wang, J. Nakazato, M. Asad, E. Javanmardi, and M. Tsukada,
[21] A. Khaled, K. Mishchenko, and P. Richtárik, “Better communication “Overcoming environmental challenges in CAVs through MEC-based
 complexity for local SGD,” 2019, Preprint. federated learning,” in Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Ubiquitous Future Netw.
[22] G. Malinovskiy, D. Kovalev, E. Gasanov, L. Condat, and P. Richtarik, (ICUFN), 2023, pp. 151–156.
 “From local SGD to local fixed-point methods for federated learning,” [46] Y. Jiang et al., “Model pruning enables efficient federated learning on
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 6692–6701. edge devices,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 12,
[23] B. Woodworth et al., “Is local SGD better than minibatch SGD?” in pp. 10374–10386, Dec. 2023.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 10334–10343. [47] W. Xu, W. Fang, Y. Ding, M. Zou, and N. Xiong, “Accelerating federated
[24] D. Li and W. Fedmd, “Heterogenous federated learning via model learning for IoT in big data analytics with pruning, quantization and
 distillation,” in Proc. NeurIPS Workshop Feder. Learn. Data Privacy selective updating,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 38457–38466, 2021.
 Confident., 2019, p. 8. [48] H. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Jia, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, and D. Dou, “FedDUAP:
[25] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “A joint Federated learning with dynamic update and adaptive pruning using
 learning and communications framework for federated learning over shared data on the server,” 2022, arXiv:2204.11536.
 wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1, [49] Ş. Cobzaş, R. Miculescu, and A. Nicolae, Lipschitz Functions, vol. 10.
 pp. 269–283, Jan. 2021. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019.
[26] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy [50] “TensorFlow federated.” Accessed: Sep. 22, 2022. [Online]. Available:
 efficient federated learning over wireless communication networks,” https://www.tensorflow.org/federated
 IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1935–1949, [51] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 Mar. 2021. network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
[27] F. Haddadpour and M. Mahdavi, “On the convergence of local descent in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6.
 methods in federated learning,” 2019, arXiv:1910.14425. [52] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
[28] H. T. Nguyen, V. Sehwag, S. Hosseinalipour, C. G. Brinton, M. Chiang,
 in Proc. ICISSp, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 and H. V. Poor, “Fast-convergent federated learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
 [53] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
 Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 201–218, Jan. 2021.
 learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
[29] H. Guo, A. Liu, and V. K. Lau, “Analog gradient aggregation for
 pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998.
 federated learning over wireless networks: Customized design and con-
 [54] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification
 vergence analysis,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 197–210,
 with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
 Jan. 2021.
 pp. 84–90, 2017.
[30] E. Jeong, S. Oh, H. Kim, J. Park, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim, [55] A. K. Sahu, T. Li, M. Sanjabi, M. Zaheer, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
 “Communication-efficient on-device machine learning: Federated dis- “On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous
 tillation and augmentation under non-IID private data,” 2018, networks,” 2018, arXiv:1812.06127.
 arXiv:1811.11479. [56] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning
[31] L. Huang, Y. Yin, Z. Fu, S. Zhang, H. Deng, and D. Liu, “LoAdaBoost: attacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in
 Loss-based AdaBoost federated machine learning with reduced compu- Proc. Workshop Decentralized IoT Syst. Secur.(DISS), 2020, pp. 1–7.
 tational complexity on IID and non-IID intensive care data,” Plos one, [57] W. Liu et al., “D2MIF: A malicious model detection mechanism for
 vol. 15, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. e0230706. federated-learning-empowered Artificial Intelligence of Things,” IEEE
[32] M. Asad and S. Otoum, “Towards privacy-aware federated learning for Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2141–2151, Feb. 2023.
 user-sensitive data,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Blockchain Comput. Appl. [58] S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Wang, Y. Liu, and T. Chen, “Learning to detect
 (BCCA), 2023, pp. 343–350. malicious clients for robust federated learning,” 2020, arXiv:2002.00211.
[33] J. Dong, D. Zhang, Y. Cong, W. Cong, H. Ding, and D. Dai, “Federated [59] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “A deep learning method with wrapper based
 incremental semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. feature extraction for wireless intrusion detection system,” Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 3934–3943. Secur., vol. 92, May 2020, Art. no. 101752.
[34] J. Dong et al., “Federated class-incremental learning,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
 pp. 10164–10173.
[35] J. Le, D. Zhang, X. Lei, L. Jiao, K. Zeng, and X. Liao,
 “Privacy-preserving federated learning with malicious clients and
 honest-but-curious servers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, Muhammad Asad (Member, IEEE) received
 pp. 4329–4344, 2023. the bachelor’s degree in telecommunication and
[36] A. E. Cinà et al., “Wild patterns reloaded: A survey of machine learning networking from COMSATS University Islamabad,
 security against training data poisoning,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, Pakistan, the master’s degree in computer science
 no. 13, pp. 1–39, 2023. from the Dalian University of Technology, China,
[37] A. K. Singh, A. Blanco-Justicia, and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Fair detection and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
 of poisoning attacks in federated learning on non-IID data,” Data Min. the Nagoya Institute of Technology, Japan. He is
 Knowl. Discovery, vol. 37, pp. 1998–2023, Sep. 2023. currently working as a Postdoctoral Researcher with
[38] M. Anisetti, C. A. Ardagna, A. Balestrucci, N. Bena, E. Damiani, and Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. He also works
 C. Y. Yeun, “On the robustness of random forest against untargeted as a Visiting Researcher with the University of
 data poisoning: An ensemble-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Tokyo, Japan. Prior to these roles, he worked as a
 Comput., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 540–554, Dec. 2023. Project Researcher with the Department of Creative Informatics, University
[39] C. Fung, C. J. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “Mitigating sybils in federated of Tokyo. His research primarily focuses on federated learning, deep learning,
 learning poisoning,” 2018, arXiv:1808.04866. and a range of advanced networking technologies, including VANETs,
[40] M. A. Önsü, B. Kantarci, and A. Boukerche, “On the impact of malicious ITS, WSNs, SDN, and IoT, showcasing his deep expertise and ongoing
 and cooperative clients on validation score-based model aggregation for contributions to the field of computer science. He received the prestigious
 federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2023, President’s Award from the Nagoya Institute of Technology in 2021–2022 for
 pp. 1634–1639. his outstanding research achievements.
3774 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 Safa Otoum (Member, IEEE) received the M.A.Sc. Saima Shaukat received the bachelor’s degree in
 and Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from computer science from the Department of Computer
 the University of Ottawa, Canada, in 2015 and Science, The University of Lahore, Pakistan, in
 2019, respectively. She is an Assistant Professor 2016, and the master’s degree in computer sciof Computer Engineering with the College of ence from the Department of Computer Science,
 Technological Innovation (CTI), Zayed University, COMSATS University Islamabad (Lahore Campus),
 UAE, and a Researcher in the field of communi- Pakistan, in September 2020. She is currently workcations and network security. Prior to joining CTI, ing as a Technical Researcher with the Graduate
 she was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the University of School of Information Science and Technology, The
 Ottawa and has been a Data Scientist with Cheetah University of Tokyo, Japan. Previously, she worked
 Networks Inc., Ottawa, since 2019. Her research as a Junior Lecturer with Superior University,
interests include network security, blockchain applications, applications of Lahore, and a Lecturer with Lahore Garrison University. Her research interests
ML and Aim, IoT, intrusion detection, and prevention systems. She received include distributed machine learning, natural language processing, and Internet
several academic and research scholarships, including the prestigious NSERC of Things.
Canada Graduate Scholarships-Doctoral, the NSERC FSS, and the RIF-Zayed
University Grant. She is actively working on several reputable events within
IEEE and ACM. She is currently a Professional Engineer Ontario.