2700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Cluster and Conquer: Malicious Traffic
 Classification at the Edge
 Alec F. Diallo and Paul Patras , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The uptake of digital services and IoT technology to bypass the perimeter defenses set by these measures [5].
gives rise to increasingly diverse cyber attacks, with which In particular, widely-deployed NIDSs, including Snort [6],
commonly-used rule-based Network Intrusion Detection Systems Zeek [7], or Suricata [8] present a number of disadvan-
(NIDSs) struggle to cope. Therefore, Artificial Intelligence (AI)
supports a second line of defense, since this methodology tages. Namely, they (i) require frequent updates of signature
helps in extracting non-obvious patterns from network traffic databases; (ii) exhibit high false alarm rates when classifying
and subsequently in detecting more confidently new types of traffic with evolving behavior; and (iii) depend on considerable
threats. Cybersecurity is however an arms race and intelligent levels of human expert intervention for system tuning and
solutions face renewed challenges as attacks evolve while network manual decision making.
traffic volumes surge. We propose Adaptive Clustering-based
Intrusion Detection (ACID), a novel approach to malicious traffic In this context, Artificial Intelligence (AI)- and Machine
classification and a valid candidate for deployment at the network Learning (ML)-based techniques such as Artificial Neural
edge. ACID addresses the critical challenge of sensitivity to subtle Networks, Clustering, and Ensemble Learning are increasingly
changes in traffic features, which routinely leads to misclassifica- appealing for building automatic network threat or anomaly
tion. We circumvent this problem by relying on low-dimensional detection systems [9], [10]. This is largely due to the unique
embeddings learned with a lightweight neural model comprising
multiple kernel networks that we introduce, which optimally ability of neural models to discover hidden patterns in vast
separates samples of different classes. Extensive experiments amounts of data, which helps boosting classification accuracy,
with datasets spanning 20 years demonstrate ACID attains 100% as already demonstrated in several research areas including
accuracy and F1-score, and 0% false alarm rate, significantly speech recognition [11], computer vision [12], and wireless
outperforming state-of-the-art clustering methods and NIDSs. and mobile networking [13].
Furthermore, our results show that ACID offers a high degree of
robustness to input perturbations, while intrinsically providing a However, despite the rapid progress of AI-based approaches
framework for continual learning. to Network Intrusion Detection (NID), existing solutions
 (e.g., [14], [15], [16]) remain extremely sensitive to small
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, kernel-based
clustering, deep learning, continual learning. changes in individual features of network traffic flows, which
 dilutes their effectiveness in the face of continuous software updates and evolving traffic landscapes, as we reveal.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Specifically, since these techniques learn from features of
 individual samples, training them on small subsets of care-
 HE ADOPTION of Internet of Things (IoT) devices
T and cloud-based services continues to grow sharply [2],
leading to a pressing need for robust and efficient defense
 fully crafted features, unwittingly mislabelled samples, or
 unbalanced datasets negatively impacts their generalization
 abilities, thereby rendering the detection of new malicious
mechanisms to safeguard the networking infrastructure and network activity very difficult. Additionally, current NIDSs
users’ private data. This is particularly critical as attackers introduce application latency due to their complexity, while
continue to discover new system/software vulnerabilities on their architectures are usually fixed, thus requiring retraining
a daily basis [3]. As a result, cybercrime costed businesses for every new task.
and individuals in the United States alone $3.5 billion in To tackle these problems, in this paper, we propose
2019 [4]. Meanwhile, traditional security measures such ACID, a classifier-agnostic and highly-effective Adaptive
as firewalls, anti-viruses, and rule-based Network Intrusion Clustering-based Intrusion Detection system, highly suited for
Detection Systems (NIDSs) are unable to keep up with the deployement on resource-constrained devices at the network
most recent and sophisticated attacks that exploit loopholes edge. Our design incorporates an original multi-kernel based
 neural network that enables our NIDS to generalize well,
 Manuscript received 30 May 2023; revised 28 September 2023; accepted
3 December 2023. Date of publication 13 December 2023; date of current regardless of any small changes incurred by small groups
version 12 July 2024. This work was supported by Arm Ltd. A preliminary of packets or the unbalanced nature of the training dataset.
version of this paper was published at IEEE Conference on Computer We achieve this by means of a clustering algorithm that
Communications 2021 (INFOCOM’21) [1]. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Zincir- learns low-dimensional embeddings from linear and non-
Heywood. (Corresponding author: Alec F. Diallo.) linear combinations of network flow features, which makes it
 The authors are with the School of Informatics, The University possible to unambiguously separate these flows. By combining
of Edinburgh, EH8 9AB Edinburgh, U.K. (e-mail: alec.frenn@ed.ac.uk;
paul.patras@ed.ac.uk). the cluster centers learned through our clustering network
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3342716 with statistical and semantic features extracted from packet
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2701

sequences, and feeding the resulting feature vectors to a adoption, they produce unacceptably high false alarm rates
classifier, we effectively improve the detection performance of for relatively small gains in detection performance. This
the NIDS while minimizing the false alarm rate. In light of the significantly limits their applicability to real-life scenarios.
practical challenges faced by current NIDS solutions, there is Auto-Encoders (AEs) can learn latent representations of
a growing demand for advanced defense mechanisms that can features and reduce their dimensionality in order to miniadapt to the evolving threat landscape. Addressing issues such mize memory consumption, which motivates their use for
as dealing with increasing volume and complexity of network anomalous traffic detection [20], [21], [22]. Tan et al. apply
traffic, designing efficient and adaptive algorithms, detecting Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to learn spatial repthreats with minimal human intervention, and guaranteeing resentations of packets, followed by image classification
reduced false alarm rates is therefore crucial for ensuring methods to identify malware traffic [23]. Wang et al. combine
the effective deployment and operation of NIDS. To this CNNs and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) structures to
end, our proposed solution provides a reliable and efficient learn both spatial and temporal correlations between feaframework for building defenses against emerging threats in tures [24]. Despite the effectiveness of these techniques, they
the digital domain. In a nutshell, our key contributions can completely ignore time-based statistical features that can be
be summarized as follows: inferred from packets and the semantic relationships within
[C1] We introduce a novel supervised Adaptive Clustering packet payloads. Min et al. use these ignored attributes and
 (AC) technique that learns optimal low-dimensional apply Natural Language Processing techniques to process
 embeddings of complex data, enabling the enhancement packet payloads [25]. This boosts detection performances, yet
 of dataset features with representative cluster centers to still presents several important weaknesses, including ignoring
 improve the robustness and generalization of classifica- dataset imbalance and exhibiting very high processing times
 tion models, particularly for NID problems. when dealing with large datasets. Under- and oversampling
[C2] Building on our clustering approach, we design a NIDS methods [26], [27] can mitigate this class imbalance problem,
 that extracts features from raw packets, which when but these techniques either reduce the number of training
 extended with learned cluster centers allow effective and data samples or use additional artificially generated data,
 reliable binary and multi-label classification. both of which negatively impact classification performance,
[C3] We demonstrate the effectiveness of our solution, ACID, as they restrain the ability of ML models to learn accurate
 on six different network traffic datasets containing illicit representations.
 flows spanning 20 years, and reveal its potential for
 complete and accurate detection of all known types
 of threats, surpassing existing NID approaches by a B. Clustering Based Intrusion Detection
 substantial margin of up to 47% in F1 -score. Ideally, any Intrusion Detection System (IDS) should
[C4] We assess the computational efficiency and runtime (i) have learning and hierarchical feature representation abilrequirements of ACID, showing its suitability for ities; (ii) handle high-dimensional data and extract valuable
 deployment on resource-constrained edge devices, and patterns. Since clustering methods group data into meaningful
 validate its robustness in practical deployments, under- sub-classes, seeking to separate members of different clusters,
 scoring its capacity to withstand noisy environments, several IDSs build on this approach. Jianliang et al. use kwhile highlighting its unique and inherent ability to means clustering to detect unknown attacks and separate large
 enhance NIDS through continual learning for increased data spaces effectively [28]. However, their approach suffers
 resilience and adaptability in the dynamic realm of cyber from degeneracy and cluster dependence, which could be
 threats. overcome with the Y-means clustering algorithm proposed
 To the best of our knowledge, ACID is the first Deep in [29]. Mingqiang et al. introduce the concept of graph-
Learning (DL)-based NIDS that exploits adaptive clustering to based clustering for anomaly detection, whereby a Local
minimize false alarm rates, it is robust to a range of malicious Deviation Coefficient Graph Based (LDCGB) approach identraffic types, and it is amenable to prototyping on commodity tifies outliers [30]. Li et al. use a Particle Swarm Optimization
gateways for real-time threat detection at the network edge. (PSO) algorithm based on swarm intelligence [31]. This
 solution avoids falling into local minima, while providing
 II. R ELATED W ORK good overall convergence. Multi-stage techniques improve
 NID by (i) generating meta-alerts through clustering and
 We briefly overview NID approaches related to our ACID
 (ii) reducing false alarm rates via classification of these
system, with a focus on deep learning and clustering based
 meta-alerts [32].
approaches and their limitations. We also discuss the current
 However, these approaches are frequently unable to discrimstate of continual learning research, specifically from the
 inate superficially similar but in essence different attacks (e.g.,
standpoint of model resilience and adaptability, and highlight
 U2R and R2L vs. benign), present high misclassification rates
the shortcomings that our proposed solution aims to address.
 due to their unsupervised nature, and/or are computationally
 expensive, making them unfit for deployment on constrained
A. Deep Learning-Based Intrusion Detection devices. We overcome these issues through a simple and effec-
 Most DL-based NIDSs attempt to match observed network tive adaptive clustering approach, while offering significant
flows against previously learned patterns. Despite increasing improvements in detection rate and minimizing false alarms.
2702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

C. Continual-Learning efficient threat detection security breaches, while enhancing
 In recent years, there has been a growing interest in real-time response capabilities and reducing the burden on
developing deep learning models that exhibit robustness and centralized security infrastructures. These are essential features
adaptability in network intrusion detection systems (NIDS). any NIDS must meet to be suitable for practical real-life
Several studies have explored techniques to improve the environments. We fulfill these goals by combining three key
resilience of deep learning models to random noise and components shown in the high-level overview of our ACID
enhance their support for continual learning. For instance, system in Fig. 1, namely:
Goodfellow et al. [63] investigated catastrophic forgetting in • Feature Extractor Module: transforms raw network packgradient-based neural networks, aiming to develop preventa- ets into vectors of header and statistical features, and
tive methods and ensure efficient adaptation to new tasks as (optionally) semantic representations of payloads (i.e.,
they are encountered. Von Oswald et al. [64] proposed the use additional feature vectors);
of hypernetworks for continual learning, creating dedicated • Adaptive Clustering Module: builds low-dimensional
sub-networks to handle new tasks without retraining the entire embeddings of network flow features and computes a
model. Draelos et al. [65] introduced a neurogenesis deep set of abstract attributes that are common to samples
learning approach to extend deep networks to accommodate belonging to the same traffic type;
new classes, while Rusu et al. [66] presented progressive • Classification Module: uses features extracted from both
neural networks that integrate new knowledge without for- network flows and by the clustering module to improve
getting the old. Furthermore, Finn et al. [67] proposed a detection rate and minimize the impact of outliers. This
model-agnostic meta-learning technique for fast adaptation of module corrects any misclassifications made via clusterdeep networks. In contrast to our approach, existing work still ing and can exploit further correlations in the inputs.
face many issues such as catastrophic forgetting in gradient- In what follows, we detail the operation of each of these
based neural networks, increased model complexity, scalability modules, then demonstrate how the synergies among them lead
issues, or dependency on initial models. to remarkable malicious traffic detection performance.

 III. T HREAT M ODEL A. Feature Extractor
 We consider both home networks and enterprise environ- ACID handles very large amounts of traffic by processing
ments subject to two offensive scenarios. First, we envisage streams of raw network packets into feature-based representaattackers located outside the target network, to which they tions of bidirectional flows corresponding to communications
attempt to gain access, compromise victim devices, or retrieve between (source, destination) pairs, over specific applications
sensitive data. In this scenario, the attacker would scan all or protocols. These are subsequently used for clustering and
the devices connected to the network to find weaknesses that classification. Our feature extractor comprises two parallel prowould allow access. In the second scenario we consider, the cessing pipelines: (1) a header analyzer logic that builds a set
attacker is either located outside the target network, which was of header and statistical features (including source/destination
already compromised (giving them the ability to control the port numbers, packet inter-arrival time, total number of packets
hijacked hosts), or is internally connected to that network. In in a flow, etc.), which provide a compact representation
both cases, we assume an NIDS is deployed on an edge device, of traffic behaviors; and (2) an optional word embedding
where all incoming and outgoing network traffic packets logic that builds vectors of semantic representation of the
can be captured. Furthermore, we consider the possibility payloads, through word2vec [33] and Text-CNN [34] techwhere an attacker has acquired sufficient knowledge of the niques, similarly to the methodology previously used in [25].
network infrastructure, including target IP addresses, open port While this additional payload features extractor unit signifnumbers, etc. However, we assume the deployed NIDS is icantly increases the computation costs, it can improve the
hardened and attackers do not have the ability to access or performance of the classifier. This is because the semantic repalter its behaviour. resentations of payload features encode important information
 Our proposed system is best suited to networks where most about contents of payload-based attacks, such as in the case
user traffic belongs to a finite set of known applications. of SQL injection.
Therefore, as we monitor all incoming and outgoing commu- Depending on the computational power of the device where
nications, we are able to train our neural model in a supervised the NIDS is deployed, the feature extraction module may
manner on a labelled dataset. introduce some latency. Regardless, online operation is easily
 achievable if running the NIDS separately from the packet
 IV. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE forwarding unit. It is also worth noting that by aggregating
 packets into bidirectional flows, we drastically reduce the size
 We propose a novel Deep Learning (DL)-based NIDS that
 of the training and evaluation sets, which in turn reduces the
maximizes the probability of detecting malicious network
 inference time of ACID.
flows and minimizes the false alarm rate. Our approach aims
to (i) quickly adapt to complex data structures and patterns, by
discovering low-dimensional embeddings of networks flows, B. Adaptive Clustering Module
which optimally separate samples of different types; and (ii) be One of our key contributions is a novel technique that
suitable for deployment on devices with limited computational improves the generalization abilities and robustness of any
capabilities situated at the periphery of the network, enabling DL-based classification engine. In essence, we propose a
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2703

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed ACID system. Header and statistical features, and (optionally) payload features are extracted from raw network packets,
then grouped into bidirectional flows. Our AC module takes these flows, computes cluster centers, and appends them to the extracted features, before feeding
the resulting vectors to a classifier for final decisions.

clustering algorithm that produces cluster centers to be used of the specifics of the classifier, as they reduce the divergence
as extensions of the input features being clustered. As our between samples of the same class. To further reduce this
Adaptive Clustering (AC) approach is designed to be end-to- divergence, we use each sample’s corresponding cluster center
end differentiable, the training is performed on mini-batches, instead of its low-dimensional representation, when extending
whereby the network learns low-dimensional representations its features vector. This not only improves the accuracy of
of the inputs and computes the corresponding kernel centers. the NIDS, but also minimizes the impact of outliers. To
This operation is performed online (in an iterative manner) and support this claim, we provide a theoretical proof of the gain
the final layer of the kernel networks yields the probabilities of introduced by using cluster centers as additional features.
each sample in the inputs belonging to all possible classes. For Theorem 1 (Clustering-Based Divergence Reduction): Let
our NIDS, we retrieve the computed cluster centers of each Kc be the set of features obtained from the cluster center of
class and use them to expand their samples’ features, thereby a given class C. For any two samples χi , χj ∈ C ,
obtaining more features for each data point. These combined    
features are then given to the classification module for final distance χi ∪ Kc , χj ∪ Kc ≤ distance χi , χj ,
decisions about the nature of the traffic observed. Proof: Let χi and χj be n-dimensional real-valued vectors:
 Since we aim to deploy our NIDS in a live environment,
we aim at a clustering algorithm which: χi = {xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xin } ∈ Rn ,
 • Handles very large amounts of high-dimensional data χj = {xj 1 , xj 2 , . . . , xjn } ∈ Rn ,
 points – This requirement prevents us from using clustering approaches that need all training data at once. where xit and xjt correspond to individual features of the
 • Handles incoming streams of data at random time sample data, with t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}. Assume that χi and χj
 intervals – New incoming data should not require both belong to the C-th cluster according to our clustering
 retraining the entire clustering algorithm; instead, data module, and the C-th cluster center is defined as
 distributions should be learned on the fly.
 • Quickly and effectively clusters even the most complex
 Kc = {kc1 , kc2 , . . . , kcm } ∈ Rm .
 data points in multi-dimensional spaces – Having seman- The aggregated features obtained after clustering are then
 tically good clusters would boost the performance of the
 classifier, as proven by our experiments. χi = {xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xin , kc1 , kc2 , . . . , kcm } ∈ Rn+m ,
 • Produces cluster centers – This is an essential require- χj = {xj 1 , xj 2 , . . . , xjn , kc1 , kc2 , . . . , kcm } ∈ Rn+m .
 ment for improving the robustness and generalization
 abilities of the classifier. An intuitive way to calculate the impact of the clustering on
 These set of desired properties lead to designing a plug & robustness is to compare the similarities between the original
play type DL-based clustering algorithm that can be trained and aggregated feature vectors, i.e., Q1 = distance(χi , χj ) vs
with batches of data at a time, which we detail in Section V. Q2 = distance(χi , χj ). Expanding each yields

 1 
 n
 2
C. Classification Module Q1 = xiα − xj α ,
 n
 Finally, ACID employs a classification module that α=1
  n 
processes the combined extracted features and cluster cen- 1  2 
 m
 2
ters for each sample, and outputs the inferred traffic class Q2 = xiα − xj α + (kcα − kcα )
 n +m
 α=1 α=1
to which that flow belongs. While the classifier’s architecture can be designed to obtain any desired property (e.g., 1 
 n
  2
 = xiα − xj α .
exploit spatio-temporal correlations or perform binary/multi- n +m
 α=1
label classification), the additional features provided by our m
AC algorithm improve classification performance regardless Q1 − Q2 = · Q1 =⇒ Q2 = β · Q1 ,
 n +m
2704 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 parametrized by θe ∈ Re , onto Rm , where m is the target
 dimension. The embedding of our entire dataset via ψθe can
 be expressed by Ψθe : RN ×n −→ RN ×m . In this setting, we
 also use the same dimension m for the kernels to be learned
 by the kernel networks. We now define Ψθk (x ) : RN ×m −→
 RN to be our kernel functions with parameters θk ∈ Rk . For
 every target class, a new kernel network is generated such that
 each network learns to represent a unique cluster from the
 embedding output by the encoder.
Fig. 2. Architecture of our Adaptive Clustering network.
 In our design, each layer of the encoders implements an
 activation-like sine function yt = wa sin(2πwf yt−1 ), where
 yt−1 is the output of the previous layer, and wa and wf are
where β = n/(n + m) ≤ 1, ∀n > 0, ∀m ≥ 0, is the impact weight vectors of respective sizes |wa | = 1 and |wf | = |yt−1 |,
measure obtained by using the cluster centers as additional which are learned by the network. The chosen sine activationfeatures. This implies that Q2 ≤ Q1, ∀m ≥ 0. like functions enable the networks to learn faster and adapt to
 Hence, using cluster centers as additional features can complex data structures. For the kernel networks, we use fullyonly improve the decision capability of the classifiers by connected neural models, whose outputs  are passed through
reducing the differences between items of the same group. The a softmax function σ(yi ) = exp(yi )/ N j =1 exp(yj ), thereby
experimental results we present in Section VII fully support returning the set of probabilities that a given sample belongs
this finding. In our experiments, we will use a Random Forest to different clusters. As such, with the kernel networks, we
structure [35] to perform the final classification of traffic flows. aim to map any embedding from the encoder to single values
 It is worth noting that our clustering approach is not limited representing the likelihood estimations that samples belong to
to NID, but can be applied to any other classification task. their respective clusters. For each sample, this mapping is done
 through a deep NN while simultaneously the kernel weights
 defined by these networks, i.e., cluster centers, are computed
 V. A DAPTIVE C LUSTERING from the embeddings of all samples.
 Clustering algorithms learn some notion of similarity within To train our AC network, we combine two distinct loss
a dataset, to group similar samples together. They usually functions, i.e., L = Lp + Lc , where Lp is the Mean Squared
heavily depend on individual data points and (i) bear sig- Error (MSE) between the estimated probabilities of samples
nificant time complexity when handling large amounts of belonging to clusters and the ground truth, and Lc is a
data or large sample dimensionality; (ii) require an explicit contrastive loss that aims to control the distance between the
measure of “distance” (even in multi-dimensional spaces); different clusters. The latter is important when the number of
and (iii) return multiple possible interpretations of clustering clusters grows, hence they become closer to each other and
results. Neural Networks (NNs) tackle these issues, yet often at harder to separate. To compute the MSE, we first perform
the cost of reduced clustering performance. This is particularly one-hot encoding of the target cluster ids (ci ) as follows:
problematic when dealing with complex datasets, where the 
NN, in seeking to generalize to all possible clusters (or 1, if i = ci ,
 pi =
classes), ends up only able to correctly classify a small subset 0, otherwise,
of unambiguous samples. Unfortunately, most realistic datasets
are multi-dimensional, wherein there are no obvious distinct then compute
patterns between members of different classes.
 1 
 N
 To tackle this problem, the Adaptive Clustering (AC) Lp = (pi − ŷi )2 ,
method we propose builds on multiple kernel networks, each N
 i=1
learning to tailor itself to one of the possible clusters associated
with a particular type of traffic which we want to classify, where ŷ = {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷN } ∈ RN denotes the output probabilias illustrated in Fig. 2. For any observed sample, different ties of the model. Lc is designed to optimize the assignments
encoders discover its optimal low-dimensional embedding, and of the clusters and is defined as
kernel networks learn to extrapolate a general representation Lc = Y · dS + (1 − Y ) · max(0, δ − dD ),
(i.e., cluster center) of its group’s members. By using encoders,
our model reduces the dimensionality of the input features where dS is the distance between all pairs of similar points and
to any desired dimension. While the encoder architecture can dD is the distance between all pairs of dissimilar points, Y is
be selected according to the task at hand, using a simple a binary label indicating whether the pairs are similar (i.e., 1
multi-layer, feed-forward NN allows the model to achieve if they should be deemed similar, 0 otherwise), and δ > 0 is
optimal clustering while minimizing the overall computational a margin defining the radius around the embedding space of
overhead, as our results in Section VII demonstrate. a sample, so that dissimilar pairs only contribute to the loss
 Formally, let us consider the set of N samples of n features if dD ≤ δ. The training of the neural model combining the
D ⊂ RN ×n . Let ψθe (x ) : Rn −→ Rm be an embedding encoders and kernel networks is then performed end-to-end by
of a sample x mapped by a fully-connected feed-forward NN running back-propagation over a suitable number of iterations.
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2705

 then evaluate ACID with three publicly-available network
 intrusion datasets. To completely cover all aspects of the
 NID task, we perform both binary and multi-label classifications on all datasets. We further use one of these datasets
 for a performance comparison with state-of-the-art NIDSs.
 Additionally, we perform a complexity and runtime analysis
 of our solution to understand its deployability on constrained
 edge devices.

 A. Datasets
 1) Synthetic Datasets: We generate five different artificial
 datasets covering a range of scenarios with different levels
Fig. 3. Illustration of embeddings in a two-dimensional kernel space learned of complexity, including number of clusters/groups, shape,
with our AC method: sample datasets (above) and their representations along
with cluster centers (below). ambiguity, and distributions. Specifically, we consider
 • Two-Circles: A binary classification task with samples
 that fall into concentric circles. This is suitable for testing
 By this approach, the embeddings learned by our AC if an algorithm can learn complex non-linear manifolds.
algorithm are easily separable even by the simplest classi- • Five-Circles: A multi-label classification problem with
fiers, as exemplified in Fig. 3. This indicates that the AC samples that fall into concentric circles. Similarly to the
network automatically discovers optimal kernels to be learned, Two-circles dataset, this is also suitable for testing if an
which constitutes one of its main advantages as compared to algorithm can learn complex non-linear manifolds.
existing clustering methods. Additionally, using cluster centers • Two-Moons: A binary classification problem consisting
provided by our approach as features given to classifiers inher- of samples falling into two interleaved half-circles. This
ently enhances privacy, since all members of the same class dataset is suitable for testing if an algorithm can learn
would possess the same feature values. In our experiments, non-linear and intertwined class boundaries.
we use the same NN structure and the same hyper-parameters. • Blobs: Groups of data-points with Gaussian distributions,
Only the number of sub-networks changes, as this is task- which are suitable for assessing the ability of algorithms
specific and corresponds to the number of output classes. to solve linear classification problems.
 • Sine/Cosine: The samples consist of sine and cosine
 VI. I MPLEMENTATION data points. This dataset is suitable for testing if an
 We implement ACID in Python 3.7 using the PyTorch [36] algorithm can learn complex, non-linear, and intertwined
and Scikit-Learn [37] libraries. For our AC algorithm, we class boundaries.
employ a set of encoders that are fully-connected NNs With these, we are able to compare the performance
with 3 hidden layers comprising 500, 200, and 50 neurons, of our clustering approach against three popular clustering
respectively. The number of neurons in the output layers is methods, and ascertaining its universal learning abilities. For
equal to the desired dimensionality of the kernels, which we visualization purposes, each of these synthetic datasets consists
set to 10 in our experiments. The kernel networks are also of samples of 2-dimensional data points, whose features
fully-connected, with 3 hidden layers of size 100, 50 and 30 correspond to their Cartesian coordinates, and each sample is
neurons, respectively.1 Inputs are processed in mini-batches of assigned a label corresponding to its cluster ID.
size 256 and we train the model using the Adam optimizer [38] 2) Intrusion Detection Datasets: To showcase the
with a learning rate of 1e−4 . We adopt a Random Forest (RF) performance of our NIDS, we use three datasets that capture
classifier due to its performance and computational efficiency, a total of 40 types of network attacks collected over a span
using default parameters, except the number of trees, which of 20 years, namely KDD Cup’99 [17], ISCX-IDS 2012 [18],
we set to 200. Our complete NIDS is trained over 100 and CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 [19]. The KDD Cup’99 dataset was
iterations. To mimic computationally constrained edge devices, produced by MIT Lincoln Labs in a LAN operated similarly
we execute all our experiments on a virtual machine running to an Air Force environment over the course of 9 weeks,
Ubuntu 18.04 LTS, with 4GB RAM, 50GB storage space, and during which raw TCP data was collected [39]. The CSEa quad-core Intel Celeron N4100 CPU operating at 1.1 GHz. CIC-IDS 2018 dataset is the result of a controlled attacks
For the same reason, we perform no parallelization and no campaign run by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity
specific optimization of our clustering algorithm. using 50 machines that targeted a victim organization with 5
 departments, involving 420 machines and 30 servers [40].
 VII. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION For comparison purposes, we evaluate all the benchmarks
 considered on a random subset of the ISCX-IDS 2012 dataset,
 We first demonstrate the performance of our AC algorithm which was released by the University of New Brunswick and
on general clustering tasks using five synthetic datasets, consists of seven days of raw network data, including benign
 1 The source code of our implementation is available at and four types of malicious network traffic, namely BruteForce
https://github.com/Mobile-Intelligence-Lab/ACID. SSH, DDoS, HttpDoS, and Infiltration [41].
2706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE I
 ISCX-IDS 2012 DATASET A FTER P REPROCESSING

B. Preprocessing
 Based on the features extracted from raw packets (including
fields in the packet headers and statistical attributes), we generate bidirectional flows, thereby incorporating more temporal
information than what can be observed from individual packets
(e.g., the time interval between two sequential packets). The
first packet of each flow determines its direction, i.e., forward
(source to destination) or backward (destination to source).
 To obtain relatively balanced datasets for benchmarking, we
randomly select a predefined number of malicious and benign
traffic samples. The preprocessed dataset is then divided into
a training, validation, and testing sets using a 70/10/20 split
ratio. As an example, we illustrate the preprocessing results
obtained for the ISCX-IDS 2012 dataset in Table I.

C. Evaluation Metrics
 To measure the performance of our NIDS, we use the held- Fig. 4. Comparison of clustering results of the proposed AC method and
 five popular benchmarks on two-circles, five-circles, two-moons, blobs, and
out testing set to compute confusion matrices, based on which sine/cosine datasets. The Purity The Purity Score [47] metric is used to
we calculate the number of True Positive (TP), True Negative evaluate the quality of all clustering results (shown below each plot).
(TN), False Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN) inferences.
With these, we derive a number of metrics that allow us to
assess the quality of the classification results of ACID and As observed in Fig. 4, Spectral Clustering obtains optimal
those produced by the benchmarks considered, namely: results with the two-circles and the two-moons datasets,
 while DBSCAN performs very well on three out of the five
 TP + TN
Accuracy = ; datasets, i.e., two-circles, five-circles, and two-moons. Both
 TP + FP + TN + FN approaches partially misclassify the blobs and consistently
 TP TP
Precision = ; Recall = ; fail to cluster correctly the sine/cosine dataset. The k-Means
 TP + FP TP + FN clustering algorithm, however, systematically fails on all these
 FP Precision · Recall
 FAR = ; F1 −score = 2 · . tasks.
 FP + TN Precision + Recall In contrast, our AC approach flawlessly clusters the data
In the above, FAR is the false alarm rate. points in all the datasets considered, regardless of shape,
 distribution, or complexity (Fig. 4, rightmost column). This
D. General Clustering Results demonstrates the key advantage of using kernel networks to
 identify cluster centers and augmenting the feature set with
 We first compare the clustering performance of our AC
 information about these centers in view of classification.
network against that of Density-Based Spatial Clustering
of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN) [42], Spectral
Clustering [43], and k-Means [44], which are widely-used E. Network Intrusion Detection Results
clustering approaches. These methods were selected as bench- Next, we evaluate the performance of our complete NIDS.
marks due to their prevalent use in the literature, enduring Recall that ACID extrapolates meaningful low-dimensional
relevance, and diverse mechanisms for capturing different representations from header and statistical features extracted
types of cluster structures. For completeness, two of the most from raw network traffic data. Using these automatically
recently proposed clustering algorithms were also included for learned features, we determine different cluster centers and
comparison, namely HDBSCAN [46] and Mean Shift [45]. To use them to extend the header and statistical attributes. With
obtain a fair comparison with these methods, we specifically these additional features, we expect our classifier to be more
tune the parameters of each to optimize their performance. accurate and easily distinguish even the most similar patterns.
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2707

Fig. 5. Normalized confusion matrix for multi-label classification using ACID
on the KDD Cup’99 dataset.
 Fig. 7. Normalized confusion matrix for multi-label classification using ACID
 on the CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 dataset.

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE S UMMARY OF ACID ON THE KDD CUP’99, THE
 ISCX-IDS 2012, AND THE CSE-CIC-IDS2018 DATASETS FOR THE
 M ULTI -L ABEL C LASSIFICATION TASK

Fig. 6. Normalized confusion matrix for multi-label classification using ACID
on the ISCX-IDS 2012 dataset.

To verify our hypothesis, we perform binary and multilabel classification on the three real-world datasets mentioned
above, where we distinguish benign/malicious traffic flows,
and respectively identify the type of every single traffic flow. We also compute the accuracy, precision, recall, F1 -score,
 We also experimentally compare our approach with recent and FAR for all datasets. The results confirm that ACID attains
NIDS designs based on neural networks. In particular, we 100% accuracy, 0% FAR, and 100% F1 -score, when performperform classification using DAGMM [14], which employs ing both binary and multi-label classification, irrespective of
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) to learn low-dimensional the number of classes. Multi-label classification results are
embeddings of complex data structures while avoiding summarized in Table II. These remarkable performance can
undesired local optima; N-BaIoT [15], which relies on Auto- be attributed to the manner in which our approach acts on the
Encoders (AEs) to discriminate IoT traffic; Deep NNs [16], data, which is akin to a two-stage classification process, where
which offer provably high performance despite using a simple the first stage corresponds to classifying network traffic via
architecture; CNN-BiLSTM [48] combining a CNN and a clustering, and the second corrects the misclassified samples
Bi-directional LSTM to obtain high detection rates while through a further classifier. These results also confirm that our
minimizing false positive rates; and TR-IDS [25], which learned features consist of transferable knowledge across all
exploits payload contents to enhance NID performance. samples in the respective datasets.
 In Figs. 5, 6, and 7, we provide normalized confusion We further juxtapose ACID with the benchmark NIDSs
matrices obtained with ACID, demonstrating its performance considered, when classifying traffic in the ISCX-IDS 2012
on the KDD Cup’99, ISCX-IDS 2012, and CSE-CIC-IDS dataset. We limit this comparison to binary classification,
2018 datasets, respectively. Observe that our approach pro- which is the intended goal of most of these methods. The
duces perfect results in the multi-label classification task, results obtained are shown in Table III, which reveals that
even where some network traffic flows may be very similar, ACID outperforms existing solutions by up to 47% in terms of
e.g., Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks and high F1 -score. By combining a Text-CNN and RF, TR-IDS attains
volume benign traffic. ACID correctly classifies 100% of the very good performance on the binary classification task, but
traffic flows when using both kernel and payload features. unlike ACID, it struggles to discriminate malicious traffic flows
Accuracy degrades only marginally when payload features are of different types that are superficially similar. Specifically, in
not employed for classification, specifically 99.41% accuracy multi-label classification, TR-IDS misclassifies ∼1% of DDoS
is attained on the CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 dataset in this scenario. and ∼1% Infiltration as benign flows, while flagging more
2708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF ACID W ITH E XISTING M ETHODS ON B INARY C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF O UR C LUSTERING A PPROACH TO
 C LASSIFICATION W ITH ISCX-IDS 2012 DATASET NIDS, W ITH AND W ITHOUT PAYLOAD F EATURES . E XPERIMENTS ON AN
 E MULATED C ONSTRAINED D EVICE AS D EFINED IN S ECTION VI

than 1% of benign flows as attacks. In practice, this would not
only lead to manual inspection of large numbers of flows, but
allow attacks with dramatic consequences (e.g., Infiltration) to
succeed, and potentially block traffic with commercial value.
 The generation of network traces for these NID datasets
taking place in controlled testbed environments, their traffic
patterns exhibit much lower variability than can be expected
in real network environments. Despite the remarkable classi- Fig. 8. Evolution of loss function values for different kernel sizes when
fication performance of ACID within these testbeds, achieved training AC on the ISCX-IDS 2012 dataset.
through a thorough analysis of traffic dynamics from packet
headers and patterns found in payloads, further research 1) Kernel Size: In the first experiment, without changing
would be warranted to measure the true impact of ACID in any other parameter of our model, we vary the kernel size and
real-world deployments. Nevertheless, the substantial improve- evaluate its impact on the quality of the clustering. Specifically,
ments demonstrated over the benchmark methods serve as we examine the loss curve during training when the kernel
compelling evidence that our proposed architecture excels in size is respectively 5, 10, and 30. The results are shown in
capturing the intricate patterns and dynamics that underlie Fig. 8.
network traffic flows. Observe that the impact of the dimension of the kernels is
 relatively negligible, as our AC approach converges rapidly
F. Complexity
 to small loss values that lead to efficient separation of data
 Having demonstrated exceptional NID performance, we samples into different clusters. This observation is particularly
now study the complexity of our ACID approach, both from valuable when considering deploying our NIDS on constrained
computational and runtime perspectives. To this end, we count devices. For this reason, working with 10 as the NIDS kernel
the number of parameters of our neural model and the number size, as we did in all experiments reported in this paper,
the floating point operations (FLOP) performed per inference. is reasonable. Also note that training our clustering method
We also measure the inference time for a single sample and for only 20 iterations is sufficient to obtain state-of-the-art
a batch of 128 samples, respectively, accounting for all the performance and reduce the False Alarm Rate (FAR) to zero.
processing undergone by packet through ACID’s complete 2) Feature Importance: To better understand the impact of
pipeline. The results obtained are reported in Table IV, where different features on the classification results, we analyze their
we also assess the additional complexity incurred when using degree of contribution to this process. Since we use the RF
payload features. Given that we use an edge device emulation classifier in the final stage of ACID, its implementation in the
set-up (described in Section VI) and inference times can be as Scikit-Learn library directly provides the importance weight
low as 80ms, we conclude that it is feasible to deploy our ACID of each feature, thereby making it easy to rank all features
system on constrained edge devices for intrusion detection according to their importance score. From these aggregated
purposes. Further, increasing the batch size to 128 reduces features, we select the top-15 ones according to their relative
the runtime per sample by 100×. We also note that payload importance to the decision process and plot them in Fig. 9.
features incur ∼2× higher execution time per single flow To appreciate the importance of the cluster centers relative to
inference, while they can prove orders of magnitudes more all header and statistical features extracted, as well as payload
costly when working with proportionally larger batches, which based features, we extract 50 features from the payloads, using
needs to be accounted for when deploying at the network edge. two modern Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques
 (word embedding and Text-CNN), as also performed in [25].
 VIII. A BLATION S TUDY
 Recall that these payload features can help to detect malicious
A. Sensitivity Analysis contents, such as those seen with payload-based attacks, i.e.,
 We conclude with a sensitivity analysis of our AC algorithm SQL injection, cross-site scripting (XSS), and shell-code.
wrt. (i) the dimensionality of the learned representations, and Finally, we perform the same experiment excluding the
(ii) the importance of cluster centers in the final classification. payload features and observe that the cluster centers extracted
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2709

 Fig. 11. Performance of ACID with different classifiers: No classification
 layer, Quadratic Discriminant Analysis [49], Linear SVM [50], MLP, Gaussian
 Process [51], Decision Tree [52], kNN [53], RBF SVM [54], and RF [35].
Fig. 9. 15 most important features in the classification process on the ISCX-
IDS 2012 dataset. 50 features extracted from the payloads in total. TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION OF CNN-B I LSTM AND ACID (W ITHOUT
 PAYLOAD -BASED F EATURES ) AGAINST R ECENT N ETWORK I NTRUSION
 D ETECTION DATASETS

 and categorizing network intrusions. The results of this exploration, shown in Fig. 11, further ascertain the adaptability and
 versatility of ACID, establishing it as an effective and flexible
 solution for network security applications.

Fig. 10. (t-SNE) 2-D projections of clusters obtained by our AC approach C. Evaluations on Recent NID Datasets
for multi-label classification of ISCX-IDS 2012.
 In this section, we assess the robustness of our proposed
 framework against more recent network traffic datasets.
from our clustering algorithm significantly outweigh all other Specifically, we extend our evaluation to incorporate the OPC
features during the decision process. More specifically, the UA [55] and the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 [56] datasets. This
cluster centers contribute to the decision process by 5.77% to expansion of our evaluation scope highlights the adaptability
9.03% (almost 2 to 3.6 times more than the most important and efficacy of ACID in the face of contemporary threats and
of all header and statistical features combined). Furthermore, affirms the practical applicability and relevance of ACID in
the clusters obtained by our AC approach to NID provide evolving network landscapes. Table V summarizes the results
perfectly separable representations of our data points for all of our evaluations.
network traffic categories, which is confirmed by the t-SNE
representation [57] of the clusters shown in Fig. 10. Indeed, IX. P RACTICAL C HALLENGES
reducing the dimension of embedded representations obtained
 For NIDS to be practically viable, they need to maintain
by our model to 2 through this method reveals that the clusters
 their performance over time, be compatible with different
corresponding to all types of attacks and benign traffic are
 network architectures, and handle network traffic distributions
clearly distinguishable to the clustering algorithm.
 that are different than those observed during training. In
 this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed
B. Impact of Classification Algorithm on ACID’s framework in light of two of the most challenging issues:
Performance data corruption (modelled from random distributions) and
 In this section, we examine the impact of different classi- evolution of network traffic (categorized as concept and data
fication algorithms as the final layer of our ACID framework. drifts). To tackle these practical challenges, we simulate both
This evaluation is crucial for understanding how different conditions using the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [41], [58] with
classifiers influence ACID’s overall performance in detecting entries grouped into Benign traffic and 5 attack categories,
2710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

namely: Bot, Brute-Force, DoS/DDoS, Infiltration, and Web • Exponential: describing the inter-arrival times in a
Attack. For all experiments, we split the dataset into a training Poisson process, it is defined using a probability density
and testing set using a 70/30 ratio, and make use of header function:
and statistical features alone to exclude performance gains
introduced by payload features. The experiments performed f (x ) = λe −λx ,
highlight the advantages of using our proposed framework
compared to traditional NN architectures, where we use as for a constant average rate λ.
baseline a 5-layer MLP consisting of: feed-forward, ReLU Each of these distributions is parametrized to produce
activation, batch-normalization, and dropout layers for each noises of specific magnitudes employed to perturb timeblock [16]. based features of network traffic flows, such as: packet
 inter-arrival time, active-idle time, and number/size of packets
A. Robustness to Data Corruption transferred. In Fig. 12 we report the performance comparison
 To verify the comprehensive performance of ACID in clas- as NIRE, examining a range of noise magnitudes (0–5%, 10%,
sifying network traffic when deployed in noisy environments, 15%, 20%, 25%, 50%, and 100%). Negative values indicate
we simulate corrupted features from different distributions. performance degradation, while positive ones reflect potential
For each distribution function we make a comparison between performance improvements.
our proposed architecture and that of the classical NN. As The results obtained show negligible to no degradation
evaluation metric, we measure the accuracy gain/loss incurred of ACID’s performance for perturbation magnitudes of up
by the noise. Formally, let a d (m) denote the classification to 25%, regardless of the nature of the perturbation (i.e.,
accuracy of a model for any given probability distribution d distribution from which the perturbation is drawn). Further, we
and any given noise magnitude m ∈ [0..1]. The Noise-Induced note that when using our proposed framework, low-magnitude
Relative Error (NIRE) in percentage is thus given by: perturbations have a tendency to improve the classification
 performance (up to 7.5% with the experiment performed).
 a d (m) − a d (0) These results confirm our intuition that, compared to tra-
 NIRE (m, d ) = × 100%,
 a d (0) ditional NN architectures, our ACID framework inherently
 provides a high degree of tolerance to random perturbations.
where a d (0) is the accuracy of the models without any noise
(i.e., 0% noise magnitude). We generate corrupted network
traffic features to evaluate the NIDS architectures by applying B. Continual Learning
perturbations drawn from 5 different random distributions. Despite significant performance boosts offered by NNs
Namely: for the intrusion detection task, the ever-evolving nature of
 • Uniform: generates random values with equal probability network traffic in real-world environments presents a major
 over a given range using a probability density function challenge. In fact, with the increasing heterogeneity and
 defined as: complexity of network environments, most NIDS are faced
 1 with high volumes of traffic continuously changing in nature,
 f (x ) = ,
 b−a either due to the emergence of new types of traffic or by
 where a and (b − a) are the location and scale parameters, changes in the underlying structure of known types (e.g.,
 respectively. the codecs employed by media streaming services). While
 • Bernoulli: generates random values consisting of one of defense systems usually perform well in static environments,
 two possible outcomes (x = 0 and x = 1) defined by the this dynamicity degrades their performance over time. This
 probability density function: is mainly due to the static and fixed structure of traditional
 DNNs, which limits their learning capability. Further, with
 f (x ) = p x (1 − p)1−x , new types of traffic emerging, previously learned knowledge may be erased by training the models on the newly
 where p is the probability of having x = 1 and 1 − p the
 encountered data distributions (known as catastrophic forgetprobability of having x = 0.
 ting [59], [60], [61]).
 • Normal: produces values symmetrically centered around
 To overcome this issue DNNs traditionally incorporate
 a given mean (μ) with a standard deviation (σ), defined
 new knowledge by retraining with both the new data and
 by the following probability density function:
 all previous training data, which requires massive amounts
 1 2 2
 f (x ) = √ e −(x −μ) /(2σ) . of computational and memory resources as more data is
 σ 2π encountered. This is however impractical, especially in the
 • Log-Normal: describes random variables whose loga- context of IoT settings where devices are characterized by
 rithms follow a normal distribution. For any given mean limited processing, memory, and networking capabilities [62].
 (μ) and standard deviation (σ), its probability density As such, Continual Learning solutions have been proposed,
 function is given by: whereby ML models are trained only using newly acquired
 data (also known as Incremental Learning), which on top
 1 2
 √ e −(ln(x )−μ) /(2σ ) .
 2
 f (x ) = of solving this problem, also improves speed and memory
 x σ 2π efficiency.
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2711

Fig. 12. Performance comparison of ACID and traditional NN architectures in terms of robustness to random noise. Perturbations generated for increasing
magnitudes of noise and drawn from different distributions. Negative values indicate performance degradation; positive values indicate improvements.

 In what follows, we compare ACID to a traditional NN We undertake a performance comparison of our approach
architecture and show that ACID, with its task-oriented sub- with an MLP (representing a traditional DNN), and show that
nets, inherently incorporates the notion of Continual Learning where traditional NN structures are biased towards recentlyin its learning process, by creating new sub-nets for each learned tasks (task-recency bias), leading to catastrophic
new task encountered. This allows our proposed framework to forgetting. Similar to ACID, this MLP, consisting of six
preserve its performance over time by learning and adapting feed-forward layers (with non-linear activations), is trained
its structure when new training data are available, contin- and evaluated using a traditional Class-Incremental Learning
ually expanding its knowledge of previously learned tasks approach, where both models are sequentially exposed to
without requiring to retrain models from scratch. In order new classes of network traffic over time. At each stage, the
words, the architectural design of our proposed Adaptive networks are trained using samples from a new class, and
Clustering networks overcomes the need of storing any evaluated on test samples from all previously learned classes.
previous training datasets while maintaining the stability of ACID maintains consistent performance across stages of
the NIDS. the learning process (see Fig. 13). While not guaranteed, we
 1) Class-Incremental Learning: We first consider the note that despite the precipitous degeneration effect observed
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) problem, where each task with classical DNN architectures, they can partially recover
consists of learning from data collected for a previously their performance on a previous task if the previous and the
unseen class of network traffic (e.g., type of attacks). In this new tasks share some underlying attributes. Our proposed
scenario, the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset is divided into a sequence architecture on the other hand overcomes any degeneration
of tasks, each task associated with a separate training session effect resulting from the introduction of new tasks, since
where the NIDS only has access to the data of the current the training and classification of any given task’s samples is
task. We aim to verify ACID’s intrinsic ability to prevent handled by a dedicated sub-net.
catastrophic forgetting while (i) maintaining its performance 2) Concept Drift Adaptation: Having confirmed ACID’s
on all previously learned tasks and (ii) avoiding the problem of ability to learn new tasks based on newly available training sets
intransigence (failure to adapt to new tasks). Our experiment alone, and without degrading its performance on previously
is designed to observe the performance of the NIDS at each learned tasks, we now assess the classification accuracy under
stage of the CIL learning process. the effect of conceptual drifts, where statistical properties
2712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 13. Performance comparison of ACID (top) and MLP (bottom) at different stages of a Class-Incremental Learning process, by which different attack
types are observed sequentially.

Fig. 14. Adaptive performance of ACID when presented with conceptual drifts. At each Class-Incremental Learning stage, the “Unknown” category represents
all classes of traffic that have yet to be learned by new sub-nets.

(relationships between input and output data) of our NIDS (AC) neural network that achieves exemplary performance
change over time. To simulate this notion, we extend the on three different datasets, in both binary and multi-label
previous experiment (presented in Section IX-B1) by attempt- traffic classification tasks. Our design hinges on multiple
ing to classify any network traffic not yet learned by ACID as kernel networks to learn optimal embeddings of data samples,
“unknown”. This change of distribution observed for this class thereby acquiring the ability to easily distinguish different
of outliers, as we learn new types of traffic at each stage of types of network traffic. Through extensive experiments, we
the CIL process, thereby characterizes our concept drifts. The have proved the superiority of our clustering method over
results depicted in Fig. 14 show that throughout the learning existing alternatives, and made the case for a lightweight and
process, the definition of “unknown” traffic is continually effective Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) that can
expended by our solution, thereby enabling the extension of be deployed on devices with limited computational resources,
its knowledge base with a new sub-net for each new type thereby strengthening defenses at the network edge. We have
of traffic, while updating its knowledge of the “unknown” subsequently studied the viability of our approach in practical
types. settings by highlighting its robustness to noise and its intrinsic
 support for continual learning.
 X. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS As future work, we will extend our Adaptive Clustering
 In this paper, we introduced a novel approach to Network framework to unsupervised classification tasks, virtually elim-
Intrusion Detection (NID) based on an Adaptive Clustering inating the need for high-quality labelled data.
DIALLO AND PATRAS: CLUSTER AND CONQUER: MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION AT THE EDGE 2713

 R EFERENCES [28] M. Jianliang, S. Haikun, and B. Ling, “The application on intrusion
 detection based on k-means cluster algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Inf.
 [1] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic Technol. Appl., vol. 1, May 2009, pp. 150–152.
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. [29] Y. Guan, A. Ghorbani, and N. Belacel, “Y-means: A clustering method
 Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10. for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng.
 [2] The IoT Business Index: A Steep Change in Adoption, Economist Toward Caring Humane Technol., vol. 2, Jun. 2003, pp. 1083–1086.
 Intelligence Unit, London, U.K., Feb. 2020. [30] Z. Mingqiang, H. Hui, and W. Qian, “A graph-based clustering algorithm
 [3] N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum, and N. Ghani, for anomaly intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Sci. Educ.,
 “Demystifying IoT security: An exhaustive survey on iot vulnerabilities Jul. 2012, pp. 1311–1314.
 and a first empirical look on internet-scale IoT exploitations,” IEEE [31] Z. Li, Y. Li, and L. Xu, “Anomaly intrusion detection method based
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2702–2733, 3rd Quart., 2019. on k-means clustering algorithm with particle swarm optimization,” in
 [4] 2019 Internet Crime Report, Federal Bureau of Investigat. (FBI), Proc. IEEE Inf. Technol. Comput. Eng. Manag. Sci., vol. 2, Sep. 2011,
 Washington, DC, USA, Feb. 2020. pp. 157–161.
 [5] Z. Inayat, A. Gani, N. B. Anuar, M. K. Khan, and S. Anwar, [32] F. Hachmi and M. Limam, “A two-stage technique to improve intrusion
 “Intrusion response systems: Foundations, design, and challenges,” J. detection systems based on data mining algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 62, pp. 53–74, Feb. 2016. Conf. Model. Simulat. Appl. Optim., Apr. 2013, pp. 1–6.
 [6] (Cisco, San Jose, CA, USA). “Snort.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [33] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of
 [Online]. Available: https://talosintelligence.com/snort word representations in vector space,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop, 2013,
 [7] “Zeek.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://zeek.org/ pp. 1–12.
 [8] “Suricata.” Accessed: Dec. 26, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// [34] T. He, W. Huang, Y. Qiao, and J. Yao, “Text-attentional convolutional
 suricata.io neural network for scene text detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process.,
 [9] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning and deep learning methods for vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 2529–2541, Jun. 2016.
 intrusion detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396, [35] L. Breiman, “random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
 2019. 2001.
[10] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and machine [36] “PyTorch.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://pytorch.
 learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun. org/
 Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2nd Quart., 2016. [37] “Scikit-learn.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
[11] A. B. Nassif, I. Shahin, I. Attili, M. Azzeh, and K. Shaalan, “Speech scikit-learn.org/stable/
 recognition using deep neural networks: A systematic review,” IEEE [38] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 19143–19165, 2019. in Proc. ICLR, 2014, pp. 1–15.
[12] W. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Liu, N. Zeng, Y. Liu, and F. E. Alsaadi, “A [39] J. Stolfo, W. Fan, W. Lee, A. Prodromidis, and P. K. Chan, “Costsurvey of deep neural network architectures and their applications,” based modeling and evaluation for data mining with application to fraud
 Neurocomputing, vol. 234, pp. 11–26, Apr. 2017. and intrusion detection,” in Proc. Results JAM Project Salvatore, 2000,
[13] C. Zhang, P. Patras, and H. Haddadi, “Deep learning in mobile and pp. 1–15.
 wireless networking: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, [40] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. Ghorbani, “Toward developno. 3, pp. 2224–2287, 3rd Quart., 2019. ing a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for intrusion
[14] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for detection,” Comput. Security, vol. 31, no. 3, p. 357–374, May 2012.
 unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, Mar. 2018, pp. 1–19. [41] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
[15] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT: Network-based detection of IoT botnet new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.” in
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17, Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, pp. 108–116.
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.-Sep. 2018. [42] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based
[16] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. Soman, P. Poornachandran, algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
 A. Al-Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach in Proc. KDD, vol. 96, 1996, pp. 226–231.
 for intelligent intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, [43] F. R. Chung and F. C. Graham, Spectral Graph Theory. Providence, RI,
 pp. 41525–41550, 2019. USA: Amer. Math. Soc., 1997.
[17] “KDD cup’99.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://kdd. [44] J. MacQueen, “Some methods for classification and analysis of multiics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/kddcup99.html variate observations,” in Proc. Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Probabil.,
[18] “ISCX-IDS 2012.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// vol. 1, 1967, pp. 281–297.
 www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids.htm [45] D. Comaniciu and P. Meer, “Mean shift: A robust approach toward
[19] “CSE-CIC-IDS 2018.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: feature space analysis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 24,
 https://registry.opendata.aws/cse-cic-ids2018 no. 5, pp. 603–619, May 2002.
[20] Y. Yu, J. Long, and Z. Cai, “Session-based network intrusion detection [46] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and S. Astels, “Hdbscan: Hierarchical density
 using a deep learning architecture,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Model. Decis. based clustering,” J. Open Sour. Softw., vol. 2, no. 11, p. 205, 2017.
 Artif. Intell., Sep. 2017, pp. 144–155. [47] H. Schütze, C.D. Manning, and P. Raghavan, Introduction to Information
[21] Y. Yu, J. Long, and Z. Cai, “Network intrusion detection through Retrieval, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, vol. 39, 2008,
 stacking dilated convolutional autoencoders,” Security Commun. Netw., pp. 234–265.
 vol. 2017 pp. 1–10, Nov. 2017. [48] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
[22] M. Yousefi-Azar, V. Varadharajan, L. Hamey, and U. Tupakula, network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
 “Autoencoder-based feature learning for cyber security applications,” in Recognit., 2020, pp. 223–231.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., May 2017, pp. 3854–3861. [49] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical
[23] Z. Tan, A. Jamdagni, X. He, P. Nanda, R. Liu, and J. Hu, “Detection Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, vol. 2. New York,
 of denial-of-service attacks based on computer vision techniques,” IEEE NY, USA: Springer, 2009, pp. 1–758.
 Trans. Comput., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 2519–2533, Sep. 2015. [50] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Machine learning,
[24] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial-temporal vol. 20, pp. 273–297, Sep. 1995.
 features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,” [51] C. E. Rasmussen, and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for
 IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2017. Machine Learning, vol. 1. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006.
[25] E. Min, J. Long, Q. Liu, J. Cui, and W. Chen, “TR-IDS: Anomaly- [52] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone,
 based intrusion detection through text-convolutional neural network and “Classification and regression trees,” in Wadsworth and Brooks, New
 random forest,” Security Commun. Netw., vol. 2018, pp. 1–9, Jul. 2018. York, NY, USA: Routledge, 1984.
[26] S. Nejatian, H. Parvin, and E. Faraji, “Using sub-sampling and ensemble [53] T. Cover and P. Hart, “Nearest neighbor pattern classification,” IEEE
 clustering techniques to improve performance of imbalanced classifica- Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 21–27, Jan. 1967.
 tion,” Neurocomputing, vol. 276, pp. 55–66, Feb. 2018. [54] B. E. Boser, I. M. Guyon, and V. N. Vapnik, “A training algorithm
[27] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer, for optimal margin classifiers,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Workshop Comput.
 “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell. Learn. Theory, 1992, pp. 144–152.
 Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 321–357, 2002. [55] R. Pinto, M2M Using OPC UA, IEEE Dataport, Porto, Portugal, 2020.
2714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

[56] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari, Alec F. Diallo received the joint integrated master’s
 “Detection of doh tunnels using time-series classification of degree from Mundiapolis University and ESIEE
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Depend. Auton. Paris, with a focus on computer science and elec-
 Secure Comput. Int. Conf. Pervasive Intell. Comput. Int. Conf. trical engineering. He is currently pursuing the
 Cloud Big Data Comput. Int. Conf. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr. Ph.D. degree with The University of Edinburgh. His
 (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), 2020, pp. 63–70. current research seeks to bridge the gap between the
[57] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. ever-evolving nature of cyber threats and the security
 Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008. and privacy of users’ data on networked systems, by
[58] “CSE-CIC-IDS 2017.” Accessed: Sep. 27, 2023. [Online]. Available: using artificial intelligence to build automatic threat
 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html detection and counteraction mechanisms.
[59] S. Lewandowsky and S.-C. Li, “Catastrophic interference in neural
 networks: Causes, solutions, and data,” in Interference and Inhibition in
 Cognition, F. N. Dempster, C. J. Brainerd, and C. J. Brainerd, Eds. San
 Diego, CA, USA: Elsevier, 1995, pp. 329–361.
[60] R. French, “Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks,” Trends
 Cogn. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 128–135, Apr. 1999.
[61] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
 p. 436, May 2015.
[62] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under Paul Patras (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12, M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Universidad
 pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ Carlos III de Madrid. He is an Associate Professor
 tkde.2018.2876857 with the School of Informatics, The University of
[63] I. J. Goodfellow, M. Mirza, D. Xiao, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, Edinburgh, where he leads the Mobile Intelligence
 “An empirical investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based Lab – a multi-disciplinary team that pursues research
 neural networks,” 2013, arXiv:1312.6211. at the intersection of network engineering and artifi-
[64] J. von Oswald, C. Henning, B. F. Grewe, and J. Sacramento, “Continual cial intelligence, to improve the analysis, resilience,
 learning with hypernetworks,” 2019, arXiv:1906.00695. and management of next generation mobile systems.
[65] T. J. Draelos et al., “Neurogenesis deep learning: Extending deep He is also a Co-Founder and the CEO of Net AI,
 networks to accommodate new classes,” in Proc. IJCNN, 2017, a pioneering university spinout specializing in AIpp. 526–533. driven network analytics. He was the recipient of a prestigious Chancellor’s
[66] A. A. Rusu et al., “Progressive neural networks,” 2016, Fellowship awarded by the University of Edinburgh. He has served on the
 arXiv:1606.04671. organizing committee on several conferences and workshops in his field, and
[67] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for advised the ITU-T Focus Group on machine learning for future networks,
 fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2017, pp. 1126–1135. including 5G.