Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

Combine intra- and inter-flow: A multimodal encrypted traffic classification
model driven by diverse features
Xiangbin Wang a,b , Qingjun Yuan a,b ,∗, Yongjuan Wang a,b , Gaopeng Gou c,d , Chunxiang Gu a,b ,
Gang Yu a,b , Gang Xiong c,d
a
 Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
b Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou, 450001, China
c Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China
d School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: The increasing prevalence of encryption for data security in network communication highlights the urgent
Encrypted traffic classification need for effective encrypted traffic identification methods. Challenges such as payload concealment, diverse
Spectrogram encryption protocols, and evasion tactics necessitate innovative approaches, including deep learning and
Graph convolutional network
 multiple features integration. Multimodal learning, which utilizes features from multiple sources, proves
Multimodal learning
 more effective than single-modality methods, offering a more comprehensive analysis. However, current
 methods often overlook valuable inter-flow information, hindering optimal classification. Hence, we propose
 a novel multimodal encrypted traffic classification model driven by diverse features, named MeDF, which
 combines intra- and inter-flow features. MeDF leverages both intra-flow and inter-flow features: it constructs
 spectrograms of flows’ raw bytes and extracts statistical features, combining the two as the intra-flow
 features. MeDF also builds flow relation graph to extracts inter-flow features, helping the model learn the
 complex relationships between flows. The intra- and inter-flow features complement each other and extract
 the maximum amount of valid information from encrypted traffic. Thus, MeDF overcomes the performance
 limitations of existing multimodal models for encrypted traffic classification. MeDF is validated on 2 realworld traffic datasets with accuracy of 98.57% and 94.73%. The outperformance can be attributed to the
 complementary information of the employed features and the modeling of complex relationships, when
 compared to both classical single-modality classification methods and state-of-the-art multimodal methods.

1. Introduction Some models use raw flow data, like L4 payload, as input, integrating feature/representation learning and classification into a unified
 Network traffic classification is a crucial tool for network supervi- pipeline [6,7,9]. Handling these features typically involves the use of
sion [1,2]. In recent years, machine learning, particularly deep learning CNN, MLP, ensemble learning, and Transformer models.
methods capable of handling intricate data relationships and large- Additionally, when different network flows share common
scale data processing, has gained more preference over traditional attributes like IP, port, and protocol, these correlation features conmethods [3,4]. tribute to effective traffic classification. Often represented through
 In order to fully unleash the potential of the model, it is typically graph structures, these are referred to as graph features. It is crucial
necessary to choose appropriate features from encrypted traffic data
 to note that certain studies, despite using graph structures, represent
for learning. We have summarized the types of features used in recent
 an individual flow with a single graph, deviating from the convennetwork traffic classification works in Table 1. These features include
 tional understanding of graph features in this context [10–15]. GNN
statistical feature, Temporal feature, original traffic and graph feature.
 is commonly used to learn graph feature.
 Statistical features of network flows, such as packet number, average packet size, and average arrival time, prompt the use of learning- It can be observed that the majority of methods for encrypted traffic
based algorithms to model feature distributions for network flow clas- classification typically focus solely on one aspect of encrypted traffic
sification [5–7]. Temporal features include the packet length sequence features [16,17]. This limitation hinders the full utilization of informaand packet arrival interval sequence, treating flows as time series [8]. tion from other aspects during classification, thereby weakening overall

 ∗ Corresponding author at: Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China.
 E-mail addresses: Moskyes@outlook.com (X. Wang), gcxyuan@outlook.com (Q. Yuan), pinkywyj@163.com (Y. Wang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110403
Received 15 January 2024; Received in revised form 6 March 2024; Accepted 6 April 2024
Available online 8 April 2024
1389-1286/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 Table 1
 Summary of the features used in recent network traffic classification work and our MeDF.
 Feature Intra-flow feature Inter-flow feature
 Model Statistical feature Temporal feature Original traffic Graph feature
 1D-CNN [9] ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
 XGBoost [5] ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗
 ACID [8] ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
 ProGraph [13] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
 WTAGraph [15] ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
 AppNet [6] ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗
 MIMETIC [7] ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗
 MeDF (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

effectiveness. To address this, multimodal learning methods have been diversified feature representation method helps to improve the
introduced to the task of encrypted traffic classification. [6,7] model’s adaptability and generalization ability to new situations,
 Multimodal learning, a technique integrating information from two making the model more robust when encountering new data.
or more modalities, facilitates effective classification and prediction
[18]. In contrast to general encrypted traffic classification methods, In this study, we introduce MeDF, a multimodal encrypted trafapproaches based on multimodal learning can simultaneously lever- fic classification model, driven by a diverse array of features. Our
age features from different perspectives of traffic, thereby enhancing approach emphasizes the simultaneous utilization of both intra-flow
classification effectiveness. These approaches treat features as different and inter-flow features. Specifically, we employ statistical features and
modalities and learn them using an appropriate model to combine time–frequency domain features as intra-flow features for network
multiple sources of information for classifying encrypted traffic. flows, while graph features serve as inter-flow features. Given that traf-
 Network traffic inherently consists of multimodal data with diverse fic data inherently encompasses temporal features in both the time and
features. The features fall into two main categories: intra-flow features frequency domains, we treat these features as intra-flow components
and inter-flow features. Intra-flow features consist of statistical char- within the Euclidean space. To comprehensively characterize features
acteristics of the traffic, raw bytes, etc. These features can be directly in both domains, we leverage spectrograms, allowing us to address
quantified and represented in Euclidean space, constituting Euclidean the potential oversight of using only one aspect of the features and
space features. They help capture the fundamental patterns and be- mitigating the lack of information on the other.
haviors of the traffic, providing an intuitive feature representation for Recognizing the necessity of non-Euclidean features, we introduce
classification tasks. Inter-flow features can be extracted from the struc- the concept of a relation graph of flows to represent inter-flow features.
tural or sequential characteristics of encrypted traffic. For instance, This supplementary representation in non-Euclidean space enhances
relationships between flows in the traffic can be captured through the model’s capacity to capture diverse aspects of network traffic
graph representation learning methods, which are more naturally rep- relationships. Our classification process entails the use of three disresented in non-Euclidean spaces such as graph space, constituting tinct deep learning models, each specialized in learning one of the
non-Euclidean space features. The diverse features enable multimodal three feature types. Subsequently, these models seamlessly integrate to
learning to be effectively applied to encrypted traffic classification achieve a comprehensive classification outcome. This holistic approach,
tasks. combining Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces, ensures our model
 Currently, many research studies focus on either intra-flow or inter- effectively addresses the intricate challenges associated with encrypted
flow features exclusively. Our focus, however, lies on methods employ- traffic classification.
ing multimodal learning. Theoretically, multimodal learning necessi- To the best of our knowledge, this is the first encrypted traffic
tates complementary and heterogeneous characteristics among differ- classification model that uses both of intra-flow and inter-flow features.
ent modalities. Utilizing features meeting these criteria as modalities The main contributions of this study are as follows.
enhances the information exchange between them, thereby improving
 1. We construct a multimodal classification model MeDF. It can
the effectiveness of multimodal learning. Despite the utilization of
 make full use of the comprehensive information extracted from
multimodal learning in existing research, feature selection remains
 inter-flow and intra-flow features, meeting the needs of multilimited to a single type of intra-flow feature. This constraint may hinder
 modal learning for feature complementarity and heterogeneity.
the model’s ability to fully capture features from diverse perspectives
of network flows, potentially impacting classification performance. 2. We use the flow relation graph to characterize the inter-flow
 Combining intra-flow and inter-flow features as Euclidean space and features while spectrogram and statistical feature to characterize
non Euclidean space features respectively has certain advantages: the intra-flow features. These complementary features on both
 aspects can provide more comprehensive information about en-
 1. Complementarity: Euclidean space features are typically suit- crypted traffic to the model. Therefore, MeDF can achieve better
 able for capturing linear relationships and regular geometric classification result.
 structures, while non Euclidean space features excel at handling 3. We validate the model on the real-world dataset and achieve
 complex topological structures and nonlinear relationships. This good results, proving that classification using both intra-flow
 complementarity can enable the model to comprehensively un- features and inter-flow features is highly effective.
 derstand and characterize encrypted traffic, and also meet the
 requirements of multimodal learning. The subsequent chapters of this paper are organized as follows:
 2. Enhanced representation capability: By combining two spatial Section 2 focuses on the works related to network traffic classification
 features, the model can more flexibly represent different types and some basic knowledge required in this paper. Section 3 explains the
 of data and relationships. This enhanced representation ability model framework of MeDF. Section 4 verifies the validity of the model
 helps to improve the generalization ability and accuracy of the through experiments. Section 5 concludes the work of this paper.
 model.
 3. Improving the generalization ability of the model: Non Euclidean 2. Background and related work
 features can help the model capture deeper, non explicit data
 structures and relationships, while Euclidean features can pro- Network traffic classification is one of the key research problems
 vide more intuitive and conventional data representations. This in the field of network security. This section focuses on a review of

 2
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

existing work, including the definition of network traffic classifica- In our model, We use the spectrograms of flows as the repretion (Section 2.1), feature-based classification methods (Section 2.2), sentation of intra-flow features. Spectrograms can provide both time
and current works related to encrypted traffic classification that use domain and frequency domain attributes of flows, avoiding the lack of
multimodal learning (Section 2.3). information due to the use of only a single attribute. In addition, we
 also utilize statistical features as supplementary information to ensure
2.1. Definition of network traffic classification that the model captures sufficient information from the traffic.

 Encrypted traffic classification refers to the identification of the 2.2.2. Inter-flow-feature-based methods
category to which the traffic belongs without decrypting the traffic, Inter-flow features mainly refer to the relationship features in
such as the application generating the traffic or the purpose of the network flows. Different network flows may have the same source/
traffic. The encrypted traffic classification is typically done at the destination IP, protocols, and representative work to construct flow repacket, flow, or session level. A flow is a set of packets represented by a lation graph, and train GNN to complete the classification of encrypted
five-tuple, including destination IP, source IP, destination port, source traffic.
port, and protocol. A session refers to the bidirectional flow between Yang et al. [15] propose WTAGRAPH, a network tracking and ad
two network nodes over a period of time. detection framework based on Graph Neural Networks (GNN). We
 Assuming we have a set of encrypted traffic data  = (𝐱𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ), 𝑖 = first construct an Attribute Homogeneous Multigraph (AHMG) repre-
1, … , 𝑁, where 𝑁 is the number of samples, 𝐱𝑖 represents the feature senting HTTP network traffic, and formulate network tracking and
representation of the 𝑖th sample, and 𝑦𝑖 is the corresponding class label. ad detection as tasks of edge representation learning and classifica-
 In multimodal learning, 𝐱𝑖 can be composed of data from multiple tion based on GNN in AHMG. Li et al. [13] proposed ProGraph,a
modalities, such as raw bytes, packet size distributions, etc. Therefore, graph-propagation-based method. It builds a correlation graph with
𝐱𝑖 can be further represented as 𝐱𝑖 = (𝐱𝑖1 , 𝐱𝑖2 , … , 𝐱𝑖𝑀 ), where 𝑀 is the session clusters aggregated from different networks, upon which efnumber of modalities, and 𝐱𝑖𝑚 represents the feature representation of fective graph propagation can be implemented iteratively to predict
the 𝑖th sample in the 𝑚th modality. labels for test nodes. Cai et al. [23] proposed the MEMG method, which
 The structure of a multimodal learning model typically includes sub- combines Markov chains and graph neural networks to represent the
models that process features from each modality and a fusion network encrypted traffic of mobile applications as a first-order Markov chain
that combines these features for final classification. In the context of graph representation, transforming the encrypted traffic classification
encrypted traffic classification, this can be represented as follows: problem into a graph classification problem.
 Modality feature extraction: For each modality 𝑚, there exists a Essentially, intra-flow features are features in Euclidean space,
function 𝑓 𝑚 (⋅) to extract relevant features, i.e., 𝐳𝑖𝑚 = 𝑓 𝑚 (𝐱𝑖𝑚 ). which are the various properties of the encrypted flows themselves.
 Modality fusion: After extracting the features𝐳𝑖1 , 𝐳𝑖2 , … , 𝐳𝑖𝑀 , these fea- Meanwhile, inter-flow features are features on non-Euclidean space,
tures are combined using a fusion function𝑓 (⋅), i.e., 𝐳𝑖 = 𝑓 (𝐳𝑖1 , 𝐳𝑖2 , … , 𝐳𝑖𝑀 ). which can reflect the relationship between multiple network flows.
 Classification: Finally, a classification function ℎ(⋅) is used to predict Our model combines these two types of features to classify encrypted
the class from the fused features, i.e., 𝑦̂𝑖 = ℎ(𝐳𝑖 ). traffic. It can preserve the complete information of encrypted traffic
 and optimize the classification effect.
2.2. Feature-based methods
 2.3. Multimodal-learning-based methods
 The primary concept of feature-based classification methods is to extract various types of features of network traffic and combine them with Multimodal learning refers to the process of integrating informaclassification algorithms, such as machine learning or deep learning, to tion from several modalities, specifically, combining information from
accomplish the classification of traffic. The existing feature-based work multiple perspectives of an object, to perform classification. When
can be categorized into two categories: methods based on intra-flow performing classification, a single modality typically cannot contain all
features and methods based on inter-flow features. the valid information needed to produce accurate prediction results.
 In contrast to from the general feature-based encrypted traffic clas-
2.2.1. Intra-flow-feature-based methods sification methods, the approach of multimodal learning in encrypted
 The methods based on intra-flow features can be categorized into traffic classification aims to synthesize multiple features of traffic by
attribute-based features and sequence-based features. Among them, leveraging the concept of multimodal learning. The approach treats
attribute-based features include statistical features such as maximum different features of traffic as different modalities, and learn them using
packet size, the average packet size of packets and string features models that are compatible with the modalities to unify multifaceted
extracted directly from the flow. information to complete the classification of encrypted traffic. Aceto
 Machine learning or deep learning algorithms can use these features et al. proposed MIMETIC [7], a multimodal deep learning framework
as input to classify encrypted traffic. Taylor et al. [19]. designed burst that uses the first 576 bytes of payload and four protocol features as
and flow statistical features and proposed AppScanner for fingerprint input sources. The payload part is processed using a one-dimensional
mobile applications. Chen et al. [20]. proposed Multi-Attribute Asso- CNN and the protocol feature part is processed using a lightweight
ciation Fingerprinting (MAAF) to classify mobile encrypted services. RNN structure GRU. Most previous approaches work by obtaining the
MAAF uses domain names, certificates, and data length to predict the payload portion of the first packet or by piecing together a mixed
application to which the encrypted flow belongs. payload by extracting specific bytes from multiple packets, which lacks
 The sequence-based features of encrypted traffic include packet feature information of the entire network flow.
length and message state sequences. Liu et al. [21]. used first-order Wang et al. proposed a multimodal encrypted traffic classification
Markov chains to model packet length sequences and constructed a framework, called AppNet. The framework uses a 1-D CNN to extract
multi-attribute Markov probabilistic fingerprint model MaMPF. Liu features from the first 1014 bytes and uses LSTM to learn the temet al. [22]. also designed a neural network model called Flowing poral relationship of the packet length sequence, and finally connects
Sequence Network (FS-Net), which consists of an encoder, decoder, the features learned from both perspectives for classification [9]. Lin
and classifier. The encoder converts the input length sequence into et al. proposed PEAN [24], a model that takes raw bytes and length
encoded features, while the decoder attempts to recover the sequence sequences as input. It utilizes Transformer and bidirectional LSTM
by reconstructing the layers; the classifier uses the encoded features to as sub-models and employs self-attention mechanism to learn deep
identify the application class of the flow. relationships between network packets.

 3
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 Fig. 1. The framework of MeDF.

 Numerous current encrypted traffic classification methods using the Algorithm 1: Framework of MeDF
multimodal learning use a combination of multiple intra-flow features. Input: Several pcap files containing 𝑚 flows in total
Additionally there is a lack of research on using both intra-flow features
 Output: Classification results
and inter-flow features for encrypted traffic classification. Therefore, in
this study, we consider using the time–frequency domain features of 1 Initialize 𝑀 as an empty set;
flows as intra-flow features and the flow relation graph as inter-flow 2 Let 𝑖 = 𝑚;
features of encrypted traffic. 3 Intra-Flow features extraction:
 4 while 𝑖 > 0 do
3. Description of MeDF 5 Extract the raw byte sequence 𝐑𝐁𝐒𝐢 of 𝐟 𝐥𝐨𝐰𝐢 ;
 6 Generate the spectrogram 𝐬𝐩𝐞𝐜𝐢 of 𝐑𝐁𝐒𝐢 ;
 This section introduces MeDF, the proposed encrypted traffic clas-
 7 Extract the statistical features vector 𝐬𝐟 𝐯𝐢 of 𝐟 𝐥𝐨𝐰𝐢 ;
sification model. This model mainly consists of four parts: Traffic
 8 Input 𝐬𝐩𝐞𝐜𝐢 and 𝐬𝐟 𝐯𝐢 into CNN and MLP respectively, and
data preprocessing, Inter-flow features extraction, Intra-flow features
 obtain sub-modalities 𝑚1𝑖 and 𝑚2𝑖 ;
extraction and classification module, as shown in Fig. 1. It aims to
achieve the integration of intra-flow and inter-flow features to meet the 9 Let 𝑀1𝑖 = 𝑓 (𝑚1𝑖 , 𝑚2𝑖 ),where 𝑓 is the modality fusion
requirements of multimodal learning for modality complementarity and function;
heterogeneity. To achieve this, we design two modules for extracting 10 𝑖 = 𝑖 − 1;
preprocessed traffic features: one for intra-flow features and the other 11 Inter-Flow features extraction:
for inter-flow features. 12 Build the relation graph 𝐺 of all the 𝑚 flows;
 Specifically, we construct a flow relationship graph to reflect the 13 Input 𝐺 into GCN;
connections between different flows and utilize graph convolutional 14 while 𝑖 > 0 do
networks to extract inter-flow features. For intra-flow feature extrac- 15 Obtain the representation vector of the node 𝑖 as the
tion, it involves two aspects: flow spectrogram and flow statistical
 modality 𝑀2𝑖 ;
features. Since traffic can be considered a type of time series data, we
 16 𝑖 = 𝑖 − 1;
aim to use spectrograms to simultaneously capture its features in both
the time and frequency domains. Additionally, combining statistical 17 Multimodal classification:
features, known for their universality and effectiveness, forms the intra- 18 while 𝑖 > 0 do
flow features. Finally, we input both inter-flow and intra-flow features 19 Let 𝑀𝑖 = 𝑓 (𝑀1𝑖 , 𝑀2𝑖 );
into the classification module to complete the final classification. We 20 Save 𝑀𝑖 to 𝑀;
describe each module in detail as following. 21 𝑖 = 𝑖 − 1;
3.1. Traffic data preprocessing 22 Input 𝑀 into the classification model to obtain the 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡
 23 return 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡
 The pcap data is divided into flows based on five tuples {source IP,
source port, destination IP address, destination port, protocol}. It is also
necessary to filter out the following three types of traffic.

 4
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 1. TCP Handshake Failed flows. The data packets of a failed
 handshake do not carry with any valid application information
 and does not provide valid information for the actual service
 traffic identification. The TCP handshake failure packet does not
 carry any valid application information and does not provide
 valid information for actual service traffic identification. The
 filtering criteria for this type of session is that the transport layer
 protocol is TCP and the entire session handshake information is
 incomplete or there is no service load.
 2. DNS domain name query flows. The IP address and port of
 the DNS server are generally different from the IP address and
 destination port of the specific business traffic. Therefore, even
 if a traffic service requires the use of a DNS service, its DNS
 query traffic and the business-specific traffic will be divided
 into different sessions when session segmentation is performed.
 Separate DNS traffic sessions are less helpful for traffic type
 identification. The traffic filtering criteria for this type of session Fig. 2. An example of the flow relation graph.
 is that the entire session data packet is a DNS protocol packet.
 3. LLMNR protocol flows. Application Scenarios for the LLMNR Algorithm 2: Construct Flow Relation Graph
 Protocol Similar to the DNS protocol, DNS client computers can
 Input: The set 𝐹 of flows; Each flow is represented as a triplet
 use the LLMNR protocol to resolve names on local network
 {S_IP, D_IP, protocol}.
 segments when DNS servers are unavailable.
 Output: The flow relation graph 𝐺.
 The above three types of flows occur frequently in different types 1 Function ConstructGraph(𝐹 ):
of traffic and can be regarded as common background traffic [25,26]. 2 Initialize an empty undirected graph 𝐺;
However, they carry less effective information by themselves, which 3 for each flow {S_IP, D_IP, protocol} in 𝐹 do
is not conducive to the model’s extraction and learning of specific 4 Generate a unique node ID using S_IP, D_IP, and
business features of this type of traffic. Therefore, they are filtered out protocol;
in the data processing. 5 Add the node to graph 𝐺;
 6 for each node 𝑋 in graph 𝐺 do
3.2. Inter-flow features extraction 7 for each node 𝑌 in graph 𝐺 do
 8 if 𝑋 ≠ 𝑌 and S_IP or D_IP of 𝑋 is the same as 𝑌 , and
 This section describes the construction method of the network flow protocol is also the same then
relation graph used in the model.
 The purpose of constructing the flow relation graph is to obtain 9 return graph 𝐺;
the inter-flow features of network flows, specifically whether there is
any correlation between flows. Therefore, we use flows as nodes in the
graph. In this process, the directionality between flows is not necessary,
so we use an undirected graph for construction, where edges represent Fig. 2 provides an example of a flow relation graph, which includes
the existence of correlations between flows. Whether to add an edge 8 nodes representing 8 flows., while the presence of an edge between
between nodes depends on the node attributes. The node attributes we two nodes indicates that the source IP of one of these two network
consider are the triplet source IP, destination IP, protocol. The specific flows is the same as the source/destination IP of the other flow, or the
process is as follows: destination IP of one flow is the same as the source/destination IP of
 the other flow and they have the same protocol.
 1. Create an empty undirected graph: First, initialize an empty
 undirected graph G. 3.3. Intra-flow features extraction
 2. Add flows as nodes: Iterate through all flows, and for each flow,
 add it as a node to the graph G. Each node represents a flow We use flow spectrograms as a representation of intra-flow features,
 and has three attributes: source IP, destination IP, and protocol. while using statistical features as supplements. The following will
 Make sure each node has a unique identifier to distinguish explain them separately.
 different flows.
 3.3.1. Flow time–frequency spectrogram generation
 3. Check flow attributes and add edges: For each flow node A in the
 Network traffic data can be considered as a discrete time series, typgraph, iterate through all other flow nodes in the graph (B, C,
 ically analyzed in the time domain in previous studies. This approach,
 etc.). For each pair of flow nodes, perform the following checks:
 however, may not fully leverage the potential information within the
 if the source IP, destination IP set of flow A has common values
 frequency domain, either because it is theoretically unavailable or
 with the source IP, destination IP set of flow B, and they use the challenging to utilize when solely focusing on time domain analysis.
 same protocol, add an edge between node A and node B. This Conversely, relying solely on frequency domain information may result
 edge represents the association between flow A and flow B. in the loss of valuable information from the time domain.
 4. Repeat the checking process: Continue to repeat step 3 for the Therefore, we use time–frequency spectrograms to depict the fearemaining flow nodes in the graph until all possible pairs of flow tures of traffic in both the time and frequency domains. The traffic
 nodes have been considered. in the time domain undergoes Fourier transform processing, resulting
 5. Complete the flow relationship graph: When all flows have been in the generation of a time–frequency spectrogram for the traffic data.
 traversed, and their relationships have been checked and added This spectrogram encapsulates the distinctive features of the traffic data
 to the graph, the undirected graph G is completed. This graph in both time and frequency domains, facilitating the comprehensive
 represents flows as nodes and their relationships as edges. utilization of information within the traffic.

 5
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 We employ the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) to generate where 𝑖 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 − 𝑚 + 1, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗. Calculate the template matching
spectrograms of flows. The STFT offers precise time–frequency reso- probability of the subsequence 𝑋(𝑖):
lution within a predetermined window of fixed size. In practical ap- [ ]
 𝑛𝑢𝑚 𝑑𝑖𝑗 < 𝑟
plications, the STFT is frequently computed using overlapping analysis 𝐵𝑖𝑚 (𝑟) = (10)
 𝑁 −𝑚
windows. These windows slide in a manner that introduces dependencies between adjacent windows, thereby mitigating the loss of accuracy In turn, the average similarity can be calculated for all subseat boundary locations. Typically, the STFT function can be expressed as quences:
 ∑𝑁−𝑚+1 𝑚
STFT {𝑥 [𝑡]} (𝑚, 𝜔) ≡ 𝑋 (𝑚, 𝜔) 𝑖=1 𝐵𝑖 (𝑟)
 𝐵 𝑚 (𝑟) = (11)
 ∑
 +∞
 (1) 𝑁 −𝑚+1
 = 𝑥 [𝑡] 𝑤 [𝑡 − 𝑚𝐻] 𝑒−𝑗𝜔𝑡 Due to the length of the raw byte sequence of the flow is a finite
 −∞
 value, the sample entropy of the sequence is obtained as
where 𝑥(𝑡) denotes the input data sampled at time 𝑡, 𝑤[𝑡] is the sliding [ ]
 𝐵 𝑚+1 (𝑟)
window, 𝜔 denotes the phase, 𝑚 signifies the position of the window, 𝐒𝐚𝐦𝐩𝐄𝐧 (𝑠𝑒𝑞) = lim −𝑙𝑛 𝑚 (12)
 𝑁→∞ 𝐵 (𝑟)
and 𝐻 is the overlap constant when the window is sliding continuously.
 The STFT possesses linearity property, defined by The analysis indicates that the calculation of sample entropy in
 { } { } the time domain is linear, while the Fourier transform possesses the
STFT 𝑎𝑥1 [𝑡] + 𝑏𝑥2 [𝑡] = 𝑎 ⋅ STFT 𝑥1 [𝑡]
 { } (2) property of maintaining linear operations. Therefore, following the
 +𝑏 ⋅ STFT 𝑥2 [𝑡] short-time Fourier transform and considering the introduction of noise,
 In order to avoid complex calculations and preserve the most rele- the information entropy in the frequency domain representation of
vant information, it is common practice to process only the magnitude the flow byte sequence does not surpass that of the time domain
of the STFT. This results in a joint representation of the time and representation. Consequently, the information entropy of the flow byte
frequency domains, i.e., spectrogram. It is defined as sequence in the time–frequency spectrogram representation exceeds
 that of the time domain representation. From this, we can obtain the
spectrogram {𝑥 [𝑡]} (𝑚, 𝜔) ≡ |𝑋 (𝑚, 𝜔)|2 (3) following inequality.
 When applied to characterize network traffic, for a flow, we take 𝐒𝐚𝐦𝐩𝐄𝐧 (𝑠𝑒𝑞) < 𝐭𝐟 𝐄𝐧 (𝑠𝑒𝑞) ≤ 2 ⋅ 𝐒𝐚𝐦𝐩𝐄𝐧 (𝑠𝑒𝑞) (13)
the first 𝑛 bytes of it to form a byte sequence and use 𝐹 as the
representation of this flow in the time domain. Considering that the where 𝐭𝐟 𝐄𝐧 (𝑠𝑒𝑞) represents the entropy of the sequence in the time–
byte sequence is a discrete time series, it is necessary to perform a frequency domain.
discrete Fourier transform on each window. In this case, the STFT can
be represented as 3.3.2. Supplement with statistical features
 In the context of network traffic classification, statistical features
STFT {F [𝑖]} (𝑚, 𝜔) ≡ 𝑋 (𝑚, 𝜔) are utilized to enhance the process of encrypting traffic. Statistical
 ∑
 +∞
 (4) features involve analyzing various characteristics and patterns within
 = F [𝑖] 𝑤 [𝑖 − 𝑚𝐻] 𝑒−𝑗𝜔𝑖 the encrypted traffic data. These features may include packet size
 −∞
 distribution, inter-arrival time, payload length, and statistical moments
where F [𝑖] denotes the 𝑖th sample point, 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛. And the spectrogram such as mean and variance.
is By leveraging statistical features, the encrypted traffic can be catspectrogram {F [𝑖]} (𝑚, 𝜔) ≡ |𝑋 (𝑚, 𝜔)|2 (5) egorized into different classes or types, allowing for more accurate
 identification and classification. These features can be extracted from
 The spectrogram can be seen as a two-dimensional visual represen- the encrypted traffic data and utilized in machine learning algorithms
tation of time and frequency domain information. It simultaneously or statistical models to train and build classifiers.
reflects information from both the time and frequency domains, as The utilization of statistical features in encrypting traffic classificaopposed to the one-dimensional representation in the time domain. tion provides a robust and reliable method to differentiate various types
 Here, we examine the flow’s spectrogram using information entropy of encrypted traffic.
theory. The encrypted flow is treated as a time series, and we apply We use statistical features as a supplement to spectrograms, and
the sample entropy method to gauge its information content. Sample together they form the intra-flow features. They mainly include the
entropy quantifies the complexity of a time series, indicating the likeli- following categories:
hood of new information occurring. It measures the probability of new
information in a conditional manner: the more complex the time series, 1. Packet size distribution: Statistics on the size distribution of
the higher the sample entropy. This metric can effectively reflect the individual packets in encrypted traffic, including mean packet
information content in a two-way packet size sequence. size, median packet size, mode packet size, standard deviation,
 For a sequence of flow bytes of length 𝑁, percentiles, kurtosis and skewness.
 2. Inter-arrival time: Statistics on the time intervals between in-
{𝑏(1), 𝑏(2), 𝑏(3), … , 𝑏(𝑁)} (6)
 dividual packets in encrypted traffic, such as mean interval,
 Let the similarity comparison threshold be 𝑟 and the subsequence variance and maximum interval.
length metric be 𝑚. The original sequence is reconstructed so that 3. Payload length: Statistics on the length distribution of the pay-
(𝑁 − 𝑚 + 1) subsequences can be obtained as load in encrypted traffic,including forward byte count and packet
 count, backward byte count and packet count, as well as corre-
{𝑋(1), 𝑋(2), 𝑋(3), … , 𝑋(𝑁 − 𝑚 + 1)} (7) sponding maximum, minimum, average, variance, and standard
 Each subsequence is denoted as deviation. The payload refers to the actual effective data carried
 in the packet, excluding the header or encryption parts.
𝑋(𝑖) = 𝑏(𝑖), 𝑏(𝑖 + 1), … , 𝑏(𝑖 + 𝑚 − 1) (8) 4. Byte sent rate: The rate at which data is sent in bytes over a
 For any subsequence 𝑋(𝑖) we can define its distance from subse- certain period of time, including the total sent rate, forward sent
quence 𝑥(𝑗) as rate, and back sent rate.
 { } 5. Usage of encryption algorithms: The encryption algorithm suites
 | ||
𝑑(𝑖𝑗) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 |𝑏𝑖 (𝑘) − 𝑏𝑗 (𝑘)| |𝑏𝑖 (𝑘) ∈ 𝑋(𝑖), 𝑏𝑗 (𝑘) ∈ 𝑋(𝑗) (9) and protocol types used in encrypted traffic.
 | ||

 6
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 Fig. 3. The framework of inter-flow features extractor.

3.4. Classification module

 After obtaining the inter-flow and intra-flow features, we use models
that adapt to them respectively for learning, and then complete the final
classification using multimodal learning method.
 Inter-flow Features Learning We use the GCN model to extract Fig. 4. The framework of intra-flow features extractor.
the flow relationship features in flows. GCN is a neural network
model specifically designed for processing graph structured data. It
performs convolution operations on the graph, effectively capturing layers use 3 Convolutional kernel of 3, with a step size of 1 and padding
local neighborhood information and global topology structure between of 1 and all pooling layers are Maximum pooling of 2, with a step size
nodes [27]. of 2 and no padding.
 The model we used is shown in Fig. 3. It contains 3 graph convo- We use multi-layer perceptron(MLP) to learn statistical features.
lutional layers and one fully connected layer. We use the cross-entropy This MLP model contains three hidden layers. The statistical features
loss function, and the result of this part of the loss function is noted as of encrypted traffic are obtained by summarizing, calculating, or com-
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 , and the obtained feature extraction result is 𝑀𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 . bining the original features, which may contain complex nonlinear
 ∑
 𝑛
 ( ) ( ( )) relationships. MLP can automatically learn complex interactions and
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠Inter = − 𝑝 graph𝑖 log 𝑞 graph𝑖 (14) combination relationships between features through multiple layers of
 𝑖=1 weight combinations and activation functions. It has strong nonlinear
 We use two parallel graph convolutional layers, where these two modeling ability and can better capture information in the statistical
layers employ different aggregation functions: sum and max, respec- features [29].
tively. This approach allows the two graph convolutional layers to The structure of the two model is shown in Fig. 4. For both models,
capture different feature representations from the graph. It aids the we use cross entropy loss functions defined as, where the final loss
model in capturing a more diverse set of node features, thereby en- function is the sum of the two loss functions, defined as
hancing the model’s understanding and representational capacity of the
 ∑
 𝑛
 ( ) ( ( ))
graph. 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠CNN = − 𝑝 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑞 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖 (15)
 Intra-flow Features Learning After obtaining the spectrograms 𝑖=1
representation of the flows, we use CNN to learn them. Spectrograms ∑
 𝑛
 ( ) ( ( ))
often contain many local structures, such as changes in frequency 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠MLP = − 𝑝 𝑓𝑖 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑞 𝑓𝑖 (16)
and instantaneous changes in time. CNN is capable of automatically 𝑖=1

learning these local features through convolutional layers. Moreover, 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠Intra = 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠CNN + 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠MLP (17)
by utilizing multiple convolutional and pooling layers, CNN can progressively extract more abstract and higher-dimensional features [28]. We use the cross-entropy loss function, and the result of this part of the
Thus, CNN can better capture the complex structures and patterns loss function is noted as 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎 , and the obtained feature extraction
within spectrograms. result is 𝑀𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎 .
 The CNN model we used referred to VGG16. VGG16 is a con- Multimodal fusion The outputs of the three sub-models are fused
volutional neural network model widely used in the field of image in a cascading manner. Specifically, GCN is used to process the flow
processing. This network model has a total of 16 layers, including 13 relation graph, obtaining the representation vectors for each node as
convolutional layers and 3 fully connected layers. In order to reduce inter-flow features. MLP and CNN are respectively used to process
the amount of parameters and computation, we have replaced some the statistical features and spectrogram of the encrypted traffic. And
convolutional layers with depthwise separable convolution(DSC) layers their output vectors are concatenated to obtain a representation vector.
and reduced the number of layers in the network. All convolutional Finally, the two representation vectors are concatenated to obtain the

 7
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

final representation vector, which is input into the fully connected layer Table 2
 The composition of the Malicious_TLS dataset.
for classification.
 Category Flow count
 We combine the previously extracted features 𝑀Intra and 𝑀Inter for
 Arachni 2000
classification through the fully connected layer and softmax layer, also Awvs 2000
using the cross-entropy loss function, denoted as 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠mf . We want Burpsuite 2000
the neural network to utilize both the intra-flow features and inter- Shifu 2000
 Tiggre 2000
flow features so that they can complement each other. In order to
 Tor 2000
achieve the best classification effect of the model, we assume that the Benign 4000
final classification effect will be optimal when the inter-flow features
extraction module, the intra-flow features extraction module and the
 Table 3
classification module all reach the optimal parameters. Therefore, the The composition of the ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset.
final loss function 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑙 of the whole model is Category Flow count
 Chat 31 334
𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠all = 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠Intra + 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠Inter + 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠mf (18)
 Mail 24 719
 File Transfer 67 790
 In multimodal learning, the weights of each modality’s loss function Streaming 36 128
represent the importance of that modality. To ensure that intra- and Torrent 169 309
 VoIP 53 040
inter-flow features receive equal attention during model training, we
set the weights of the loss functions for these two modalities to be the
same.
 4.2. Experiment setup

4. Experiment
 This section describes the configuration of the experimental environment we used, the evaluation metrics and the baseline.
 This section presents the network traffic dataset used for the exper- (1) Environment Settings: The computer specifications used in the
iments as well as the implementation details, evaluation metrics, and experimental environment are as follows: Intel Core i7-9700K CPU,
baseline methodology. Also in this section, encrypted traffic classifica- Nvidia 3080 GPU, 32 GB RAM, and Windows operating system. The
tion experiments are performed for all models, including quantitative experiments are conducted based on the PyTorch 1.11.0 framework and
evaluation, ablation studies, and sensitivity analysis, to comprehen- implemented in the Python language of version 3.7.13.
sively and specifically evaluate the performance of MeDF.
 (2) Evaluation Metrics:In this paper, Accuracy, Recall, False Positive
 Rate (FPR) and Precision are used to assess the performance of the
4.1. Dataset model and are calculated as follows.
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (19)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 We used two publicly available datasets:ISCX VPN-nonVPN 2016 TP
 TPR = (20)
[30] and Malicious_TLS [31]. The former is a commonly used dataset TP + FN
in encrypted traffic recognition research, while the latter is used to FP
 FPR = (21)
evaluate the performance of MeDF in malicious traffic classification. FP + TN
 TP
We do not use the entire traffic data for training models when using Precision = (22)
 TP + FP
these two datasets.
 where TP, FP, TN and FN denote true positive, false positive, true
 The Malicious_TLS dataset includes traffic generated by 22 active
 negative and false negative, respectively.
malicious code families from 2018 to 2021, as well as some benign
traffic. All of this traffic is collected from real networks and encrypted (3) Baseline: To better evaluate the performance advantages and
through TLS. We selected six types of malicious traffic and some benign disadvantages of the MeDF proposed in this paper, we selected 6
traffic for our experiment. The composition of the dataset is shown in currently well-performing encrypted traffic classification models as,
Table 2. two of which use unimodal learning and the other two use multimodal
 learning.
 The ISCX VPN-nonVPN dataset comprises 14 categories of regular
traffic (non-VPN) and VPN traffic (including VOIP, VPNVOIP, P2P, 1 D-CNN An end-to-end classification method that converts bytes to
 image grayscale values and then classifies traffic using 1 D-CNN [9].
VPN-P2P, etc.), encompassing various types of traffic such as browsing,
VoIP, streaming, chatting, email, and more. The dataset has a size of XGBoost A decision tree model that is an implementation of the
approximately 28 GB, and for the analysis, six labeled categories of Gradient Boosting algorithm and is widely used in various machine
regular traffic were used. The available dataset composition is outlined learning tasks [5].
in Table 3. ACID A clustering model for encrypted traffic classification [8].
 In practical scenarios, network traffic may contain various types of ProGraph A graph neural network based encrypted traffic classifidata, including malicious traffic and regular traffic. Malicious traffic cation model [13].
and regular traffic often have different characteristics and behavioral AppNet A multimodal deep learning framework that uses the packet
patterns. Therefore, testing on these two types of traffic can help deter- length sequence of the initial packet and the payload bytes as input. The
mine the effectiveness of the model. Additionally, using these two types former is modeled using Bi-LSTM and the latter using 1D-CNN [6].
of traffic for experimentation can evaluate the model’s generalization MIMETIC A multimodal deep learning framework also using 4 proability. Therefore, testing the model using these two types of traffic can tocol fields extracted from the bi-directional flow and payload bytes of
better simulate real-world application scenarios and ensure the model’s the initial packet as input, the former modeled using GRU (a simplified
usability in a real environment. version of LSTM) and the latter modeled using 1-D CNN [7].

 8
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

Table 4
Comparison of classification results on Malicious_TLS (%).
 Models Accuracy Recall FPR Precision
 1D-CNN 92.37 91.76 0.31 90.78
 XGBoost 90.29 90.17 0.37 90.21
 ACID 96.13 95.87 0.22 95.98
 ProGraph 91.55 91.34 0.33 91.39
 AppNet 95.52 95.30 0.27 95.52
 MIMETIC 96.73 96.32 0.26 96.29
 MeDF (Ours) 98.57 98.62 0.22 98.14

Table 5
Comparison of classification results on ISCX VPN-nonVPN 2016 (%).
 Models Accuracy Recall FPR Precision
 1D-CNN 89.68 89.25 0.42 89.17
 XGBoost 88.32 88.27 0.41 89.06
 ACID 92.73 92.48 0.30 91.63
 ProGraph 94.35 94.54 0.30 93.89
 AppNet 90.17 90.34 0.34 90.28
 MIMETIC 91.56 91.45 0.32 90.89
 MeDF (Ours) 94.73 94.56 0.28 93.86

4.3. Comparison of classification results

 The comparison of the classification performance of different models is shown in Tables 4 and 5, respectively, for the experimental results
on Malicious_TLS and ISCX VPN-nonVPN 2016.
 MeDF achieves the best classification results of all the approaches. It can be seen that the multimodal models AppNet, MIMETIC,
and MeDF have improved in accuracy compared to the unimodal 1D-
CNN model on both datasets. This indicates that the multimodal models
are able to learn the information in the encrypted traffic data more fully
after obtaining more than one class of feature inputs, which leads to
better classification results. Similar to the 1D-CNN model, MeDF also
converts the raw byte information of the flow into images and then
analyzes them. The difference between 1D-CNN and MeDF is that 1D-
CNN converts flows into grayscale spectrograms and uses 1D CNN for
analysis, while MeDF converts flows into time–frequency spectrograms
and uses 2D convolution for analysis, in addition to adding inter-flow
relationship information, thus achieving better results.
 In addition, compared to AppNet and MIMETIC models, MeDF has
further improvement in classification accuracy, which we consider because MeDF combines both inter-flow features and intra-flow features Fig. 5. Confusion matrices of MeDF on two datasets.
modalities.MIMETIC uses the first 576 bytes of payload and 4 protocol
features as input; AppNet extracts features from the first 1014 bytes of
the first packet features from the first 1014 bytes of the first packet, as 4.4. Flow spectrogram
well as the time-relative features of the packet length sequence. The
different modalities used by these two models are essentially inter- For each flow, we extract the first 500 raw bytes of it as the input
flow features. MeDF, on the other hand, uses features embedded in the of the STFT. For flows less than 500 bytes in length, we pad with 0
flow-relations graph to complement the inter-flow features of encrypted to complete 500 bytes. The IP addresses are masked. For the STFT,
traffic in addition to the inter-flow features using the time–frequency there are some key parameters that need to be set in advance, including
graph to characterize it. This indicates that using both intra-flow fea- window length, window overlap rate, and window function, etc. The
tures and inter-flow features can achieve better complementary effects window length we use is 100, with a overlap rate of 67%, and the
when using modality fusion methods for encrypted traffic classification, window function is the Hanning window.
and thus optimize the classification results. Fig. 6(a) shows the intuitive representation of the original byte
 stream in the time domain, where the horizontal axis represents time
 The confusion matrices of MeDF on two datasets for classification
 and the vertical axis represents the corresponding bytes. Fig. 6(b) shows
are given by Fig. 5. It can be observed that on Malicious_TLS, MeDF
 the spectrogram, where the horizontal axis represents time, the vertical
achieves close to 1 prediction accuracy across all categories, while on axis represents frequency.
ISCX VPN-nonVPN, the accuracy for each category is almost all below The spectrogram can be viewed as a two-dimensional visual rep-
95%. We attribute this to the more complex data structure of ISCX resentation of the joint function of time domain information and
VPN-nonVPN compared to Malicious_TLS. Additionally, the weaker frequency domain information of a network flow. Unlike the onecorrelation between flows leads to less prominent inter-flow features, dimensional representation of the network flows in the time domain,
resulting in a decrease in the model’s classification accuracy. the spectrogram representation of the network flows can reflect the

 9
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

 Table 6
 Ablation study results (%).
 Models Accuracy Recall FPR Precision
 MeDF 98.57 98.62 0.22 98.14
 intra-MeDF 96.82 92.76 0.31 95.79
 inter-MeDF 90.25 89.92 0.97 90.27

 Table 7
 Complexity of feature extraction.
 Time complexity Space complexity
 Spectrogram 𝑂 (NM𝑙𝑜𝑔M) 𝑂 (NM)
 ( )
 Flow relation graph 𝑂 V2 𝑂 (E)

 4.5. Ablation study

 In this section, we further illustrate the effectiveness of combining
 inter-flow features and intra-flow features for multimodal learning by
 constructing 2 weakened models of MeDF.
 We construct two weakened models, one is to remove the interflow features extraction module from the original model and use only
 the intra-flow features extraction module and classification module for
 classification, called intra-MeDF; the other is to remove the intra-flow
 features extraction module from the original model and use only the
 Fig. 6. The representations of flow in different domains. flow relation graph and GCN model for classification, called inter-
 MeDF. We conducted experiments on the Malicious_TLS dataset and
 obtained the results as shown in Table 6.
 Both aspects of the modality extracted by MeDF are useful. And
 intra-flow features are better for traffic classification than inter-flow
 features we used. It can be seen that there is a significant decrease
 in the classification accuracy of both weakened models compared to
 MeDF: the accuracy of intra-MeDF decreased by 1.75% compared to
 MeDF, while the accuracy of inter-MeDF decreased by 8.32% compared
 to MeDF. The other three indicators of MeDF are also better than the
 weakened models. It indicates that the inter-flow features and intraflow features of network traffic are able to complement each other in
 the modality fusion process.
 By comparing intra-MeDF and inter-MeDF, the accuracy, recall
 and precision of inter-MeDF decreased by 6.57%, 2.84% and 5.52%
 respectively compared to intra-MeDF. We think that it is because
 when constructing the flow relation graph, we did not use too much
 information about the network flows themselves, mainly retaining the
 correlation features between flows. Therefore, using only flow relation
 graph for node classification to complete traffic classification is not
 effective enough. When using intra-flow features to complete classification, it contains more information about the network flow, thus
 achieving better classification results.
 Fig. 7. The spectrograms of different applications.
 4.6. Complexity analysis

 In this section, we analyzed the complexity of MeDF, including time
 complexity, space complexity, the number of model parameters and run
information of the encrypted traffics in both the time and frequency
 time per-epoch.
domain.
 Spectrogram is a more effective way to characterize network (a) Complexity of feature extraction
flows than 1D time-series In the STFT process, the features are In this part, we analyze the time and space complexity of feature
already ‘‘pre-extracted’’. The amount of information of the features extraction in MeDF, including the construction of spectrogram and flow
 relation graph. The result is as shown in the Table 7.
characterized by a single point in the spectrogram is larger than that of
 The method we use to construct the spectrogram is the STFT,
a single point in the one-dimensional temporal bits. So it is easier for
 which involves dividing the original signal into multiple windows and
the classifier to use its information for feature characterization.
 performing Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) on each window. Assuming
 Fig. 7 shows the spectrograms of some malicious traffics in the the length of the original signal is 𝑁 and the window length is M, the
dataset we used. It can be seen that the time–frequency spectrograms time complexity of FFT is 𝑂 (M𝑙𝑜𝑔M). For STFT, since FFT needs to be
of different types of encrypted traffic have more obvious differences, performed on different time windows, the overall time complexity is
which also confirms the effectiveness of using time–frequency diagrams 𝑂 (NM𝑙𝑜𝑔M). The space complexity depends on the memory required to
to characterize the time–frequency domain of encrypted traffic. store the time–frequency spectrograms. For STFT, it typically requires

 10
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

Table 8 Data availability
Model complexity.
 Model Parameter size (millions) RTPE (s)
 The data used in the article are all publicly available data and have
 MeDF (Ours) 2.54 47.5 been cited.
 MIMETIC 1.78 39.4

 Acknowledgments

storing the spectral information for each time window. Therefore, the This work is supported by The National Key Research and Develspace complexity can be approximated as 𝑂 (NM). opment Program of China No. 2023YFB2705000, and The Blockchain
 When constructing a flow relation graph, as we need to iterate system security Key technology research of Henan Province Major
over all subsequent flows for each flow, the time complexity can be public welfare Project No. 201300210200. The authors would like to
represented as the total computation of a nested loop. Assuming there thank the reviewers for their valuable comments that helped to improve
are V flows, the first flow needs to iterate over the remaining (V − 1) this manuscript.
flows, the second flow needs to iterate over the remaining (V − 2) flows,
and so on, until the second-to-last flow needs to iterate over the last References
flow. Therefore, the total computation can be represented as:
 [1] Ankit Thakkar, Ritika Lohiya, A survey on intrusion detection system: feature
[(V − 1) + (V − 2) + ⋯ + 1] (23) selection, model, performance measures, application perspective, challenges, and
 ( ) future research directions, Artif. Intell. Rev. 55 (2021) 453–563.
 V(V−1)
 This is the sum of an arithmetic progression, and its sum is . [2] Bhoopesh Singh Bhati, C.S. Rai, Analysis of support vector machine-based
 ( 2) 2
Therefore, the computational complexity is 𝑂 V . intrusion detection techniques, Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 45 (4) (2020) 2371–2383.
 The flow relation graph can be stored in the form of a sparse matrix. [3] Thijs van Ede, Riccardo Bortolameotti, Andrea Continella, Jingjing Ren, Daniel J.
 Dubois, Martina Lindorfer, David R. Choffnes, Maarten van Steen, Andreas Peter,
The number of edges is much smaller than the square of the number of
 FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on encrypted network trafnodes, resulting in a space complexity of 𝑂 (E), where E is the number fic, in: Proceedings 2020 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium,
of edges in the flow relation graph. 2020, pp. 1–18.
 [4] Wisam Elmasry, Akhan Akbulut, Abdul Halim Zaim, Evolving deep learning
(b) Model complexity architectures for network intrusion detection using a double PSO metaheuristic,
 In this part, we analyze the number of model parameters and RTPE Comput. Netw. (ISSN: 1389-1286) 168 (2020) 107042.
of two multimodal learning models. The result is as shown in the [5] Zhe Wang, Baihe Ma, Yong Zeng, Xiaojie Lin, Kaichao Shi, Ziwen Wang,
Table 8. Differential preserving in xgboost model for encrypted traffic classification, in:
 International Conference on Networking and Network Applications, 2022, pp.
 It can be seen that MeDF has an increase in both parameter size 220–225.
and RTPE compared to MIMETIC. This is because, in order to obtain [6] Xin Wang, Shuhui Chen, Jinshu Su, App-net: A hybrid neural network for enmore comprehensive feature information, the model of MeDF is more crypted mobile traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020 - IEEE Conference
complex than MIMETIC. Due to the significant improvement in classi- on Computer Communications Workshops, 2020, pp. 424–429.
fication performance of MeDF, these additional costs are acceptable. [7] Giuseppe Aceto, Domenico Ciuonzo, Antonio Montieri, Antonio Pescapé,
 MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,
 Comput. Netw. 165 (2019) 106944.1–106944.12.
5. Conclusion [8] Alec F. Diallo, Paul Patras, Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic classification at the network edge, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2021 - IEEE Conference on
 In this paper, we propose an encrypted traffic classification model Computer Communications, 2021, pp. 1–10.
 [9] Wei Wang, Ming Zhu, Jinlin Wang, Xuewen Zeng, Zhongzhen Yang, End-to-end
based on multimodal fusion, called MeDF. We mainly consider interencrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural netflow features and intra-flow features when selecting features of network works, in: IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics,
traffic, in order to allow the classification model to learn information 2017, pp. 43–48.
about multiple aspects of traffic. We validated the effectiveness of [10] A.V.D. van Deventer, R.S. Holz, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, A novel method for
our model on a real-world encrypted traffic dataset and were able encrypted traffic classification using N-gram-based techniques, IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Secur. 12 (10) (2017) 2207–2220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.
to achieve an accuracy of over 98%, superior to multimodal learning
 2017.2717945.
methods that use only intra-flow features. This shows that the com- [11] Mohamed A. Khedr, Bassant M. El Bagoury, Alaa M. Riad, et al., Aubination of intra-flow and inter-flow features is effective. Moreover, tomated traffic classification and application identification using machine
compared to MeDF using only intra-flow features and only inter-flow learning, in: 2017 IEEE Conference on Dependable and Secure Computing,
features, the accuracy is improved by 2.62% and 9.19% when using IEEE, 2017, pp. 491–498, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/DASC-PICom-DataCom-
 CyberSciTec.2017.242.
both features, respectively. This further illustrates the necessity of using
 [12] A.V.D. van Deventer, R.S. Holz, A.N. Zincir-Heywood, Encrypted traffic classifiboth intra- and inter-flow features for multimodal flow classification. cation using machine learning techniques: A case study with netflix traffic, in:
 IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks, LCN, IEEE, 2016, pp. 226–229,
CRediT authorship contribution statement http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LCN.2016.91.
 [13] Wenhao Li, Xiao-Yu Zhang, Huaifeng Bao, Haichao Shi, Qiang Wang, ProGraph:
 Robust network traffic identification with graph propagation, IEEE/ACM Trans.
 Xiangbin Wang: Writing – original draft, Validation, Software,
 Netw. 31 (2023) 1385–1399.
Methodology, Conceptualization. Qingjun Yuan: Writing – review & [14] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Y. Wang, W. Zhou, Y. Xiang, Y. Guan, Network traffic
editing, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Yongjuan classification using correlation information, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.
Wang: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Methodology. Gaopeng 24 (1) (2013) 104–117.
Gou: Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Chunxiang [15] Zhiju Yang, Weiping Pei, Mon-Chu Chen, Chuan Yue, WTAGRAPH: Web tracking
 and advertising detection using graph neural networks, in: IEEE Symposium on
Gu: Methodology, Validation. Gang Yu: Methodology, Formal analysis. Security and Privacy, 2022, pp. 1540–1557.
Gang Xiong: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. [16] Wenhao Li, Huaifeng Bao, Xiao-Yu Zhang, Lin Li, Amdetector: Detecting largescale and novel android malware traffic with meta-learning, in: International
Declaration of competing interest Conference on Conceptual Structures, 2022, pp. 387–401.
 [17] Wenhao Li, Xiao-Yu Zhang, Gblnet: Detecting intrusion traffic with multigranularity bilstm, in: International Conference on Conceptual Structures, 2022,
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- pp. 380–386.
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to [18] Peng Xu, Xiatian Zhu, David A. Clifton, Multimodal learning with transformers:
influence the work reported in this paper. A survey, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 45 (2022) 12113–12132.

 11
X. Wang et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110403

[19] V.F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, AppScanner: Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic, in: IEEE European Yongjuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree from Informa-
 Symposium on Security and Privacy, (EuroS&P), 2016, pp. 439–454. tion Engineering University in 2009. She currently works
[20] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, J. Wu, Robust network traffic at Information Engineering University. Her main research
 classification, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 23 (3) (2015) 1257–1270. interests include cryptographic analysis and cyberspace
[21] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, FS-net: A flow sequence network for security.
 encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE Conference on
 Computer Communications Workshops, 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[22] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, Classification of encrypted traffic with
 second-order Markov chains and application attribute bigrams, IEEE Trans. Inf.
 Forensics Secur. 12 (8) (2017) 1830–1843.
[23] Wei Cai, Gaopeng Gou, Minghao Jiang, Chang Liu, Gang Xiong, Zhen Li, MEMG:
 Mobile encrypted traffic classification with Markov chains and graph neural
 network, in: HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys, 2021, pp. 478–486. Gaopeng Gou received the Bachelor, M.Eng. and Ph.D.
[24] Peng Lin, Kejiang Ye, Yishen Hu, Yanying Lin, Chengjie Xu, A novel multimodal degrees from Beihang University in 2005, 2008 and 2014,
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification, IEEE/ACM Trans. respectively. He is currently a full professor in the Institute
 Netw. 31 (2023) 1369–1384. of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
[25] Khalid Shahbar, Nur Zincir-Heywood, How far can we push flow analysis to China. His research interests include network security and
 identify encrypted anonymity network traffic? in: NOMS 2018 - 2018 IEEE/IFIP network anomaly detection.
 Network Operations and Management Symposium, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[26] Riyad Alshammari, Nur Zincir-Heywood, Machine learning based encrypted
 traffic classification: Identifying SSH and skype, in: 2009 IEEE Symposium on
 Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[27] Ling Zhao, Yujiao Song, Chao Zhang, Yu Liu, Pu Wang, Tao Lin, Min Deng,
 Haifeng Li, T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for traffic prediction,
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 21 (2018) 3848–3858. Chunxiang Gu received the Ph.D. degree s Ph.D. degrees
[28] Linshan Jia, Tommy W.S. Chow, Yixuan Yuan, GTFE-net: A gramian time from Information Engineering University. He is currently
 frequency enhancement CNN for bearing fault diagnosis, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. a professor of Information Engineering University. His re-
 119 (2023) 105794. search interests include network security and cryptographic
[29] Ibrahim Masood, Statistical features-MLP neural network for recognizing bivari- analysis.
 ate spc chart patterns, Int. J. Adv. Trends Comput. Sci. Eng. 8 (1.3) (2019)
 87–91.
[30] Gerard Draper-Gil, Arash Habibi Lashkari, Mohammad Saiful Islam Mamun,
 Ali A. Ghorbani, Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using timerelated features, in: International Conference on Information Systems Security
 and Privacy, 2016, pp. 312–315.
[31] Qing jun Yuan, Chang Liu, Wentao Yu, Yuefei Zhu, Gang Xiong, Yongjuan
 Gang Yu received the Ph.D. degree s Ph.D. degrees from
 Wang, Gaopeng Gou, Boau: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels based
 Information Engineering University. His research interests
 on boundary augmentation, Comput. Secur. 131 (2023) 103300.
 include network security and blockchain applications

 Xiangbin Wang received the M.Eng. degrees from Information Engineering University, China, in 2021. He is currently
 a graduate student studying for a Ph.D. in Information Engineering University, China. His research interest is network
 security.

 Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 Academy of Sciences, China. He has authored more than
 60 papers in refereed journals and conference proceedings.
 His research interests include network and information
 Qingjun Yuan received the M.Eng. degrees and Ph.D. from security. He is a member of the 3rd Communication Security
 Information Engineering University, China, in 2016 and Technical Committee of China Institute of Communications.
 2023. His research interests include network security and
 side channel attack.

 12