IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 2751

 Constraining Adversarial Attacks on Network
 Intrusion Detection Systems: Transferability
 and Defense Analysis
 Nour Alhussien, Ahmed Aleroud , Abdullah Melhem , and Samer Y. Khamaiseh , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Adversarial attacks have been extensively studied I. I NTRODUCTION
in the domain of deep image classification, but their impacts
 EEP learning (DL) is revolutionizing almost every busion other domains such as Machine and Deep Learning-based
Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs) have received limited attention. While adversarial attacks on images are generally
 D ness sector by enabling the creation of intelligent systems
 and providing solutions to complex problems, which include
more straightforward due to fewer constraints in the input defenses against network intrusion. Tasks such as intrusion
domain, generating adversarial examples in the network domain detection are becoming increasingly complex in today’s modposes greater challenges due to the diverse types of network
 ern networks due to the ever-changing methods and techniques
traffic and the need to maintain its validity. Prior research has
introduced constraints to generate adversarial examples against employed by cyber attackers to circumvent traditional security
NIDSs, but their effectiveness across different attack settings, measures [1].
including transferability, targetability, defenses, and the overall There is an increasing number of NIDSs that employ DL
attack success have not been thoroughly examined. In this paper, algorithms for detecting suspicious traffic in network flows [2].
we proposed a novel set of domain constraints for network traffic This recent trend of using DL as opposed to traditional ML
that preserve the statistical and semantic relationships between
traffic features while ensuring the validity of the perturbed adver- algorithms is attributed to the limitations of traditional ML
sarial traffic. Our constraints are categorized into four types: algorithms. ML-based intrusion detection approaches are typfeature mutability constraints, feature value constraints, feature ically rule-based. Even when statistical or feature engineering
dependency constraints and distribution preserving constraints. methods are used for analyzing traffic, they can still lead to a
We evaluated the impacts of these constraints on white box significant percentage of false positives [3]. This also requires
and black box attacks using two intrusion detection datasets.
Our results demonstrated that the introduced constraints have a significant monitoring effort by system administrators and
a significant impact on the success of white box attacks. Our security teams to adapt to emerging threats.
research revealed that transferability of adversarial examples However, the increased use of DL algorithms in NIDSs is
depends on the similarity between the targeted models and the also associated with the recent threats of adversarial attacks.
models to which the examples are transferred, regardless of the While DL methods are capable of detecting malicious activattack type or the presence of constraints. We also observed
that adversarial training enhanced the robustness of the majority ities [4], existing research shows that DL approaches are
of machine learning and deep learning-based NIDSs against vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In these attacks attackers
unconstrained attacks, while providing some resilience against deliberately craft adversarial examples (AEs) with the goal
constrained attacks. In practice, this suggests the potential use of misleading IDSs and causing incorrect classification of
of pre-existing signatures of constrained attacks to combat the incoming traffic [5]. Most studies have been investigating
new variations or zero-day adversarial attacks in real-world
NIDSs.
 adversarial attacks against DL models in the context of
 image classification, leading to findings such as the capability
 Index Terms—Adversarial attacks, network intrusion detec- of adversaries to arbitrarily perturb image features [6], [7].
tion systems, artificial intelligence, neural networks, computer
networks.
 Existing works in this area rely on the assumption that
 image features can be updated without adhering to specific
 constraints. This is due to the domain itself where images can
 be perturbed easily [8]. This is not the case for network data
 Manuscript received 20 June 2023; revised 10 November 2023; accepted 2 where changes are usually bounded by constraints related to
January 2024. Date of publication 22 January 2024; date of current version the data and the domain itself, where few changes in network
12 July 2024. This material is based upon work supported by the National features can lead to invalid network flows [7], [8], [9]. The
Science Foundation under grant No. 2131538 and grant No. 2306109. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for majority of existing research on adversarial attacks on network
publication was T. Inoue. (Corresponding author: Ahmed Aleroud.) data have focused on crafting and mitigating adversarial
 Nour Alhussien, Ahmed Aleroud, and Abdullah Melhem are with the examples without taking into consideration a need of the
School of Computer and Cyber Sciences, Augusta University, Augusta,
GA 30912 USA (e-mail: noalhussien@augusta.edu; aaleroud@augusta.edu; generated examples to be valid network traffic [10], [11]. It
abanimelhem@augusta.edu). can be easily detected by IDSs otherwise.
 Samer Y. Khamaiseh is with the Computer Science and Software Applying constraints when crafting adversarial attacks
Engineering Department, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056 USA (e-mail:
khamaisy@miamioh.edu). means that the adversary should consider the generated AEs
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3357316 still meeting the characteristics of the network traffic [12].
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Generating AEs using conventional adversarial attacks may application of our constraints in enhancing adversarial training
lead to invalid network traffic such as generating negative port to create defense mechanisms against sophisticated adversarial
numbers, a source TCP window advertisement value with a attacks targeting NIDSs.
value greater than 255 or setting a DNS service to a TCP The contributions of the paper can be summarized under
protocol. Although most of the existing works have reported the following three research areas:
high attack success rates [13], [14], they do not consider such 1) Adversarial domain constraints: We proposed a new
domain constraints. However, with the recent trend of systems set of network domain constraints that can be applied
detecting AI-generated data, attackers are expected to adapt to to network data. Not only those constraints preserve
such changes to avoid detection of AEs. Therefore, it is quite characteristics such as feature ranges, but also the
significant to study the behavior of network Adversarial attacks semantic-based and statistical relationship between feaunder the contextual constraints of a valid traffic. Such a tures after the generation of AEs. We then tested the
contextual analysis can lead to create new defense approaches validity of the generated AEs within the network domain
to mitigate those attacks. both before and after applying the created constraints.
 While there is a recent growing body of work that 2) Transferability analysis: In addition to evaluating the
explores the impact of constrained adversarial attacks on transferability of constrained AEs, we extended this
NIDSs [15] [16] [8], there are many limitations in the existing analysis to include transferability of defenses. This commethods: prehensive evaluation provides valuable insights into the
 1) Most of the existing research does not comprehensively generalization capabilities of both attacks and defense
 investigate the impact of constraints under different mechanisms across different datasets and models.
 threat models, attack classifications, and characteris- 3) Analysis of transferability and defense using similar and
 tics. There are different classifications of attacks which different attack signatures: The paper investigates the
 include targeted and untargeted attacks, black box (BB) effects of the proposed adversarial domain constraints on
 and white box (WB) attacks. It is then necessary transferability of AEs between similar/different source
 to investigate whether applying generally crafted con- and target DL/ML models. Using the observed varistrained AEs will lead to similar/different decisiveness ations in the signatures of the generated AEs, we
 behavior when applied to different attacking methods. investigated whether training a model on AEs from
 While existing research indicates that network con- a specific attack could be effective in detecting AEs
 straints may not inherently improve robustness against from a different attack. By considering a range of
 AEs [8], a comprehensive examination is essential, con- model complexities, including both basic and intricate
 sidering the varieties of adversarial attacks, the models architectures, we provide a comprehensive analysis of
 they target, and the complexity of the DL architectures the constraints’ applicability and the transferability of
 involved. It’s also critical to assess whether implement- attacks and defenses across various model setups.
 ing constraints as part of an adversarial training defense The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
 mechanism can improve resilience against AEs [17], and discusses the existing research that is relevant to our work.
 if such defenses are transferable between DL and ML) Section III delves into the threat models investigated in our
 models. research. Section IV introduces our methodology. Section V
 2) While constraints may enhance the robustness of some discusses the results of our experiments. The research is
 adversarial attacks against a specific model, their effec- concluded in section VI. Table I summarizes the symbols
 tiveness and transferability across different models or and abbreviations used in the related work and methodology
 architectures need to be studied. Constrained adversarial sections.
 attacks on a specific DL model may not be necessarily
 effective against other models, making them less practical in the real-world NIDSs. II. R ELATED W ORK
 3) Existing works that develop constraints do not con- General Background: Adversarial attacks can be classified
 sider relationships/dependencies between traffic features. into two main categories: BB and WB attacks. This catego-
 Some of those dependencies are statistical and others rization depends on the extent of the attacker’s knowledge of
 are semantic-based dependencies. By overlooking the the targeted DL/ML model and data [29]. In BB adversarial
 relationships between traffic features when creating AEs, attacks, the attacker does not have access to the internal workthe generated traffic may not accurately reflect the ings of the model. She/he may only have partial knowledge
 complex interdependencies and interactions among the about the input features or feature vectors and output, which
 features in the original data. correspond to the predictions made by the model [30]. WB
 This paper presents an approach for crafting and implement- adversarial attacks occur when the attacker has full access
ing constraints to generate AEs against NIDSs. We adopted to the internal workings of the model, including the model
a new set of network constraints while generating AEs to architecture and parameters [12]. WB attacks tend to be more
produce valid network traffic posing a real threat to NIDSs. effective compared to BB attacks. This is because in WB
We conducted evaluations to assess the impact of the network- attacks the attacker has more information about the model.
constrained AEs on the success rates of both BB and WB With this increased knowledge, the attacker can craft fineattacks and transferability of AEs. Additionally, we tested the tuned AEs [31].
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2753

 TABLE I
 L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS Residual Networks (ResNet), which were all trained and
 evaluated using the KDD99 and the IDS2018 datasets. A
 key success factor in their work was mirroring the target
 model and the substitute model. However, the proposed work
 didn’t consider adding constraints to craft AEs. The authors
 limited the number of modifiable features and concentrated on
 introducing perturbations to specific features of network flow
 data.
 GAN-Based Approaches: Abdelaty et al. [39] presented the
 GADoT framework, which is a novel GAN-based approach
 for adversarial training. GADoT was proposed to leverage and
 augment the training set with adversarial traffic samples and
 increase the robustness of ML models against DDoS attacks.
 The approach generates fake-benign samples and adversarial
 training data that can be fed into LUCID (i.e., a lightweight
 DL solution for DDoS attack detection). GADoT successfully
 reduced the percentage of undetected malicious flows to 1.5%
 compared to 60% without it. The approach focused solely
 on adversarial training to mitigate the impact of adversarial
 attacks. However, the evaluation of adversarial training did not
 utilize constrained adversarial network flows for retraining the
 The effectiveness of existing adversarial attacks can be GAN model, which limits the applicability of the approach
determined by the attack success rate and magnitude of to real-world IDSs. In [40] a related IDSGAN approach was
perturbations introduced [32]. The attack success rate refers proposed. IDSGAN consists of a generator transforming the
to the percentage of AEs that are successfully misclassified original malicious traffic records into adversarial versions
by the model. The magnitude of perturbations indicates the and a discriminator dynamically learning the real-time blackextent of noise introduced to the original input to ensure they box detection system by classifying traffic examples. The
are not easily detectable by the targeted DL/ML models [33]. framework incorporates a restricted modification mechanism
Success of AEs can be also determined based on their to ensure the adversarial generation preserves the original
transferability [34]. Transferability measures the capacity of functionalities of the traffic records, but traffic constraints were
an attack to successfully fool other models differing from the not explicitly applied to perturbed traffic.
one specifically designed to evade. Adversarial Domain Constraints: Several studies examined
 Compared to WB attacks, the success of BB attacks can domain constraints to generate valid adversarial network
be also determined by their computational efficiency [35]. data. The authors in [15] used evolutionary algorithms and
Efficiency refers to methods that minimize the number of generative adversarial networks to create AEs that bypass
queries or interactions with the model to craft AEs [36]. ML-based NIDSs. The authors introduced the concept of
Therefore, researchers employed several query optimization mutability within domain constraints, where certain network
techniques for enhancing the efficiency of BB adversarial traffic features can be perturbed while others are immutable.
attacks, including: zeroth-order optimization [37], BB gradient Mutable feature perturbations were limited to incrementing
estimation [38], and evolutionary algorithms [15]. feature values to generate valid AEs. Our method proposes a
 Since the seminal work of Szegedy et al. [24] who discov- broader set of constraints allowing various modifications while
ered that DL/ML models are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, adhering to the semantics and statistical relationships between
it became apparent that even the most sophisticated DL models the features of network data.
can be deceived when targeted by a well-crafted noise to the The authors in [41] employed the Carlini and Wagner
inputs. The field of adversarial attacks applied to IDSs has (C&W) method to create an adversarial attack known as the
experienced an increase in the number of works exploring their Restricted Traffic Distribution Attack (RTDA). The attack was
applicability. The following subsections provide an overview used to target ML models used for classifying network traffic.
of the recent advancements and contributions in this field. The approach relied on two types of constraints: increasing
 BB Attacks and Substitute Models: Guo et al. [9] proposed the values of packet sizes and ensuring that the distribution
a BB attack method against ML-based anomaly network flow of the manipulated packet size maintained a monotonically
detection models. The method consists of training another non-decreasing property. The authors, however, solely focused
model to substitute for the target ML model. Based on on maintaining their constraints on packet sizes without
the overall understanding of the substitute model and the considering other features of network traffic.
migration of the AE, they used the substitute model to In [42], the authors conducted an evaluation of an anomalycraft adversarial examples. The authors conducted experiments based NIDS in terms of its effectiveness against AEs created
on typical classification models, including Convolutional through legitimate traffic transformations. The proposed con-
Neural Networks (CNNs), Support Vector Machines (SVMs), straints pertained to how adversaries interact with the victim
k-nearest Neighbor (kNN), Multilayer Perception (MLP), and system rather than perturbing a traffic to deceive DL models.
2754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

They focused on dividing the payload across multiple packets,
changing IP addresses and the timing between packets while
keeping their content intact. They also created fake packets
with predefined attributes and subsequently transmitted such
packets alongside the attack traffic.
 Evaluating DL/ML Models’ Resilience to Adversarial
Attacks: The authors in [43] conducted a comparative study
on various adversarial machine learning techniques applied
to NIDSs, which included Fast Gradient Sign Method
(FGSM), Basic Iterative Method (BIM), DeepFool, C&W,
EAD (Elastic-Net Attack with Directional Gradients), JSMA
(Jacobian-based Saliency Map Attack), and CW-L2 (C&W
with L2 Norm) on two public datasets, NSL-KDD and
CICIDS2017. FGSM, BIM, and DeepFool were the most
effective methods. Following these top-performing methods,
the study identified additional effective techniques, namely
C&W, EAD, and JSMA, and C&W-L2. The approach involved
generating adversarial examples (AEs) without enforcing
network domain constraints. In a similar vein, Zhang et al. [44]
presented a framework called TIKI-TAKA to generate and
detect adversarial attacks on well-known IDSs datasets in oneto-one and one-to-all and classification tasks. Their framework
targeted attacks that occur due to time-based features perturbations. They proposed three defense mechanisms: ensemble
voting, adversarial training through ensemble techniques, and
query detection. The authors assumed that many features
should be left unchanged when creating AEs as they directly
affect the behavior of traffic flow. However, leaving too many
features unchanged limits the scope for adversarial attacks.
 Analysis of Transferability and Adversarial Training: The
 Fig. 1. A taxonomy of adversarial attacks and dimensions covered in our
authors in [16] investigated how AEs transfer between differ- threat models.
ent ML models, including transferability from feed-forward
neural networks to logistic regression and random forests attacks. Our constraints partially addressed the problem space
models. Key findings indicated that adversarial attacks were of network data to generate valid AEs.
less successful when applied to models different from the Robust and Explainable Attacks: Recent research has
target model. The study also found that transferability of AEs focused on evaluating the robustness of WB adversarial-trained
tended to decrease when ML models were trained on datasets models using explainable AI and the SHAP (SHapley Additive
with imbalanced class distributions. Our research extends exPlanations) method [46]. By leveraging SHAP method, the
this category of studies by examining the transferability of authors were able to measure the contribution of different
constrained AEs and the effectiveness of adversarial training features for a deeper understanding of the model’s behavior
across various ML and DL models, including both similar and and identify vulnerabilities or areas where the NIDSs is more
different attack signatures. susceptible to adversarial attacks.
 The authors in [8] focused on whether network domain constraints can enhance defense against adversarial attacks. They
modified two adversarial algorithms: Adaptive Jacobian-based III. A SSUMPTIONS
Saliency Map (AJSMA) and Histogram Sketch Generation Our methodology were developed based on the taxonomy
(HSG) and integrated constraints in creating valid AEs. presented in prior research within the area of adversarial
Additionally, they conducted an analysis of transferabil- attacks as summarized in Figure 1. We adapted the threat modity, utilizing two metrics: inter-transferability (transferability els within the context of adversarial attacks on NIDSs based
between different models) and intra-transferability (transfer- on the 1) attacker’s knowledge, 2) attack space, 3) attacker’s
ability within the same model). We discussed our comparison strategy, 4) attacker’s goal, and 5) attack target.
with this research in the experiments section. Attacker knowledge describes the amount of knowledge
 Problem Space Attacks: Recent research has placed empha- the attacker know about the targeting ML/DL model. Based
sis on adversarial ML attacks in the problem space. These on that, adversarial attacks are classified into WB, BB and
attacks deceive ML models by modifying the input data in grey box. Under WB attacks setting, we assumed that the
a way that is imperceptible to humans. The authors in [45] attacker has full access to the internal details of the targeted
argued that problem-space attacks pose greater challenges to model. This includes knowledge of the model architecture,
the defense mechanism compared to traditional feature-space parameters, and potentially the training data. In BB attacks
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2755

setting, we assumed that the attacker has no access to the
internal details of the targeted model, such as its architecture,
parameters, or training data. The attacker can only observe the
input-output behavior of the model and has limited knowledge
about specific features or patterns that influence its classification process. Gray-box attacks assume that the attackers have
partial knowledge of the targeted ML/DL models. Under those
attacks, the attackers may have a partial knowledge about the
model either by querying it or by having some level of access
to its training data.
 Attack space refers to possible perturbations applied to the
data used in the training and evaluation of ML/DL models.
In the domain of network traffic, perturbations can be applied
at two levels: the feature space and the raw network data
space. The feature space represents a high-level aggregation
of network traffic, which includes various features extracted
from network packets such as protocol types, services, port
numbers, and other features that characterize the traffic. The
raw network data space involves the unprocessed network
traffic data, typically captured in pcap files containing the
actual network packets that were transmitted over the network.
As a result, attackers have two principal approaches for
launching their attacks. They can operate within the feature
space, where they manipulate existing feature values to deceive
ML/DL NIDSs models. Alternatively, attackers may opt to
operate within the problem space, generating entirely new
 Fig. 2. A framework for generating valid network adversarial traffic.
instances of network traffic that the ML/DL model has
never encountered. While the primary focus of this paper is
feature space attacks, the constraints we developed maintain Attacker’s target can be the physical domains such as the
the semantic and statistical characteristics of network data. cyber-physical systems or the applications of ML/DL. In this
Therefore, our constraints are applicable to problem space research our target is to undermine the effectiveness of DL
attacks as well. and ML models’ in accurately classifying network traffic as
 Attacker’s strategy pertains to the stage within the ML either an attack or a benign activity.
process when the attacker carries out their attacks, which
can be categorized into evasion, poisoning, or oracle attacks.
Evasion attacks are executed during the inference or testing IV. M ETHODOLOGY
phase, after the model has been trained. Poisoning attacks The paper employs the methodological framework sumtake place during the model’s training phase, with the intent marized in Figure 2 to generate AEs under targeted and
of corrupting the model learning process. Oracle attacks untargeted attack modes. Under the targeted mode, the goal of
involve creating substitute models that mimic the behavior and the attacker is to misclassify an AEs as a benign activity. In
functionality of the target model to induce similar responses. the untargeted mode, the attacker’s goal is to cause misclassi-
Our attacks were only conducted at testing time; therefore, we fication of attacks and benign activities without specifying a
applied the evasion strategy. particular target class. The approach allows for the evaluation
 Attacker’s goal refers to the specific objectives that she/he of the techniques’ evasiveness on both attacks and benign
seeks to accomplish. These objectives can be broadly cate- activities before and after applying the developed network
gorized into three main areas: integrity, confidentiality, and domain constraints.
availability. If the attacker’s intention is to tamper with or Threat Models: Our constraints work for both WB and
corrupt the training data, this falls under the category of BB attacks. We assumed that BB attacks mimic real-world
integrity-related goals. If the attacker is looking to gain scenarios where attackers possess limited knowledge of the
access to the characteristics of the ML/DL Model or the internal workings and architecture of the targeted ML/DL
network data it handles, this aligns with confidentiality-related NIDS. In addition, we aimed to assess the vulnerability of
goals. On the other hand, when the attacker aims to disrupt ML/DL NIDSs under WB attacks, where the attacker has full
the normal functioning of ML-based NIDSs Systems, their knowledge about the targeted models.
goal is to compromise the model’s availability. In our study, We considered Zeroth Order Optimization BB attack
we conducted both targeted and untargeted attacks with the (ZOO) [37], DeepFool WB attack [47], and Carlini & Wagner
primary aim of compromising the model’s integrity and, to WB Attack (C&W) [48]. Those attacks were commonly
some extent, its confidentiality. adopted as benchmark attacks within the domain of adversarial
2756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE II
ML. Moreover, prior research extensively validates their effi- TABLE OF N OTATIONS
cacy [49], [50], [51], [52]. Therefore, they represent a suitable
choice for evaluating the resilience of NIDSs under various
attacking strategies. Under BB attacks, the attack on a DL/ML
model involves a series of steps as shown in Fig. 2. The
attacker begins by querying the targeted BB NID model with
an input network example such as a netFlow x to obtain a
corresponding prediction y = f (x). Input examples and query
results are used to construct a substitute dataset D  , consisting
of input-output pairs (x  , y  ). Those pairs represent the initial
AEs without any constraints. Given our interest in binary
classification of network traffic as attacks or benign activities,
our primary objective is to develop a BB hard-label attack.
This attack involves iterative updates of input vectors using
gradient estimates obtained from the targeted trained DL/ML
NID model [53]. A hard-label attack directly assigns a discrete
label to each input instance without providing probabilities or
confidence scores. The attacker then generates AEs x̂p while
satisfying the set of network domain constraints C. These con- is 255. Another example can be an invalid tcp roundtrip time
straints encompass restrictions on: 1) the number of modified tcprrt, which potentially affects the sum of the synack and
features, 2) the magnitude of perturbation, 3) statistical and ackdat of the TCP packet. This can happen if an attacker
semantics restrictions, and 4) feature range restrictions. modifies the values of the synack and ackdat features in a way
 The approach to create AEs for WB attacks is relatively that can result in a different checksum calculation compared
different since the attacker is assumed to have knowledge to the original values. By bypassing the network functionality
about the target model and data. The goal is to perturb the of the checksum, attackers aim to create AEs passing the
input network data by adding noise while considering domain integrity checks performed by the network devices and NIDSs.
constraints to ensure the validity of the perturbed examples. However, they may still need to consider network constraints
Both categories of attacks were tested under targeted and into their account when crafting AEs to evade threat detection
untargeted attack modes. The created adversarial examples algorithms.
were tested under many experimental scenarios, which include Table II demonstrates the formal notations used to create,
transferability of those examples DL/ML models similar to apply, and experiment our constraints. Formally, given a
initially targeted model and to models with different or more benign sample x ∈ X , with the corresponding correct label
complex architectures. The next subsection discusses the role y ∈ Y , where y belongs to either an attack or a benign activity,
of constraints to create valid network traffic and outlines our the attacker goal is to craft an AE x̂p = x + η such that
formal model to define constraints. TCA(x̂p ) = y in an untargeted attack, TCA(x̂p ) = y t in a
 targeted attack, η denotes the applied perturbation, and TCA
 is a traffic classification algorithm.
A. Defining Network Constraints in NIDSs In this paper, y t represents the target chosen by the attacker,
 NIDSs rely on network traffic features to establish a baseline with the intention of classifying AEs as benign network flows.
profile of typical network behavior. The created profiles detect It is important to note that our constraints are not mutually
deviations in the incoming traffic to identify attacks [54]. exclusive, meaning that multiple types of constraints can be
However, the incoming traffic needs to maintain network applied to the same feature. For each of the attack modes, our
protocols and standards. Network traffic that fails to conform constraints belong to one or more of following categories:
to the established protocols can be identified as an anomaly, • Features Mutability Constraints: Network traffic includes
suggesting it may be invalid or suspicious. Such a traffic could mutable and immutable features. Mutable features are
be the result of an attacker’s deliberate perturbation, leading those attributes of network traffic that can be changed,
to the creation of AEs. Therefore, adversarial attacks against while immutable features are network traffic attributes
security systems such as NIDSs may also lead to a non- that cannot be changed. Examples of mutable features
functional network traffic. A common example of generating are srcbytes, dstbytes, duration and port numbers. The
invalid AEs is through perturbing the “Source to Destination examples of immutable features are protocol, which is the
Time to Live” (STTL) feature. STTL is used to ensure that protocol used to transmit data, state, which denotes the
packets have a large enough TTL value to reach their intended state of the network connection, whether it is established,
destination even if there are many routers in the path. In some closed, or in the listening state, and service, which is the
cases, anomalies or deviations in the STTL values can be type of service or application associated with the network
indicative of potential network attacks or abnormal network communication, such as HTTP or FTP.
behavior. If the value of STTL is manipulated to be 257, Formally, let an immutable feature denoted by I ∈
the perturbation applied is considered invalid because the {protocol , state, service} and a mutable feature denoted
maximum value allowed for the STTL field in an IP packet by MU ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , r }. The attacker goal is to craft AEs
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2757

 that satisfy the following constraint: associated with the device receiving the packet. Another
 example is the flow average inter-arrival time which is the
 ∀i ∈ I , fˆp = f (1) average time between packets in a flow. It is calculated
 ∀mu ∈ MU , fˆp = f + η (2) by dividing the total time of the flow (duration) by the
 number of packets in the flow. If R denotes a relationship
 where the perturbation η is applied to the original mutable
 between the features f and k in the original flow, then
 feature to create an AE x̂p
 the introduced constraint must preserve the relationship
 • Feature value constraints: Network traffic features can
 between the features of the perturbed flows fˆp and k̂p as
 adopt different forms, such as binary, discrete, continufollows:
 ous, and categorical. Binary traffic features are those that    
 can only have two possible values 0 or 1. The examples ∀R(f , k )∃R fˆp , k̂p |R fˆp , k̂p = R(f , k ) (6)
 of binary features in network traffic are IP options,
 Fragmentation features, and Error features. Continuous Dependency relationships can be also regression-based,
 network features can take a value within a numerical example of those relationships is the linear regression. In
 range. The examples of continuous features in network BB models those relationships can be approximated from
 traffic include ackdat, which is the time duration between the substitute dataset D  . Suppose that there is a linear
 the sending of a SYN packet and the receiving of an relationship between features z and h. Let us assume that
 ACK packet in a TCP connection, sintpkt, which is the D  contains (m) number of features. Let us also assume
 inter-packet arrival time between consecutive packets sent that z can be predicted based on h. We are interested
 from the source to the destination, and sload, which is in preserving the relationship between z and h in the
 the average traffic load (in bits per second) from the corresponding linear regression model:
 source to the destination. Categorical network features are
 those that can take discrete values without any inherent z = hβ + ε (7)
 order or numerical relationship between the categories. Suppose that n × m data matrix contains observations
 The examples of categorical features in a network traffic of both features, β is the coefficient of the model that
 include: the protocol field in the IP header, which take we are trying to find, and ε is the error. If we use
 the values such as TCP, UDP, or ICMP, service field, ordinary least square method for estimation, then, β̂ =
 which can take values such as HTTP, FTP, and DNS, state (h T h)−1 h T z . Here h T h is the covariance matrix of the
 field which can values such as FIN, INT, CON, URH or data if the mean of each feature is set to zero. h T z is the
 others, and Flag feature which indicates various control covariance between every feature vector of h and z. Our
 flags in the TCP header, such as SYN (synchronize), ACK constraints ensure the preservation of the linear regression
 (acknowledge), RST, and (reset). relationship between those features.
 Let the set of binary features in the network traffic is • Distribution-preserving constraints: The statistical disdenoted by Bj ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , n}, the set of continuous tribution of feature values in the original network data
 features is denoted by Rj ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , m}, and the set should be taken into account by attackers when craftof categorical features is denoted by Cj ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , t}. ing AEs. Specifically, an attacker should try to craft
 The attacker goal is to craft AEs that satisfy the following AEs that follow the same statistical distribution of the
 constraints: benign examples to make them look legitimate if his
 ∀bj ∈ Bj , fˆp ∈ [0, 1] (3) target is classifying them as benign. For instance, if
 a NIDS is trained on a dataset where the majority
 ∀j ∈ Rj , min(f ) ≤ fˆp ≤ max(f ) (4) of packets have a small size, an attacker may try to
 t
  craft AEs with small size too. Hence, the adversary
 ∀cj ∈ Cj , fˆp ≡ Cj = 1 (5) should follow the original statistical distribution of data
 j =1 to avoid outliers AEs through considering the following
 where t in formula 5 represents the total number of values constraints:
 for a categorical feature cj . Since categorical features are
 mapped using one hot encoding, the last constraint holds. ∀fˆp |fˆp = f ±  (8)
 In one-hot encoding, each category is represented by a μfˆ ≈ μf (9)
 p
 binary feature that takes the value of 1 if the category is σfˆ ≈ σf (10)
 p
 present and 0 otherwise.
 • Feature dependency constraints: Some features of Due to the absence of access to the original data in
 network traffic are dependent on other features. For BB attacks, we utilize substitute data D  to uphold
 instance, the source IP address and source port of a this constraint. In order to perturb numerical features,
 packet are often dependent on each other because they are we employ a noise parameter (e.g., ) as indicated in
 associated with the device sending the packet. Similarly, formula 8. This perturbation process ensures that the
 the destination IP address and destination port num- mean and standard deviation of the perturbed feature
 ber have a dependency relation because they are both closely match those of the original feature.
2758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Algorithm 1 Constrained Generation of Adversarial Examples to control the attack confidence. For estimating the gradient
Require: Dataset D or D = (xp , yp )n p=1 , Adversarial perturbation information, symmetric difference quotient is used to optimize
 budget B = {, cf , mi , ss }, Attack set A, Constraints set C, the model and approximate gradients in BB setting without
 Feature set M any knowledge about model architecture and parameters as
Ensure: Adversarial examples x̃p for p = 1, ..., n
 follow:
 1: for p = 1 to n do
 2: xp ← Preprocess(xi ) {Preprocess input flow} ∂f (x ) f (x + ss i ) − f (x − ss i )
 3: yp ← One-Hot(yp ) {Encode true label as one-hot vector} ≈ (13)
 4: x̃p,0 ← xp {Initialize adversarial example as original input} ∂xi 2ss
 5: for all a ∈ A do The partial derivative above approximates f (x) with respect
 6: x̃p,a ← ApplyAttack(a, x̃p,a−1 , yp , B ) {Apply adversarial attack} to xi by measuring the difference in the model’s output for
 7: for all c ∈ C do perturbed inputs x + ss i and x − ss i . The step size ss is a
 8: x̃p ← Project(x̃p , c) {Projection of constraints set on small constant used in the approximation.
 M} 2) DeepFool WB Attack: DeepFool WB adversarial attack
 9: end for is based on the idea of finding the minimum perturbation to
10: end for
11: end for an input that will cause the model to misclassify it [47]. The
12: return AE = {x̃p,a , yp )}n
 (t) attack works with an initial input, then it iteratively computes
 p=1 , a ∈ A
 the gradient of the model’s output with respect to the input. At
 each iteration, the attack adds a small perturbation to the input
 in the direction of the gradient that will increase the model’s
B. Generating Constrained AEs for NIDSs output for the least likely class. The process is repeated until
 Our AEs generation procedure is depicted in Algorithm 1. the model’s output for the least likely class exceeds that of
The algorithm requires a set of constraints C, which encom- the true class. The process of generating AEs is formalized as
passes a broad spectrum of constraints discussed earlier. The follows:
parameters of perturbation budget B are selected depending on
the type of the attack used to generate AEs. It can be a WB or a x̂p ← x ; (14)
BB attack. B includes parameters such as attack confidence cf , ȳ ← 1 to T ; (15)
maximum iterations mi , step size ss or the noise parameter .    
 cf x̂p,ȳ ← cf x̂p ; (16)
Preprocessing of flows includes removal of any missing feature    
values and label binarization. The algorithm returns, for each wȳ ← ∇cfy x̂p,ȳ − ∇cfȳ x̂p,ȳ ; (17)
 wȳ  
type of attacks, the set of AEs = {x̃p,a , yp )}np=1 , a ∈ A,
 (t,u)
 Δxȳ ←  ; x̂p,ȳ+1 ← x̂p,ȳ + Δxȳ . (18)
 (t)
 |wȳ |2
and the targeted labels of AEs yp . The attacks used in the
generation of AEs are WB or BB. They can be targeted or DeepFool takes as input the traffic flow x to be perturbed,
untargeted. The following subsections discuss each of those a classifier cf and a perturbation parameter . The attack will
attacks in detail. run for T number of iterations. It starts by initializing the
 In our study, we employed three adversarial attack genera- adversarial example x̂p to be the same as the original example.
tion algorithms presented in the subsequent subsections: A minimum perturbation is required to move the input across
 1) Zeroth Order Optimization BB Attack (ZOO): ZOO the decision boundary of the neural network. At each iteration,
attack was proposed by the authors in [37]. It operates under the gradients output of the neural network with respect to the
the constraint that the attacker lacks direct access to the original input example are calculated, wȳ is the direction of the
gradients of the target model and can only observe model’s decision boundary between the true class y and the ȳth class. It
output for a given input. Unlike gradient-based adversarial is obtained by linearizing the decision boundary. The direction
attacks, which utilize model gradients to create AEs, ZOO of the minimum perturbation to change the classification of
generates such examples through optimization of the following the input example is then computed. DeepFool then checks
regularization function: whether the input example has been successfully classified as
   benign if the attack is targeted. The process is continued until
 min x̂p − x p + c · g x̂p (11) that example is classified as benign.
 x̂p
 3) Carlini & Wagner WB Attack: The Carlini and Wagner
 Such that . p is the regularization used to enforce the (C&W) attack is a WB adversarial attack [48]. The generation
similarity between AEs and the benign examples in terms of of adversarial examples is formulated as the minimization of
the Euclidean distance (if the attack is targeted), p is the norm, the distance between the adversarial example and the original
and c is regularization parameter. g(x̂p ) is the BB hinge loss input, while also maximizing the classifier’s confidence in the
function which depends on model output as follow: target class. C&W attack finds an initial AE, which is an input
     that is close to the original example. It continues refining it
 g x̂p = max max i = t log[f (x )i ] − log[f (x )t ], −cf until it generates an AE based on the following optimization
 (12) functions:
where f (x) represents the logarithm of the probability of the min x̂p − x 2 + c · f (x , t) (19)
model’s output for class i given the input flow x, t is the x̂p
label of the target class (i.e., the benign label), and cf is used f (x , t) = maxi=t [Z (x )]i − [Z (x )]t (20)
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2759

 TABLE III
 DATASETS utilized the Min-Max approach to normalize the data before
 the training step to ensure that all features are on the same
 scale and to prevent some features from dominating the
 learning process based on their magnitudes. We addressed the
 class imbalance in the UNSW-NB15 dataset since imbalanced
 datasets can result in a model that exhibits a bias towards
 the majority class, making the models more vulnerable to
where x̂p is the perturbed input, x is the original input or adversarial attacks [16]. We utilized random sampling without
the clean sample to be perturbed. · 2 denotes the Euclidean replacement to generate representative and unbiased samples
norm or the L2 norm to measures the distance between x̂p from both classes such that every instance has an equal chance
and x, c is a scalar constant that controls the trade-off between of being selected [59].
the perturbation size and the confidence of the attack, f (x, t),
is the objective function which includes both the distance
 B. Training of Adversarial Attacks
( x̂p − x 2 ) and confidence (c · f (x, t)), and Z (x )i is the
confidence score of the logit layer. Z (x )i is computed using For the ZOO attack, we employed the Decision Tree
the SoftMax classification rule to predict the class label of (DT) model in the training and testing phases. The DT was
an input. The AEs are passed through the logit layer and the configured with the Gini impurity criterion and employed
SoftMax function to maximize the difference between the true a best split strategy with no imposed restrictions on the
class and the target class. tree’s maximum depth, allowing it to expand until reaching
 a minimum split of 2 in our configuration. Additionally, we
 constrained the maximum number of nodes to 50 as a measure
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS to control the tree’s growth. DeepFool and C&W were trained
A. Data Preprocessing on a DNN model with 3 hidden layers, each comprising 256,
 We employed the UNSW-NB15 and IoT-23 datasets to 256, and 128 neurons. The model employed Rectified Linear
assess the effectiveness of our methodology. Both datasets Unit (ReLU) activation function and utilized Adam optimizer.
comprise network flows specifically designed to evaluate We used Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.99, and a
NIDSs based on DL/ML methods. Table III demonstrates the learning-rate of 0.01 to control the parameter updates during
details of both datasets. each DNN training iteration. In our experiments on DeepFool
 UNSW-NB15 dataset [55] is a public dataset that was and C&W attacks, we systematically explored a range of
collected at the Cyber Range Lab of the Australian Centre for hyperparameter values to identify the optimal configuration
Cyber Security using IXIA PerfectStorm devices. This dataset for our datasets and threat model. We adopted this parameter
includes both legitimate and malicious network traffic repre- tuning approach using the methodology presented in [48]. Our
sented in both packet and flow-based formats. The attacks in main objective was to preserve the balance between ASR and
this dataset are classified into backdoors, DoS, Reconnaissance attack stealthiness. After a comprehensive evaluation, we have
activities, Worms, and some other generic attacks. From this determined that the following hyperparameter settings yielded
dataset, we generated a balanced sample containing 17,814 the best results: for the DeepFool attack: mi = 100,  = 1e−6,
benign flows and 17,814 attack flows. and the number of class gradients = 10. For the C&W attack:
 The IoT-23 dataset contains IoT network flows that were cf = 0.0, learning-rate = 1e − 2, and the binary search step
captured by the Avast AIC lab between 2018 and 2019 [56]. = 10. All experiments run on a NVIDIA A100 GPU with 80
IoT-23 includes both malicious and benign network traffic GBs of VRAM. Details about our experimental setup and the
from 20 infected IoT devices and 3 non-infected devices. source code are available in the source code repository.1
The dataset was created to examine how benign IoT devices
behave within computer networks. IoT-23 includes the orig-
 C. Evaluation Metrics
inal network capture (i.e., pcap file) and the log files. The
log files have been analyzed and labeled manually. Flows In our experimental analysis, we employed various evaluaare labeled as benign or attacks under different categories tion metrics as outlined below.
including C&C, DDoS, Filedownload, Heartbeat, Mirai, Okiru, 1) Attack success rate (ASR): For untargeted attacks the
 ASR is calculated as: ASR untargeted = N S × 100 where
PartOfHorizontalPortScan, or Torii.
 We applied several data preprocessing and cleaning steps. S represents the number of successful AEs (i.e., correctly
We removed records with missing values from both datasets. misclassified), and N represents the total number of the
We then binarized the class labels by converting the target tested AEs. Attack success rate for targeted attacks is
 S
classes into a binary format representing attacks or benign calculated as: ASR targeted = targeted
 N × 100 where
activities. To prepare the data for ML and DL algorithms, ASR targeted represents the ASR for targeted attacks,
we converted categorical features into numerical values using Stargeted represents the number of successful targeted
the One-Hot Encoding technique [57]. The most influential AEs that deceived the model, and N represents the total
features were selected using Information Gain leading to number of attempted targeted AEs.
excluding some features such as timestamps, locally originated
connections, and locally originated responses [58]. We also 1 https://github.com/Nour-Alhussien/ConstrainedAdversarialAttacks
2760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 2) The percentage of valid AEs based on the measure target class. As a result, the attacker has a broader range of
 (VAR): VAR provides insight on the effectiveness of the perturbation magnitudes that meet the constraints and lead to
 constrained attacks. It measures the proportion of adver- misclassification across the two classes.
 sarial examples that mimic a valid network traffic. VAR The results for employing ZOO attack on the IoT-23 dataset
 is calculated as: VAR = VT ×100 where V represents the which has a smaller number of features is shown in Table V.
 number of valid AEs and T represents the total number Changing the mi and cf does not significantly affect the values
 of AEs. of ASR and Acc. However, the performance of ZOO attack is
 3) Accuracy (Acc): Model accuracy is calculated as: (Acc) affected by varying the values of the step size ss . Increasing
 = CP N ×100 where Acc represents the effectiveness of the ss from 0.2 to 0.8 resulted in a significant increase in
 model in terms of classifying attacks as attacks and the ASR from 0.045 to 27.84% under untargeted modes and
 benign activities as benign activities, and CP represents before applying any constraints. This substantial increase can
 the total number of correctly classified flows at the be attributed to the ss numerical estimation of the derivatives.
 testing time and N is the total number of tested flows. The larger ss enables the algorithm to navigate and explore
 Since we are interested in testing the model’s resistance more perturbation magnitude.
 to intentional manipulation and analyzing the model’s Applying network constraints to the IoT-23 dataset does not
 vulnerability to adversarial attacks, we solely focus on have a significant impact on ASR. It is also noticed that the
 testing the model’s performance against these crafted ASR for the targeted/untargeted ZOO attacks was higher on
 inputs. IoT-23 compared to UNSW-NB15. This is because in the case
 The measures above were evaluated under both targeted of the IoT-23 dataset, the model was trained on smaller number
and untargeted attacking modes. Targeted attacks involve of attack signatures compared to the UNSW-NB15 dataset.
training the model on both benign and malicious activities Results of DeepFool and C&W WB Attacks: The results of
but generating AEs specifically crafted to misclassify attacks our experiments on DeepFool and C&W attacks are shown
as benign activities. On the other hand, untargeted attacks in Table VI. Before conducting both attacks, we assessed
involve the same training process, but the attacker targets the the accuracy of the DNN models, which resulted in a high
testing phase using AEs generated for both the benign and Acc value of 95%. However, after executing both attacks,
malicious activities. During the testing phase, untargeted and the accuracy has significantly decreased before applying any
targeted attacks were evaluated on the UNSW-NB15 dataset constraints. It is noticed that applying constraints leads to a
using two sets of AEs. Specifically, 8916 adversarial network significant impact on the ASR of WB both attacks. Results
flows were used for testing untargeted attacks, while 4502 in Table VI demonstrate the following observations under
adversarial network flows were employed for testing targeted different experimental settings:
attacks. For the IoT-23 dataset, 2000 and 1121 adversarial • There is no significant difference observed between tarnetwork flows were generated to test untargeted and targeted geted and untargeted attack modes on the UNSW dataset
attacks respectively. when utilizing the DeepFool attack. Applying constraints
 leads to very low ASR of x ≤ 0.001% (Table VI). It
 is observed that the introduced constraints interfere with
D. Results and Discussions the effectiveness of the adversarial perturbations. The
 This section discusses the results of 1) effectiveness of constraints may alter the behavior of the model and
adversarial attacks under constraints, 2) transferability of the introduced BB perturbations in a way that weakens
attacks, and 3) attack defense using adversarial training. their ability to deceive it, leading to a significantly
 1) Effectiveness of Attacks: lower ASR. DeepFool attacks approximate the model’s
 Results of ZOO BB Attack: To examine the impact of decision boundary linearly, therefore, when network conparameter settings on the ASR of the ZOO adversarial attack, straints were applied after generating DeepFool AEs,
we tuned two parameters mi and cf , then analyzed their the linear approximation between the features of the
impacts on both Acc and ASR. Tables IV and V show the UNSW dataset is disrupted, resulting in a significant drop
results of this experiment before and after applying network in ASR. The decline in the ASR when experimenting on
constraints on the two datasets. Our observations on the the IoT-23 dataset, which has less number of features
UNSW-NB15 dataset indicate that increasing mi and cf was less significant under both targeted and untargeted
results in a higher ASR. Specifically, varying the mi between attack modes. The ASR dropped from 95.15% to 34.36%,
20 to 80 and the cf between 0.0 to 0.5 increased the ASR from and from 96.38% to 39.20% for untargeted and targeted
0.061% to 20.4% under untargeted attack mode. However, modes respectively.
increasing mi and cf in the targeted attack resulted in a • The findings for C&W attack were relatively similar
small increase in ASR from 0.039 to 0.088. It is observed to DeepFool. Under the untargeted model, the ASR
that applying constraints do not lead to significant changes in was higher before applying our constraints and reaches
ASR and Acc as noticed in Table IV. We observed a small 99.30%. It drops to 42.20% on the UNSW dataset
impact on ASR when applying such constraints to targeted after enforcing network domain constraints. ASR was
attacks. In untargeted attacks, the objective is to find any comparable for C&W attacks under both untargeted and
perturbation that leads to misclassification regardless of the targeted attack modes.
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2761

 TABLE IV
 R ESULTS FOR ZOO ATTACK ON UNSW-NB15 DATASET

 TABLE V
 R ESULTS FOR ZOO ATTACK ON I OT-23 DATASET

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF ATTACK P ERFORMANCE ON TARGETED AND U NTARGETED ATTACKS FOR D EEP F OOL AND C&W ATTACKS

 • We observed that C&W was less impacted by constraints
 compared to DeepFool. Its optimization function encourages minimizing the distance between the adversarial
 example and the original input while maximizing the
 classifier’s confidence in the target class. Particularly,
 C&W attack aims both AEs leading to misclassification
 and have a minimal distance between the original input
 and the perturbed example. DeepFool attack takes a
 different approach since it considers perturbation magnitude. such a difference contributes to variations in
 both attack responses to constraints. The C&W attack,
 with its explicit consideration of distances has partially
 Fig. 3. Impact of constraints on different models-UNSW dataset,
 handled constraints that affect perturbation direction and DT:Decision Tree, T: Targeted Attack, U: Untargeted Attack.
 the confidence in that direction. Not only on the features
 where constraints were applied but also on other features
 that contribute to the model prediction. the difference in ΔASR before applying constraints compared
 While the existing BB attacks are usually tested on ML to after applying them. The calculation of ΔASR is done as
models, we conducted additional experiment where the ZOO follows:
attack targets a DNN model. The AEs were also tested on
the same DNN model used to generate and test DeepFool ΔASR = ASR beforeC − ASR afterC
and C&W attacks. We then reported the constraint impacts
under both targeted and untargeted modes. The results on both The applied constraints had a substantial effect on DNN
datasets are shown in Figures 3 and 4. The figures illustrate models when applied to WB attacks, surpassing the impact of
2762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 in successfully fooling models, even when they deviate from
 the specific model they were originally designed for. In the
 previous experiments, we conducted extensive analysis and
 evaluations on both datasets. However, since we observed
 similar result patterns and to maintain clarity in our discussion,
 we decided to limit the presentation of our findings to the
 results obtained from the UNSW-NB15 dataset.
 Table VIII shows the architectures of the various models
 used in this series experiments. The table highlights the
 structures of the DL models used in our transferability and/or
 adversarial training experiments. For transferability analysis,
 we mainly used Deep Neural Network 1 (DNN1), Deep Neural
Fig. 4. Impact of constraints on different models-UNSW dataset,
DT:Decision Tree, T: Targeted Attack, U: Untargeted Attack.
 Network 2 (DNN2), and Deep Belief Network (DBN). DNN1
 and DNN2 have similar structure, since both consist of three
 layers with 256, 256, and 2 neurons in each layer. Both
the ZOO BB attack. In addition, our observations revealed that models employ ReLU activation function. However, DNN1
the constrained ZOO attack had a greater impact on the DNN utilizes the Adam optimizer, while DNN2 employs the ASGD
model compared to the ML model. Nonetheless, this impact optimizer.
was notably lower compared to DeepFool and C&W attacks. Additionally, we conducted experiments using a DBN
 Validity of AEs: We analyzed the differences between model with a more complex structure consisting of multiple
adversarial attacks in terms of generating valid AEs before layers of restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs). With the
compared to after applying constraints. The results are shown Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer, the DBN optiin Table VII. VAR was lower in the unconstrained domain mizes the model parameters by iteratively updating them based
for the two WB attacks compared to the BB attack. In the on mini batches of training data.
constrained domain, VAR has improved significantly to 80.88% Two ML models were used in our experiments, mainly the
for DeepFool and 75.85% for C&W attacks. For the ZOO Decision Tree (DT) and Gradient Boost (GB). The DT model
attack, the VAR increased from 75.34% to 100%. Notably, VAR consists of a hierarchical structure of nodes and branches.
was higher for the ZOO compared to DeepFool and C&W The GB model is an ensemble ML model that combines
attacks before enforcing network constraints. The effectiveness multiple weak learners through a boosting mechanism. Since
of the ZOO attack in generating valid AEs, despite being a Gradient Boosting commonly employs DT as weak learners
BB attack can be attributed to its reliance on a surrogate in its ensemble, both models have some similarities in the
model to generate adversarial AEs. This approach enables the classification process.
generated AEs to be closer to the original valid examples, as Our experiments evaluate the transferability of AEs genthey are based on the output of the model rather than solely erated by WB and BB attacks between models with similar
the input itself. However, direct perturbation in WB attacks structures and different structures. The evaluation includes
resulted in noticeable changes to the input, making most of transferability of constrained/unconstrained AEs under both
the crafted AEs invalid. Consequently, VAR does not seem to targeted/untargeted attacks modes as follows:
have much dependency on the threat model or having access to 1) The transferability of AEs between models with similar
model parameters and data. In our experiments, the BB attack structures:
yields higher VAR compared to WB attacks. The results were a) WB attacks: In this scenario, we tested
consistent across both datasets. We observed no significant the transferability of AEs from DNN1 to
differences when generating Valid AEs under targeted and DNN2 model. Specifically, the AEs created
untargeted attack modes. using the DNN1 model are assessed against the
 It is important to note that for DeepFool and C&W attacks, DNN2 model.
the number of valid AEs do not reach 100% as for ZOO b) BB attacks: In this scenario, we tested the transattacks. We believe that the existence of some outliers in the ferability of AEs from the DT to GB model. The
datasets leads to examples that are still not a valid network AEs generated on the DT model were evaluated on
traffic. Sometimes modifying network features can also change the Gradient GB model.
the relationships between them, which potentially results in an 2) The transferability of AEs between models with different
invalid traffic. structures:
 2) Transferability Analysis: This series of experiments a) WB attacks: In this scenario, tested the transaims to evaluate the transferability of constrained and uncon- ferability of AEs from DNN1 to DBN model.
strained AEs under both targeted and untargeted attack modes. Particularly, the AEs generated by the DNN1 model
Our main focus is to answer the following question: To were evaluated on the DBN model.
what extent do constrained/unconstrained AEs maintain their b) BB attacks: In this scenario, we tested the transdeceptive behavior when transferred between DL/ML models ferability of AEs from the DT to DNN1 model.
with similar or different structures/architectures? Our exper- Particularly, the AEs generated by the DT model
iments involve examining the resilience of these examples were evaluated on the DNN1 model.
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2763

 TABLE VII
 VAR R ESULTS FOR B OTH DATASETS

 TABLE VIII
 S TRUCTURES OF ML/DL M ODELS

 Transferability Scenario 1a: We first assessed the trans- transferability of the untargeted unconstrained ZOO attack
ferability of AEs between DNN1 and DNN2 models. mode demonstrated no significant variations when compared to
We implemented the untargeted DeepFool attack against the targeted unconstrained attack modes. The findings suggest
a DNN1 model and measured its ASR on that model. that ZOO AEs do not exhibit notable transferability among the
Subsequently, we conducted a test by applying the generated examined models that share similar structures.
DeepFool AEs on the DNN2 model and measured the ASR. Transferability Scenario 2a: Our objective in this scenario
Transferability results that correspond to this experiment are is to investigate the transferability of AEs between DL models
shown in Table IX. Most of unconstrained and untargeted with different structures. To accomplish this, we generated
DeepFool AEs are transferable as indicated by their ability to DeepFool AEs on DNN1 model and measured the ASR on
achieve an ASR of 99.80% on DNN2, which is close to the the same model. Subsequently, we transferred these AEs to a
ASR of 99.99% achieved on DNN1. Constrained DeepFool different and more complex DBN model. The results of this
AEs showed limited transferability likely due to their inability experiment are summarized in Table X. It is noticed that a
to fool the original DNN1 model. significant portion of DeepFool AEs, regardless of whether
 The transferability of unconstrained DeepFool AEs under they were generated under constrained or unconstrained setthe targeted attack mode is lower compared to the untargeted tings or in targeted or untargeted attack modes, did not
attacks. However, the constrained DeepFool AEs exhibit sim- exhibit transferability to the DBN model. It appears that when
ilar behavior in both targeted and untargeted settings. It is AEs are transferred from simple model structures to complex
noticed that under the targeted attack mode, the transferability and fundamentally different model structures, they lose their
of the DeepFool attack is relatively lower. The targeted attack evasiveness. A relatively similar results were observed when
might have been successful in exploiting the decision boundary transferring the constrained and unconstrained C&W AEs. The
of the original examples of the targeted class, but it might transferability of such AEs was limited before constraints.
not generalize well to other models with a minor variation However, transferring C&W AEs under the untargeted attack
in the decision boundaries. The unconstrained C&W AEs mode was higher compared to the targeted mode.
showed similar transferability behavior under both targeted Transferability Scenario 2b: We explored the transferability
and untargeted modes. Likewise, it is observed that the of ZOO AEs across different model architectures. Specifically,
transferability of the constrained C&W AEs is comparable the ZOO AEs generated by attacking the DT model were
to that of the unconstrained ones under both targeted and transferred to the DNN1 model. The ASR of the DNN1 model
untargeted attack modes. was evaluated on the clean model when exposed to the
 Transferability Scenario 1b: We implemented a ZOO attack transferred ZOO AEs. The experiments were conducted conagainst a DT model, we then used the resulting AEs against a sidering both constrained and unconstrained ZOO AEs under
GB model. Table XI summarizes the findings of this experi- both targeted/untargeted attack modes. Table XII demonstrates
ment. We observed a limited transferability of the untargeted our results. The transferability of ZOO AEs to a completely
constrained ZOO attack. The original model yielded an ASR different model structure is notably limited. The ASR experiof 19.5%. When these AEs were tested on the GB model, the enced a significant decline to 0.004 when the DNN1 model
ASR significantly drops to 0.0174. There are a few possible was exposed to the transferred ZOO AEs. We noticed that
explanations for this. In general GB models are less sensitive the ZOO AEs did not achieve a high ASR on the original
to perturbations given their ensemble prediction model, which ML model. Therefore, transferring these AEs also had no
makes them more robust to adversarial perturbation. The significant impact on the accuracy of the target model. One
2764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE IX
 T RANSFERABILITY OF WB AE S A MONG M ODELS W ITH S IMILAR S TRUCTURES (S CENARIO 1 A )

 TABLE X
 T RANSFERABILITY OF WB AE S A MONG M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT S TRUCTURES (S CENARIO 2 A )

 TABLE XI
 T RANSFERABILITY OF BB AE S A MONG M ODELS W ITH S IMILAR S TRUCTURES (S CENARIO 1 B )

 TABLE XII
 T RANSFERABILITY OF BB AE S A MONG M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT S TRUCTURES (S CENARIO 2 B )

explanation is that ZOO AEs rely on a local search strategy to and unconstrained AEs. We investigate the effects of varying
find perturbations that lead to misclassifications when applied the percentage of AEs with respect to clean examples during
to ML models, which make such perturbations sensitive to a the model training phase and through considering both targeted
specific model structure and decision boundaries. and untargeted attacks modes. Furthermore, we evaluated the
 3) Adversarial Training: Adversarial training is one of robustness of adversarial training under two distinct cases:
the defense mechanisms used to strengthen ML/DL models same attack signature (i.e., SS) and different attack signaagainst adversarial attacks [17]. It involves generating then ture(i.e., DS). In the first case, we retrained the model using
using AEs into the model’s training process. By exposing the the same type of AEs that were employed to attack it initially.
model to AEs during the training process, its performance In the second case, we retrained the model using AEs from a
in detecting similar AEs is supposed to improve. In tradi- different type of attack that is used against that model.
tional ML approaches, the model’s loss function measures We further explored the first case through two different
the deviation between model’s predictions and the ground- approaches: similar model same signature (SMSS) and diftruth labels. However, when employing adversarial training, ferent model same signature (DMSS). The SMSS approach
an additional loss function is used to evaluate the deviation involves two models M1 and M2 having a similar structures.
between the model’s predictions on AEs and the targeted class Specifically, we attacked M1 and used the AEs generated
determined by the attacker. As a result, the core of adversarial from M1 to retrain M2. We then tested M2 on the AEs
training lies in modifying the model’s loss function, which generated from M1 to evaluate the robustness of M2 after
becomes a weighted combination of the regular loss function adversarial training. In this approach, M1 and M2 have similar
for clean examples and a loss function specifically designed structures in terms of the number and structure of layers and
for AEs. By incorporating the adversarial loss function into the activation function used (e.g., DNN1 and DNN2).
the training process, the model learns to defend against The DMSS approach involves retraining and testing using
potential adversarial attacks by explicitly considering their AEs that have SS. We used two models M1 and M3 with
impact during optimization. different structure or different categories (e.g., DNN1 and
 We conducted a series of experiments to assess the effec- GB). Figure 5 describes the DMSS approach where we trained
tiveness of adversarial training on the ASR for both constrained two different models M1 and M3 on clean examples, then
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2765

 with just 20% of C&W AEs was sufficient to
 enhance its robustness. A similar behavior was
 observed under the targeted attack mode, but the
 targeted attack led to a more robust model as it
 yielded lower ASR (Figure 6(b)).
 b) DMSS-WB attacks: we targeted the DNN1 model
 using C&W attack. Subsequently, we retrained
 the DNN3 model using C&W AEs generated
 through attacking the DNN1 model. Figure 6(c)
 and Figure 6(d) show the results for this exper-
Fig. 5. Description of adversarial training process. iment. Before applying adversarial training, the
 ASR of the DNN3 model using the constrained
 TABLE XIII and unconstrained untargeted attacks was 66.6%
 A DVERSARIAL T RAINING S CENARIOS and 99.6% respectively. After applying adversarial
 training, the ASR significantly dropped to 0.034%
 and 0.017% (Figure 6(c)). Our observations indicated that both unconstrained and constrained
 adversarial training under the untargeted mode
 improved the model’s resilience to the tested AEs.
 Under the untargeted mode, both the constrained
 and unconstrained AEs exhibited a similar behavior
we generated C&W AEs by attacking M1 and M3. We then in terms of robustness. The targeted mode yielded
retrained M3 using the clean data and the AEs generated on relatively similar results. The DMSS adversarial
M1. This results in a trained Model M 3 which was then tested training approach improved the model’s resilience
on AEs generated from M3. to the C&W attack using both constrained and non-
 We examined the second case using two distinct approaches: constrained targeted attacks (Figure 6(d)).
similar model different signature (SMDS) and different model c) SMSS-BB attacks: In this experiment, we generdifferent signature (DMDS). Table XIII shows the character- ated ZOO AEs based on a DT model, then we
istics of each approach, specifically the AEs used for training, used the resulting AEs to train and test a GB
the models employed, and the AEs used for testing model’s model. Figures 6(e) 6(f) show the results for this
robustness. In this series of experiments, we created a DNN3 experiment. Prior to the adversarial training, the
DL model with a higher degree of intricacy, consisting of six ASR on the GB model for constrained and unconlayers, each with a different number of neurons. Each of the strained untargeted attacks was 35.4% and 37%,
first five layers includes 256 neurons, and the output layer respectively. However, after applying adversarial
includes 2 neurons. We used the ReLU activation function for training, the ASR significantly dropped to 0.072
all layers except for layer 4, where the Tanh activation function and 0.048 using only 20% of AEs (Figure 6(e)).
is employed. The Adamax optimizer is employed for training Both constrained and unconstrained AEs improved
the DNN3 model. the model’s robustness in untargeted attacks mode.
 The results of the experiments on adversarial training while The values of ASR were comparable when varying
varying the percentage of AEs used for training are shown in the percentages of AEs.
Figure 6. The following scenarios outline the specific details We observed slight variations in the ASR when
of each experimental case. using different percentages of AEs. Using 33%
 1) Same Signature: of AEs with constraints demonstrated the highest
 a) SMSS-WB attacks: we initially targeted the effectiveness in reducing the ASR under the tar-
 DNN2 model using C&W attack. Subsequently, geted mode. In contrast, employing 20% of the
 we retrained the DNN1 model using C&W AEs unconstrained AEs exhibited the most significant
 generated through the attack on the DNN2 model. reduction in ASR as depicted in Figure 6(f). After
 Figure 6(a) and Figure 6(b) show the results for applying adversarial training, we noticed a signifithis experiment. Before applying adversarial train- cant decrease in the ASR. For the constrained AEs,
 ing, the ASR on the DNN1 model using constrained the ASR dropped from 19.7% to 0.005. Similarly,
 and unconstrained untargeted AEs was 42.20% for the unconstrained AEs, the ASR decreased from
 and 99.30%, respectively. However, after applying 21.5% to 0.002.
 adversarial training, the ASR significantly dropped 2) Different Signature:
 to 9% and 7%. We noticed that the ASR was a) SMDS-WB attacks: In this scenario, we utilized
 comparable when varying the percentages of AEs. C&W adversarial attacks to target the DNN1 model
 We observed that both constrained and uncon- and performed adversarial training using those
 strained AEs improved the model’s robustness. AEs. Subsequently, we employed the DeepFool
 Furthermore, we observed that retraining the model AEs generated by attacking a DNN2 model
2766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 6. Results of adversarial training on constrained/unconstrained AEs for both targeted/untargeted attacks.

 to assess the robustness of the DNN1 model. model retraining. However, the unconstrained AEs
 Figures 6(g) and 6(h) show the results for this significantly decreased the ASR from 99.3% to
 experiment. Prior to applying adversarial train- 33% (Figure 6(g)). The results were significantly
 ing, the ASR of the DNN1 model on untargeted different under the targeted AEs. As shown in
 attacks was 47.7% for the constrained AEs and Figure 6(h)) constrained AEs increased the robust-
 99.3% for the unconstrained AEs. The constrained ness of the model.
 untargeted AEs do not add much robustness b) DMDS-WB attacks: In this experiment, we
 to the DNN1 model, since the ASR dropped initiated C&W adversarial attack against a
 from 47.7% to 45% using 33% of AEs for DNN3 model. Subsequently, we retrained the
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2767

 DNN3 model using DeepFool AEs generated by
 attacking a DNN1 model. We then tested the
 DNN3 against C&W AEs. The results of this
 experiment are illustrated in Figure 6(i) and 6(j).
 Overall, both the constrained and unconstrained
 AEs improved model robustness. For the untargeted
 attack mode, we noticed that the unconstrained
 AEs add more robustness to the DNN3 model
 compared to the constrained Examples. The constrained AEs performed better under targeted
 attacks (Figure 6(j)). For both untargeted and targeted modes, varying the percentages of AEs
 resulted in an analogous ASR. In general, 20%
 and 25% yielded the best results in most of the Fig. 7. AEs generation: time analysis.
 experiments.
 c) DMDS-BB attacks: In this experiment, we generated ZOO AEs against a GB model. Subsequently,
 we retrained the GB model using C&W AEs generated by attacking a DNN1 model. The GB model
 was then tested against ZOO AEs. The results
 of this scenario are illustrated in Figures 6(k)
 and 6(l). The ASR dropped significantly to 0.056
 and 0.052 for constrained and unconstrained untargeted attacks. This finding indicates that the
 adversarial training process using 20% percentage
 of AEs effectively enhanced the model’s robustness
 against untargeted attacks (Figure 6(k)). Likewise,
 in the scenario of targeted attacks, both constrained
 and unconstrained AEs improved model robustness Fig. 8. Scatter plot analysis of AEs generation time: model comparison and
 using adversarial training defense (Figure 6(l)). attack type Visualization.”
 4) Time Analysis of AEs Generation: We conducted
 another experiment to measure the time taken to generate
 AEs for each model-attack combination (Figure 7). The t-test. The null hypothesis we tested is that there is no
 bars represent the time it takes to generate AEs for significant difference between the two cases with and
 each type of attack with constraints(C) and without without constraints. With t-value = 2.7468, p-value =
 Constraints (NoC). For each attack, we changed the 0.0405, and significance level α = 0.05, the p-value is
 optimizer or the type of the ML model used to mea- less than α. That is, there is a statistically significant
 sure results consistency across different scenarios. We difference between the times taken to generate AEs with
 observed no significant differences between the time to constraints and without constraints.
 generate AEs for the DeepFool attack. The creation of To determine the type of the relationship between the
 AEs using DeepFool, which is a WB attack, is relatively times with constraints and without constraints, we first
 fast, which can be attributed to the attack’s inherent plot the execution times on the scatter plot (figure 8) to
 efficiency in generating AEs. In addition, DeepFool assess the relationship. We then calculated the Pearson
 is a directional attack that focuses on finding the correlation coefficient, which may indicate the strength
 smallest possible perturbation that can fool the target of the linear relationship between the two sets of
 model making it an efficient attack compared to others. values. We then fitted two types of models: linear and
 C&W takes longer to generate AEs, specifically when exponential to the set of values and determined which
 applying constraints. This is attributed to the approach one has the best fit based on the values of the coefficient
 that C&W attack uses to generate AEs. It is based on of determination R 2 .
 the constrained optimization problem of minimizing the The scatter plot shows the relationship between the times
 L2 norm of the perturbation while ensuring that the without constraints and with constraints for the attack
 model is fooled. The ZOO attack also takes longer time scenarios shown in figure 7. Each point represents a
 than DeepFool to generate AEs. BB attacks such as model-attack combination. The red dashed line repre-
 ZOO are generally more time-consuming than white-box sents the diagonal where both times would be equal.
 attacks. This is because they lack direct access to model Most points lie above the diagonal, which indicates
 gradients and must estimate them. To determine if the that for most model-attack combinations, the time with
 differences in attack times with and without constraints constraints is greater than without constraints. The points
 are statistically significant, we applied a paired sample do not cluster around a straight line, which shows that
2768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 the relationship is not perfectly linear. The spread in the used for generating AEs, while the top row represents
 points indicates a variability in how constraints affect the target models for testing AEs. The values represent
 different model-attack combinations. both inter and intra-transferability. The diagonal entries
 We found that Pearson correlation coefficient = 0.8914, denote the ASR when the source and target models are
 which indicates a strong positive linear relationship the same.
 between the times with constraints and without con- The comparison shown in table XIV indicates that our
 straints. We then fitted both linear and exponential constraints when employed to JSMA yield a lower ASR
 models by comparing their R 2 values. For the lin- compared to the constraints proposed by Sheatsley et al.
 ear model, the R 2 = 0.7947 which suggests that This signifies that our constraints introduced higher
 approximately 79.47% of the variance in the time with robustness to the model by constraining the perturbation
 constraints is explained by the time without constraints magnitude available to the attacker. Subsequently, the
 using a linear relationship. This supports our earlier transferability of AEs was lower using our approach.
 observation from the Pearson correlation coefficient, This was not the case for Inter-transferability values,
 which indicated a linear relationship. The R 2 value for which show that our constraints lead to more transferable
 the exponential model, which = −∞ indicates that the AEs when applied to certain models such as LR and
 exponential model is not suitable for this difference. SVM. This observation aligns with the results obtained
 Although constraints lead to a longer time for generating by Sheatsley et al. who discovered that inter-technique
 AEs, this increase in time does not follow an exponential transferability rates were largely model-dependent.
 trend across various model-attack combinations. We further assessed our constraints when generating
 5) Comparison With Existing Approaches: We con- adversarial sketches using the perturbation histogram
 ducted a comparative analysis between applying our approach proposed in [8]. Sketches are universal perconstraints to adversarial attacks and the approach turbations that adhere to network domain constraints.
 proposed by Sheatsley et al. in [8]. The authors proposed Similar to the authors in [8], we generated those sketches
 an algorithm to incorporate network constraints into through: 1) creating AEs using the JSMA attack, 2) con-
 JSMA WB adversarial attack. Their objective was to structing a perturbation histogram to identify the most
 explore the effects of enforcing a set of constraints influential set of features having the highest potential to
 they developed on both model accuracy and trans- fool the targeted model, 3) crafting adversarial sketches
 ferability. To conduct this comparison, we employed by selecting the top n features from the perturba-
 JSMA attack and enforced our constraints during the tion histogram, and 4) employing these sketches to
 process of generating AEs. To maintain consistency in attack the model and report both ASR and transferthe experimental setup, we adopted the same evaluation ability. In our experiment, we adopted n = 9 for the
 metrics outlined by Sheatsley et al. Specifically, we UNSW-NB15 dataset to ensure a consistent comparison.
 measured ASR and transferability on the same dataset The results presented in Table XIV demonstrated that
 (UNSW-NB15). They investigated the transferability when our constraints are applied to create adversarial
 of the constrained AEs based on two approaches, sketches, they lead to a relatively lower average (ASR)
 intra-transferability and inter-transferability. The intra- compared to the constraints proposed by the authors
 transferability involves measuring the transferability of in [8]. This indicates that our constraints enhanced
 AEs within the same model. This was accomplished the model’s robustness even when attackers focus their
 by partitioning the dataset into five distinct subsets effort to perturb the most influential features. While our
 labeled as A, B, C, D, and E. The evasiveness of approach results in lower intra-transferability of adverthe crafted AEs using dataset A was then tested on sarial sketches, this does not hold for inter-transferability
 datasets B, C, D, and E. To ensure comparable trans- values of models such as LR and SVM, which shows
 ferability results, we divided the UNSW-NB15 dataset that inter-transferability of adversarial sketches relies on
 into five separate partitions using a stratified shuffle- the model used.
 split technique [8]. This technique ensures that each split 6) Summery of Findings: The summary of our experipreserves the class proportions of the original dataset, ments can be condensed into three investigated areas as
 facilitating better learning and model generalization. The follows:
 inter-transferability examined the transferability of AEs • Attack effectiveness using constrained/unconstrained
 across models that use different learning mechanisms. AEs: During the assessment of the attack
 Specifically, the authors considered four ML models effectiveness of both constrained and unconstrained
 namely DT, Logistic Regression (LR), Support Vector AEs, we made several observations. First, we
 Machine (SVM), and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN). found that the existence of constraints did not
 We adopted a similar model framework as in [8], and significantly impact the ASR for the ZOO BB
 we incorporated analogous architectures and hyperpa- attack. Both constrained and unconstrained AEs
 rameters in our comparison. We used a DBN model displayed comparable performance in successfully
 with a learning rate equal to 0.01 and using 10 epochs. fooling the model. However, when it came to the
 Table XIV illustrates the results of our comparison. The DeepFool WB attack, the ASR was significantly
 second column from left represents the source models affected by applying network domain constraints.
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2769

 TABLE XIV
 C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER A PPROACHES

 The constrained DeepFool AEs demonstrated a attack methods exhibited limited ability to fool
 significant decrease in their ability to deceive models with different architectures. The differences
 the intrusion detection models compared to their in model boundaries between the source and target
 unconstrained ones. Constraints applied to C&W architectures lead to significant impacts on trans-
 WB attack showed a moderate impact on the ASR ferability. Regardless of the threat model used, the
 compared to that DeepFool attack. The observation transferability of AEs between models with different
 that constraints have larger effect on the ASR for architectures did not appear to be significantly
 WB attacks compared to BB attacks suggests that influenced by the application of constraints.
 the knowledge and accessibility of the model’s • Adversarial training using the conarchitecture and parameters play a role in the strained/unconstrained AEs: We assessed the
 effectiveness of constraints. This shows that the robustness of different models against constrained
 applied constraints appear to reduce the attack and unconstrained AEs through adversarial training.
 surface for WB attacks. We also found that the When adversarial training is applied using AEs
 validity of the resulting AEs does not depend on the with different signatures to retrain the model, we
 used threat model. Before applying any constraints, found that the drop rate in the ASR was lower
 the percentage of the valid AEs was higher for the compared to the same signature retraining. Overall,
 ZOO BB attacks compared to both WB attacks. we found that similarities and differences between
 • Transferability of the constrained/unconstrained the signatures of AEs used for retraining and
 AEs: We investigated the transferability of the con- testing play a reasonable role in the effectiveness
 strained and unconstrained AEs under two scenarios, of adversarial training against WB attacks. The
 similar model structures and different model struc- adversarial training was less effective to mitigate
 tures. When considering similar model structures, AEs when they are 1) unknown to the model,
 we observed that the unconstrained DeepFool AEs 2) constrained, or 3) when the attack is untargeted.
 yielded good transferability, while the constrained Table XV presents a summary of the attacks we exper-
 AEs exhibited a low transferability. In contrast, imented with, their effectiveness, transferability within
 both the constrained and unconstrained C&W AEs similar model structures, transferability to different
 demonstrated a reasonable transferability between model structures, and their utility in adversarial training.
 similar models. For the ZOO AEs, both constrained To represent the impact levels on each of the investigated
 and unconstrained AEs exhibited a low transfer- areas, we used the abbreviations “H” for High, “M” for
 ability. The low transferability observed in ZOO Medium, and “L” for Low. The following observations
 attack can be attributed to its local search pro- can be drawn from this table
 cess to generate AE. When generating adversarial a) When no constraints are applied, WB adversarial
 perturbations, ZOO relies on specific features that attacks demonstrate a comparable high level of
 are distinctive to the original model(the one on transferability. However, this pattern changes when
 which the attack was trained), which may not align constraints are imposed. Based on our experiments,
 with the vulnerabilities of the targeted model. we assert that transferability of WB AEs under
 The transferability analysis of different model struc- constraints depends on the characteristics of the
 tures revealed that the AEs generated by the three attack used.
2770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE XV
 S UMMARY OF R ESULTS

 b) Both WB and BB AEs do not transfer well between [2] J. Lansky et al., “Deep learning-based intrusion detection systems: A
 models with different architectures. Applying con- systematic review,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 101574–101599, 2021.
 [3] G. Kocher and G. Kumar, “Machine learning and deep learning
 straints do not seem to have significant impact methods for intrusion detection systems: Recent developments and
 on transferability between models with different challenges,” Soft Comput., vol. 25, no. 15, pp. 9731–9763, 2021.
 architectures. [4] S. Gurung, M. K. Ghose, and A. Subedi, “Deep learning approach on
 network intrusion detection system using NSL-KDD dataset,” Int. J.
 c) Effectiveness of using AEs generated by each Comput. Netw. Inf. Secur., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 8–14, 2019.
 attack as a defense mechanism was effective in [5] O. Ibitoye, O. Shafiq, and A. Matrawy, “Analyzing adversarial attacks
 most of the experiments. The results show a against deep learning for intrusion detection in IoT networks,” in Proc.
 IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6.
 promising direction of using existing signatures [6] X. Yuan, P. He, Q. Zhu, and X. Li, “Adversarial examples: Attacks
 of AEs to mitigate novel variations of adversar- and defenses for deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 ial attacks or zero-day adversarial attacks against vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 2805–2824, Sep. 2019.
 [7] H. Xu et al., “Adversarial attacks and defenses in images, graphs and
 NIDS. text: A review,” Int. J. Autom. Comput., vol. 17, pp. 151–178, Mar. 2020.
 [8] R. Sheatsley, N. Papernot, M. J. Weisman, G. Verma, and P. McDaniel,
 “Adversarial examples for network intrusion detection systems,” J.
 VI. C ONCLUSION Comput. Secur., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 727–752, 2022.
 This paper investigated the impact of the constrained [9] S. Guo, J. Zhao, X. Li, J. Duan, D. Mu, and X. Jing, “A black-box attack
 method against machine-learning-based anomaly network flow detection
WB/BB adversarial examples against DL/ML based NIDS. models,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–13, Apr. 2021.
We created a set of network domain constraints and applied [10] N. Alhussien and A. Aleroud, “A novel poisoning attack on few-shot
them to generate WB and BB-based AEs. The examination based network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper.
 Manag. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–5.
of the AEs encompassed three key perspectives: 1) evaluating [11] N. Alhussien, A. Aleroud, R. Rahaeimehr, and A. Schwarzmann,
the success rate of the attack, 2) assessing the transferability “Triggerability of backdoor attacks in multi-source transfer learningof the AEs to similar/different models, and 3) analyzing their based intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Big Data
 Comput., Appl. Technol. (BDCAT), 2022, pp. 40–47.
effectiveness in defending against adversarial attacks through [12] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning for
adversarial training. We found that WB attacks exhibited a network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE
high ASR without any constraints. Adding constraints limited Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 1st Quart., 2023.
 [13] D. Shu, N. O. Leslie, C. A. Kamhoua, and C. S. Tucker, “Generative
the success rate of those attacks. However, the impact of these adversarial attacks against intrusion detection systems using active
constraints can vary depending on the specific characteristics learning,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Wireless Security Mach. Learn.,
of the attack. We found that constraints have less impact 2020, pp. 1–6.
 [14] H. Qiu, T. Dong, T. Zhang, J. Lu, G. Memmi, and M. Qiu, “Adversarial
on transferability of AEs to models with different learning attacks against network intrusion detection in IoT systems,” IEEE
approaches compared to the original or source models that Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 13, pp. 10327–10335, Jul. 2021.
generate those AEs. Both WB and BB AEs do not transfer well [15] E. Alhajjar, P. Maxwell, and N. Bastian, “Adversarial machine learning
 in network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 186,
between models with different structures. The results indicated Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115782.
a promising potential for utilizing existing signatures of AEs [16] A. Chernikova and A. Oprea, “Fence: Feasible evasion attacks on neural
to mitigate novel variations or zero-day adversarial attacks networks in constrained environments,” ACM Trans. Privacy Secur.,
 vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1–34, 2022.
against NIDSs. [17] T. Bai, J. Luo, J. Zhao, B. Wen, and Q. Wang, “Recent advances in
 This study is limited to experiments on three types of adversarial training for adversarial robustness,” 2021, arXiv:2102.01356.
attacks. We plan to extend it to examine other existing attacks. [18] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
We also plan to extend this work to consider AEs that are [19] Y. Dong et al., “Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum,” in Proc.
generated from a raw network traffic such as pcap files IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 9185–9193.
(i.e., problem space attacks). Finally, we plan to extend our [20] R. Wiyatno and A. Xu, “Maximal Jacobian-based saliency map attack,”
 2018, arXiv:1808.07945.
approach to detect zero-day AEs against NIDSs. [21] P.-Y. Chen, Y. Sharma, H. Zhang, J. Yi, and C.-J. Hsieh, “Ead: Elasticnet attacks to deep neural networks via adversarial examples,” in Proc.
 R EFERENCES AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 1–19.
 [22] A. Kurakin, I. J. Goodfellow, and S. Bengio, “Adversarial examples in
 [1] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban the physical world,” in Artificial Intelligence Safety and Security. Boca
 IDS: An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT Raton, FL, USA: Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2018, pp. 99–112.
 edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, [23] Y. Nesterov, Introductory Lectures on Convex Optimization: A Basic
 Aug. 2020. Course, vol. 87. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2003.
ALHUSSIEN et al.: CONSTRAINING ADVERSARIAL ATTACKS ON NIDSs: TRANSFERABILITY AND DEFENSE ANALYSIS 2771

[24] C. Szegedy et al., “Intriguing properties of neural networks,” 2013, [50] N. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. Hu, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou,
 arXiv:1312.6199. “MANDA: On adversarial example detection for network intrusion
[25] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image detection system,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, no. 2, pp. 1139–1153, Mar./Apr. 2023.
 pp. 770–778. [51] J. Wang, J. Pan, I. AlQerm, and Y. Liu, “Def-IDS: An ensemble
[26] M. Clerc, Particle Swarm Optimization. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, defense mechanism against adversarial attacks for deep learning-based
 2010, pp. 1–17. network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw.
[27] D. Whitley, “A genetic algorithm tutorial,” Statist. Comput., vol. 4, (ICCCN), 2021, pp. 1–9.
 pp. 65–85, Jun. 1994. [52] J. Clements, Y. Yang, A. A. Sharma, H. Hu, and Y. Lao, “Rallying adver-
[28] K. Kotecha et al., “Enhanced network intrusion detection sarial techniques against deep learning for network security,” in Proc.
 system,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 23, p. 7835, 2021. IEEE Symp. Series Comput. Intell. (SSCI), 2021, pp. 01–08.
[29] C. Xiao, B. Li, J.-Y. Zhu, W. He, M. Liu, and D. Song, [53] M. Cheng, T. Le, P.-Y. Chen, J. Yi, H. Zhang, and C.-J. Hsieh, “Query-
 “Generating adversarial examples with adversarial networks,” 2018, efficient hard-label black-box attack: An optimization-based approach,”
 arXiv:1801.02610. 2018, arXiv:1807.04457.
[30] H. A. Alatwi and A. Aldweesh, “Adversarial black-box attacks against [54] A. Aleroud and G. Karabatis, “Contextual information fusion for
 network intrusion detection systems: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE World AI intrusion detection: A survey and taxonomy,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 52,
 IoT Congr. (AIIoT), 2021, pp. 0034–0040. pp. 563–619, Feb. 2017.
[31] S. Alemany and N. Pissinou, “The dilemma between data trans- [55] N. Moustafa, J. Slay, and G. Creech, “Novel geometric area analysis
 formations and adversarial robustness for time series application technique for anomaly detection using Trapezoidal area estimation on
 systems,” in Proc. SafeAI@ AAAI, 2022, pp. 1–8. large-scale networks,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 481–494,
[32] C. Zhang, P. Benz, A. Karjauv, J. W. Cho, K. Zhang, and Dec. 2019.
 I. S. Kweon, “Investigating top-k white-box and transferable black-box [56] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, 2020, “IoT-23: A labeled
 attack,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, dataset with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” IoT-23 Dataset,
 pp. 15085–15094. Zenodo. [Online]. Available: http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4743746
[33] M. A. Ayub, W. A. Johnson, D. A. Talbert, and A. Siraj, “Model [57] C. Seger, An Investigation of Categorical Variable Encoding Techniques
 evasion attack on intrusion detection systems using adversarial machine in Machine Learning: Binary Versus One-Hot and Feature Hashing,
 learning,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS), 2020, pp. 1–6. KTH Royal Inst. Technol., Stockholm, Sweden, 2018.
[34] Y. Liu, X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Delving into transferable [58] T. A. Alhaj, M. M. Siraj, A. Zainal, H. T. Elshoush, and F. Elhaj,
 adversarial examples and black-box attacks,” 2016, arXiv:1611.02770. “Feature selection using information gain for improved structural-based
[35] A. Ilyas, L. Engstrom, A. Athalye, and J. Lin, “Black-box adversarial alert correlation,” PloS ONE, vol. 11, no. 11, 2016, Art. no. e0166017.
 attacks with limited queries and information,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [59] O. Shamir, “Without-replacement sampling for stochastic gradient meth-
 Learn., 2018, pp. 2137–2146. ods,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 29, 2016, pp. 1–36.
[36] D. Lee, S. Moon, J. Lee, and H. O. Song, “Query-efficient and scalable
 black-box adversarial attacks on discrete sequential data via Bayesian
 optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 12478–12497.
[37] P.-Y. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Sharma, J. Yi, and C.-J. Hsieh, “ZOO: Zeroth
 order optimization based black-box attacks to deep neural networks
 without training substitute models,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell.
 Secur., 2017, pp. 15–26.
[38] J. Chen, M. I. Jordan, and M. J. Wainwright, “HopSkipJumpAttack:
 A query-efficient decision-based attack,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
 Privacy (SP), 2020, pp. 1277–1294.
 Nour Alhussien is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[39] M. Abdelaty, S. Scott-Hayward, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa,
 degree with the School of Computer and Cyber
 “GADoT: Gan-based adversarial training for robust DDoS attack detec-
 Sciences, Augusta University. Her research focuses
 tion,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Security (CNS), 2021,
 on intrusion detection and adversarial machine learnpp. 119–127.
 ing attacks. With expertise on deep learning and
[40] Z. Lin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “IDSGAN: Generative adversarial networks
 data analysis, she has publications in conferences
 for attack generation against intrusion detection,” in Proc. Adv. Knowl.
 like NOMS and IEEE/ACM Conference on Big Data
 Discov. Data Min., 2022, pp. 79–91.
 Applications.
[41] A. Granados, M. S. Miah, A. Ortiz, and C. Kiekintveld, “A realistic
 approach for network traffic obfuscation using adversarial machine
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Decis. Game Theory Secur., 2020,
 pp. 45–57.
[42] M. J. Hashemi, G. Cusack, and E. Keller, “Towards evaluation of NIDSs
 in adversarial setting,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT Workshop Big Data,
 Mach. Learn. Artif. Intell. Data Commun. Netw., 2019, pp. 14–21.
[43] H. Jmila and M. I. Khedher, “Adversarial machine learning for network
 intrusion detection: A comparative study,” Comput. Netw., vol. 214,
 Sep. 2022, Art. no. 109073.
[44] C. Zhang, X. Costa-Perez, and P. Patras, “Adversarial attacks against
 deep learning-based network intrusion detection systems and defense
 mechanisms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1294–1311, Ahmed Aleroud is an Associate Professor with
 Jun. 2022. the School of Computer and Cyber Sciences. His
[45] F. Pierazzi, F. Pendlebury, J. Cortellazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Intriguing research has been published in journals, such as
 properties of adversarial ML attacks in the problem space,” in Proc. IEEE Transactions, ACM Digital Threats Research
 IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2020, pp. 1332–1349. and Practice, Computers and Security, Information
[46] K. Sauka, G.-Y. Shin, D.-W. Kim, and M.-M. Han, “Adversarial robust Security and Applications, Information System
 and explainable network intrusion detection systems based on deep Frontiers, Knowledge, and Information Systems. His
 learning,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 13, p. 6451, 2022. work has been supported by NSF, the Office of
[47] S.-M. Moosavi-Dezfooli, A. Fawzi, and P. Frossard, “DeepFool: A Naval Research, European IP Networks, and the
 simple and accurate method to fool deep neural networks,” in Proc. Department of Energy. His research work focuses
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, pp. 2574–2582. on machine learning computational approaches and
[48] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural social approaches to combat security and privacy attacks, including social
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2017, pp. 39–57. engineering attacks, computer network intrusions, disinformation, social
[49] K. Yang, J. Liu, C. Zhang, and Y. Fang, “Adversarial examples against media propaganda, state-linked social media attacks, online extremism, and
 the deep learning based network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. re-identification of private information on individuals or devices. He is also
 IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), 2018, pp. 559–564. working on adversarial attacks on security systems.
2772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Abdullah Melhem received the master’s degree Samer Y. Khamaiseh (Member, IEEE) is an
 in data science from the Jordan University of Assistant Professor of Computer Science and
 Science and Technology. He is a Graduate Research Software Engineering with Miami University. His
 Assistant with School of Computer and Cyber research focuses on cybersecurity with the integra-
 Sciences, Augusta University. He has a strong back- tion of artificial intelligence. Specifically, adversarial
 ground in advanced data analytic. Previously, he machine learning, software-defined networking, softworked as a Data Scientist with KADDB Design and ware security, machine learning security, and
 Development Center, Jordan. network security. He discovers two new attacks
 that defeat state-of-the-art image classification neural
 networks. His main research interest on the area of
 intrusion detection systems for SDN fabric; often
 applied deep learning techniques to develop smart DDoS detection and
 prevention systems. In addition, he is applying adversarial machine learning
 attacks to develop adversarial traffic generation tools that penetrate reallife IDS/IPS systems. In the area of software security, his research focuses
 on integrating deep learning and knowledge graph on large-scale source
 code systems to develop state-of-the-art security vulnerability detection tools.
 Another area, he is heavily focusing on is adversarial machine learning.