IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 10231

 Contrasting Estimation of Pattern Prototypes for
 Anomaly Detection in Urban Crowd Flow
 Yupeng Wang , Xiling Luo , and Zequan Zhou

 Abstract— Crowd flow anomaly detection (CFAD) plays a vital
role in ensuring public safety due to its capability to distinguish
abnormal crowd movement behaviors from the norm. However,
the influence of coexisting spatiotemporal factors presents a
substantial challenge in capturing the dynamic normal pattern.
Moreover, the inherent similarities within the original crowd
flow data necessitate the creation of a discriminative feature
space. To address this, we propose ProtoDetect, a novel method
that learns distinguishable representations (named as prototypes)
of the influencing factors. It subsequently identifies anomalous Fig. 1. (a) Illustration of inflow and outflow of Region A. (b) Crowd flow
samples by comparing them with their normal counterparts, variation from Wednesday to Sunday (eight-week average).
estimated based on the prototypes. Experimental evaluations on
three real-world datasets demonstrate ProtoDetect’s consistent
superior performance in CFAD. The source code is available at and concerts often result in increased crowd flow. Conversely,
https://github.com/yupwang/ProtoDetect. extreme weather conditions typically lead to a decrease in
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, crowd management, urban crowd flow. Street closures, on the other hand, result in a
transportation systems, contrastive learning. decrease in the crowd flow of the closed street and an increase
 in neighboring streets [11]. Recognizing anomalies in crowd
 I. I NTRODUCTION flow is essential as it helps identify these issues and is crucial
 for enhancing public safety and improving urban planning.
C ROWD management plays a crucial role in enhancing urban transportation systems, traveler information
systems, and promoting sustainable urban development [1],
 Performing CFAD encounters two main difficulties. Firstly,
 due to the complex impact of anomalies on crowd flow,
 simply recognizing decreases or increases in the original crowd
[2], [3], [4]. With the advancement of urban transportation
 inflow and outflow struggles in real-world environments.
infrastructures, large volumes of traffic data is being collected
 To illustrate this challenge, we examine the inflow and
from sources such as vehicle trajectories, trip records, mobile
 outflow of an urban region encompassing Millennium Park
phone call logs, social media posts, and surveillance camera
 and Grant Park in Chicago during the period from August
signals [4], [5], [6]. This data provides valuable insights into
 16th, 2019, to September 1st, 2019, as depicted in Figure 2.
individual movement within urban environments and has expe-
 We estimate crowd flow dynamics by aggregating taxi and
dited the development of efficient crowd management in areas
 bike trip records arriving at or leaving the region every hour
such as crowd simulation [1], [7], [8] and crowd flow predic-
 (as detailed in Section V-A). Real-world anomalies happened
tion [4], [9], [10]. Nonetheless, further investigation is required in the two parks, including Grant Park Music Festival (16th,
to address the field of anomaly detection within crowd flow. 17th), Summer Dance Celebration (24th), and Chicago Jazz
 Crowd flow anomaly detection (CFAD) involves identifying Festival (29th, 30th), are indicated by light red shading. The
uncommon or abnormal patterns in the movement of indi- observation from the figure reveals the considerable challenge
viduals within urban environments. Crowd flow refers to the in discerning a distinct and intuitive difference in crowd flow
count of people entering (inflow) or exiting (outflow) specific patterns in the presence or absence of anomalies.
urban regions during specific times, as shown in Figure 1. Secondly, modeling the normal patterns that represent
Anomalies in crowd flow arise from exceptional events. For the expected crowd behavior poses a difficulty. In anomaly
example, occurrences such as sports competitions, festivals, detection, it is common to compute the deviation of observed
 Manuscript received 17 July 2023; revised 6 November 2023 and 8 January data from their expected normal pattern. However, estimating
2024; accepted 12 January 2024. Date of publication 31 January 2024; date the normal pattern is complex as it involves contributions
of current version 1 August 2024. This work was supported by the Zhejiang from various spatial and temporal factors. Temporal factors
“Jianbing” Research and Development Project under Grant 2022C01055.
The Associate Editor for this article was F. Xia. (Corresponding author:
 include considerations like the time of day and day of
Xiling Luo.) the week. For example, crowd flow tends to peak during
 The authors are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, morning and evening hours while significantly decreasing
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, and also with the Hangzhou during nighttime. Similarly, crowd flow in office buildings may
Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou 310000, China (e-mail:
wangyup@buaa.edu.cn; luoxiling@buaa.edu.cn; zhouzequan@buaa.edu.cn). be much more active on workdays and quieter on weekends.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3355143 Holidays introduce additional temporal factors, leading to
 1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
10232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 spatiotemporal dependencies of data points and do
 not prioritize enhancing feature discriminability. The
 homogeneity among features makes it difficult to
 effectively distinguish anomalies from normal data
 points.
 2) Coexistence of spatiotemporal factors: Capturing the
 expected crowd behavior necessitates modeling the
Fig. 2. Crowd flow of the region encompassing Millennium Park and Grant spatial and temporal factors and how they contribute
Park, Chicago, from August 16th to September 1st, 2019. Light red shading to normal patterns. However, existing approaches often
highlights real-world anomalies in the two parks, including the Grant Park
Music Festival on the 16th and 17th, the Summer Dance Celebration on the rely on general anomaly detection algorithms that are
24th, and the Chicago Jazz Festival on the 29th and 30th, emphasizing the not specifically designed to handle the simultaneous
challenge in distinguishing crowd flow patterns in the presence of anomalies. occurrences of influencing factors. This oversight leads
 to inaccurate estimations of normal patterns and can
 hinder the detection of anomalies.
 In this paper, we leverage contrastive representation learning
 to obtain a discriminative feature space, and to represent
 distinguishable influencing factors. Contrastive representation
 learning has garnered significant attention in recent years,
 primarily due to its outstanding performance across diverse
Fig. 3. Eight-week averaged total crowd flow (sum of inflow and outflow) domains, including computer vision [20], [21], [22], time
of regions with different functional properties. Various factors contribute
distinctively to the normal pattern. series analysis [23], [24], [25], and graph learning [26],
 [27]. This approach, executed in an unsupervised manner,
 aims to foster a representation that effectively distinguishes
increased crowd flow in tourist areas and decreased flow in
 one instance from others. Specifically, to overcome the
work-related regions. Spatial factors, such as the presence
 homogeneity challenge in the feature space, we introduce the
of public functional places, also contribute to diverse crowd
 Instance Contrast Module (IC) to obtain an informative
flow patterns. To illustrate this, we present the eight-week
 and discriminative feature space. This module captures spaaveraged total crowd flow (sum of inflow and outflow) of two
 tiotemporal dependencies by contrastively encoding local and
urban regions in Figure 3. These regions are categorized as
 global views of crowd flow data. Furthermore, by comparing
residential and commercial based on the number of functional
 the encoded samples with their augmented counterparts,
places within them. It is evident that the peak hours of the two
 it effectively disperses the samples in the feature space, thereby
regions exhibit noticeable differences. Additionally, the crowd
 enhancing their discriminability. Additionally, we propose the
flow in the residential area experiences a substantial decrease
 Prototype Contribution Contrast Module (PCC) to estimate
on weekends, whereas the flow in the commercial region is
 representations of the influencing factors in the feature
more evenly distributed throughout the week.
 space. These representations are referred to as prototypes.
 Existing approaches for CFAD, including general traffic
 Instead of directly modeling the prototypes themselves,
anomaly detection methods, typically adopt a two-step
 we focus on modeling their contribution to the observed
approach. Firstly, they transform the original traffic data
 crowd flows. To achieve this, we train a projection head
into a feature space. These features encompass direct traffic
 that estimates the contributions by contrasting contribution
dynamics such as vehicle speed, travel distance, and traffic
 vectors between the local and global views. This process
flow volume [12], [13], as well as handcrafted statistics derived
 aligns vectors from the same prototype and repels vectors
from the dynamics [14], [15], [16]. Advanced techniques like
 from different prototypes, leading to distinguishable prototype
tensor factorization [17] or neural networks [11], [18] can also distributions, as demonstrated in our experiment section Vbe employed for feature extraction. In the second step, general D.3. These contribution vectors are then used to iteratively
anomaly detection algorithms widely used in data science are update the randomly initialized prototypes through a crossapplied to the extracted features to identify anomalous data view prediction task. In the anomaly degree scoring stage,
points. However, despite the effectiveness of these approaches, we measure the degree of anomaly by computing the deviation
they fail to adequately address the two difficulties mentioned between incoming crowd flow features and their corresponding
previously. Here we summarize the aspects that have not been normal features, which are estimated based on the prototypes.
adequately considered: Our main contributions can be summarized as follows.
 1) Homogeneity of the feature space: As discussed in
 Figure 2, the original features (inflow and outflow) 1) We present the ProtoDetect model for CFAD. It introtend to exhibit similarities, making it challenging to duces the IC module to acquire an informative
 identify anomalies. Existing approaches address this and discriminative representation of crowd flow data,
 issue by utilizing handcrafted statistics derived from the enabling accurate differentiation between abnormal and
 original features [14], [15], [16], [19], or by employing normal crowd flow. It introduces the PCC module
 embedding features obtained through tensor factoriza- to facilitate the estimation of prototypes and their
 tion [17] or neural networks [11], [18]. However, contributions to crowd flow, providing a new means of
 these feature generating processes often overlook the modeling the normal pattern.
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10233

 2) We conduct extensive experiments on three sets of real- Neural networks can operate in two key modes: first,
 world crowd flow anomalies. The result demonstrates by generating spatiotemporal features that are subsequently
 our ProtoDetect method surpasses baseline approaches, fed into general anomaly detection algorithms, as exemplified
 showcasing a significant enhancement in precision. by ST_decomp [18], which employs fully connected layers to
 Additionally, we conduct case studies to examine the capture spatial and temporal patterns and feeds the deviation
 evolution of anomaly scores during the occurrence and from normal patterns into the LOF algorithm for anomaly
 conclusion of anomalies. This analysis offers insights detection. Second, neural networks can be tailored for endinto the behavior of the proposed method and its to-end anomaly detection, as seen in STGAN [11], which
 effectiveness in detecting anomalies in real-world traffic employs a generator to produce synthetic traffic data slices and
 environments. a discriminator to assess the degree of anomaly. By training
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. We first a generator to produce synthetic slices, it can be argued
present the related work regarding traffic anomaly detection that STGAN essentially models a single abnormal pattern.
and contrastive learning in Section II. We then clarify the However, although these deep learning-based methods are
definitions of key terms used in the paper in Section III. capable of modeling single normal or abnormal patterns, they
In Section IV we introduce details of our ProtoDetect method. often overlook the complexity of traffic data. Different times of
The experiment results are discussed in Section V. Finally, the day, regions with varying social properties, and weekdays
we conclude our work in Section VI. versus weekends can exhibit different normal patterns.
 The connections between our work and existing research,
 II. R ELATED W ORK as well as our improvements, can be outlined as follows.
 In this section, we introduce the existing works in traffic Like existing feature-based methods, we propose the IC
anomaly detection and contrastive learning. module to generate high-dimensional crowd flow features.
 However, we go beyond existing approaches by utilizing
 instance contrastive learning. This enables us to capture
A. Traffic Anomaly Detection spatiotemporal dependencies and obtain a discriminative
 General traffic anomaly detection approaches can be broadly feature space that improves the detection of anomalies. In our
categorized into three types: handcrafted feature-based, tensor- PCC module, we adopt the idea of estimating normal patterns,
based, and deep learning-based. which is commonly used in tensor-based methods. However,
 Handcrafted feature-based methods involve the creation we enhance this concept by estimating prototypes and
of features according to predefined rules from traffic data, utilizing the learned prototypes to predict normal components.
followed by the application of general anomaly detection Additionally, we introduce a scoring method that evaluates
algorithms to these features. Commonly employed anomaly the deviation between incoming crowd flow features and their
detection algorithms in this category include the elliptic corresponding normal features, which are estimated based on
envelope (EE) [28], isolation forest (IF) [29], local outlier the prototypes. This scoring method is particularly well-suited
factor (LOF) [30], and One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [31]. These for the urban traffic environment.
features may have physical interpretations, such as vehicle
speed, travel distances, and movement direction [12], [13], B. Contrastive Learning
[32]. They can also be manually defined statistics, encom- In our study, we employ contrastive learning as a
passing aspects like spatial similarity, temporal similarity, technique to acquire discriminative high-dimensional features
and traffic flow distribution [14], [15], [16]. While these and prototype contribution vectors. Contrastive learning,
features provide valuable insights into real-world implications a popular approach in deep learning, facilitates unsupervised
and are easily interpretable, they often lack high-dimensional representation learning by repelling negative pairs while
spatiotemporal characteristics and rely heavily on, and are attracting positive pairs [21], [22], [23], [40].
limited by, human knowledge. The representations learned through contrastive learning
 Tensor-based methods are employed to learn normal pat- have proven to be effective in various domains such
terns in traffic data by utilizing restricted tensor factorization. as computer vision (image classification, object detection)
In this approach, traffic data is represented as a region- [20], time series analysis (human activity recognition, fault
feature-time tensor [17], [33], [34], [35]. For instance, [17] diagnosis) [23], and graph learning (node classification, graph
utilize nonnegative CP decomposition to estimate normal classification) [26]. To facilitate effective contrastive learning,
patterns and their distribution across temporal and spatial data augmentation techniques are commonly employed to
dimensions. To identify anomalous regions that display create positive and negative pairs. These techniques involve
distributions distinct from their past behavior, the LOF generating different views of the original data, where samples
algorithm is subsequently employed. Similarly, [33] employ from the same data points are considered positive pairs, while
nonnegative tensor cofactorization, incorporating the social samples from different data points are treated as negative pairs.
activity check-in tensor. However, it is important to note that For image data, common augmentation techniques include
tensor-based methods model regions independently, neglecting cropping, resizing, rotating, or blurring the images [21], [22].
spatial correlations between them. In the case of time series data, transformations in the time
 Deep learning-based methods have demonstrated their and frequency domains are applied [23], [41], [42]. In graph
efficacy in modeling traffic data [36], [37], [38] and are learning, graph diffusion is often utilized to create a global
also used in traffic anomaly detection [11], [18], [39]. view for contrastive learning [26], [27], [43].
10234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE I connectivity between these regions, and A ∈ Rn×n represents
 D ESCRIPTION OF M ATHEMATICAL S YMBOLS the adjacency matrix of G.
 Definition 4 (Crowd Flow Dynamics): We model the
 crowd flow dynamics by aggregating trip records, which
 detail the initiation and termination times and locations of
 individual movements. For instance, a trip record can be
 represented as {(−73.99, 40.73), (−73.98, 40.73), 2014-01-09
 20:45, 2014-01-09 21:12}, signifying the starting location,
 ending location, starting time, and ending time of a specific
 trip.
 We formally define the collection of trip records as
 trip trip trip trip trip
  = {ω | ωi = (vsi , vei , tsi , tei )}. In this context, vs ∈
 trip
 V and ve ∈ V represent the starting and ending regions of the
 trip trip
 trip, respectively. Similarly, ts ∈ T and te ∈ T represent
 the time slots during which the trip commences and concludes.
 Crowd flow dynamics are represented as a tensor
 X ∈ Rl×n×2 . The inflow and outflow are defined as:
 n o
 trip trip
 X i, j,1 = ω | ωk ∈  ∧ tek = ti ∧ vek = v j (1)
 n o
 trip trip
 X i, j,2 = ω | ωk ∈  ∧ tsk = ti ∧ vsk = v j (2)
 where X i, j,1 and X i, j,2 denote the inflow and the outflow,
 respectively.
 Definition 5 (Problem: Crowd Flow Anomaly Detection):
 We represent expert-labeled anomaly  events using the  symbol
 ts1 , te1 , vr1 , ts2 , te2 , vr2 , . . . , tsk , tek , vrk . Each
  
 U =
 individual anomaly event is denoted by a tuple (ts , te , vr ),
 In our study, as we represent crowd flow data as a sequence where ts ∈ T represents the starting time slot of the event,
of attributed graphs, we propose a combination of time series te ∈ T indicates the ending time slot of the event, and vr ∈ V
augmentation and graph augmentation techniques to create specifies the region in which the event takes place.
two views of the original data. We construct instances that Given crowd flow dynamics denoted as X ∈ Rl×n×2 , our
incorporate spatiotemporal neighboring information from both objective is to derive the anomaly status matrix O ∈ Rl×n ,
views and encode them into discriminative feature vectors by wherein Oi, j ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether a data point at position
contrasting positive and negative instance pairs. Additionally, (i, j) is normal (0) or anomalous (1). The ideal anomaly status
we model the contribution of prototypes by contrasting matrix O∗ is labeled by anomaly events U, thereby serving as
contribution vectors from both views. a reference for assessing the accuracy of anomaly detection
 algorithms, i.e.,
  if ∃ (ts , te , vr ) ∈ U,
 
 III. P RELIMINARY
 1
 The definitions of key terms used in the paper are shown Oi,∗ j = such that ts ≤ i ≤ te and vr = j; (3)
 0 otherwise.
 
as follows. Table I lists the mathematical symbols used in the
paper.
 Definition 1 (Urban Region): Urban regions are denoted by IV. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
partitioning the bounding box of the urban boundary into a grid The proposed ProtoDetect model consists of two main
of cells, based on longitude and latitude. Each grid cell has modules: the IC module and the PCC module, as depicted in
uniform dimensions and corresponds to a distinct region. Note Figure 4. The IC module encodes spatiotemporal information
that grid cells falling outside the urban boundary are excluded. of crowd flow in a contrastive manner, enabling it to learn
Formally, we denote the urban region set with symbol V = discriminative features from the original data. The PCC
{v1 , v2 , . . . , vn }.
 module estimates prototypes within the feature space and
 Definition 2 (Time Slot): We denote a set of timestamps as leverages them to model the normal component of crowd flow.
{γ1 , γ2 , . . . , γl+1 }, with each consecutive pair of timestamps
 The anomaly degree of incoming data points is determined
satisfying the condition γi+1 − γi = 1hour. The time slot set by measuring their deviation from the estimated normal
is formally defined as T = {t | ti = (γi , γi+1 ) , i ≤ l}, where component, computed using the prototypes.
each time slot represents a 1-hour time interval.
 Definition 3 (Urban Region Network): Viewing urban
regions as nodes in a graph, we construct the urban region A. Instance Contrast Module
network represented by an undirected graph G = (V, E, A). The IC module utilizes unsupervised contrastive learning
This graph describes the interrelationships between urban to create a discriminative feature space. It achieves this by
regions, where E denotes the set of edges indicating the employing both temporal and spatial augmentation techniques
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10235

Fig. 4. The proposed ProtoDetect model comprises two modules: the Instance Contrast Module (IC) and the Prototype Contribution Contrast Module (PCC).
By utilizing spatiotemporal contrastive learning, the IC module extracts discriminative features from the original crowd flow data. Specifically, it generates
local and global views by applying temporal and spatial augmentation techniques, respectively. Instances in each view are encoded and projected into features,
denoted as h, using a pre-trained spatiotemporal encoder and a feature projection head. The instance contrasting loss Lic is defined to compare positive feature
pairs from the same data point and negative pairs from different data points, thereby enhancing the discriminability of the feature space. Subsequently, in the
feature space, the PCC module estimates prototypes P contributing to the normal crowd flow patterns. Instead of directly modeling the prototypes, it estimates
the contribution of prototypes to the observed crowd flow by contrasting contribution vectors z between the local and global views. This involves training a
contribution projection head with the prototype contribution contrasting loss L pc . Moreover, to achieve the estimation of the prototypes, the model employs
a cross-view prediction task that updates the randomly initialized prototypes. During the inference stage, the incoming data point x(i) is mapped into feature
h(i) and subsequently compared with its corresponding normal feature ĥ(i) estimated with prototypes. The deviation between h(i) and ĥ(i) is computed as
the anomaly degree score w(i) .

to generate local and global views of the crowd flow capabilities. Specifically, we use weak temporal augmentation
data. From these views, instances that capture spatial and to introduce minor variations that do not significantly alter
temporal neighboring information of the original data points the data’s characteristics, and strong temporal augmentation
are constructed. By maximizing the agreement between the to introduce more pronounced perturbations.
representations of these instances from the two views for In our method, the weak augmentation method relies on a
each data point, the IC module effectively encodes its jitter-and-scale strategy [23], which involves adding Gaussian
comprehensive local and global information. Meanwhile, noise to the time series and applying magnitude changes
it enhances the discriminability of the feature space by to each time step using a value drawn from a Gaussian
minimizing the similarity between the representations of distribution with a mean of 1 and a standard deviation of σ ,
different data points. a hyperparameter. On the other hand, the strong augmentation
 1) Instance Construction: In our approach, the comparison method uses window warping [42], which has demonstrated
between positive and negative pairs is vital to the acquisition effectiveness in time series representation [41]. This strategy
of the discriminative features. As it is hard to directly compose involves selecting a random window of the time series and
positive and negative data point pairs without prior knowledge, stretching it by a factor of β or contracting it by a factor of
we employ temporal and spatial augmentation techniques 1/β, where β is a parameter. We discuss details about the
to generate two diverse yet related data views. In the two temporal augmentation selection in Section V-D.4.
views, samples from the same data point are defined as Spatial Augmentation: We employ the graph diffusion as
positive, and samples from different data points are defined the spatial augmentation, which effectively captures the global
as negative. Subsequently, we construct the spatiotemporal structure information [26], [27], [47]. By performing graph
instances carrying both spatial and temporal neighboring diffusion, we obtain a global view of the original graph
information in the two augmented views. topology. Specifically, we leverage the heat kernel [27], [48]
 Temporal Augmentation: To enable the model to learn as the instantiation of generalized graph diffusion to power the
consistent representations from various augmented signals in a graph diffusion process. Given an adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n ,
contrastive manner, we rely on the approach of simultaneously the global view graph topology can be formulated as:
applying weak and strong augmentation and conducting cross-    
view tasks. This approach has proven effective in domains S = exp λ ⊙ AD−1 − λ (4)
such as computer vision [44], [45] and time series [23], [46]
representation learning. It is known to promote consistency where λ denotes diffusion time; ⊙ represents element-wise
in representations and enhance the model’s generalization multiplication; D ∈ Rn×n denotes the diagonal degree matrix
10236 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

of A; λ is subtracted element-wise from each element in the In particular, for each view, we construct an MLP with two
resulting matrix. linear layers and ReLU non-linearity, forming two projection
 Instance Sampling: In our method, the strong temporal heads. We use f local (·) and f global (·) to denote the steps
augmentation creates the local view, while the combination of for mapping instances into codes and projecting codes into
weak temporal augmentation and graph diffusion generates the features within the local and global views, respectively. Codes
global view. These choices are made based on the observed are mapped into feature h ∈ R H via hlocal = f local y local
performance of the augmentation techniques in the context and hglobal = f global y global , on which contrastive learning is
of CFAD (detailed in Section V-D.4). For each data point, conducted, where H is the length of feature vector.
we sample two sequences of attributed graphs from both local Given a batch of N data points x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(N ) , 2N
and global views, forming an instance pair. The instance pair is spatiotemporal instances are constructed from its two augsampled by performing fixed-length sliding window sampling mented views. These instances are thenencoded and projected
on the temporal dimension, and subgraph sampling on the into features, resulting in a feature set h(1) , h(2) , . . . , h(2N ) .
spatial dimension, and represented as a tuple containing a time Notably, the first N instances correspond to the local view,
series and an adjacency matrix. We employ the subgraph (·) while the subsequent N instances pertain to the global view.
function for spatial sampling. Specifically, given a region vi , For feature h(i) (i ≤ N ), its corresponding feature h(i+N )
this function identifies the eight nearest regions to vi in the from the other view is considered as its positive feature
graph G and returns nine indices (one for vi and eight for the sample, and other features negative. We then employ instanceneighboring regions): level contrastive loss to maximize the similarity between the
 X positive feature pairs while minimizing the similarity between
 subgraph (vi ) = {k | vk ∈ d vi , v j }
 
 arg min (5) the negative feature pairs. In this work, we adopt cosine
 V ′ ⊂V ,|V ′ |=9 v ∈V similarity, i.e.,
 j

where V ′ represents the set comprising the eight nearest sim (a, b) = a · b/ max (∥a∥2 · ∥b∥2 , ϵ) (9)
regions to vi and vi itself; d vi , v j denotes the Euclidean
 
 where ϵ is a small value to avoid division by zero. This choice
distance between the center point coordinates of region vi and is consistent with its common usage in various applications,
vj. particularly in the context of contrastive loss computation [21],
 Given a data point Xi, j,: , the corresponding spatiotemporal [22], [23], [40]. We adopt InfoNCE loss [40] to compute
instances y local from the local view and y global from the global instance contrasting loss Lic , i.e.,
view are constructed as:
 exp sim h(i) , h(i+N ) /τic
 XN  
 nodes = subgraph v j
 
 (6) Lic = − log P2N
 (i) ( j) /τ
 j=1 1[ j̸ =i+N ] exp sim h , h
  
 ic
 local
 = str ong Xi−T :i,nodes , Anodes,nodes
   i=1
 y (7)
 (10)
 global
 = weak Xi−T :i,nodes , Snodes,nodes
  
 y (8)
 where 1condition represents an indicator function, which takes
where weak (·) is the weak temporal augmentation function; on the value 1 when the condition is true and 0 otherwise.
str ong (·) is the strong temporal augmentation function; T is The parameter τic controls the temperature, influencing the
the sequence length. concentration level of the feature distribution [20].
 2) Instance Contrasting: In our approach, we use contrastive learning to derive discriminative representations of
spatiotemporal instances. Since each instance consists of B. Prototype Contribution Contrast Module
a time series and a subgraph adjacency matrix, applying To estimate prototypes coexisting simultaneously in the realcontrastive learning directly is challenging. To address this, world crowd flow, the PCC module employs a contribution
we first encode each instance into a vector, which we call projection head learning the contribution of each prototype
a code, that captures both spatial and temporal information. to the observed data point. This involves contrasting the
Then we perform contrastive learning on the codes to acquire contribution vectors between the local and global views.
discriminative representations. Furthermore, the PCC module employs a cross-view prediction
 Instance Encoding: As instances are temporal graph signals, task to iteratively update the randomly initialized prototypes,
we use pre-trained temporal graph encoders that can learn ultimately leading to an estimation of the prototypes.
spatial and temporal dependencies effectively [36], [37], [49]. Prototype Contribution Contrasting: Contrastive learning in
For each view, we train an autoencoder consisting of two computer vision involves projecting an instance into a feature
GCGRU layers [36] to compress and reconstruct temporal space with a dimensionality equal to the number of clusters,
graph signals. The encoder layers of the GCGRU-autoencoder allowing the feature vector’s i-th element to represent the
are then utilized to map the instances into codes. instance’s probability of belonging to the i-th cluster [50].
 Instance Contrasting: Contrastive learning is then applied However, the semantic information of crowd flow data used in
to learn the discriminative instance representations. As the our work varies relatively mildly, in contrast to images where
two independent GCGRU-encoders encodes instances into two distinct pictures (e.g., a dog and a plane) would exhibit
different feature spaces, we then apply the feature projection significant visual differences. As a result, we do not assign
heads to project the codes into an unified feature space, where instances to specific clusters, but rather use the i-th element to
instance-level contrastive learning is conducted. indicate the relative contribution of the i-th pattern prototype.
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10237

 To map the features obtained in Section IV-A.2 into C. Anomaly Degree Scoring
contribution vectors, we employ a contribution projection head In the scoring process, we use symbol Xtest ∈ Rltest ×n×2
constructed with two linear layers and ReLU non-linearity, to denote the test dataset. For a data point x = Xtesti, j,: ,
similar to the instance projection head. However, given that we employ Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) to construct spatiotemporal
the projected vector elements represent the contributions of instances y local and y global . Subsequently, we obtain
prototypes, we apply a softmax layer to the MLP. Features are  h via
 M local = g hlocal
 hlocal = f local y local and h global = f global y global , and z
mapped into contribution  vectors z ∈ R via z via zlocal = g hlocal and zglobal = g hglobal .
  
and z global =g h global , where M is the number of prototypes, We estimate the normal component of h by a linear
g (·) denotes the contribution projection head. combination of prototypes, with the weights indicated by z, i.e.
 We concatenate the contribution vectors into matrix form, zT P. The anomaly score is denoted as Wi, j , and we measure
resulting in Zlocal ∈ R N ×M and Zglobal ∈ R N ×M . Each the deviation of h from the estimated normal component using
row of Z represents the contribution vectors of features, the square distance, as defined in Eq. (15).
while each column of Z denotes the contributions of  2
a single prototype through all the features. We conduct w = hlocal + hglobal − (zlocal )T P − (zglobal )T P (15)
prototype contribution contrastive learning on the column
vectors. Formally, we denote the prototype contribution We represent the anomaly scores of Xtest with W ∈ Rltest ×n .
vectors of Z) with symbol c, forming Aligning with previous works [51], [52], [53], we incorpo-
 (1) (2)(column(M)vectors
 c , c , . . . , c , c(M+1) , . . . , c(2M) where c(i) = Zlocal
 :,i ∈ rate a 1-D Gaussian filter to mitigate false positive rates by
 (i+M) global smoothing anomaly scores, i.e.,
 N
R and c = Z:,i ∈ R (i ≤ M) become a positive
 N
  2
 1 k
pair. For instance, c(1) represents the contributions of the first G (k) = √ exp − (16)
prototype to all the features in the local view, and c(1+M) 2π 2
represents the contributions in the global view. The prototype T /2
 X
contribution contrasting loss L pc is computed as Eq. (11). W
 e i,: = G (k) ⊙ Wi−k,: (17)
 k=−T /2

 exp sim c(i) , c(i+M) /τ pc
 M  
 X where G (k) denotes the discrete Gaussian kernel; W e is the
 L pc = − log P2M
 (i) ( j) /τ
 j=1 1[ j̸=i+M] exp sim c , c
 smoothed anomaly scores. During computation, we extend
  
 i=1 pc
 Wi,: by replicating the nearest value on its boundaries.
 (11)
 Utilizing the smoothed anomaly scores, a hyperparameter
 threshold η is employed to classify points as anomalies (1)
where τ pc denotes the temperature parameter.
 or non-anomalies (0). This classification is determined by the
 Through prototype contribution contrastive learning,
 condition:
we align the prototype contributions for each prototype in (
 ei, j ≥ η
the two views while separating the contributions for different 1 W
 Oi, j = (18)
prototypes. This process enhances the distinguishable 0 W ei, j < η
distribution of prototype contribution vectors, thereby In our subsequent evaluation, the threshold η is set as the K -
indirectly improving the diversity of the learned prototypes. th highest anomaly score, where the value of K is tailored to
 Pattern Prototype Estimation: We define the prototypes as align with the evaluation metrics.
a learnable parameter P ∈ R M×H , and perform a cross-view
feature prediction task to learn it. Specifically, we predict the V. E XPERIMENTS
feature h with a weighted sum of prototypes, i.e. ĥ = zT P. In this section, we evaluate our ProtoDetect method using
To predict the feature of one view, the contribution vector z of real-world datasets and compare it with existing works.
the other view is adopted as weights, and the prediction loss
is defined as Eq. (13). A. Datasets and Evaluation Metric
 n Datasets: We conduct experiments on data from two cities:
 1X New York City (NYC) and Chicago. To model the crowd flow
 MSE (a, b) = (ai − bi )2 (12)
 n dynamics, we utilize taxi trip records and bike trip records,
 i=1
 N  namely NYC Yellow Taxi Trip Records,1 NYC Citi Bike Trip
 1 X  
 Records,2 Chicago Taxi Trip Records3 and Chicago Divvy
 L pr ed = MSE h(i) , (z(i+N ) )T P
 N
 i=1 Bike Trip Records.4 By aggregating the trip records every
   1 hour, we generate the inflow and outflow features. These
 (i+N ) (i) T
 + MSE h , (z ) P (13) crowd flow features are transformed into range [0, 1] by a
 min-max scaler. To test the performance of CFAD approaches
By training the neural network with L pr ed , the learnable in an online way, we split the dataset into a training set and
parameter P is iteratively updated. a testing set.
 The overall self-supervised loss of our ProtoDetect model 1 https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page
is defined as follows. 2 https://citibikenyc.com/system-data
 3 https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Taxi-Trips-2019/h4cq-z3dy
 L = Lic + L pc + L pr ed (14) 4 https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Divvy-Trips/fg6s-gzvg
10238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 Preprocessing: Given that the trip records do not encompass TABLE II
the entire city, as observed in previous works [14], [17], [54], E VENT S AMPLES F ROM C ROWD G ATHERING E VENT DATASETS
our approach centers on a bounding box area that encapsulates
both the starting and ending locations of recorded trips.
Subsequently, we partition this area into urban regions using a
grid system. Specifically, for NYC, we establish 161 regions,
each measuring 500 square meters, and for Chicago, we create
87 regions, each with a size of 1000 square meters, as shown
in Figure 5.
 Following previous works [11], [37], we construct the urban
region network by computing the adjacency matrix with a
Gaussian kernel. The weighted adjacency matrix A can be
formed as Eq. (19).
  2 !
  exp − d vi , v j
 
 , i ̸ = j and ei j = 1
 Ai j = σ2 (19)
 
 0, otherwise.
 

where d vi , v j denotes the Euclidean distance between center
 
point coordinates of region vi and v j ; σ is the standard
deviation of distances; ei j indicates the edge between node
vi and v j , ei j = 1 if region vi and v j are adjacent.
 Ground Truth: Acquiring a comprehensive set of ground
truths that records all crowd flow anomalies in a city
presents significant challenges. Therefore, in line with previous
research [11], [14], [18], [33], [55], [56], we rely on expertlabeled anomaly events to label anomalies for detection.
To evaluate the performance of CFAD algorithms in detecting
long-term and short-term anomalies, we investigate two sets
of events with different durations in NYC and one set of
events in Chicago, as depicted in Figure 5 and detailed in
Table II. Specifically, the NYC long-term anomalies (NYC-
L), previously collected by [55] and utilized as the anomaly
ground truth in subsequent studies [11], [14], [18], comprises
20 events with an average duration of 40.4 hours. These events
were originally reported by nycinsiderguide.com between
November 1 and November 30, 2014. In contrast, we adopt the
NYC Parks Events5 as NYC short-term anomalies (NYC-
S), which provides event information displayed on the Parks
website, nyc.gov/parks. The average duration of NYC shortterm events is 5.5 hours. Regarding Chicago, we collect
Twitter posts posted by ChicagoAlerts,6 an official source that
provides notifications on a range of events including sports
competitions, festivals, street closures, concerts, parades, and the ROC curve, we incrementally vary K from zero to 100%
extreme weather. All the posts from August 2019 are gathered of the total number of data points. The Area Under the Curve
to form a relatively objective anomaly set. We refer to this (AUC) is then computed to assess the performance of different
collection as the Chicago short-term anomalies (Chicago-S), algorithms. A higher AUC value indicates superior anomaly
encompassing 59 events with an average duration of 5.5 hours. detection performance. To assess the recall metric, we employ
In the anomaly detection stage, if an event persists in region K values at 10%, 20%, 30% and 40% of the total number of
v j during the time slot ti , the corresponding data point xi, j is data points.
labeled as anomalous.
 Evaluation Metric: Anomaly detection algorithms inher- B. Baselines
ently perform binary classification, distinguishing outliers In our evaluation, we contrast our proposed method
from inliers. Therefore, we adopt Receiver Operating Char- against several baseline approaches. These baselines comprise
acteristic (ROC) and recall as evaluation metrics, in alignment individual methods that exclusively detect anomalies on
with prior research [11], [18], [51], [56], [57]. To construct isolated data point x, as well as spatiotemporal methods that
 5 https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/NYC-Parks-Events- incorporate the spatial and temporal neighbors of x into the
Listing-Event-Listing/fudw-fgrp detection process. The details of these baselines are presented
 6 https://twitter.com/chicagoalerts below.
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10239

 graph sequences, while the discriminator distinguishes
 between them from real sequences. Any sequence that
 is discriminated as fake is considered anomalous.
 • DCdetector, as detailed in [25], stands as a stateof-the-art model for time series anomaly detection.
 This model employs a multi-scale dual attention contrastive representation learning process, resulting in a
 permutation-invariant representation with discriminatory
 capabilities. Given its original design for time series data,
 we employ one instance of DCdetector for each region
 in order to conduct spatiotemporal anomaly detection.

 C. Implementation Details
 In relation to temporal augmentations, we utilize the default
Fig. 5. The urban regions of NYC and Chicago, together with the locations parameters for jitter-and-scale and window warping functions
of three sets of anomaly events used in evaluating CFAD algorithms. as provided by Iwana and Uchida [41].7 Specifically, our weak
 temporal augmentation involves the introduction of Gaussian
 noise with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 0.03,
 Individual methods:
 along with changes in magnitude sourced from a Gaussian
 • Elliptic envelope (EE) [28] employs an elliptic envelope
 distribution with a mean of one and a standard deviation of
 to fit the data points and utilizes Mahalanobis distances
 0.1. For strong temporal augmentation, we set the value of β
 to quantify the degree of outlyingness.
 to 2. In the context of graph diffusion time (λ), we choose a
 • Isolation forest (IF) [29] randomly selects features and
 value of 5, consistent with the approach detailed in [26].
 split values to isolate observations in a tree-like structure.
 To construct instances, we employ a time series sampling
 Anomalies tend to have shorter path lengths, and a forest
 with T = 12, ensuring a temporal range that encompasses
 of such random trees that produce shorter paths for
 sufficient neighboring information. The pre-trained spatiotemspecific samples is indicative of anomalies.
 poral encoders are designed to map instances into tensors
 • Local outlier factor (LOF) [30] measures the deviation
 with dimensions of 9 × 16, where each 16-dimensional vector
 of the density of a given sample in comparison to
 represents an individual region. For feature projection heads,
 its neighbors and identifies outliers as samples with
 we adopt a Concat-Linear-ReLU-Linear form, featuring two
 substantially lower density than their neighbors.
 linear layers with 72 and 32 units, respectively, facilitating an
 • One-Class SVM (OCSVM) [31] is an unsupervised
 effective compression workflow. Similarly, we employ a stack
 learning algorithm that maps the input data into a highof Linear-ReLU-Linear-Softmax layers for the contribution
 dimensional space and learns a boundary around the
 projection head. The first linear layer consists of 32 units,
 normal data points. Any points outside this boundary are
 and the second linear layer accommodates M units.
 considered to be anomalies.
 Based on the findings of our hyperparameter sensitivity
 Spatiotemporal methods:
 analysis as presented in Section V-D.5, we determine the
 • Spatiotemporal Autoencoder (STAE) is a neural network
 hyperparameters M = 9, τic = 0.1 and τ pc = 0.1.
 that compresses signals through a bottleneck structure and subsequently reconstructs the original signal
 from the compressed features. We utilize STAE with D. Results and Discussion
 GCGRU [36] layers to represent reconstruction-based 1) Anomaly Detection Performance: The evaluation results
 anomaly detection methods and capture the spatial and are presented in Figure 6 and Figure 7. Our ProtoDetect
 temporal information of the data. The reconstruction error method outperforms the baseline methods with AUC metrics
 is utilized as the anomaly score. of 0.85, 0.83 and 0.84 on the three anomaly sets, respectively.
 • STGCN [37] is the first study to utilize purely Remarkably, the curve of our method almost completely
 convolutional structures to extract spatiotemporal features encompasses all other curves, indicating its superior perforconcurrently from graph-structured time series in a traffic mance across all sensitivity configurations. The STAE method
 prediction study. We employ STGCN as a representative demonstrates suboptimal performance. It is important to note
 example of prediction-based anomaly detection methods that during both the training and inference processes of STAE,
 and utilize the prediction error as the anomaly score. we utilize instances constructed from the original crowd
 • ST_decomp [18] is a neural network designed specifically flow data view, employing the same instance construction
 for detecting anomalies in urban traffic. It models normal strategy of ProtoDetect. The suboptimal performance of
 urban dynamics using both spatial and temporal features STAE underscores the advantage of learning spatiotemporal
 and subsequently adopts a LOF anomaly detector to dependencies from instances.
 detect outliers of abnormal dynamics. As depicted in Table III, when assessing performance using
 • STGAN [11] is a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) the recall metric, ProtoDetect consistently attains either the
 employed to detect anomalies in traffic speed data
 and crowd flow data. The generator produces fake 7 https://github.com/uchidalab/time_series_augmentation
10240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 Fig. 8. ROC curves on Chicago-S.
Fig. 6. ROC curves on NYC-L.

 2) Ablation Study: In this section, we aim to examine
 the individual contributions of our IC and PCC modules to
 the overall model. To assess the impact of the IC module,
 we conduct a direct training of the PCC module on the
 original data using the loss functions L pc and L pr ed . We then
 detect anomalies based on the deviation from prototypebased predictions. Similarly, to evaluate the contribution of
 the PCC module, we train the IC module solely with Lic .
 Afterward, we employ general anomaly detection algorithms
 on the extracted features h.
 The results of the ablation study are presented in Table IV.
 When the IC module is removed, the AUC value decreases by
 0.09, 0.10 and 0.09 on the three anomaly sets, respectively.
 Similarly, when the PCC module is removed, the AUC value
 decreases by at least 0.05, 0.05 and 0.04 on the three anomaly
 sets, respectively
 It is worth highlighting that the utilization of the IC
 module leads to improved performance compared to directly
 employing general anomaly detection algorithms on the
 original data. As shown in Table V, serving as a front module,
 IC enhances the AUC metrics of EE, IF, LOF, and OCSVM.
 This improvement underscores the discriminative nature of the
 feature space generated by IC, emphasizing its effectiveness in
 enhancing the detection capabilities of the subsequent anomaly
 detection algorithms.
 3) Effectiveness of Prototype Contribution Contrasting: In
 this subsection, we investigate the effectiveness of prototype
Fig. 7. ROC curves on NYC-S. contribution contrasting, i.e. L pc . Specifically, we assess how
 the inclusion of L pc impacts CFAD performance in terms of
highest or the second-highest results across different evaluation AUC and the diversity of the learned prototypes. To measure
settings. prototype diversity, we calculate the standard deviation of
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10241

 TABLE III
 R ECALL @K%

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDY ON M ODEL C OMPONENTS E FFECT OF THE P ROTOTYPE C ONTRIBUTION C ONTRASTING
 I MPROVING THE D IVERSITY OF E STIMATED P ROTOTYPES

 TABLE V
 TABLE VII
 E FFECT OF THE IC M ODULE I MPROVING THE P ERFORMANCE
 OF G ENERAL A NOMALY D ETECTION A LGORITHMS CFAD P ERFORMANCES W ITH D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS OF
 S PATIAL AND T EMPORAL AUGMENTATION T ECHNIQUES

pair-wise similarities between prototypes using the similarity
matrix Q, as expressed by:
 Qi, j = sim Pi , P j
 
 (20)
 v
 u
 M M
 u 1 X X 2
 Diversity = t Qi, j − Q̄ (21)
 u
 M (M − 1)
 i=1 j=1, j̸=i

where Q denotes the similarity matrix of P, and Q̄ denotes Fig. 9. AUC scores on three anomaly sets, trained with feature dimensions
the mean similarity in the similarity matrix. H in {8, 16, 32, 48, 64, 128}.
 Table VI demonstrates that prototype contribution contrasting enhances CFAD performance. Moreover, the prototypes
learned with L pc exhibit greater diversity, aligning with our
objective of using prototypes to represent various influencing
factors.
 4) Temporal Augmentation Selection: Since the appropriate
selection of temporal augmentations remains an ongoing
challenge, as highlighted in a previous study [58], and
the exploration of the combination of temporal and spatial Fig. 10. AUC scores on three anomaly sets, trained with prototype numbers
augmentations is relatively uncharted territory, we conduct M in {3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 30}.
experiments to investigate these issues in CFAD context.
 Our initial investigation centers on the combination of observed when the strong temporal augmentation is applied to
temporal and spatial augmentations within the CFAD frame- the local view, and the weak augmentation is applied to the
work. As illustrated in Table VII, the optimal performance is global view. It is important to note that the absence of temporal
10242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 11. AUC scores on three anomaly sets, with τic and τ pc in {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}.

 TABLE VIII influence normal crowd flows. Additionally, the performance
 CFAD P ERFORMANCES W ITH D IFFERENT S TRONG remains stable as M increases beyond the respective optimal
 T EMPORAL AUGMENTATION T ECHNIQUES
 values of 9 and 11 for the three sets.
 Figure 11 illustrates how the temperature parameters τic and
 τ pc impact the anomaly detection performance. For all the
 three anomaly sets, as τic increases from 0.1 to 0.9, the AUC
 value decreases significantly, indicating that the feature space
 becomes less discriminative. However, the varying τ pc does
 not noticeably affect performance.
 6) Case Study: Figure 12 displays individual anomaly score
 curves for single regions which change over time, particularly
 during events. When events occur, the background is colored
 red to signify an anomaly.
augmentations, as well as the absence of strong augmentations, We first investigate the anomaly score curves influenced
can result in a significant decline in the AUC metric. by single events. Figure 12a depicts the anomaly score curve
 Moreover, we explore the impact of various strong aug- during the Big Apple Film Festival that occurred at 54 Varick
mentation techniques that introduce significant perturbations. St between November 5th, 2014 at 6:00 pm and November 9th,
As detailed in Table VIII, our experiments indicate that 2014 at 11:00 pm. Figure 12b illustrates the anomaly score
window warping provides the best performance. Nevertheless, curve in Chicago, specifically during the three-day Retro on
alternative techniques such as time warping, window slicing, Roscoe event held at Roscoe Village. This event occurred from
and magnitude warping also yield acceptable AUC values. 5:00 pm to 10:00 pm on August 9th, 2019, and from 12:00
This suggests that while window warping is our preferred pm to 10:00 pm on both August 10th and August 11th, 2019.
choice, the selection of the strong temporal augmentation These figures demonstrate a significant increase in anomaly
algorithm is not rigidly fixed. It is worth noting that the scores during event occurrences. Notably, the anomaly score
permutation algorithm, which shuffles segments of the signal, begins to rise several hours before the events commence,
is not suitable for CFAD, as it severely disrupts the data’s in agreement with the principle of events attracting crowds
fundamental characteristics. in anticipation. As the events unfold, the anomaly scores
 5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: We perform sensi- gradually decline to their normal level, suggesting a decrease
tivity analysis to study the impacts of several hyperparameters in the event’s attraction.
namely, the feature dimensions H , the number of prototypes Additionally, we investigate how a recurring event influ-
M, and the two temperature parameters τic and τ pc . ences the anomaly score curve. Here we focus on the
 Figure 9 illustrates the impact of the feature dimension H on Exhibition George Boorujy Taxonomy held at the Arsenal
CFAD performance. Results indicate that shorter features offer Gallary situated at 830 Fifth Avenue, NYC, from 9:00 am
insufficient information, leading to decreased performance. to 5:00 pm on October 31st, November 3rd, November 4th,
Optimal performance is achieved when feature lengths are set November 5th, and November 6th in 2014. Represented in
at 32. Notably, the performance remains stable with increasing Figure 12c, the anomaly score curve pertains to the recurring
feature sizes exceeding 32. event. As with the other curves, the anomaly score follows
 Figure 10 illustrates the relationship between the number of a pattern of increasing during event. Notably, a significant
prototypes M and the performance of CFAD. The results show decrease in anomaly scores is observed on November 1st and
that optimal performance is achieved at M = 9 for NYC-L November 2nd, when the periodic event did not occur.
and NYC-S, while for Chicago-S, the optimal performance 7) Effectiveness of the Prototypes: To demonstrate the
is observed at M = 11. Notably, when M is lower, the effectiveness of the PCC module in our method, and to
performance deteriorates, underscoring the importance of an highlight the coexistence of influencing factors in real-world
adequate number of prototypes in capturing the factors that crowd flows, we present the timeline-averaged prototype
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10243

 Fig. 14. Number of trainable parameters of deep learning models.

 Fig. 15. Number of theoretical multiply-add operations for processing
 1000 samples.

Fig. 12. Single region anomaly scores evolved over time. Light red shaded
background represent anomaly events happening in the urban region. The
captions of each subfigure reveal the event names.
 Fig. 16. Empirical runtime performance of baseline models inferring 30-day
 period anomaly scores of NYC.

 top-right regions predominantly correspond to Prototype 4,
 while the bottom-left regions mostly belong to Prototype 3,
 creating a noticeable boundary along Central Park North
 street. Furthermore, we observe that regions farther from
 these borders generally display a single pattern (e.g., region
 0 and region 160), while those closer to the borders exhibit
 mixed patterns (e.g., region 28, 67, 68, 107), indicating the
 co-contribution effect from spatial factors. These findings
 suggest that multiple prototypes simultaneously contribute to
 the observed crowd flow data.
 8) Efficiency Study: In this subsection, we conduct a comparative analysis of our ProtoDetect model’s computational
 efficiency and runtime performance in relation to baseline
 models.
 Figure 14 provides a visual representation of the number
 of trainable parameters in various deep learning models.
Fig. 13. Average prototype contribution vector of each region. Regions are Figure 15 offers an illustration of the theoretical count of
colored with their major prototypes. Both single (region 0, 160) and mixed multiply-add operations necessary for processing a batch of
(region 28, 67, 68, 107) patterns are observed.
 1000 samples across different deep learning models. Notably,
 our ProtoDetect model is characterized by 197,361 trainable
contribution vector of each region of NYC in Figure 13. For parameters and demands 3.84 billion multiply-add operations
clarity in depicting prototype contributions, we set M = 5 and in this specific context. This positions ProtoDetect within a
use colors to represent the primary contributing prototype moderate range when compared to the baseline models.
of each region. We label the contribution vectors of several In Figure 16, we provide empirical data illustrating the
representative regions in the format v : (z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z 5 ), where runtime performance of the baseline models when inferring
z i denotes the contribution of the i-th prototype. anomaly scores over a 30-day period for NYC. The experiment
 The prototype contributions exhibit distinct geographical is executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Xeon
characteristics, aligning with the reasonable expectation that Gold 5218 CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. Notably,
neighboring regions will share similarities. Notably, the our proposed method achieves this task within a remarkable
10244 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

5.86 milliseconds, signifying its potential practical utility in [10] Z. Lin, J. Feng, Z. Lu, Y. Li, and D. Jin, “DeepSTN+: Contextreal-world applications. aware spatial–temporal neural network for crowd flow prediction in
 metropolis,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
 pp. 1020–1027.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [11] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
 adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 In this paper, we present ProtoDetect, a novel CFAD Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
framework that learns discriminative crowd flow features [12] Y. Wang, J. Xu, M. Xu, N. Zheng, J. Jiang, and K. Kong, “A
and models pattern prototypes in the feature space. These feature-based method for traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. 2nd ACM
 SIGSPATIAL Workshop Smart Cities Urban Anal., 2016, pp. 1–8.
prototypes are subsequently employed to estimate normal [13] M.-F. Chiang, E.-P. Lim, W.-C. Lee, and A. T. Kwee, “BTCI: A new
crowd flow, providing a baseline for identifying abnormal framework for identifying congestion cascades using bus trajectory
crowd behaviors. We introduce the IC module to encode data,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2017,
 pp. 1133–1142.
spatiotemporal information of crowd flow, improving feature
 [14] H. Zhang, Y. Zheng, and Y. Yu, “Detecting urban anomalies using
expressiveness and discriminability through contrasting local multiple spatio-temporal data sources,” Proc. ACM Interact., Mobile,
and global views. Then in the feature space, we propose Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2018.
the PCC module to model prototypes and utilize them to [15] Y. Dong, F. Pinelli, Y. Gkoufas, Z. Nabi, F. Calabrese, and
 N. V. Chawla, “Inferring unusual crowd events from mobile phone
estimate the normal component of crowd flow. Anomaly call detail records,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn. Knowl.
degree scores are computed by measuring the deviations Discovery Databases (ECML PKDD). Porto, Portugal: Springer, 2015,
between incoming crowd flow features and their corresponding pp. 474–492.
normal features. Experimental evaluations on real-world crowd [16] Y. Djenouri, A. Zimek, and M. Chiarandini, “Outlier detection in urban
 traffic flow distributions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
flow anomalies demonstrate the superior performance of Nov. 2018, pp. 935–940.
ProtoDetect compared to baseline methods, with improved [17] C. Lin, Q. Zhu, S. Guo, Z. Jin, Y.-R. Lin, and N. Cao, “Anomaly
precision in anomaly detection. Ablation studies further detection in spatiotemporal data via regularized non-negative tensor
validate the effectiveness of both the IC and PCC modules analysis,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 32, pp. 1056–1073,
 Mar. 2018.
in enhancing the overall performance of the framework. [18] M. Zhang, T. Li, H. Shi, Y. Li, and P. Hui, “A decomposition approach
While ProtoDetect exhibits superior performance compared for urban anomaly detection across spatiotemporal data,” in Proc. Int.
to baseline methods, it currently relies on the pre-training Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2019, pp. 6043–6049.
 [19] X. Li, Z. Li, J. Han, and J.-G. Lee, “Temporal outlier detection in vehicle
of spatiotemporal encoders, which may introduce practical traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Data Eng., Mar./Apr. 2009,
inconveniences in real-world applications. In our future pp. 1319–1322.
research endeavors, we aim to enhance ProtoDetect’s adapt- [20] Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, S. X. Yu, and D. Lin, “Unsupervised feature learning
ability for real-world scenarios. This may involve streamlining via non-parametric instance discrimination,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3733–3742.
the workflow, reducing model complexity, and exploring [21] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
incremental deployment strategies. for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 [22] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
 R EFERENCES in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2021,
 [1] X.-C. Liao, W.-N. Chen, X.-Q. Guo, J. Zhong, and X.-M. Hu, “Crowd pp. 15750–15758.
 management through optimal layout of fences: An ant colony approach [23] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 based on crowd simulation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 no. 9, pp. 9137–9149, Sep. 2023. Aug. 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
 [2] A. Boukerche and R. W. L. Coutinho, “Crowd management: The [24] G. Woo, C. Liu, D. Sahoo, A. Kumar, and S. Hoi, “CoST: Contrastive
 overlooked component of smart transportation systems,” IEEE Commun. learning of disentangled seasonal-trend representations for time series
 Mag., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 48–53, Apr. 2019. forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–18.
 [3] R. Zhao et al., “Dynamic crowd accident-risk assessment based on [25] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
 internal energy and information entropy for large-scale crowd flow attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 considering COVID-19 epidemic,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
 vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 17466–17478, Oct. 2022. Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
 [4] Y. Xie, J. Niu, Y. Zhang, and F. Ren, “Multisize patched spatial–temporal [26] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representransformer network for short- and long-term crowd flow prediction,” tation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML),
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 21548–21568, 2020, pp. 4116–4126.
 Nov. 2022. [27] N. Liu, X. Wang, D. Bo, C. Shi, and J. Pei, “Revisiting graph contrastive
 [5] M. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Li, P. Hui, and Y. Zheng, “Urban anomaly learning from the perspective of graph spectrum,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 analytics: Description, detection, and prediction,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 2972–2983.
 vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 809–826, Jun. 2022. [28] P. J. Rousseeuw and K. V. Driessen, “A fast algorithm for the
 [6] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal minimum covariance determinant estimator,” Technometrics, vol. 41,
 feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,” no. 3, pp. 212–223, Aug. 1999.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781, [29] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
 Oct. 2022. detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39,
 [7] R. Zhao, Q. Hu, Q. Liu, C. Li, D. Dong, and Y. Ma, “Panic propagation 2012.
 dynamics of high-density crowd based on information entropy and [30] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 aw-rascle model,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 10, density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 pp. 4425–4434, Oct. 2020. Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 [8] Q. Wang, H. Dong, B. Ning, L. Y. Wang, and G. Yin, “Two-time-scale [31] B. Schölkopf, R. C. Williamson, A. Smola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and J. Platt,
 hybrid traffic models for pedestrian crowds,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Syst., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 3449–3460, Nov. 2018. Process. Syst., vol. 12, 1999, pp. 582–588.
 [9] C. H. Liu et al., “Modeling citywide crowd flows using attentive [32] G. Raja et al., “AI-empowered trajectory anomaly detection and
 convolutional LSTM,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), classification in 6G-V2X,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24,
 Apr. 2021, pp. 217–228. no. 4, pp. 4599–4607, Apr. 2023.
WANG et al.: CONTRASTING ESTIMATION OF PATTERN PROTOTYPES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 10245

[33] L. Chen, J. Jakubowicz, D. Yang, D. Zhang, and G. Pan, “Fine- [53] L. Wong, D. Liu, L. Berti-Equille, S. Alnegheimish, and
 grained urban event detection and characterization based on tensor K. Veeramachaneni, “AER: Auto-encoder with regression for time
 cofactorization,” IEEE Trans. Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 47, no. 3, series anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big
 pp. 380–391, Jun. 2017. Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 1152–1161.
[34] J. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, F. Gao, and Z. Xiong, “Understanding [54] S. Wang, H. Miao, J. Li, and J. Cao, “Spatio-temporal knowledge
 urban dynamics via context-aware tensor factorization with neighboring transfer for urban crowd flow prediction via deep attentive adaptation
 regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 11, networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 5,
 pp. 2269–2283, Nov. 2020. pp. 4695–4705, May 2022.
[35] L. Sun and K. W. Axhausen, “Understanding urban mobility patterns [55] Y. Zheng, H. Zhang, and Y. Yu, “Detecting collective anomalies
 with a probabilistic tensor factorization framework,” Transp. Res. from multiple spatio-temporal datasets across different domains,” in
 B, Methodol., vol. 91, pp. 511–524, Sep. 2016. Proc. 23rd SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2015,
[36] Y. Seo, M. Defferrard, P. Vandergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Structured pp. 1–10.
 sequence modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks,” in [56] S. E. Sofuoglu and S. Aviyente, “GLOSS: Tensor-based anomaly
 Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. (ICONIP). Siem Reap, detection in spatiotemporal urban traffic data,” Signal Process., vol. 192,
 Cambodia: Springer, 2018, pp. 362–373. Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108370.
[37] B. Yu, H. Yin, and Z. Zhu, “Spatio-temporal graph convolutional [57] Z. Xu, X. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Contrastive attributed
 networks: A deep learning framework for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. network anomaly detection with data augmentation,” in Advances in
 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2018, pp. 3634–3640. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
[38] C. Chen, Z. Liu, S. Wan, J. Luan, and Q. Pei, “Traffic flow prediction 2022, pp. 444–457.
 based on deep learning in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. [58] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A
 Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 3776–3789, Jun. 2021. survey,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), Z.-H. Zhou,
[39] A. R. Javed, M. Usman, S. U. Rehman, M. U. Khan, and M. S. Haghighi, Ed. 2021, pp. 4653–4660, doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2021/631.
 “Anomaly detection in automated vehicles using multistage attentionbased convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4291–4300, Jul. 2021.
[40] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748. Yupeng Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic
[41] B. K. Iwana and S. Uchida, “An empirical survey of data augmentation and information engineering and the M.S. degree in
 for time series classification with neural networks,” PLoS ONE, vol. 16, transportation information engineering from Beihang
 no. 7, Jul. 2021, Art. no. e0254841. University in 2018 and 2021, respectively, where
[42] A. Le Guennec, S. Malinowski, and R. Tavenard, “Data augmentation he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the
 for time series classification using convolutional neural networks,” in School of Electronics and Information Engineering.
 Proc. ECML/PKDD Workshop Adv. Anal. Learn. Temporal Data, 2016, His research interests include urban computing and
 pp. 1–9. spatiotemporal data mining.
[43] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
[44] K. Sohn et al., “FixMatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
 consistency and confidence,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 vol. 33, 2020, pp. 596–608.
[45] Q. Xie, Z. Dai, E. Hovy, T. Luong, and Q. Le, “Unsupervised data Xiling Luo received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
 augmentation for consistency training,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. electronic and information engineering. He is cur-
 Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6256–6268. rently a Professor with Beihang University, Beijing,
[46] E. Eldele et al., “Self-supervised contrastive representation learning for China. His research interests include intelligent
 semi-supervised time-series classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. transportation systems, spatiotemporal data mining,
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15604–15618, Dec. 2023. and urban computing.
[47] J. Gasteiger, S. Weißenberger, and S. Günnemann, “Diffusion improves
 graph learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
 pp. 13366–13378.
[48] R. I. Kondor and J. Lafferty, “Diffusion kernels on graphs and other
 discrete structures,” in Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2002,
 pp. 315–322.
[49] H. Lin, R. Bai, W. Jia, X. Yang, and Y. You, “Preserving dynamic
 attention for long-term spatial–temporal prediction,” in Proc. 26th ACM
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2020, pp. 36–46. Zequan Zhou received the M.S. degree in elec-
[50] Y. Li, M. Yang, D. Peng, T. Li, J. Huang, and X. Peng, “Twin contrastive tronic and information engineering from Beihang
 learning for online clustering,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 9, University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is
 pp. 2205–2221, Sep. 2022. currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
 of Electronics and Information Engineering. His
[51] Z. Wang, Y. Zou, and Z. Zhang, “Cluster attention contrast for video
 research interests include cloud security and data
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2020,
 mining.
 pp. 2463–2471.
[52] S. Sheng, J. Jing, X. Jiao, Y. Wang, and Z. Dong, “MÆIDM: Multi-scale
 anomaly embedding inpainting and discrimination for surface anomaly
 detection,” Mach. Vis. Appl., vol. 34, no. 4, p. 66, 2023.