2648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 CoopGBFS: A Federated Learning and
 Game-Theoretic-Based Approach for Personalized
 Security, Recommendation in 5G Beyond IoT
 Environments for Consumer Electronics
 Muhammad Shafiq , Senior Member, IEEE, Rahul Yadav,
 Abdul Rehman Javed , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Syed Agha Hussnain Mohsan

 Abstract—In 5G IoT for consumer electronics security its growth is increasing every minute due to its efficient
recommendation systems, Machine Learning (ML) based performance results. Moreover, by introducing this technology,
Federated Learning (FL) methods plays an important for the life becomes very comfortable due to easy accessibility. In
detection of cyberattacks. For this objective, several different models for effective feature selection and recommendation the initial stage of IoT technology Consumer Electronics, the
systems are presented in the literature. However, presented mod- administrator can only install it in small offices and homes,
els prone to misclassify 5G Internet of Things (IoT) malicious then gradually, this technology extended and grew up very
traffic due to inappropriate feature recommendation system. To rapidly. Then to save time and control everything efficiently,
address the issue, In this paper, firstly, an Automatic Data set the technology is integrated into industries for more reliability.
Generator (ADG) method is proposed and then designed ADG
algorithm for the effective features set dataset. Then based on Now the result is that IoT in consumer electronics has become
proposed ADG algorithm we proposed a new recommendation a very important part of our life [1]. At the end of this year,
model CoopGBFS, based on cooperative game theory, federated the interconnected IoT network consumer electronics will
learning and correlations with algorithm accuracy to address the be expected 27.1 billion, which is expected that globally,
problem. Finally, based on proposed CoopGBFS method an algo- 3.5 IoT consumer electronics devices per person. However,
rithm named CoopGBFS is developed and designed to select and
recommend effective features set for 5G IoT network security. this is a profound change in IoT consumer electronics
For the proposed approach evaluation, Bot-IoT dataset and four technology. It is fascinating that this technology is expending
well-known ML algorithms are utilized. However, from the result very fast, but due to this development, cyber-attacks are
analysis, it is cleared that the presented method is efficient for also gaining popularity and becoming an emerging issue.
5G IoT malicious traffic detection features recommendation for Nevertheless, to overcome cyber-attacks problems and protect
Consumer Electronics.
 their personal information and unauthorized access, several
 Index Terms—CoopGBFS, recommendation system, 5G researchers in the research community endeavor hard and
IoT network, cyberattacks detection, federated learning, for present several different efficient models. However, for this
consumer electronics.
 purpose, the researchers try and present effective Machine
 Learning (ML) based cybersecurity systems models on
 I. I NTRODUCTION overcoming rising cyber-attacks issues in 5G IoT network
 ECENTLY, 5G IoT technology received much security [2], [3].
R importance, specially in Consumer Electronics, and In 2017, Denial of Service (DDoS) malicious attacks
 became the most spreading and growing attacks and got
 Manuscript received 30 April 2023; revised 20 July 2023; accepted much attention [4]. Similarly, in a report issued by Kaspersky
12 August 2023. Date of publication 15 August 2023; date of current version Lab, the cyber-attacks in IoT networks in 2017 is much
26 April 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science increased compared to cyber-attacks in 2013. However, most
Foundation of China under Grant 62250410365. (Corresponding author:
Muhammad Shafiq.) attacks were in 2017 are DDoS and Botnet attacks, which
 Muhammad Shafiq is with the Department of Cyberspace Institute of is very harmful compared to other cyber-attacks. However,
Advanced Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China to overcome these attacks, an effective intrusion detection
(e-mail: srsshafiq@gmail.com).
 Rahul Yadav is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, system is necessary to develop. For this reason, to address
Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150009, China (e-mail: rahul@ the above problem, Anderson 1980 design and presented the
hrbeu.edu.cn). first Intrusion Detection System (IDS) [5]. Similarly, in 1987,
 Abdul Rehman Javed is with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Lebanese American University, Byblos 1102 2801, Lebanon D. E. Denning introduces a new intrusion detection model
(e-mail: abdulrehmanjaved@ieee.org). capable of detecting harmful intrusion. However, their model
 Syed Agha Hussnain Mohsan is with the Optical Communications is based on a hypothesis and real-time intrusion detection, the
Laboratory, Ocean College, Zhejiang University, Zhoushan 316021, China
(e-mail: hassnainagha@zju.edu.cn). primary purpose of his proposed system is identifying mali-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3305508 cious traffic. Nonetheless, recently the most rising security
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SHAFIQ et al.: CoopGBFS: A FL AND GAME-THEORETIC-BASED APPROACH FOR PERSONALIZED SECURITY 2649

attacks are man-in-the-middle harmful threats with (DDoS) the evaluation of four well-established machine learning
attacks [6], [7] algorithms.
 Recently, in our previous work [3], [8], we studied and • In the end, we reached a conclusion and subsequently
addressed the problem of effective feature selection and presented a set of promising features that possess sufpresented numerous effective feature selection approaches. ficient information to effectively detect cyber-attacks in
Furthermore, we used well-known machine learning (ML) IoT consumer electronics network environments. These
algorithms to overcome feature selection and identify cyber- features were identified using a technique grounded in
attack traffic flows. However, in our studies, we showed that cooperative game theory. Based on the examination of
selection of more features could lead to computational com- the empirical findings, it is evident that the chosen set
plexity and affect the performance of the proposed approach of features possesses discriminative capability and conor accuracy results. For instance, the selection of more than tains sufficient information to effectively detect instances
ten feature sets can slow the presented model or slow the of cyber-attacks within IoT networks.
ML algorithms process. Hence, the selection of efficient fea- The paper is structured into the subsequent sections: The subtures for the identification of malicious attack traffic in 5G IoT sequent section provides an introduction to the works that
consumer electronics network environments using machine have been reviewed. Next, the present study is exemplified in
learning algorithms and the federated learning technique is Section III. Section IV delves into the discourse surrounding
a crucial and emerging issue [9]. the evaluation methods. Section IV of the document delves into
 To overcome the problem of effective feature selection and the examination and evaluation of the subject matter, encomrecommendation for identifying cyber-attacks in IoT networks, passing both discourse and analysis. Section V encompasses
in this paper, we proposed a new framework and algorithms the presentation of the conclusion and future work.
by using well-known machine learning algorithms and an
open-access dataset in order to achieve improved performance
outcomes. Nonetheless, the key contributions are discussed in
the paper are: II. R ELATED W ORKS
 • To tickle the issues associated with feature selection This section aims to examine and highlight the existing litand security recommendation system problems in 5G erature on the detection of cyber-attacks or malicious traffic
 IoT network for consumer electronics malicious traffic flow in the network environment of IoT consumer electronflow. In this manuscript, we introduce a novel framework ics. In our previous research conducted in [3], we presented
 model named CoopGBFS based on cooperative game the- several different effective models for effective feature selection
 ory to accurately deal with the above problem and achieve and effective network traffic detection, such as IM flow classipromising performance results. fication and malicious Bot-IoT attacks detection. Nonetheless,
 • Then based on the proposed method, correlations with it is proved in several studies that feature selection is an funalgorithm accuracy are applied to address the problem damental step of ML [10]. The primary objective of efficient
 accurately. Firstly, a novel feature ranking method corre- feature selection is to identify a set of features that possess
 lation is applied for the ranking of features, and then discriminative capabilities in detecting cyber-attacks, while
 based on correlation, an algorithm is applied in order simultaneously eliminating redundant features from a larger
 to achieve improved performance outcomes in 5G IoT pool for utilisation in machine learning algorithms. Although
 networks. redundant features are a sign of features that are insuffi-
 • Subsequently, the cooperative Shapley value is employed ciently informative for the detection of cyber-attacks in IoT
 by leveraging cooperative game theory. A considerable consumer electronics network environments, they are also a
 number of scholars within the academic research commu- sign of features that are failing to meet the needs of the IoT
 nity have employed game theory as a means to address industry. In order to address the challenge of efficient feature
 decision-making challenges, yielding highly favourable selection, numerous researchers have made significant efforts
 outcomes. Therefore, cooperative game theory was also and put forth effective models, such as: in 2018 Egea et al.
 employed to rank the features in the context of detecting in [11] studied and reviewed several proposed effective feacyber-attacks in the 5G IoT network, utilising machine ture selection techniques. The techniques that they reviewed
 learning algorithms. in their studies are based on correlation measurement. Based
 • Afterwards, leveraging the cooperative shapely value of on the reviews technique, they introduced a new technique
 game theory and correlation, researchers have devised called Fast Based Correlation Features (FCBF) to enhance the
 an algorithm called CoopGBFS. This algorithm aims to performance and select effective features in the industrial envieffectively determine the optimal feature set for identi- ronment. After that, the researchers made a modification to the
 fying IoT network traffic. The algorithm being proposed initially proposed technique, which resulted in the introduction
 is based on the wrapper technique, which is employed of the FCBFiP technique. Similarly, Meidan et al. (2018) [12]
 to prioritise the most effective feature. This technique conducted a study on the detection of cyber-attacks in the
 offers an adequate quantity of data for the detection of context of IoT networks. Their research focused on the identimalicious network traffic within the framework of the fication of malicious attacks in 5G IoT networks that originate
 Internet of Things (IoT). The methodology proposed in from IoT devices. In their study, they empirically evaluate their
 this study entails the utilisation of the Bot-IoT dataset and proposed adversarial cyber-attack detection method.
2650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Fig. 2. Real Time Detector in 5G Based IoT Network.

Fig. 1. Proposed Dataset Generator Algorithm (DGA).

 Similarly, several models in the research community
presented many effective ML models for the identification
and performance improvement and achieved effective results.
Thus, from the above reviews related to robust feature for Fig. 3. Proposed CoopGBFS Recommendation Model.
IoT traffic identification, It is evident that this topic can be
thoroughly investigated, wherein effective features can be cho- the influential features and eliminate the superfluous features
sen to sufficiently convey information for the detection of from the trace traffic dataset. Once the process of ranking and
detrimental environmental flows. selecting the optimal feature set has been completed, a widely
 The proposed algorithm that generate data set for the recognised algorithm is employed to determine the feature
proposed model is shown in Fig. 1 in detail. The 5G IoT that provides the most informative content for the identifica-
Network and detection method is shown in Fig. 2 in details. tion of malicious traffic. Then, based on the above-explained
While proposed framework is shown in Fig. 3 technique, the redundant features are removed, and effective
 features are selected. The primary purpose of applying the
 III. P ROPOSED C OOP GBFS M ETHOD algorithm is to remove unwanted features that are not appli-
 In this particular section, the presented framework cable or don’t have discriminative power to identify malicious
CoopGBFS explains and tries to demonstrate the step-by-step attacks in 5G IoT consumer electronics network environment.
process in detail to overcome the issue related to the selec- Nevertheless, the utilisation of cooperative Shapley values
tion of features for cyber-attacks 5G Internet of Things traffic has proven to be effective for the purpose of selection. In conidentification in 5G IoT consumer electronics [13] network clusion, the CoopGBFS algorithm is introduced as a means to
environments as shown in Fig. 3 The essential part of the fea- determine a proficient set of features for the classification of
ture selection process is to rank effective features that have network traffic in 5G IoT, utilising the cooperative Shapley
more information for the harmful identification and remove value. The algorithm under consideration relies on the filter
a redundant feature. In order to achieve this objective, we method to prioritise the efficient features that possess siginitially employed a novel correlation technique to prioritise nificant potential for identifying traffic in the context of 5G
SHAFIQ et al.: CoopGBFS: A FL AND GAME-THEORETIC-BASED APPROACH FOR PERSONALIZED SECURITY 2651

network. The methodology proposed in this study entails the In Eq. (3), Corr indicates the correlation coefficient of the final
utilisation of the Bot-IoT dataset and the evaluation of four value and the relationship between features of classes. At the
well-established machine learning algorithms. Nevertheless, same time, Kavg(corrfc) is the average of correlations of feathe examination of the empirical findings illustrates that the tures. Similarly, K indicates the number of features set and
suggested methodology proves to be efficacious in the detec- while Avg(corrff) refers to average relationships among class
tion of malevolent network activity within the realm of 5G features. As discussed in the previous section that applying the
Internet of Things (IoT). In order to facilitate comprehension correlation coefficient technique is essential for effective feaand provide a systematic approach, the subsequent section ture selection. However, here are some factors before using the
elucidates the comprehensive methodology of the proposed correlation coefficient technique for the effective feature selecframework. tion for malicious IoT network traffic flow identification using
 the machine learning method. If the correlation between fea-
A. Feature Selection tures is strong and the correlation coefficient between features
 This section introduced the applied metrics are discussed and classes is week, then it’s mean the correlation is week.
in detail. The detailed metrics are discussed in the following Likewise, if the correlation between the feature and classes is
subsection. strong, then it’s known as strong correlations.
 1) Correlations Based Metric: In this subsection, we 2) Accuracy (ACC) Wrapper Based Metric: As discussed
applied the Person Moment Correlation method to solve the in the previous subsection, the most critical part of the ideneffective feature selection problem or rank the most effective tification process is selecting effective IoT malicious traffic
features in the 5G IoT consumer electronics network envi- identification features. Unfortunately, it is challenging for a
ronment. To remove redundant features and rank effective network administrator to determine the outmost feature for
features correlation technique is the best choice. The technique Machine Learning (ML) classifiers. To overcome this problem,
is useful for the identification of the relationship between fea- we used the wrapper technique based on algorithm accuracy
tures and target features in a dataset. In 1889, R. E. Fancher (ACC). The accuracy (ACC) wrapper technique effectively
proposed this technique [14]. After sixteen years, researcher K ranks effective features when there is a high-dimensional
Pearson updated the technique with the name Person Product dataset. As we are interested in ranking, the feature gives
Moment Correlation. However, the main purpose of updat- enough information to identify cyber-attacks traffics in IoT
ing this technique is to identify the relationship among class networks. Thus we adopted the accuracy (ACC) wrapper techattributes or features. The updated technique is based on statis- nique for this study. The highest values of the ACC metric
tical analysis, which ranks attributes of a class. Here attributes indicate the feature is robust and could achieve effective
indicate the features of the class. For instance, let A and B performance results. On the other hand, if the ACC metfeatures, then to find out the correlation between A and B, the ric value is not high, then the classification performance
following formula can be used. results will not be effective. Thus, applying the ACC wrapper-
 Covariance(A, B) based metric is vital for ranking features in order to achieve
 CX,Y = (1) improved performance outcomes in IoT network malicious
 σx σy
 n   traffic identification using ML algorithms.
 i=1 (ai − a) bi − b 3) Cooperative Game Theory: Game theory is a branch
 C=    2 (2)
 n 2 n of mathematics and is widely applied in the economic field
 i=1 (a i − a) i=1 bi − b
 due to better performance results [15]. Due to game theory,
In equation (1), CA, B indicates the relationship among a competitive situation can be understood in which decisionattributes or simply the correlation coefficient, While covari- makers interact. Therefore, game theory has been applied in
ance is (A, B). Whereas ab indicates the standard deviation many areas such as economics, war, computer science, and
for features A and B. However, the above explanation is for business [16]. However, recently game theory has become
a simple correlation relationship, while Eq. (2). can be used scorching top in the field of computer science. In cooperative
for two set attributes correlation coefficient evaluation. For the game theory, the main and most necessary part is the coalitwo sets of attributes correlations coefficient, we used Eq. (2). tion. “Coalitions are the set of players as N = 1,2,3, . . . , n
For instance, if A and B are sets of features, then a1, b2, c3, and the coalition is a subset of players, N used for a binding
then the correlation among features is very strong. Likewise, agreement. Similarly, any subset of N, including N itself, can
if the value of the C coefficient is minus one (−1), the corre- form a coalition [17]. More in-depth, a coalition game is a
lation between features is weak, not strong. While if there is pair of (N, V), where N is a finite set of players, indexed by
zero value of C, then there is no relationship between features I:2. . . .n arrow R associate with each coalition K subset N a
of classes. Thus, it is clear from the explanation of the corre- real-valued payoff v(k) satisfying v(0) = 0”.
lation coefficient that this technique is useful for the feature Recently in game theory, Shapley’s value got much attenselection and ranking in the high dimensional dataset. Thus, tion, specifically in computer science. Shapley first introduced
the effectiveness of the feature of classes can be analyzed by the Shapley value. Then, due to its promising results for coaliusing Eq. (3) as follows: tions in game theory, the technique got much attention and
  
 kavg corrfc adopted. The cooperative Shapley value is very effective for
 Corr =    (3) the ranking problem. This paper adopted cooperative Shapley
 k + k(k − 1)avg corrff value in game theory to overcome effective features selection
2652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

cyber-attacks traffic in IoT consumer electronics network environment. In cooperative game theory [18], we need players and
coalitions as:
 N = {1, . . . , .n} (4)
and
 Colitions = S ⊆ N (5)
Then we need a characteristic functions. Actually the characteristics function game G by a pair (N,V), Where,
 V : 2N −→ IR (6)
Here Eq. (6) is the characteristics function which maps each
coalitions S⊆ N real number V(S). Then we can assume pair
distribution as: 1. Efficiency, 2. Null Players, 3. Symmetry
and 4. Additivity Then the cooperative shapely value will be
G = (N,V), the shapely value of a player i ∈ N is given by
 1  G
 φi (G) =  (i) (7)
 |N|!
 π ∈N
The main objective of cooperative Shapley value is to measure the distribution of the power. In simple words, it is
 Fig. 4. Coalition 1.
used to measure the voting game player’s distribution. We
can adopt cooperative Shapley value and rank and effective
weight features in our proposed technique through this base.
The cooperative Shapley value is very effective and efficient
to find out the feature importance when several features for
identification attack traffic. However, we also adopted this
technique in this paper for effective selection and recommendation by using Shapley value as discussed in the following
with a detailed explanation. The Cooperative Shapley value
can be denoted by (φi (v)),
  |k|!(n − |k| − 1)!
 φi (v) = i (k)x (8)
 k!
 k⊂N
 Similarly, in the Eq. (9) n is the number of players and sum
over all subset K of N, where there no player i.
 i (k) = v(k ∪ i) − v(k) (9)
Likewise, Eq. (6) represent ψ(ij)
 
    
 ψ(ij) = 1, I fj ; class|fi > I fj ; class 0 (10)
     
 1, I fj ; class|fi > I fj ; class
 ψ(ij) = (11)
 2, else Fig. 5. Proposed CoopGBFS Algorithm A.
 Similarly, to redefine the above equation definitions as
   |k| 1) CoopGBFS Algorithm: In this subsection, we explained
 1, I(k; class; fi ) ≥ 0 and fj ∈k ψ(ij) ≥ the proposed CoopGBFS algorithm-based cooperative game
 (k) = 2 (12)
 0, else theory. The objective of the proposed algorithm is to select
 effective features for the identification of malicious attacks in
 However, the Coalitions of each players for each features IoT networks using a machine learning algorithm, as shown in
are shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 and 6. For the better understanding the proposed algo-
 Then the final result of shapley value are shown in Fig. 7. rithm his two part “A” and “B” As discussed in the previous
 section, the proposed algorithm objective is to select the best
B. Proposed Algorithm features set from the given several features. For this objec-
 This section presents our proposed effective feature selec- tive, the proposed algorithm is divided into three phases, as
tion technique named CoopGBFS to identify harmful traffic. shown in Fig. 8. In the first phase, the features set is supplied,
SHAFIQ et al.: CoopGBFS: A FL AND GAME-THEORETIC-BASED APPROACH FOR PERSONALIZED SECURITY 2653

 not high enough, then the algorithm control transfer to remove
 otherwise forward to Swrapper step.
 Let  be the dataset, and let  be the set of input features.
 We begin by loading the dataset  and initializing :
  = load_dataset() (13)
  = input_featuress et() (14)
 We then enter a loop to iteratively select a subset of features:
 while_true_do (15)
 Within each iteration of the loop, we first calculate the
 number of features in the current set :
 ν = count_features() (16)
 We then calculate the weight accuracy of each feature in 
 with respect to the dataset :
 ω = calculate_weight_accuracy(, ) (17)
 Using the weights ω, we compute the Shapley value of each
Fig. 6. Proposed CoopGBFS Algorithm B.
 feature, taking into account the cooperative effect of features
 in :
 = calculate_coalition(ω) (18)
 φ = apply_cooperative_shapley_value( ) (19)
 We then apply a wrapper technique to select a subset of
 features ρ from the original set :
 ρ= wrapper_technique() ρ=wrapper_technique( ). We
Fig. 7. Cooperative Shapley Values. select the most effective features from ρ:
 φ=select_effective_features(ρ). If the selected features in
 meet some criterion, we display the results and terminate the algorithm: if check_selected_features( ) then
 display_results( ) return end if. If the selected features do not
 meet the criterion, we remove the unselected features from ρ
 to obtain a new set of input features ρ :
 ρ = remove_unselected_features( ) (20)
 If ρ is empty, we display the current selected features and
 terminate the algorithm: If ρ is empty then display_results( )
Fig. 8. Confusion Matrix.
 then return and end if statements. Finally, we update  with
 ρ and continue to the next iteration: =ρ end while =ρ
 statement.
and then it counted to calculate the number of features is
available. After calculation, the weight accuracy is calculated.
Here, accuracy is calculated after applying the correlation IV. E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY
coefficient technique, and the weight is indicated the accu- In this section, the detailed evaluation methodology is
racy of a feature. After calculating accuracy, the algorithm discussed, and the dataset used to evaluate our proposed techtransfer control to the second phase, in which the coalition nique is examined as follows subsection. Firstly, the dataset is
of counted accuracy feature is calculated. As discussed in the discussed, and then later performance evaluation metrics are
previous section, coalitions are essential in cooperative game discussed.
theory, especially in the cooperative Shapley value technique. 2) Data Set: This subsection includes the dataset that is
Then cooperative Shapley value is applied based on coalition conducted for this study. For this objective, a Bot-IoT dataset
values of features. Finally, in the third phase, the wrapper tech- is utilized for the proposed approach evaluation. In 2018,
nique is used based on the cooperative Shapley value to rank Koroniotis et al. [17] and Van der Elzen et al. [19] developed
the best feature for the identification of malicious attacks in the Bot-IoT dataset to identify Bot-IoT malicious traffic flow
IoT consumer electronics network environments. The proposed in IoT networks. However, the dataset that was produced comalgorithm will select effective features and remove the redun- prises IoT traffic, Bot-IoT traffic, regular traffic, and several
dant features. Similarly, if the values of selected features are attack traffic types that are frequently utilised in botnet assaults
2654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

in IoT networks. Furthermore, the realistic testbed, which effectiveness of the proposed model can be easily
includes a labelled feature set, is used for accurate trace devel- identified.
opment. They initially extracted a small collection of features (TP + TN)
for the machine learning technique’s successful performance Accuracy = (21)
 (TP + TN + FP + FN)
outcomes, but later expanded and included more features for
 • Precision: the precision metric can be defined as Class
the precise classification of Bot-IoT traffic flow. Attacks traf-
 X correctly classified sample traffic in all those classified
fic, categories, and subcategories, among other things, were
 in Class X. In a simple way, the true positive metrics
labelled. They divided the Internet of Things testbed into
 divide by true positive and false positive. The mathethree sections, including features extraction, network platform,
 matical equation that we used for this study is shown
and forensics analytics. They integrated five IoT devices for
 below.
the IoT data in more detail. For instance, an IoT device
 TP
that generates weather data, such as the current temperature, Precission = (22)
humidity, air pressure, etc., is utilised to provide weather (TP + FP)
information. In a similar vein, the second Internet of Things • Sensitivity: This metric can be defined as the correctly
(IoT) gadget they employed for their research is an IoT-based identified sample divide by the overall sample. This metrefrigerator that automatically generates data on the inte- ric is also known as the recall metric. The mathematical
rior temperature and regulates the temperature. Pseudorandom equation that we used in this study is given below.
general signal-based lights are the third special IoT gadget TP
that they used for their research. These lights work off of Sensitivity = (23)
 (TP + FN)
movement. Based on motion, the smart bulb turns on auto-
 • Specificity: This metric is a very simple metric that sevmatically when there is movement, and it stays off when
 eral researchers use for their performance analysis. This
there is no movement. The smart IoT door is the fourth one,
 metric indicates that a metric that can identify the negaand the smart thermostat is the fifth. This gadget is used to
 tive results is called specificity metric. The mathematical
automatically manage and regulate the indoor temperature of
 equation is given below.
the house.
 3) Performance Measurement: For the identification of TN
 Specificity = (24)
performance analysis of the proposed model, performance (FP + TN)
analysis is essential. For this objective, numerous researchers Therefore, we applied the above-discussed metrics for our
in the research community applied confusion metrics, partic- proposed model performance measurements. The detailed
ularly for machine learning (ML) model performance mea- results analysis of the proposed model is presented in the next
surement. Therefore, confusion metrics are the critical metrics section.
for the performance measurement and based on confusion
metrics. In this paper, we also adopted this technique to A. Results and Analysis
find out the performance analysis of our proposed method. This section covered the in-depth findings and analysis of
The graphical representation of confusion metrics is shown our suggested method, CoopGBFS, for selecting appropriate
in Fig. 8. However, the graph includes rows and columns. features to detect cyberattack traffic flows in IoT consumer
Rows represent the class samples, and column represents electronics network environments. to use machine learning
the classified samples of a class. The most important and (ML) techniques to solve the issue of effective feature selecwidely used confusion metrics that numerous researchers used tion and determine which feature has discriminative capacity
for their proposed technique performance evaluation are dis- to appropriately identify cyber-attacks traffic in IoT networks.
cussed below in detail. For our proposed model performance In order to identify cyberattack traffic in the IoT network, we
evaluation, we adopted the following confusion metrics as presented the efficient feature selection method CoopGBFS
follows: and efficiently picked five different features. Four well-known
 The above showing metrics in the figure are widely applied machine learning (ML) algorithms Support Vector Machine
for the ML model performance measurement. Based on the (SVM), Decision Tree (C4.5), Naive Bayes, and Random
above-explained metrics, several different metrics can be made Forest (RF) are used for the proposed technique, which makes
for better performance analysis. It is significant to note that use of the CoopGBFS assessment Bot-IoT dataset. With the
effective machine learning (ML) classifiers always minimize help of the useful features set suggested by our feature selecthe FP metrics value and FN metrics values for effective tion approach and the corresponding performance assessment
performance results. However, the metrics that we selected metrics of accuracy, precision, sensitivity, and specificity metfor this study are explained below: rics, the four applied ML algorithms show promising results
 • Accuracy (ACC): In cyber-attack identification or detec- for identifying cyber-attacks in IoT networks. However, the
 tion, the accuracy metric is the samples that are correctly outcomes of all used ML algorithms are promising. Similar to
 identified in overall classified samples. However, the this, using the chosen feature set, the decision tree (C4.5) algodetailed explanation of the accuracy can be defined rithm produces high accuracy results for detecting cyberattacks
 mathematically below. Therefore, we adopted this accu- in IoT networks.
 racy metric for our proposed model to measure the Likewise, Random Forest and Naïve Bayes accuracy results
 performance of the model. Furthermore, using this metric are also very effective using selected features. However, the
SHAFIQ et al.: CoopGBFS: A FL AND GAME-THEORETIC-BASED APPROACH FOR PERSONALIZED SECURITY 2655

 Fig. 10. Precision Results.
Fig. 9. Accuracy Results.

Random Forest ML algorithm is very effective compared to
the Naïve Bayes algorithms accuracy result. Similarly, all the
traffic flows are effectively identified using selected features.
However, OSFpnger and SSR traffic are a bit slow identified
compared to other flow traffic of IoT networks. But overall
identification accuracy is very promising using ML algorithms
and selected feature sets, as shown in Fig. 9. However, all the
attacks and normal traffic flows are accurately classified, but
only OSFpinger are a bit slow classified compared to other
traffic flows, as shown in Fig. 9.
 Similarly, in Fig. 10, the precision results of the applied
ML algorithms are shown. The figure shows that UDPDDoS
attacks and Normal traffics are effectively identified compared Fig. 11. Sensitivity Results.
to other traffic flows. But it is also clear that SSR is a bit
slow identified than UDPDDoS and Normal traffic flows with cyber-attacks in the IoT consumer electronics network envirespective precision metrics. However, the SVM algorithm ronment are effective in comparison. Similarly, the specificity
performance result using selected features set for precision is findings of the used ML algorithms are shown in Fig. 12 Once
not very promising compared to other applied ML algorithms. more, the figure demonstrates that each ML method achieves
But it is also seen that the SVM algorithms performance results distinct performance results that are effective. Even while the
are very promising for Normal and UDPDDoS attacks, respec- results of all applied ML algorithms are encouraging, the decitively 99% and 100%. However, the lowest precision result that sion tree C4.5 ML algorithm produces the most encouraging
the SVM gives is OSFpinger traffic flow. Naïve Bayes algo- outcomes when compared to other applied ML algorithms in
rithm performance results are also very effective. However, for terms of specificity metrics. In-depth classification of IoT tech-
Data theft and Keylogging Theft attacks, Its performance result nology traffic flows includes both attacks and regular traffic.
is not effective compared to other traffic flows. Though, the SSR attacks, however, are yielding somewhat subpar findings
overall precision results for the identification of cyber-attacks in comparison to other traffic flow classification outcomes.
are effective. But decision tree (C4.5) ML algorithm gives Finally, Fig. 12 refSpecificity Results shows that our suggested
a promising performance result compared to other machine approach successfully chooses robust features for detecting
learning algorithms, as shown in Fig. 10. cyber-attacks in IoT networks.
 Likewise, the SVM algorithms give very poor sensitivity
results for sensitivity results compared to other ML algorithms,
as shown in Fig. 11. But on another side, the SVM algorithm V. C ONCLUSION
gives very effective sensitivity results for UDPDDoS and SSR To address security recommendation problem for cyberattacks traffic flows. However, the overall sensitivity results of attacks detection in the 5G IoT consumer electronics network
SVM are not effective compared to other ML algorithms. In using ML algorithms with federated learning dateset. A new
IoT consumer electronics network contexts, the decision tree framework model named CoopGBFS based on cooperative
C4.5 and Random Forest machine learning algorithms pro- game theory and correlations with algorithm accuracy is
vide effective sensitivity results for identifying cyber-attacks. proposed. Firstly, an Automatic Data set Generator (ADG)
In contrast to other network flows, UDPDDoS, TCPDDoD, method is proposed and then based on proposed method
and SSR assaults traffic is properly segmented. On the other an algorithm named ADG is designed and developed for
hand, as shown in Fig. 11, sensitivity results for detecting the effective features set data set. Then based on proposed
2656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 [3] M. Shafiq, X. Yu, A. K. Bashir, H. N. Chaudhry, and D. Wang,
 “A machine learning approach for feature selection traffic classification using security analysis,” J. Supercomput., vol. 74, no. 10,
 pp. 4867–4892, 2018.
 [4] Kaspersky. “Amount of malware targeting smart devices more than
 doubled in 2017.” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.kaspersky.
 com/
 [5] J. P. Anderson. “Computer security threat monitoring and surveillance.” 1980. Accessed: Nov. 30, 2008. [Online]. Available:
 https://seclab.cs.ucdavis.edu/projects/history/papers/ande80.pdf
 [6] X. Du, M. Guizani, Y. Xiao, and H.-H. Chen, “Defending DoS attacks
 on broadcast authentication in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 Int. Conf. Commun., 2008, pp. 1653–1657.
 [7] L. Wu, X. Du, W. Wang, and B. Lin, “An out-of-band authentication
 scheme for Internet of Things using blockchain technology,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Netw. Commun. (ICNC), 2018, pp. 769–773.
 [8] M. Shafiq, X. Yu, A. A. Laghari, and D. Wang, “Effective feature selection for 5G IM applications traffic classification,” Mobile Inf. Syst.,
 vol. 2017, May 2017, Art. no. 6805056.
Fig. 12. Specificity Results. [9] H. Yuan, W. Morningstar, L. Ning, and K. Singhal, “What do we mean
 by generalization in federated learning?” 2021, arXiv:2110.14216.
ADG algorithm we proposed a new recommendation model [10] R. Yadav, I. Sreedevi, and D. Gupta, “Augmentation in performance
 and security of WSNs for IoT applications using feature selection and
CoopGBFS, based on cooperative game theory, federated classification techniques,” Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 65, pp. 461–473,
learning and correlations with algorithm accuracy to address Feb. 2023.
the problem. Finally, based on proposed CoopGBFS method [11] S. Egea, A. R. Mañez, B. Carro, A. Sánchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 “Intelligent IoT traffic classification using novel search strategy for fastan algorithm named CoopGBFS is developed and designed based-correlation feature selection in industrial environments,” IEEE
to select and recommend effective features set for 5G IoT Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1616–1624, Jun. 2018.
network security. Based on the analysis of the experimental [12] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
results, it is apparent that the proposed methodology is effec- no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018.
tive in detecting and recommending a set of features that are [13] R. Barbado, O. Araque, and C. A. Iglesias, “A framework for fake review
capable of effectively identifying cyber-attack traffic in 5G IoT detection in online consumer electronics retailers,” Inf. Process. Manag.,
 vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1234–1244, 2019.
networks. The proposed model demonstrates a higher level of [14] R. E. Fancher, “Galton on examinations: An unpublished step in
depth and effectiveness, as it incorporates carefully selected the invention of correlation,” ISIS, vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 446–455,
features. The chosen features demonstrate efficacy and pro- 1989.
 [15] J. Chen and Q. Zhu, “Background of game theory and network science,”
vide sufficient information for the detection of cyber-attacks. in A Game-And Decision-Theoretic Approach to Resilient Interdependent
Likewise, all of the machine learning algorithms employed Network Analysis and Design. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020,
in the study yielded encouraging outcomes in the realm of pp. 5–11.
 [16] V.-H. Bui, A. Hussain, and W. Su, “A dynamic internal trading price
cyber-attack detection. strategy for networked microgrids: A deep reinforcement learning-based
 game-theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 5,
 pp. 3408–3421, Sep. 2022.
 R EFERENCES [17] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
 the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things for
 [1] L. Teng et al., “FLPK-BiSeNet: Federated learning based on priori network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” 2018, arXiv:1811.00701.
 knowledge and bilateral segmentation network for image edge extrac- [18] C. Contreras, A. Triviño, and J. A. Aguado, “A game-theoretic approach
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1529–1542, for the effective distributed coordination of STATCOMs,” IEEE Access,
 Jun. 2023. vol. 11, pp. 27730–27738, 2023.
 [2] M. Bibi et al., “A novel unsupervised ensemble framework using [19] I. Van der Elzen and J. van Heugten, Techniques for Detecting
 concept-based linguistic methods and machine learning for twitter senti- Compromised IoT Devices, Univ. Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
 ment analysis,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 158, pp. 80–86, Jun. 2022. The Netherlands, 2017.