11802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 Correlation-Aware Spatial–Temporal Graph
 Learning for Multivariate Time-Series
 Anomaly Detection
 Yu Zheng , Huan Yee Koh , Ming Jin , Lianhua Chi , Khoa T. Phan , Shirui Pan , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, and Wei Xiang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Multivariate time-series anomaly detection is criti- or sensors, forming a complex multivariate time series. Imporcally important in many applications, including retail, transporta- tantly, an operator may have thousands to millions of CPSs,
tion, power grid, and water treatment plants. Existing approaches recording a manually unmanageable amount of multivariate
for this problem mostly employ either statistical models which time-series data. For example, each server of a cloud infrascannot capture the nonlinear relations well or conventional deep tructure provider generates multivariate time-series data and
learning (DL) models [e.g., convolutional neural network (CNN)
and long short-term memory (LSTM)] that do not explicitly many providers may have up to over millions of servers [1].
learn the pairwise correlations among variables. To overcome A similar scale in the CPS has also been observed in numerthese limitations, we propose a novel method, correlation- ous commercial systems and critical infrastructures including
aware spatial–temporal graph learning (termed CST-GL), for power systems, spacecraft [2], engines, transportation, cyber
time-series anomaly detection. CST-GL explicitly captures the networks [3], and water treatment plants [4]. Relying on
pairwise correlations via a multivariate time series correlation human labors to monitor these operations would thus be not
learning (MTCL) module based on which a spatial–temporal only impractical but also impossible.
graph neural network (STGNN) can be developed. Then,
by employing a graph convolution network (GCN) that exploits
 To enable effective monitoring and warning of large-scale
one- and multihop neighbor information, our STGNN component system operations, multivariate time-series anomaly detection
can encode rich spatial information from complex pairwise has become an important topic. Successful implementation of
dependencies between variables. With a temporal module that multivariate time-series anomaly detection model could bring
consists of dilated convolutional functions, the STGNN can fur- substantial economic and social benefits. For instance, in a
ther capture long-range dependence over time. A novel anomaly water treatment plant [5], hundreds of sensors are installed to
scoring component is further integrated into CST-GL to estimate monitor water level, flow rates, and water quality. A malicious
the degree of an anomaly in a purely unsupervised manner. attack may occur by simply turning on a single motorized
Experimental results demonstrate that CST-GL can detect and valve, causing a disastrous cascading effect on the entire water
diagnose anomalies effectively in general settings as well as enable
 distribution system. Automatically, monitoring and detecting
early detection across different time delays. Our code is available
at https://github.com/huankoh/CST-GL. these abnormal behaviors can thus provide a fast response,
 which helps rectify errors, reduce cost, and save lives.
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, graph neural networks Among the various implementation approaches for detecting
(GNNs), multivariate time series. anomaly events, unsupervised anomaly detection is one of
 which has attracted the most attention due to the difficulty of
 I. I NTRODUCTION obtaining ground-truth anomalies over time. Early approaches
 typically employed either statistical unsupervised models such
R APID developments in cyber–physical systems (CPSs)
 have resulted in an explosive growth of time-series data
collected across industries. In many applications, the CPS
 as autoregressive integrated moving average/vector autoregressive (ARIMA/VAR) [6] or distance-based approaches [7],
implemented generates time-series data from multiple devices [8]. Unfortunately, these methods cannot capture the nonlinear spatial and temporal relationship from the multivariate
 Manuscript received 13 February 2023; revised 17 July 2023 and 5 October time-series data well. More recently, with the flourish of
2023; accepted 15 October 2023. Date of publication 14 November 2023; deep learning (DL), significant advances have been made.
date of current version 4 September 2024. (Yu Zheng and Huan Yee Koh For instance, Hundman et al. [2] proposed a long short-term
contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Lianhua Chi.)
 Yu Zheng, Lianhua Chi, Khoa T. Phan, Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen, and memory (LSTM) network together with a nonparametric
Wei Xiang are with the Department of Computer Science and Information thresholding approach and Su et al. [3] proposed a repre-
Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: sentation learning-based stochastic recurrent neural network
yu.zheng@latrobe.edu.au; l.chi@latrobe.edu.au; k.phan@latrobe.edu.au; (RNN) approach to improving the current ability to detect
phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au; w.xiang@latrobe.edu.au).
 Huan Yee Koh and Ming Jin are with the Department of Data Science and
 multivariate time-series anomaly events. While the proposed
AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia (e-mail: DL frameworks can efficiently scale through high-dimensional
huan.koh@monash.edu; ming.jin@monash.edu). multivariate time-series data, they did not explicitly model
 Shirui Pan is with the School of Information and Communication the underlying pairwise interdependence among variable pairs,
Technology, Griffith University, Southport, QLD 4215, Australia (e-mail: weakening their capacity in detecting complex anomaly events.
s.pan@griffith.edu.au).
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at The difficulty of detecting anomaly events in multivariate
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667, provided by the authors. time-series data lies in the fact that the variable pairs are
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3325667 intricately related. Fig. 1 shows a real-world inspired example
 2162-237X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11803

 network (GAT) is used to propagate historical information
 among the variables to forecast the next observation. Anomaly
 events are subsequently detected based on the magnitude of
 deviation between forecast and real observations. Nevertheless,
 in this preliminary study, GDN only captures the spatial
 dependency in the direct neighbors of each variable, which
 may cause it to lose important information from high-order
 (multihop) neighbors. Furthermore, it did not explicitly model
 temporal relations within each univariate time series, which
 are crucial for characterizing multivariate time series data [12]
 and thus further compromises the effectiveness of GDN.
Fig. 1. Example of multivariate time-series data. Red span represents Based on the above observations, we summarize the chalanomaly events while gray span represents time event highlights that are
nonanomalous but form a reference to compare the behaviors of anomaly
 lenges for multivariate time series anomaly detection from the
events. The first three examples showcased are from the SMD [3], which GNN perspective as follows.
contains data from Internet servers, while the last three are drawn from the 1) Multivariate Time-Series Correlation Learning (MTCL)
WADI, a water treatment plant sensing dataset [5]. (Challenge 1): The underlying correlations among the
 time-series variable pairs are important for multivariate
of multivariate time-series data with six variables where A, B, time series anomaly detection task. How to explicitly
and C represent closely related variable groups. A1 variable capture the pairwise relations among variables to enable
is not closely related to other variables and the detection of spatial–temporal analysis is the first challenge.
anomaly events can simply be a significant deviation from 2) Spatial–Temporal Dependency Modeling (Challenge 2):
past behaviors. B1 and B2 are two interrelated variables Multivariate time-series analysis requires a deep underthat should go up and down together, a deviation from this standing of spatial–temporal dependence; how to simultarelationship is thus an anomaly event. On the other hand, C1 neously capture spatial and temporal dependency remains
always increases with a lag after C2 is switched on (upward a challenge for multivariate time series.
spike). The exception to the C1-C2 relationship (gray span of 3) Anomaly Scoring (Challenge 3): How to estimate the
Fig. 1) is when C3 is also switched on as C3 decreases C1, anomaly score in an unsupervised way is the ultimate
creating an offsetting effect on C2. The red span in the C challenge for multivariate time series anomaly detection.
variable groups indicates that an anomaly event has occurred To address these challenges, we propose a novel algorithm
because C1 does not increase despite C2 being switched on correlation-aware spatial–temporal graph learning (CST-GL)
and C3 being switched off. While variable pairs that form in this article. Our theme is to model multivariate time series
the multivariate time series are naturally interdependent, the as a graph and design an STGNN to perform forecasting.
degree of interdependence tells the full story of multivariate Based on the forecasting results, the anomaly score can be
time-series data. Further, as shown above, the complexity well estimated, and the anomalies can be detected accordincreases exponentially with the increase in the number of ingly. To be more specific, we propose an MTCL module
variables. It is thus crucial for an anomaly detection model that can automatically infer the underlying correlation among
to not only assume the interdependent relationship but to variables (for Challenge 1). Then, a well-designed STGNN is
explicitly learn and capture the pairwise correlations (i.e., presented to model both the spatial and temporal dependency
degree of spatial dependence) between the variables of a (for Challenge 2). The spatial dependence is modeled via a
multivariate time series. graph convolution network (GCN) based on the gated mix-hop
 To explicitly capture the pairwise correlations, a natural way feature propagation that exploits neighbors from both single
is to model multivariate time series as a graph. For example, and multiple hops to better encode spatial information. The
by treating each sensor as a node, a sensor graph can be con- temporal dependence is captured via a temporal convolustructed in which the node features are continuously changed tional network which incorporates a gating mechanism with
over time. With a representative graph, spatial–temporal graph convolution functions for long dependence modeling. Based
neural networks (STGNNs) can then be employed to tackle the on the forecast, we introduce a robust principal component
multivariate time series anomaly detection task by explicitly analysis (PCA)-based anomaly scoring module to compute
modeling the pairwise correlations via a graph neural network the anomaly scores, enabling effective anomaly detection and
(GNN) module and temporal information via a convolutional diagnosis (for Challenge 3). Experimental results on real
neural network (CNN) [9] or RNN [10] module. However, datasets demonstrate the superb performance of our method.
generic STGNN models necessitate a predefined graph to The main contributions of this article are as follows.
explicitly model pairwise correlations between variable pairs, 1) We propose an integrated algorithm for multivariate time
which is often absent in many multivariate time-series datasets. series data analysis. Our method seamlessly integrates
Consequently, while previous STGNN methods are equipped correlation learning into a spatial–temporal network for
to capture spatial dependencies, their capacity to learn and multivariate time series.
construct the relationship between the variables may not 2) We propose a novel algorithm for multivariate time series
always be optimized, especially in cases where a predefined anomaly detection. Our method can automatically detect
graph is not readily available in many multivariate time-series anomalies from complex time series via autothresholding
data. and enable early detections effectively.
 To address the limitations of generic STGNNs, graph devi- 3) We compare our method with 11 baselines for both
ation network (GDN) [11] employs a simple graph learning general multivariate time series anomaly detection which
layer to learn and construct the pairwise correlation rela- aims to evaluate the overall performance in a whole
tionship between the variable pairs. Then, a graph attention dataset, as well as early detection of anomalies that needs
11804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 to detect anomaly as early as possible. Our experimental knowledge of the underlying graph topology is not readily
 results demonstrated that our method outperforms all available.
 baselines in both settings.
 1) Generic Graph Neural Networks: GNNs have recently
 4) We conduct a case study to demonstrate that our method
 become de facto models to exploit graph data for graph
 not only enables effective anomaly detection but also
 provides interpretability in real-life applications. analytics [36], [37], [38], [39], [40], [41]. The core idea of
 The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section II GNNs is to employ a message passing scheme, which iterareviews the related work. Section III gives the definition of the tively updates the representation (embedding) of a target node
task. Section IV presents the proposed CST-GL. Section V by propagating the representations of neighboring nodes. For
illustrates our experiments and conclusion in Section VI. instance, GCN [36] updates its node embedding by assigning
 a predefined weight to each message (embedding) from a
 neighbor. GAT [37] automatically learns the weight of each
 II. R ELATED W ORK neighbor and performs a weighted aggregation to update the
 In this section, we introduce the past work on multivariate target node’s representation. Due to the capacity of modeling
time-series anomaly detection and GNNs. interrelationship of different entities in various domains, GNNs
 have been widely used in domains and applications including
A. Anomaly Detection in Multivariate Time Series traffic [35], [42], recommender systems [43], drug discovery
 [44], [45], and anomaly detection [46], [47].
 Detecting anomalies in time series is a challenging task
that has been perennially studied [13], [14], [15]. Histor- 2) Graph Structure Learning: Learning GNN models typiically, statistical models such as ARIMA/VAR [6], PCA cally requires a predefined graph structure so that the message
[16], and support vector machine (SVM) [17] have been passing can be performed along with the topological structure.
applied to detect anomalies in univariate and multivariate time However, in many applications related to time series, the
series. Traditional techniques involving wavelet analysis [18], graph structure may be not available and the GNN modnonparametric [19], pattern-based [20], [21], and distance- els are not directly applicable. To overcome this challenge,
based [7], [8] approaches have also been collaboratively graph structure learning [48], [49] recently has emerged to
implemented. More recently, substantial efforts have been automatically learn the graph structure from the data itself.
made to advance DL approaches for anomaly detection in For instance, StrUcture Bootstrapping contrastive LearnIng
multivariate time-series data across numerous domains [2], fraMEwork (SUBLIME) [49] presents a structure bootstrap-
[3], [22]. As argued by Wu et al. [23] and Garg et al. ping contrastive learning framework to infer the relationship
 among data. However, these approaches can only be applied
[24], this phenomenon has arisen because: 1) DL frameworks
 to static data. For dynamic data such as time series considered
are free from stationary assumptions and can scale through
 in this article, these methods cannot be directly applied.
high-dimensional temporal data and 2) unlike pattern-based
approaches that only detect anomaly events by identifying 3) Spatial–Temporal Graph Neural Networks: To extend
anomalous subsequences, DL frameworks can detect anoma- GNNs for handling dynamic graph-structured data, recent
lous event timestamp-by-timestamp within sequences and are research has delved into STGNNs [50]. These are especially
thus well suited for the deployment of real-time streaming effective in situations where the underlying graph structure
anomaly detection systems. remains static, but the features of the nodes undergo dynamic
 DL models for multivariate time-series anomaly detection changes over time. A prime example of STGNNs in action
are primarily designed using RNN that are combined either is traffic forecasting, where the physical infrastructure such
with CNNs [22], [25], variational autoencoder (VAE) [3], [26], as subway stations and tracks is constant, but the traffic
or generative adversarial networks [27]. The RNN is employed volume fluctuates continuously. Seo et al. [10] proposed a
to capture temporal dependencies [2], [28], [29], while the recurrent STGNN which adopts the Long-LSTMs [51] and
CNN, VAE, or GAN are incorporated to capture dependencies GCN [36] as key components to capture temporal and spatial
among the multivariate variables. Any time-series observations dependencies. Instead, Li et al. [9] proposed a CNN-based
which unexpectedly deviate from the learned temporal and method (1-D convolution) to capture the capture temporal
relational dependencies would then be treated as anomalies. dependencies and a GCN to capture spatial dependencies.
However, since CNN, VAE, and GAN do not explicitly learn Wu et al. [23] propose a joint graph structure learning and
the relationship between the multivariate variables and only forecasting framework for spatial–temporal modeling. The
encapsulate interactions among variables into a global hidden ability of STGNNs to handle dynamic graph-structured data
state, they cannot fully exploit the latent dependencies between has spurred interest in various domains, including traffic manthe variable pairs [30], [31]. For more research on DL for agement [52], infrastructure monitoring [53], cloud computing
time-series anomaly detection, we refer readers to the most [54], human activity analysis [55], and anomaly detection [56],
recent survey [32]. [57]. While the aforementioned STGNN methods concentrate
 on graph learning and spatial–temporal pattern modeling,
B. Graph Learning CST-GL stands out by integrating two pivotal components:
 first, it incorporates a graph learning module with STGNN to
 Graph learning [33] is a new learning paradigm that enables accurately capture spatial–temporal dependencies; and second,
machine learning for graph data. A key component of this it introduces a robust anomaly scoring module. This scoring
paradigm, GNNs, have been widely studied to handle an array module efficiently separates anomalous signals from the noise
of graph-structured data [34]. This includes a well-known in multivariate time series data forecast by CST-GL’s STGNN
subset of methods, namely STGNNs, which are typically module. By doing so, it maximizes the benefits of the relational
applied to modeling multivariate time series [35]. In this structures learned by CST-GL’s graph learning module, facilcontext, graph structure learning is often involved when prior itating effective anomaly detection and diagnosis.
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11805

Fig. 2. Overall framework of CST-GL. (a) Multivariate time-series correlation learning (MTCL) starts with a randomly initialized node embedding for each
multivariate variable, and learn the underlying graph adjacency matrix, A, adaptatively with the entire model in an end-to-end manner. The adjacency matrix,
A, will be used by the GCNs in the STGNN module. (b) Spatial–temporal graph neural network’s (STGNN) 1 × 1 convolution layer projects the sliding
window input into the latent space. Then, the temporal and GCNs are interlaced to capture rich spatial and temporal dependencies, representing one layer of
STGNN. Skip connections, Z 0 + Z 1 + · · · + Z L , are incorporated to obtain hidden features that encapsulated the spatial–temporal patterns. Finally, the forecast
head module projects the hidden features into a one-step forecast output, x̂ T . (c) Anomaly detection and diagnosis (ADD). 1) Real-time anomaly indicator:
Takes in the current one-step forecast result and all observation-forecast pairs computed prior to timestamp T , computes normalized forecast deviation and
outputs an anomaly indicator score in real-time using PCA-based scorer. 2) Root cause anomaly diagnosis: Takes in result from real-time anomaly indicator
and learned pairwise correlation, A, from MTCL to enhance CST-GL’s interpretability and identify the root causes of anomaly events.

 III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION together with the historical observations are then encoded by
 A multivariate time series with T successive obser- a sandwich-structured STGNN to make reliable forecasting.
vations of equal-spaced samples as represented X = Specifically, we interlace the designed graph and temporal
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xT }, xt ∈ R N is composed of N number of convolutions to capture rich spatial and temporal dependenunivariate time-series {xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtN }. In a real-time fashion, cies, respectively. The underlying considerations are twofold.
the multivariate time-series anomaly detection task requires First, the potential anomalies in a univariate time series can
learning of a scoring function, A(·), that outputs an anomaly be easily identified by referring to its historical observations.
score to current observation T so that we have A(xA ) > A(xM ) For example, a sudden high CPU wattage is likely to trigwhere xA is anomalous observation and xM is not. Ideally, the ger the system alert if compared with long-term historical
proposed framework should also output a binary label that readings. Second, however, for multivariate time-series data,
indicates whether a timestamp is anomalous or not, where the anomalies in a specific variable may not only associate
y T ∈ {0, 1} and y T = 1 if the observation xT is anomalous. with its historical observations but also the readings of other
In this article, we tackle unsupervised real-time anomaly variables. A concrete example is traffic networks, where the
detection. A model first learns normality from a nonanomalous change of road conditions in a street may cause a serious
training set. Then, as it receives a stream of observations traffic jam in another one. Thus, it is crucial to model the
containing both normal and anomalous data, it must detect underlying spatial and temporal dependencies in historical
anomalies in real time, basing decisions solely on past data observations to perform precise and stable anomaly detection
and cannot reverse its previous decisions. at each time step. To accomplish this goal, we propose
 an anomaly detection and diagnosis module on the top of
 MTCL and STGNN, where the anomaly score at each time
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY point is derived from the forecasting errors. In other words,
 In this section, we present the overall framework of we conjecture that time-series anomalies are typically reflected
CST-GL and its detailed designs to detect anomaly events as the mismatch between anomalous observations and the
in a multivariate time series. As shown in Fig. 2(a)–(c), our forecasting results given by the well-trained spatial–temporal
method mainly consists of three main constituents: 1) MTCL; model on nonanomalous data.
2) STGNN; and 3) anomaly detection and diagnosis module, Further, we argue that for root cause of anomaly events
respectively. to be identified, pairwise correlations of variables have to be
 Given a multivariate time series, we first propose to learned and captured by a proposed model. This is because
exploit the latent associations (i.e., edges) between each univariates that deviate significantly from past spatial and
univariate time series (i.e., nodes) explicitly via a pair- temporal behaviors may only be symptoms of the root cause
wise correlation learner, where the learned graph structure and the relationship of pairwise correlation can reveal the root
11806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

cause variables. As shown later in the experimental section, a spatial graph convolution layer to effectively pass mes-
CST-GL identifies root cause of an anomaly events using the sages between variables and their neighbors to exploit the
well-learned pairwise correlation graph that captures well the underlying spatial patterns, allowing better encoding historical
interdependence relationship between the variable pairs. observations to make more precise and stable predictions, thus
 In the rest of this section, we introduce the MTCL in benefiting the downstream anomaly detection tasks. Similar
Section IV-A. Then, in Sections IV-B1 and IV-B2, we illustrate to simple graph convolution (SGC) [60] and the discrete of
the detailed designs of the proposed STGNN in capturing the multivariate time series with dynamic graph neural ordinary
underlying spatial and temporal clues for accurate forecasting. differential equations (MTGODE) [12], given an adjacency
Finally, we discuss how the proposed anomaly detection and matrix A and the input (initial) states Hin , we may characterize
diagnosis module can compute the real-time anomaly score in the graph propagation process as a combination of the feature
Section IV-C1 and identify the root cause of an anomaly event propagation and linear transformation steps
in Section IV-C2.
 A Hk , k ∈ {0, . . . , K }
 ( k+1
 H =e
 (3)
A. Multivariate Time-Series Correlation Learning Hout = H K 2
 To explicitly enable the modeling of pairwise dependencies
among variables in a multivariate time series, we design a where K denotes the graph propagation depth, and we have
correlation learning layer and propose to learn the underlying H0 = Hin . Specifically, e A in the above equation denotes the
unknown graph adjacency matrix A adaptively, where nodes normalized adjacency
 P A = e
 matrix, i.e., e D−1 (A + I) and
and edges denote variables and their connectivity. Specifically, Dii = 1 +
 e
 j Ai j .
our detailed formulation is given as follows: However, (3) suffers from two critical limitations. First,
 although the above feature propagation design allows to recur-
 N1 = tanh(αN1 W1 )
 
 
 
 e sively propagate latent node states along with a given graph
  structure, it is inevitable to see that node latent states become
 N2 = tanh(αN2 W2 )
 e (1) indistinguishable, i.e., converge to a single point, or known as
 
  over-smoothing, with an increase in the propagation depth K
 A = ReLU tanh α e NT2 − e NT1
  
 N1 e N2 e
 [12]. Second, only applying the linear transformation on the
where N1 , N2 ∈ R N ×d are two randomly initialized node last node latent states H K may be prone to errors [23], [61].
embedding matrices, and W1 , W2 ∈ Rd×d are two set of train- For example, if there are no correlations between variables in a
able parameters. The hyperparameter α denotes the nonlinear multivariate time series, the feature propagation step will introactivation saturation rate. Compared with our approach, many duce noises to latent node states by blindly aggregating the
existing works construct such adjacency matrix by measur- neighboring information. Thus, merely considering the linear
ing the pairwise distance or similarity between variables in transformation of the last propagated states hinders accurately
a multivariate time series, such as Euclidean distance [58] modeling the latent spatial dynamics of a multivariate time
and Cosine similarity [59], resulting in high time and space series. To address these two limitations, we equipped the
complexity of O(N 2 ) [23]. Another significant drawback of vanilla feature propagation in (3) with a gating mechanism
existing methods based on distance or similarity metrics is and replaced the upcoming linear mapping with an attentive
that the learned pairwise dependencies are symmetric, which transformation that mixes the information from multiple hops.
is not desired in describing the relations between variables We have the proposed GCN defined as follows:
in real-world multivariate time series. For example, the traffic  k+1
 H = β Hin + (1 − β) e A Hk , k ∈ {0, . . . , K }
jam on a street may cause the jam on another street but may
 
 
 
not vice versa if there are alternative routes. XK (4)
 Thus, we expect the learned time-series dependencies to be  Hout =
 
  Hk 2k
 N1 and e
unidirectional. Let e N2 be two transformed node embed- k=0
ding matrices, the unidirectional property can then be achieved where β controls to retain how much original node information
by the subtraction term e NT2 − e
 N1 e N and two nonlinear
 N2 e to avoid the aforementioned over-smoothing issue. Regarding
activation functions, i.e., if Ai j is a positive number, then A ji the attentive transformation in (4), we can easily alleviate
will be zero. The output adjacency matrix A will have all its the problem mentioned in the above example by assigning
elements regularized between 0 and 1. To reduce the required a relevant large weight to the initial node states H0 and small
computational cost and ease the optimization, we further mask weights to Hk , where k ∈ {1, . . . , K }.
elements with zeros in the learned graph adjacency matrix only As mentioned in Section IV-A, the learned pairwise depenexcept for the top-k closest neighbors of each node to make dencies are unidirectional. Thus, we refactor the final output of
A sparse controlled by the hyperparameter k. Specifically, for the GCN as the summation of two transformations described
ith row in A, we have the following postprocessing: in (4), where the input latent node states are both Hin but with
 (
 topk = argmax(A[i, :], k) different adjacency matrices, i.e., A and AT , to incorporate
 (2) nodes’ inflow and outflow information, respectively.
 2) Temporal Convolution Network: Solving (4) only allows
  
 A i, −topk = 0
 to model the spatial dynamics at a certain point of time,
where argmax(·, k) returns the indices of top-k largest values where the rich temporal clues in multivariate time series are
in the input vector. neglected. To complete this missing information, we devise
 a simple yet effective temporal convolution network together
B. Spatial–Temporal Graph Neural Network with our GCN to capture the expressive spatial and temporal
 1) Graph Convolution Network: The spatial correlations patterns in historical observations.
between variables play a vital role in reflecting the intrinsic We first introduce the composition of the proposed tempodynamics of multivariate time-series. Toward this, we design ral convolution network, which consists of multiple residual
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11807

dilated temporal convolution layers to extract and aggregate nonanomalous data, it is expected that the anomalous obserhigh-level temporal features in a nonrecursive manner to avoid vations in the test set deviate significantly from the learned
the shortcomings of RNNs, such as time-consuming iteration patterns. Accordingly, to detect anomalous multivariate obserand gradient explosion [12], [23], [62]. Specifically, given a vations, we first compute the normalized forecasting deviation
sequence of historical observations X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT−1 }, for every univariate variable and take the sum of the reconwe have the temporal convolution layer defined as follows: structed univariate deviations to be the anomalous score for
 each multivariate observation.
 Zl+1 = T Zl , Q l+1 + TCN Zl , 8l , l ∈ {0, . . . , L} (5)
  
 Univariate variables within a multivariate time series often
where the outputs of network are Zout = Z L , the input states Z0 possess vastly different attributes and scales. Consequently,
are obtained by applying a linear mapping on X, TCN(·, 8l ) we independently normalize each univariate deviation to preis an temporal convolution function parameterized by 8l at clude any single variable from dominating the aggregate
the lth layer, and T (Zl , Q l+1 ) denotes a truncate function multivariate deviation value. For every univariate variable, xiT ,
that takes the last Q l+1 elements from Zl along its sequence we compute the absolute forecasting error, given by eiT =
 T
length axis. The underlying consideration is that the residual |xiT − x̂ i |, at the current timestamp T . This error is then
input Zl has to be truncated to the length of TCN(Zl , 8l ) normalized
before adding them together because the sequence length of T eiT − µiT
latent node states shrinks gradually as the underlying temporal ẽi =
information is aggregated after each temporal convolution σ iT
layers. Specifically, we have Q l+1 = Q l − r l × (k − 1) where µiT and σ iT are the median and interquartile range
and Q 1 = R − k + 1, where k, r , and R are kernel size, (IQR) value across error values, {eiT −Wa , eiT −Wa +1 , . . . , eiT } in
dilation factor, and receptive field [i.e., R = L(k − 1) + 1 and a sliding window where Wa represents the window length.
R = 1 + (k − 1)(r L − 1)/(r − 1) when r = 1 and Our normalization approach is an extension of [11] where
r > 1]. In terms of the design of temporal convolution function we acquire the median and IQR values through a sliding
TCN(·, 8l ), we follow [23] and adopt a gating mechanism to window rather than from the entire test set observations. This
guide the information flow during the aggregation: modification allows us to detect anomalies in real time as
 TCN Zl , 8l = f C Zl , 8lc ⊙ f G Zl , 8lg normalizing error at time T only relies on past observations
   
 (6)
 and does not require future information as in [11].
where f C (·) and f G (·) are filtering and gating convolutions, After the normalization of each univariate variable,
and ⊙ denotes the elementwise product. Specifically, we define we obtain a multivariate normalized error vector, e ET ∈ R1×N ,
these two convolutions in below for the current timestamp. Although prior research suggests
  
 directly taking the summation [63] or maximum [11] to
 
  f C Zl , 8lc = tanh W1×n ⋆1 Zl + b1×n
 
 8lc 8lc summarize the error vector into a single anomaly score at
   (7)
  f Zl , 8l  = sigmoid W1×n ⋆ Zl + b1×n . the current timestamp, we propose to leverage PCA as an
 G g 8 l 1 8l
 g g intermediate step before aggregating the normalized errors into
In the above equation, ⋆1 denotes the dilated convolution a final anomaly score.
operation, where the dilation 1 = r l . Specifically, to allow In particular, after training the STGNN module, we comthe model exploring multigranular temporal clues and inspired pute the normalized errors in the validation set, e Ev . We fit
by Wu et al. [23], f C (Zl , 8lc ) and f G (Zl , 8lg ) consists of a PCA on the validation normalized errors by finding the
multiple convolution filters (e.g., W1×n and b1×n ) with width validation mean vector Ev = mean(e Ev ), their covariance
 8lc 8lc
n ∈ {2, 3, 6, 7}. Since most of multivariate time-series data matrix, Cv = cov(e Ev ), and the orthogonal eigenvectors, U.
has some intrinsic periods [23], [62], such as 7, 14, 24, 28, U consists of N orthogonal eigenvectors associated with the
and 30, the combination of the aforementioned kernel widths N largest eigenvalues in the diagonal matrix, 3, decomposed
allows these common periods to be fully covered. from Cv = U3U−1 . With the fit PCA, we reconstruct the
 To simultaneously model spatial and temporal dynamics of normalized errors at current timestamp
a sequence of historical observations in a multivariate time
   
  P= e ET − Ev UT
series, we construct an STGNN by combining the proposed 
 
 
spatial and temporal convolution networks, where the temporal P, e
 e U = P[:, L], U[:, L] (9)
and spatial convolution layers are interlaced, as shown in 
 
 ETPCA = e UT + Ev .
 
Fig. 2. More precisely, a layer of the proposed STGNN is e Pe
defined as follows by combining (4) and (5):
 In the above equation, we first apply zero-centering to the
 Zl+1 = T Zl , Q l+1 + GCN TCN Zl , 8l , 2
   
 (8) normalized error at the current timestamp, eET , by subtracting
where GCN(·, 2) and TCN(·, 8l ) are defined in (4) and (6). the mean validation error, Ev . We then project these results
Finally, we take the output states Zout to make a single- using validation eigenvectors, U. Second, we keep only the
step-ahead forecasting via a multilayer perceptron, i.e., x̂T = first L principal components. Finally, we reconstruct the
MLP(Zout , Wmlp ), which forms a critical evidence to detect ETPCA , using the reduced L dimensions and
 normalized errors, e
anomalies in a multivariate time series. revert the zero-centering deduction by adding the validation
 mean error. We set L as the number of components necessary to achieve a symmetric mean absolute percentage error
C. Anomaly Detection and Diagnosis (sMAPE) of less than 10% on the validation set.
 1) Real-Time Anomaly Indicator: With an effective joint With the reconstructed normalized error, we compute the
learning of spatial and temporal dependencies from the final anomaly score at current timestamp by taking the L1
11808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

distance between the denoised and original normalized errors TABLE I
as the final anomaly score S TATISTICS OF THE DATASETS

 A(T ) = e ET .
 ETPCA − e 1
 (10)

 The incorporation of PCA addresses the fundamental problem posed by anomalies: the anomalous node variables have
the potential to introduce bias into the learned embeddings In some cases, the top ranked variables that most contribute
within a neural network module, inadvertently affecting the to the anomaly score may not be the root causes but are merely
forecast across all dimensions. This effect, corroborated by the symptoms [11], [24]. When the top ranked contributors are
previous research [64], often leads to an unwarranted increase identified not to be the root cause, we further search for the
in forecast errors in variable nodes that are otherwise unaf- variables that are most related to the top ranked contributors
fected. Even in the absence of anomaly events, certain variable by aggregating the anomaly contribution scores of one-hop
nodes may sporadically experience an upsurge in errors due distance neighbors
to random fluctuations [11]. Such fluctuations can set off a X
cascade of effects across all nodes, echoing the impact of Ri (T ) = Ai (T ) (11)
an actual anomalous event and potentially resulting in false j∈N (i)
positives. This unintended effect contributes to the degradation where Ai (T ) represents the absolute error for the univariate
of accuracy in anomaly detection and diagnosis. node i as per (10). N (i) represents the neighbors of the
 Previous methodologies have attempted to resolve this issue univariate node i, which is based on the learned relation
with the utilization of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) between variable pairs from the MTCL module.
imputation [1], [65]. This approach, however, is inefficient. As demonstrated in our experiments in Section V, this
In contrast, we propose the application of PCA to resolve two-pronged approach ensures the systematic identification
these issues. PCA can efficiently project the normalized errors and diagnosis of: 1) variables that exhibit abnormal behavior
at current timestamp, e ET , onto the principal components and 2) variables closely related to these abnormal variables,
of the validation errors, and subsequently reconstruct them as potential root causes of an anomaly event. The choice
as, eETPCA . This process effectively dampens common noise between directly ranking the variables based on the error
variations and pinpoints variables that contribute significantly contribution or based on the one-hop distance neighbors will
to anomaly events. This identification is made possible because largely depend on the nature of the anomalies.
the variables that cannot be accurately reconstructed are more
likely the true contributors to the anomaly events, thereby V. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY
offering a more accurate depiction of the anomaly event itself.
 Though PCA is capable of mitigating the inherent noise for In this section, we conduct experiments to explore
more accurate representation, it is still the ability of STGNN CST-GL’s capabilities by answering following questions.
to capture spatial–temporal patterns that holds the key to a 1) Overall Detection Performance: Does our framework
comprehensive solution. The joint implementation of STGNN outperform baseline methods in the unsupervised, realand PCA is instrumental in detecting and diagnosis anomalies, time anomaly detection task? How do the individual
as we demonstrate in Section V. modules within CST-GL each contribute specifically to
 Last but not least, an anomaly indicator that can well signify its ability to achieve anomaly detection and diagnosis?
the abnormality of a timestamp observation helps in informing 2) Early Detection Performance: Can CST-GL be adapted
system operators and determining an appropriate threshold by and generalized to commercial systems where early
human experts to classify and detect anomalies. Nevertheless, detection of anomaly events is often paramount?
for industrial operations that involve over thousands of multi- 3) Interpretability and Case Study: Would CST-GL benefit
variate time series with distinct attributes such as warehousing system operators in detecting and diagnosing multivariate time-series anomaly events in an interpretable
robots [66], this approach does not scale well. To automate the
 manner?
threshold selection process, we classify current observation in
the test set as anomalous if A(T ) in test set observation exceed
the maximum A(t) of all observations in the validation set. A. Experimental Settings
This nonparametric approach relies on CST-GL’s ability in Here, we detail our experimental setup, covering datasets,
sufficiently capturing the spatial and temporal dependencies baseline methods, and parameter configurations.
of a multivariate time-series data, so that any observations 1) Datasets: We evaluated our method on three widely used
that exceeds the maximum anomaly score during normal time benchmark datasets: secure water treatment (SWaT), water
period (i.e., validation data) are in fact anomalies while those dIstribution (WADI), and server machine dataset (SMD). The
that do not exceed the maximum value are not anomalies. statistics are presented in Table I.
 2) Root Cause Anomaly Diagnosis: Since the final anomaly 1) SWaT [4] is a scaled-down version of a real-world
score is calculated as the linear combination of reconstruc- industrial water treatment plant initiated by Singapore’s
tion errors, we can identify the root cause of anomalous Public Utility Board. The dataset comprises seven days
events by ranking the univariate variables that contribute most of normal operations (train data) and four days of attack
significantly to the anomaly score. In practical scenarios, scenarios (test data). The anomaly labels represent the
we determine the percentage contribution of each univariate attacks that are conducted at different intervals in the
variable to the final anomaly score. This approach would test set.
provide a more detailed perspective, allowing operators to 2) WADI [5] is an extension of the SWaT dataset with a
more effectively identify the root cause of anomalous events. larger number of water pipelines, storage, and treatment
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11809

 systems, representing a more complete and realistic the number of principal components, we set it automatically
 water treatment dataset [11]. The train set of WADI based on the number required to achieve less than 10% sMAPE
 is two weeks of normal operation, while the test set on the validation set. Computing infrastructures and empirical
 is a two days attack scenario. Following the original computational complexity for all methods are detailed in the
 author’s implementation [11], we removed the first Appendix, as shown in the Supplementary Material.
 21 600 samples and down-sampled SWaT and WADI
 to one measurement every 10 s by taking the median B. Overall Detection Performance
 values.
 3) SMD [3] is a real-world server machine dataset collected As many baseline methods do not incorporate a threshold
 by a large Internet company. SMD contains time-series selection mechanism [1], [26], [67], [68], we compare model
 data of servers, each with 38 multivariate variables. performances using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
 It is divided into train and test sets of equal size. The and precision-recall curve (PRC) area under the curve (AUC)
 original SMD dataset did not have any preprocessing scores by treating every timestamp as an independent observaapplied to remove servers experiencing concept drift. tion to be classified as an anomaly or not. Under this pointwise
 This was subsequently addressed by Li et al. [1] to approach, a model is required to predict the occurrence of
 remove servers suffering from concept drift. Following anomaly events across the entire time series, including when
 the subsequent work, the reported results in this section they have started and ended. The closer the ROC and PRC
 takes the average scores computed for the 12 servers that score is to 1, the better a model is at scoring and differentiating
 do not suffer from concept drift. anomalous and nonanomalous time points.
 1) Baseline Comparison: The PRC and AUC results are
 2) Baselines: We compare our CST-GL with five stansummarized in Table II and we observe the following.
dard multidimensional anomaly detection methods that do 1) Proposed Framework: CST-GL showed superior perfornot take temporal dependencies into consideration and six mances against all the other baselines with an average
recently proposed frameworks designed specifically for mul- outperformance of 7.16 and 8.30 percentage points
tivariate time-series anomaly detection. Baseline descriptions against the next best baseline for the ROC and PRC
and implementation details are provided in the Appendix, as scores, respectively. It also achieved high performance
shown in the Supplementary Material. with relatively low variability and, in the case of WADI’s
 The five standard multidimensional anomaly detec- PRC values, the performance gain is greater than 45%
tion methods are Raw Signal [24], PCA, AutoEncoder, when compared to the next best result. The experimen-
Kmeans, and deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model tal result in Table II demonstrates CST-GL’s superior
(DAGMM) [67]. Raw Signal is a simple baseline model that performance in providing a representative anomaly indireconstructs any signal to zero, resulting in an error equivalent cator to inform and alert system operators. It also aids
to the normalized signals themselves. Using the normalized experts in deciding on an appropriate threshold for
signals, a Gaussian scoring function is employed to compute human intervention as the anomaly scores for anomalous
the negative log-likelihood of observing these signal values at and nonanomalous timepoints are well separated.
each timestamp. This model provides insights into the nature 2) Temporal Dependency: On average, baseline methods
and difficulty of the benchmark dataset. that consider temporal information achieve higher ROC
 The six state-of-the-art frameworks for multivariate and PRC results, validating that temporal information is
time-series anomaly detection are LSTM-VAE [26], Omni- paramount for detecting anomalies in multivariate time
Anomaly [3], UnSupervised Anomaly Detection on multi- series. The importance of effective learning of temporal
variate time series (USAD) [68], multivariate time-series cues is also evident by the performance of GDN, which
anomaly detection via GAT (MTAD-GAT) [63], GDN [11], did not address the temporal dependencies between
and InterFusion [1]. Notably, InterFusion, an extension of time-series observations directly. Despite explicitly
OmniAnomaly, is the state-of-the-art RNN framework, while learning spatial correlation between multivariate variable
MTAD-GAT and GDN are the state-of-the-art GNN baselines pairs, the GDN model is less effective when adapted to
for the multivariate time-series anomaly detection task. the unsupervised, real-time anomaly detection task.
 3) Parameter Settings: We train our model for 20 epochs 3) Spatial Pairwise Correlation: As LSTM-VAE,
with a batch size of 64, Adam optimizer is applied to optimize OmniAnomaly and USAD do not directly capture the
CST-GL with learning rate of 3 × 10−4 and (β1 , β2 ) = underlying pairwise interdependence among the multi-
(0.9, 0.999). Following previous works [1], [3], validation variate time-series variables, they performed poorer than
set ratios for SWaT, WADI, and SMD are 0.1, 0.1 and 0.3, InterFusion and CST-GL. Similar to our framework,
respectively. We set sliding window length, w, to be 5, 5, and InterFusion directly addresses the spatial–temporal
100 for SWaT, WADI, and SMD as suggested by the original dependencies by learning dual-view latent embeddings.
papers [3], [11]. We define the hyperparameter search space Nonetheless, as InterFusion’s latent embedding only
as shown in the Appendix, as shown in the Supplementary encapsulates spatial correlation within a global hidden
Material, and select the hyperparameters that achieve lowest state, they do not explicitly model the relationships
average root-mean-square error (RMSE) in the validation set. between variable pairs. We conjuncture that successful
After hyperparameter search, the MTCL module has neighbor capturing of spatial correlation dependencies requires
size, k, set to be 15, 30, and 10 for SWaT, WADI, and an explicit graphical modeling of relationships between
SMD, respectively. Across all datasets, the correlation learning the multivariate variables as it evidently improves the
module has a node dimension of 256, the retain ratio of effectiveness of a time-series anomaly detection model.
0.1, and saturation rate of 20. The GCN and the temporal 2) Ablation Study: We assessed the contributions of various
convolution network modules both have 16 output dimensions. CST-GL modules to anomaly detection in a targeted ablation
The skip connection layers all have 32 output dimensions. study on SWaT and WADI. In this study, we examined
We use two graph and temporal module layers. Finally, for different variants of CST-GL. The results are presented in
11810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 TABLE II
AVERAGE AUC P ERFORMANCE (± S TANDARD D EVIATION ) OF F IVE E XPERIMENTAL RUNS ON T HREE B ENCHMARK DATASETS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND
 B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 A BLATION S TUDY—AVERAGE AUC P ERFORMANCE F1 S CORE OF AUTOMATIC T HRESHOLD V ERSUS O PTIMAL T HRESHOLD
 (± S TANDARD D EVIATION )

 variable nodes, thereby improving the performance of detecting anomaly events. Conversely, when we modify the TCN
 (mod. TCN) within CST-GL, it also leads to decline in
Table III, with modifications across multiple modules detailed performance. This can be attributed to the fact that the temas follows: poral dependency of the multivariate time-series data is less
 1) W/o MTCL: CST-GL without multivariate time-series effectively captured. When the PCA-based anomaly scoring
 correlation learning. We replace the learned adjacency module is replaced by a Gaussian scoring function [24] (w/o
 matrix, A, with a complete digraph adjacency matrix PCA), we note a reduction in performance in the WADI
 and remove MTCL. dataset. This performance drop can be attributed to the Gaus-
 2) W/o GCN: CST-GL without the graph convolution net- sian function’s lack of robust denoising capabilities, an area
 work. We remove the GCN module (including MTCL) where PCA excels. Despite this, the CST-GL still outperforms
 and replace it with a linear layer. the established baselines.
 3) Mod. TCN: CST-GL with modified temporal convolu- Finally, the removal of the STGNN (w/o STGNN), leaving
 tion network. We modify TCN to nullify its ability in only PCA model, significantly reduces performance. This
 capturing multigranular temporal clues by replacing the underscores the crucial role of the STGNN. While PCA can
 multiconvolution filters with a single 1 × 1 filter. lessen inherent noise for improved representation, it is the
 4) W/o PCA: CST-GL without the PCA-based anomaly capacity of the STGNN to recognize spatial–temporal patterns
 scoring module. We replace our PCA module with that forms a comprehensive solution for anomaly detection.
 standard Gaussian scoring function [24]. The Gaussian 3) Automatic Thresholding Mechanism: Our framework
 scoring function would correspond to the Raw Signal in incorporates an automatic thresholding mechanism where the
 Table II, but the input for this function is the forecast maximum anomaly score in the validation set is taken as
 error from the STGNN in CST-GL. the threshold without a need for human experts in determining
 5) W/o STGNN: CST-GL without the STGNN. This is the optimal threshold. Table IV shows the best F1 score
 equivalent to the PCA model in Table II. achieved through an enumerative search of global optimal
When we remove the MTCL module (w/o GCN) and instead threshold against the F1 score of our automatic thresholding
employ a complete digraph adjacency matrix to model the mechanism.
interactions between variables, we notice a significant drop in The nonparametric threshold selection of CST-GL, despite
performance. Importantly, the degradation of performance is its simplicity, effectively captures the spatial–temporal depennotably more pronounced for the WADI dataset. We hypothe- dencies of multivariate time series during the normal period
size that the noise from unimportant neighboring nodes is more (i.e., training set). This capability allows for a notable degree
pronounced when the GCN propagate information among the of separation between anomalous and nonanomalous timevariables under the WADI with 127 number of multivariate points in the test set, as evidenced by promising F1 scores.
variables, as compared to SWaT that only has 51. However, it is important to note that the effectiveness of the
 Next, we scrutinize the effects of modifications to the automatic threshold is most pronounced on the SWaT dataset,
STGNN. We observe that the exclusion of the GCN mod- and exhibits some performance drops on WADI and SMD.
ule (w/o GCN) significantly degrades the anomaly detection Moving forward, we aim to refine the thresholding process to
results. This is consistent with previous studies [1], [11] as close the gap between the automatically determined threshold
modeling of the pairwise correlations among variables can and the threshold determined using best-F1 scores across a
enable information flow among the interdependent univariate broader range of scenarios.
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11811

 TABLE V
 SWAT—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN
 E ACH E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE VI
 WADI—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH
 E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

C. Early Detection Performance the delay constraint is removed), the results of the early
 detection PA approach will be the same as the original PA
 As time-series anomaly events usually form contiguous approach.
anomaly segments, previous works have argued that detect- In this work, we evaluate models’ early detection ability
ing anomalies within any subset of a ground truth anomaly with delay 0, 1, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 60 min. Following previous
segment is sufficient in real-world scenarios. Based on this work [1], [3], [68] in computing model’s anomaly scoring
notion, they evaluated multivariate time-series anomaly detec- ability, we report the best F1 score for each delay. Based on
tion models using point-adjusted (PA) approach [1], [3], Tables V–VII, we observe the following.
[68]. Under this approach, if any timestamp in a contiguous 1) Immediate Detection: CST-GL showed a substantial
anomaly segment with Ma timestamps is correctly detected advantage against the next baseline when δ = 0 where
as an anomaly, the PA approach considers the entire anomaly the performance improvement is 86.27%, 43.44%, and
segment as correctly predicted with Ma true positives [64]. 2.75% for SWaT, WADI, and SMD, respectively. This
However, since any detection within a contiguous anomaly indicates that our model significantly outperform the
segment is treated equally, the PA approach does not reward simple and state-of-the-art baselines in early detection
early detections in an anomalous segment [24], [69], [70]. of multivariate time-series anomaly events.
Nevertheless, early detection of anomaly events is often crucial 2) Practicality: On all three benchmark datasets, our proin a wide range of practical applications and a model which posed framework performed best across all delays, δ,
can detect anomaly events early will have significant value in with the exception of 5 and 10 min under the SMD
real-world settings [71]. dataset. While model performance gaps decrease as δ is
 To evaluate early detection ability of CST-GL and base- increased, our framework remains state-of-the-art even
line methods, we adopt the metric suggested by Ren et al. when delay is set to be 60 min. These results suggest
[72], where detection of contiguous anomaly segment is only that our anomaly detection model has the greatest ability
treated as true positives, if and only if an anomaly point is at detecting not only anomalous events that require
detected correctly and its timestamp is at most δ steps after immediate attention but also anomalous events that is
the first anomaly of the contiguous anomaly segment. For less hurried. CST-GL can thus be potentially applied
example, δ = 0 would equate to identifying an anomaly across a wide range of practical applications and is
segment as early as possible without any delays and δ = dependable in a diverse range of real-world operational
60 for a time series with second-interval would equate to requirements.
detecting anomaly segment within a minute after the first 3) Baseline Comparison: Consistently, InterFusion, which
anomaly timestamp. As δ becomes sufficiently large (i.e., learns temporal and intervariable dependencies, ranked
11812 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

 TABLE VII
 SMD—B EST F1 R ESULTS AT D IFFERENT D ELAYS . T HE B EST AND S ECOND B EST P ERFORMING M ETHOD IN E ACH
 E XPERIMENT I S IN B OLD AND U NDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

 second in early anomaly detection. Other baselines, not TABLE VIII
 addressing both dependencies, showed greater variability P ERFORMANCE ON ROOT C AUSE DIAGNOSIS . AVERAGE
 across delays and datasets. This validates the importance RC-T OP 3 (± S TANDARD DEVIATION )
 of learning both temporal and interdependence for model
 generalization across tasks and datasets.

D. Root Cause Anomaly Diagnosis
 In accordance with the approach suggested by
Garg et al. [24], we gauge the anomaly diagnosis performance
of all models using the root-cause top three metric (RC-Top3).
The RC-Top3 measures instances where at least one of the
genuine causes is identified among the top three causes
as determined by the detection model. We provide the
mean performance along with its standard deviation. Since
InterFusion utilizes MCMC imputation on the original
reconstruction to diagnose root causes, we present results
both with and without MCMC imputation. As argued by
Li et al. [1], anomalous node variables have the potential
to introduce bias into the learned embeddings within
their network module, creating undesirable noise. MCMC
 variables closely associated with symptomatic variables. This
imputation can help to dampen this noise, similar to the role
 is effectively achieved with our MTCL module.
of the PCA-based scorer in CST-GL.
 Contrastingly, in SMD, variables that display abnormal
 For CST-GL, we report the diagnosis performance using
 behaviors are indeed the root causes themselves. As such,
the ranking derived from the PCA-based method, as well as
 the MTCL-Graph does not provide any added benefit; instead,
the ranking obtained after aggregating the anomaly scores
 it is more advantageous to directly evaluate the anomaly score
from its one-hop neighbor (CST-GL + MTCL-Graph). The
 from the PCA-based scorer. These observations align with
latter approach leverages the learned relationships between
 the diagnosis results of InterFusion. When MCMC imputation
variables from the MTCL module to diagnose root causes.
 is employed, the effects of anomalous noise are mitigated,
This approach considers that anomalous behavior exhibited
 enabling InterFusion to accurately diagnose the root causes in
by some variables may merely be symptomatic, while the
 SMD. However, MCMC imputation does not enhance results
root cause could be attributed to closely related variables.
 in SWaT and WADI, as it reduces the impacts of abnor-
To further assess the benefits of MTCL, we also present
 mal behaviors transferred to related variables. Consequently,
the diagnostic results of the raw signal using the MTCL-
 MCMC imputation softens the anomalous effects on the actual
Graph (Raw Signal+MTCL-Graph). This serves to evaluate
 root cause variables that do not themselves exhibit abnormal
the effectiveness of MTCL in facilitating the diagnosis of
 behaviors. To consolidate, we show MTCL-Graph to improve
anomalies, even when the raw signal alone is used.
 the ability in diagnosing the root cause directly from raw
 As evidenced in Table VIII, CST-GL excels in identifying
 signals alone in SWaT and WADI, but not in SMD.
root causes of anomalies on SWaT and WADI, using MTCL-
 On the whole, CST-GL with the aid of MTCL-Graph
Graph. It comes a close second to OmniAnomaly on SMD
 provides a comprehensive and actionable tool for operators
without MTCL-Graph. As detailed in Section IV-C2, the deciin detecting and diagnosing anomaly events.
sion to diagnose root cause based directly on error contribution
or one-hop distance neighbors using MTCL-Graph depends
on the anomaly characteristics. SWaT and WADI often have E. Case Study in Practice
symptomatic variables that exhibit abnormal behaviors but not To showcase CST-GL’s implementation under real-world
causative [11], [24]. These variables were influenced by true scenarios, we conduct time-series anomaly detection case
root causes that exhibit normal behaviors. Thus, unearthing studies on WADI’s WADI System where the root cause of
the true root causes requires the explicit identification of the anomaly event is known.
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11813

Fig. 3. Root cause analysis of stealth attack on WADI system. Size of nodes represents the computed ranking of nodes as described in Section IV-C2.
Red node represents the highest ranked sensor and orange nodes represent the top five sensors that contributed the majority of anomaly score during the first
5 min of attack. Apart from the highest-ranked red node, four blue nodes indicate other potential sources of the anomaly, with their sizes signifying relative
importance. However, the primary node associated with the attack is the first red one, not the four blue nodes. The directed arrows represent the unidirectional
relationships that CST-GL has learned using the MTCL module and correspond to spatial dependencies between different sensors.

 1) Background: The WADI process in WADI is segmented 2) Root Cause Identification With Learned Relation: Lookinto three subprocesses: P1, P2, and P3. P1 involves water ing at CST-GL’s system outputs, the human operators
intake and water quality management, P2 takes in water see five sensors from subprocess P1 to contribute
from P1 and supplies it to the consumers and P3 returns the substantial majority of anomaly scores during this
excess water back to P1. To monitor and automate the system period: 1_MV_002, 1_P_002, 1_P_006, 1_LS_001, and
effectively, 127 sensors are installed. The sensors within each 1_LS_002. After inspecting all five sensors, it is found
subprocess are intimately linked to monitor and automate that they are not the root cause but are merely the
the WADI subprocess. Nonetheless, any attacks on a single symptoms of this attack. Nevertheless, they are very
subprocess will have a cascading effect on the entire WADI likely to be related to the root cause of the stealthy attack
system. In this experimental setting, CST-GL is required to event. Thus, the sensors most closely related to the five
detect malicious attacks by ill-intentioned parties that have sensors are immediately ranked based on the CST-GL’s
access to the system control from October 9, 2017 to October learned relation between variable pairs. The aggregated
11, 2017. CST-GL is provided with 14 days of normal scores of one-hop distance neighbors in subprocess P1
multisensors data from September 25, 2017 to October 9, ranks 1_AIT_001 as the sensor most associated with the
2017, to train the model. No labels or information related to five aforementioned sensors, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The
the attacks are given during training and CST-GL is required root cause of the attack is thus successfully identified
to detect the anomalies in an unsupervised manner. after inspecting merely 6 out of 127 sensors.
 2) Stealth Attack: At 10:55 A . M . on December 10, 2017, 3) Informativeness With Pointwise Detection: The original
the attacker launch a 29-min stealthy attack on WADI to WADI dataset assumes no human intervention and the
drain an elevated reservoir by changing the reading seen 29-min stealth attack ended at 11:24 A . M . Consistently,
by water quality sensor, 1_AIT_001 (i.e., the root cause of CST-GL confirms by 11:26 A . M . that the attack has
attack). Further, the attacker cleverly manipulates the root ceased, exhibiting a lag of less than 2 min. This not only
cause sensor to make the event undetectable. Consequently, allows system operator to make decisions with informed
determining the root cause of this attack is nontrivial given knowledge but also direct efforts on exploring the data
that the attacker has extensive knowledge about the WADI within the most relevant time frame to thoroughly undersystem and is deliberately hiding the root cause. stand the anomaly events that have already occurred.
 3) Proposed Framework in Action: The following describes In another WADI anomaly event, a flow sensor, 1_FIT_001,
CST-GL’s real-time anomaly detection mechanisms. is attacked via false readings. To detect the root cause of
 1) Automated Early Detection: Relying on the automated this attack is again nontrivial because the false readings
 thresholding mechanism, CST-GL alerted the human are within the normal range of this sensor [11]. Following
 operators at 10:58 A . M . (less than 4 min after the the implementation above, CST-GL is able to alert system
 attack) that a possible anomaly event has occurred and operators that an anomalous event has occurred after just 10
 emergency intervention is required. During the attack s of the attack. Similarly, the top sensors that contributed to
 period, the anomaly score remained high, continuously the anomaly score are again found not to be the root cause.
 warning operators about the urgency of the attack event. Through aggregated scores of the learned relations between
11814 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

sensors, CST-GL ranked the root cause sensor, 1_FIT_001, models can enhance graph learning [79], [80] for time-series
as the third most possible sensor to be the root cause, correctly data.
identifying the root cause after inspecting 8 out of 127 sensors.
Finally, CST-GL informs that the anomaly event has ended
 R EFERENCES
within the precision of ±1 min.
 4) Summary: The case studies demonstrate CST-GL’s abil- [1] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretaity in 1) detecting anomalous event early; 2) significantly tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc.
reducing the search range for human operators to iden- 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
 pp. 3220–3230.
tify the root cause by localizing the relevant variables; and [2] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
3) informing operators about the duration of anomaly events T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonwith reasonable precision. Importantly, it also illustrates that parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
joint learning of spatial–temporal and pairwise correlation Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
relational dependencies can help a multivariate time-series [3] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
anomaly detection model to detect and diagnose anomaly network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
events, significantly reduce the destructive impact of such Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
events on industrial systems. [4] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 Moving forward, we intend to enhance CST-GL’s robustness for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyberand real-world applicability. As noted, anomalies can bias Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36.
 [5] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water
the modeling process in GNNs. This challenge becomes even distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical
more pronounced when anomalies introduce a long chain systems,” in Proc. CySWATER, 2017, pp. 25–28.
of anomalous effects that propagate throughout large-scale [6] Q. Yu, L. Jibin, and L. Jiang, “An improved ARIMA-based traffic
sensing networks, which are common in practice. Employ- anomaly detection algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” Int. J.
ing multiple GNN layers for k-hop neighbor aggregation to Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2016, Art. no. 9653230.
 [7] E. Keogh, J. Lin, and A. Fu, “HOT SAX: Efficiently finding the most
address such long-term dependencies might expose the system unusual time series subsequence,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Conf. Data
to issues like over-smoothing [73] and over-squashing [74]. Mining (ICDM), Nov. 2005, pp. 1–8.
While the incorporation of the gating mechanism in (4) of [8] X. Wang, J. Lin, N. Patel, and M. Braun, “Exact variable-length anomaly
CST-GL could alleviate the aforementioned issues, we plan to detection algorithm for univariate and multivariate time series,” Data
fortify our framework further by incorporating recent advances Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1806–1844, Nov. 2018.
 [9] B. Li, X. Li, Z. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Spatio-temporal graph routing for
in the GNN field. Specifically, we aim to explore GNN skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI, 2019, pp. 8561–8568.
techniques known for their stability [75] and consider the [10] Y. Seo, M. Defferrard, P. Vandergheynst, and X. Bresson, “Structured
potentiality of including online adaptive rewiring for message sequence modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks,” in
passing. Proc. ICONIP, 2018, pp. 362–373.
 In addition, we aim to enhance CST-GL for a broader [11] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
range of applications by addressing the issues of concept [12] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, S. Chen, B. Yang, and S. Pan, “Multivariate
drift and missing values. In terms of concept drift, we plan time series forecasting with dynamic graph neural ODEs,” IEEE Trans.
to implement mechanisms that can detect and quantify the Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 9168–9180, Sep. 2023.
magnitude of data drift, thus facilitating necessary adjustments [13] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
to the model in line with evolving data distributions [76], ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009.
 [14] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
[77]. For handling missing values, we intend to assess the survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
robustness of CST-GL by employing standard interpola- [15] A. Blázquez-Garcia, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
tion and imputation algorithms [78]. Furthermore, we aspire on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
to incorporate spatial–temporal graph controlled differential vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
equations [12], inherently suited to scenarios involving missing [16] S. Li and J. Wen, “A model-based fault detection and diagnostic
 methodology based on PCA method and wavelet transform,” Energy
values. Buildings, vol. 68, pp. 63–71, Jan. 2014.
 [17] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classification,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, Dec. 2001.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [18] W. Lu and A. A. Ghorbani, “Network anomaly detection based on
 In this work, we proposed a novel framework for multi- wavelet analysis,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2009, no. 1,
variate time series anomaly detection. Our model, CST-GL, pp. 1–16, Dec. 2008.
 [19] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detecexplicitly learns pairwise correlations between variable pairs of tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
multivariate time-series data, jointly capture spatial–temporal Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
dependencies and effectively detect anomaly events when the [20] L. Feremans, V. Vercruyssen, B. Cule, W. Meert, and B. Goethals,
behavior of time-series data deviate from the nonanomalous “Pattern-based anomaly detection in mixed-type time series,” in Proc.
patterns. Experiments on three real-world datasets showed ECML PKDD, 2019, pp. 240–256.
that CST-GL outperformed 11 baselines in general and early [21] C. M. Yeh et al., “Matrix profile I: All pairs similarity joins for time
 series: A unifying view that includes motifs, discords and shapelets,”
detection settings. CST-GL also enables interpretation and in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Dec. 2016,
root cause diagnosis of anomaly events in multivariate time- pp. 1317–1322.
series data, paving the way for STGNN-based methods to [22] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
be implemented in real-world applications. In the future, detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI,
we will study generalizability of CST-GL in dynamic and 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 [23] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Conmissing values scenarios together with the trustworthiness of necting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural
our GNN model [34] through the perspectives of robustness networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery
and explainability. We will also look into how large language Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 753–763.
ZHENG et al.: CST-GL FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME-SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 11815

[24] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An eval- [48] W. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Tang, S. Wang, and J. Tang, “Graph
 uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,” structure learning for robust graph neural networks,” in Proc. KDD,
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517, 2020, pp. 66–74.
 Jun. 2022. [49] Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, D. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Peng, and S. Pan, “Towards
[25] T. Tayeh, S. Aburakhia, R. Myers, and A. Shami, “An attention-based unsupervised deep graph structure learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.,
 ConvLSTM autoencoder with dynamic thresholding for unsupervised Apr. 2022, pp. 1392–1403.
 anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Mach. Learn. Knowl. [50] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
 Extraction, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 350–370, Apr. 2022. Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” 2023,
[26] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for arXiv:2307.03759.
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” [51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
[27] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: [52] L. Pei, Y. Cao, Y. Kang, Z. Xu, and Z. Zhao, “Self-supervised spatiotem-
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative poral clustering of vehicle emissions with graph convolutional network,”
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. ICANN, 2019, pp. 703–716. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Jul. 19, 2023, doi:
[28] S. Chauhan and L. Vig, “Anomaly detection in ECG time signals via 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3293463.
 deep long short-term memory networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data [53] W. Liang and W. Zhang, “Learning social relations and spatiotemporal
 Sci. Adv. Analytics (DSAA), Oct. 2015, pp. 1–7. trajectories for next check-in inference,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
[29] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1789–1799, Apr. 2023.
 G. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder–decoder for multi-sensor anomaly [54] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised
 detection,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148. anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
[30] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep varia- Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023.
 tional graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series [55] J. Yu, Y. Xu, H. Chen, and Z. Ju, “Versatile graph neural netanomaly detection,” in Proc. ICML, vol. 162, 2022, pp. 3621–3633. works toward intuitive human activity understanding,” IEEE Trans.
[31] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representa- Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Nov. 28, 2022, doi:
 tions for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3216084.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, [56] L. Deng, D. Lian, Z. Huang, and E. Chen, “Graph convolutional
 pp. 2977–2986. adversarial networks for spatiotemporal anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2416–2428, Jun. 2022.
[32] Z. Z. Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi,
 [57] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial net-
 “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” 2022,
 works for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 arXiv:2211.05244.
 Syst., early access, Apr. 5, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3159538.
[33] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell.,
 [58] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
 vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021.
 neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018,
[34] H. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Yuan, S. Pan, H. Tong, and J. Pei, “Trust- pp. 1–16.
 worthy graph neural networks: Aspects, methods and trends,” 2022,
 [59] Y. Li, N. Zhong, D. Taniar, and H. Zhang, “MCGNet+: An improved
 arXiv:2205.07424.
 motor imagery classification based on cosine similarity,” Brain Infor-
[35] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analysis: mat., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Dec. 2022.
 Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” 2023, arXiv:2306.10125.
 [60] F. Wu, A. Souza, T. Zhang, C. Fifty, T. Yu, and K. Weinberger,
[36] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph “Simplifying graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2019,
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2017, pp. 1–14. pp. 6861–6871.
[37] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and [61] S. Abu-El-Haija et al., “MixHop: Higher-order graph convolutional
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–12. architectures via sparsified neighborhood mixing,” in Proc. ICML, 2019,
[38] X. Liu et al., “Survey on graph neural network acceleration: An pp. 21–29.
 algorithmic perspective,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., [62] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph WaveNet for
 Jul. 2022, pp. 5521–5529. deep spatial–temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. 29th Int. Joint Conf.
[39] X. Zheng, Y. Liu, S. Pan, M. Zhang, D. Jin, and P. S. Yu, Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019, pp. 1907–1913.
 “Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A survey,” 2022, [63] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 arXiv:2202.07082. attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
[40] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y.-F. Li, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and S. Pan, “Multi-scale Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
 contrastive Siamese networks for self-supervised graph representation [64] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autolearning,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2021, pp. 1–7. encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
[41] T. Huang et al., “You can have better graph neural networks by not Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
 training weights at all: Finding untrained GNNs tickets,” in Proc. LoG, [65] D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, and D. Wierstra, “Stochastic backpropa-
 2022, pp. 1–8. gation and approximate inference in deep generative models,” in Proc.
[42] Z. Wu, D. Zheng, S. Pan, Q. Gan, G. Long, and G. Karypis, “Tra- ICML, 2014, pp. 1278–1286.
 verseNet: Unifying space and time in message passing for traffic [66] T. Chen, X. Liu, B. Xia, W. Wang, and Y. Lai, “Unsupervised anomaly
 forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, detection of industrial robots using sliding-window convolutional varia-
 Jul. 14, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3186103. tional autoencoder,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 47072–47081, 2020.
[43] M. Jin, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “Neural temporal walks: Motif-aware [67] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsurepresentation learning on continuous-time dynamic graphs,” in Proc. pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2018, pp. 1–19.
 NIPS, 2022, pp. 19874–19886. [68] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[44] A. T. N. Nguyen et al., “The application of artificial intelligence to accel- “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 erate G protein-coupled receptor drug discovery,” Brit. J. Pharmacol., in Proc. KDD, 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/bph.16140 [69] S. Kim, K. Choi, H. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous
[45] H. Y. Koh, A. T. Nguyen, S. Pan, L. T. May, and G. I. Webb, evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI, 2022,
 “PSICHIC: Physicochemical graph neural network for learning protein- pp. 7194–7201.
 ligand interaction fingerprints from sequence data,” BioRxiv, 2023. [70] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.17.558145 benchmarks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE
[46] Y. Zheng et al., “From unsupervised to few-shot graph anomaly Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 detection: A multi-scale contrastive learning approach,” 2022, [71] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised realarXiv:2202.05525. time anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262,
[47] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y. P. Chen, “Generative pp. 134–147, Nov. 2017.
 and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detection,” [72] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct. 12, 2021, doi: Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3119326. Jul. 2019, pp. 3009–3017.
11816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, VOL. 35, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2024

[73] Q. Li, Z. Han, and X.-M. Wu, “Deeper insights into graph convolutional Khoa T. Phan received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.)
 networks for semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. in telecommunications from the University of New
 Intell., 2018, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 1–8. South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, NSW, Australia,
[74] J. Topping, F. D. Giovanni, B. P. Chamberlain, X. Dong, and in 2006, the M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering
 M. M. Bronstein, “Understanding over-squashing and bottlenecks on from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
 graphs via curvature,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, Canada, in 2008, and the California Institute of
 pp. 1–30. Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, CA, USA, in 2009,
[75] D. Tortorella and A. Micheli, “Leave graphs alone: Addressing over- respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
 squashing without rewiring,” in Proc. 1st Learn. Graphs Conf., 2022, engineering from McGill University, Montreal, QC,
 pp. 1–8. Canada, in 2017.
[76] G. I. Webb, R. Hyde, H. Cao, H. L. Nguyen, and F. Petitjean, “Charac- He is currently a Senior Lecturer and an Australia
 terizing concept drift,” Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30, no. 4, Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DECRA)
 pp. 964–994, Jul. 2016. Fellow with the Department of Computer Science and Information Technol-
[77] I. Goldenberg and G. I. Webb, “PCA-based drift and shift quantification ogy, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. His current research
 framework for multidimensional data,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 62, no. 7, interests include design, control, optimization, and operation of 5G mobile
 pp. 2835–2854, Jul. 2020. communications networks with applications in the Internet of Things (IoT),
[78] L. Beretta and A. Santaniello, “Nearest neighbor imputation algorithms: satellite communications, machine-type communications (MTC), smart grids,
 A critical evaluation,” BMC Med. Informat. Decis. Making, vol. 16, and cloud computing.
 pp. 197–208, Jul. 2016.
[79] S. Pan, L. Luo, Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, and X. Wu, “Unifying Shirui Pan (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap,” 2023, Ph.D. degree in computer science from the UniverarXiv:2306.08302. sity of Technology Sydney (UTS), Ultimo, NSW,
[80] M. Jin et al., “Time-LLM: Time series forecasting by reprogramming Australia, in 2015.
 large language models,” 2023, arXiv:2310.01728. He is currently a Professor and an ARC Future
 Fellow (2022–2025) with the School of ICT, Griffith University, Southport, QLD, Australia. He has
 authored over 130 research papers in top-tier jour-
 Yu Zheng received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in nals and conferences, including the IEEE T RANS -
 computer science from Northwest A&F University, ACTIONS ON PATTERN A NALYSIS AND M ACHINE
 Xianyang, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively. I NTELLIGENCE (TPAMI), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in com- ON K NOWLEDGE AND DATA E NGINEERING (TKDE), IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 puter science with La Trobe University, Melbourne, ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS (TNNLS), International
 VIC, Australia. Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Neural Information Processing
 Her research interests include image classification, Systems (NeurIPS), Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), Assodata mining, and machine learning. ciation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), International
 Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), International World Wide
 Web Conference (WWW), and International World Wide Web Conference
 (ICDM). His research interests include data mining and machine learning.
 Dr. Pan is a Senior Member of the ACM. He was a recipient of the Best
 Huan Yee Koh received the bachelor’s degree in Student Paper Award of IEEE ICDM 2020. He was recognized as the one of
 commerce and the master’s degree in data science the AI 2000 AAAI/IJCAI Most Influential Scholars in Australia in 2021.
 from Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia, in
 2018 and 2021, respectively, where he is currently Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen (Senior Member, IEEE)
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree in machine learning. received the B.Inf.Tech. (Hons.) and Ph.D. degrees
 His research interests include graph neural net- in computer science from The University of Queensworks (GNNs), time series analysis, drug discovery, land, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, in 1995 and 2000,
 data mining, and machine learning. respectively.
 She is currently a Professor and the Chair of the
 Department of Computer Science and Information
 Technology, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC,
 Australia. She is also the Chief Investigator of
 the ARC Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics,
 Ming Jin received the B.Eng. degree from the Hebei
 Queensland. She has been involved in research on
 University of Technology, Tianjin, China, in 2017,
 bioinformatics, health informatics, multimedia, and artificial intelligence. She
 and the M.Inf.Tech. degree from The University
 has authored over 250 research papers, many of them appeared in top journals
 of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2019.
 and conferences.
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in com-
 Dr. Chen is the Steering Committee Chair for the Asia Pacific Bioinformatics
 puter science with Monash University, Clayton, VIC,
 Conference (Founder) and Multimedia Modeling.
 Australia.
 His research interests include graph neural networks (GNNs), time series analysis, data mining, Wei Xiang (Senior Member, IEEE) was the Founand machine learning. dation Chair and the Head of the Discipline of IoT
 Engineering, James Cook University, Cairns, QLD,
 Australia. He is currently the Cisco Research Chair
 of AI and IoT and the Director of the Cisco-La
 Lianhua Chi received the dual Ph.D. degrees in Trobe Centre for AI and IoT, La Trobe University,
 computer science from the University of Tech- Melbourne, VIC, Australia. Due to his instrumental
 nology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, and the leadership in establishing Australia’s first accred-
 Huazhong University of Science and Technology, ited Internet of Things Engineering degree program,
 Wuhan, China, in 2015. he was inducted into Pearcy Foundation’s Hall
 She was a Post-Doctoral Research Scientist with of Fame in October 2018. He has authored over
 IBM Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. She has 300 peer-reviewed articles, including three books and 220 journal articles.
 been a Lecturer with the Department of Computer Dr. Xiang is a TEDx Speaker and an Elected Fellow of the IET, U.K., and
 Science and Information Technology, La Trobe Uni- Engineers Australia. He received the TNQ Innovation Award in 2016 and the
 versity, Melbourne, since 2018. Her current research Pearcey Entrepreneurship Award in 2017, and was recognized as an Engineers
 interests include data mining, machine learning, and Australia Cairns Engineer of the Year in 2017. He has served in a large number
big data hashing. of international conferences in the capacity of general co-chair, TPC co-chair,
 Dr. Chi was a recipient of the Best Paper Award in PAKDD in 2013. and symposium chair.