IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024 7555

 Counterfactual Data Augmentation With Denoising
 Diffusion for Graph Anomaly Detection
 Chunjing Xiao , Shikang Pang , Xovee Xu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Xuan Li ,
 Goce Trajcevski , Member, IEEE, and Fan Zhou , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—A critical aspect of graph neural networks (GNNs) abnormal user detection [3], [4] and fraud behavior detection
is to enhance the node representations by aggregating node [5], [6]. To identify anomalies in graph-structured data, it is of
neighborhood information. However, when detecting anomalies, paramount importance to learn expressive and distinguishable
the representations of abnormal nodes are prone to be averaged
by normal neighbors, making the learned anomaly represen- node representations by modeling the information from both
tations less distinguishable. To tackle this issue, we propose node attributes and graph topology. Among many approaches
an unsupervised counterfactual data augmentation method for that tried different learning methods for anomaly detection,
graph anomaly detection (CAGAD) that introduces a graph graph neural networks (GNNs) [7], [8] have gained significant
pointer neural network as the heterophilic node detector to attention due to their effectiveness and flexibility [8], [9].
identify potential anomalies whose neighborhoods are normalnode-dominant. For each identified potential anomaly, we design Motivation: One fundamental assumption in GNNs is that
a graph-specific diffusion model to translate a part of its similar nodes (w.r.t. node attributes and their labels) have a
neighbors, which are probably normal, into anomalous ones. At higher tendency to connect to each other than dissimilar ones.
last, we involve these translated neighbors in GNN neighborhood Hence, GNNs typically utilize the message-passing scheme
aggregation to produce counterfactual representations of anoma- to learn node representations by aggregating node attributes
lies. Through aggregating the translated anomalous neighbors,
counterfactual representations become more distinguishable and iteratively from their local neighborhoods. However, GNNfurther advocate detection performance. The experimental results based graph anomaly detection models confront a critical overon four datasets demonstrate that CAGAD significantly outper- smoothing issue [10], [11] inherent to GNNs—namely, when
forms strong baselines, with an average improvement of 2.35% aggregating information from the neighborhoods, the represenon F1, 2.53% on AUC-ROC, and 2.79% on AUC-PR. tations of anomalous nodes are averaged by normal nodes, as
 Index Terms—Counterfactual data augmentation, graph the number of normal nodes is much larger than the number of
anomaly detection, graph neural network (GNN), representation anomalies. This, in turn, can make the anomaly representations
learning.
 less distinguishable. Hence, the benign neighbors of anomalies
 might attenuate the suspiciousness of anomalies, resulting in
 I. INTRODUCTION poor detection performance.
 Several GNN models are proposed to remedy this issue,
A NOMALY detection on a graph aims to detect nodes
 that present abnormal behaviors and significantly deviate
from the majority of nodes [1], [2]. Anomaly detection has
 mainly falling into two categories: 1) resampling methods balance the number of samples by over-sampling the minority
 class or under-sampling the majority class [12], [13], [14];
numerous high-impact applications in various domains, such as
 and 2) reweighting methods assign different weights to different classes or even different samples by cost-sensitive adjustments or metalearning-based methods [15], [16], [17]. Despite
 Manuscript received 30 April 2023; revised 22 January 2024; accepted
13 May 2024. Date of publication 19 June 2024; date of current ver- considerable performance improvements, they still suffer from
sion 3 December 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural certain shortcomings: 1) most of the models rely on mas-
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62176043 and Grant 62072077. sive labeled samples to obtain a good performance. However,
(Corresponding authors: Xovee Xu; Fan Zhou.)
 Chunjing Xiao and Shikang Pang are with the School of Computer and labeled anomalies are scarce, and obtaining them is costly and
Information Engineering and Henan Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and time-consuming, as anomalies are typically rare data instances
Processing, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China (e-mail: chunjingxiao@ in most practical applications [1], [18]. 2) These methods
gmail.com; pangsk0604@henu.edu.cn).
 Xovee Xu and Fan Zhou are with the University of Electronic Science mainly manipulate the training data for building a robust clasand Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China (e-mail: xovee@ sification model. However, for the anomaly detection task, the
std.uestc.edu.cn; fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn). phenomenon of imbalanced neighbors also exists in practical
 Xuan Li is with the National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science
on Synthetic Vision, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail: (testing) data. Ignoring the manipulation of test data might
lixuanlmw@stu.scu.edu.cn). result in significant performance degradation.
 Goce Trajcevski is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Our contributions: To overcome these drawbacks, we pro-
Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011 USA (e-mail: gocet25@
iastate.edu). pose to manipulate neighbors of anomalous nodes so that the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2024.3403503 learned anomaly representations are distinguishable from the

 2329-924X © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 The detection, translation, and aggregation processes in
 CAGAD are performed in an unsupervised way without labeled data. Unlike many of the traditional anomaly detection
 methods, our proposed CAGAD can be applied to test data
 for enhancing the node representations and will not impact the
 nodes’ identification information (i.e., the generated counterfactual representations still have the same labels as the original
 ones, as changing a few neighbors or edges will not impact the
 node’s identification (label) information [22], [23]). Through
Fig. 1. Nodes with heterophily dominant neighbors.
 this scheme, our model learns more distinguishable representations for anomalous nodes and alleviates the over-smoothing
 issue of GNNs in graph anomaly detection. The main contribunormal ones. Performing direct manipulation is very difficult tions of our work are as follows.
since we do not have label information about which nodes are 1) We propose a novel CAGAD, which can produce counteranomalies. Fortunately, the anomaly detection task only has factual representations by aggregating unseen neighbors
two classes of nodes; thus, it is feasible to identify whether a to enhance the representations of anomalies in an unsutarget node has heterophily dominant neighbors—i.e., most of pervised learning way.
its neighbors have different class labels from the target node 2) We design a probabilistic anomaly generator powered by
[19], [20]. We refer to these nodes as heterophilic nodes, a denoising diffusion models. It iteratively extracts distinct
common occurrence in anomaly detection tasks due to class features of anomalies, which are involved in the generaimbalance. Our intention is to manipulate the neighbors of tive process to transfer neighbors into anomalous ones.
heterophilic nodes to enhance node representations. 3) We propose a counterfactual GNN to generate counter-
 Heterophilic nodes can be either normal or anomalous, as factual node representations by aggregating the translated
illustrated in Fig. 1. For an anomalous heterophilic node, most neighbors rather than the original ones, which can alleviof its neighbors are normal nodes, and for a normal heterophilic ate the smooth aggregation problem of GNNs.
node, most of its neighbors are anomalies [19]. Since the labels 4) Extensive experiments on four public anomaly detecof heterophilic nodes are unknown, we treat anomalous and nor- tion datasets showed that CAGAD significantly improves
mal heterophilic nodes equally, i.e., for each heterophilic node, the detection performance compared to state-of-the-art
we translate a part of its neighbors into anomalous ones and baselines.1
involve these translated nodes for neighborhood aggregation. The rest of this article is organized as follows.
Specifically, for anomalous heterophilic nodes, translating a Section II describes the problem formulation and necessary
part of their neighbors (which are probably normal) into anoma- backgrounds. Section III presents the details of our CAGAD
lies would enhance the neighborhood aggregation for learn- model. Section IV compares our model with baseline
ing distinguishable node representations. Likewise, for normal approaches on four datasets. Section V reviews the literature
heterophilic nodes, translating their neighborhoods (which are related to anomaly detection, graph data augmentation, and
probably anomalous) into anomalies would have only a small diffusion models. Finally, we conclude this work with future
impact on the neighborhood aggregation since we do not change directions in Section VI.
the labels of these neighborhoods. The selection of translated
nodes can be guided by a ranking strategy according to their II. PRELIMINARIES
similarities to the heterophilic node.
 Based on this idea, we present a counterfactual data augmen- We now formulate the graph anomaly detection problem and
tation for graph anomaly detection (CAGAD) that follows a give the necessary background information on the DDPMs,
detection → translation → representation scheme: 1) we first which are used to generate new anomalous neighbors.
introduce a graph pointer neural network (GPNN) as the heterophilic node detector to identify nodes with heterophily domi- A. Problem Formulation
nant neighbors. 2) Then, for each heterophilic node, we translate Following the commonly used notations, we use calligraphic
a part of its neighbors into anomalous ones using a probabilistic fonts, bold lowercase letters, and bold uppercase letters to deanomaly generator, which is powered by a denoising diffusion note sets (e.g., V), vectors (e.g., x), and matrices (e.g., X),
probabilistic model (DDPM) [21]. The generator can extract respectively. In general, an attributed network can be repredistinct features of anomalies, and these features are regarded sented as G = (V, E, X), where V = {v1 , v2 , ..., vn } denotes
as the conditions to be imposed on the generative process the set of nodes, E = {e1 , e2 , ..., em } denotes the set of edges,
to create new anomalous neighbors for the heterophilic node. and X = {x1 , x2 , ..., xn } ∈ Rn×h denotes the h-dimensional at-
3) Finally, the generated anomalous neighbors are involved in a tributes of n nodes. A binary adjacency matrix A ∈ Rn×n is the
counterfactual GNN that is built by incorporating the anomaly structural information of the attributed network, where Ai,j = 1
generator into a graph attention network (GAT). Counterfactual if there is a link between nodes vi and vj ; Ai,j = 0 otherwise.
GNN aggregates the information of new unseen neighbors and
produces counterfactual node representations. 1 Source code is released at https://github.com/ChunjingXiao/CAGAD
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7557

 TABLE I Since the reverse of the forward process q(zt−1 |zt ) is in-
 LIST OF NOTATIONS tractable, DDPM learns parameterized Gaussian transitions
 pθ (zt−1 |zt ). The generative (or reverse) process has the same
 Notation Description
 functional form [24] as the forward process, and it is expressed
 v The node vector of a graph
 u The attention score of a node
 as a Gaussian transition with learned mean and fixed varil A hidden layer in the GATs ance [21]
 η/α A given threshold
 h/z/d/e The feature vector of a node pθ (zt−1 |zt ) = N (zt−1 ; μθ (zt , t), σt2 I). (4)
 V The set of nodes of a graph
 E The set of edges of a graph
 Further, by decomposing μθ into a linear combination of
 G A graph G = (V, E, X) zt and the noise approximator θ , the generative process is
 X The node feature matrix that G may have expressed as
 A The adjacent matrix of a graph  
 R The set of real numbers 1 1 − αt
 H/Z The feature matrix of a graph zt−1 = √ zt − √ θ (zt , t) + σt  (5)
 αt 1 − ᾱt
 which suggests that each generation step is stochastic. Here,
Accordingly, the problem of anomaly detection on an attributed θ represents a neural network with the same input and output
graph is defined as follows. dimensions, and the noise predicted by the neural network θ
 Problem 1 (Anomaly Detection): Let Va and Vn be two dis- in each step is used for the denoising process in (5).
joint subsets from V, where Va refers to all the anomalous nodes
and Vn denotes all the normal nodes. Graph-based anomaly C. GPNN
detection is to classify unlabeled nodes in G into the normal
 The GPNN [20] aims to select the most relevant and valuable
or anomalous categories given the information of the graph
 neighboring nodes, which constructs a new sequence ranked
structure A, node features X, and partial node labels from Va
 by relation to the central node. GPNN takes a node sequence
and Vn .
 consisting of the neighbors of a given central node as input and
 Usually, there are far more normal nodes than anomalous
 outputs an ordered sequence according to the relationship with
nodes, |Va |  |Vn |, thus graph-based anomaly detection can be
 the central node. This model utilizes a sequence-to-sequence
regarded as an extremely imbalanced binary node classification
 architecture based on LSTMs for the pointer network to order
problem. The main difference is that anomaly detection focuses
 the sequence.
more on the unusual and deviated patterns in the dataset. A sum-
 Specifically, GPNN is composed of an encoder and a demary of the symbols used in this article is presented in Table I.
 coder. The encoder generates hidden states for the input sequence. At each time step i, the feature vector of node x̂i is
B. DDPMs fed into the encoder, the hidden state is denoted as
 DDPMs [21], [24] are a class of generative models that show ei = tanh(W[ei−1 , x̂i ]) (6)
superior performance in unconditional image generation compared to GANs [25], [26]. It learns a Markov Chain that gradu- where e0 is initialed to zero vector. After L time steps, GPNN
ally converts a simple distribution (e.g., isotropic Gaussian) into obtains L hidden states of input sequence and combines them
a data distribution. The generative process learns the reverse of into a content vector E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , eL } that records the inthe DDPM’s forward (diffusion) process: a fixed Markov Chain formation of entire sequence of L nodes.
that gradually adds noise to data. Here, each step in the forward The decoder then selects nodes with attention scores among
process is a Gaussian translation the L nodes. At each output time i, the hidden state of decoder
  di is obtained by
 q(zt |zt−1 ) := N (zt ; 1 − βt zt−1 , βt I) (1)
 di = tanh(W[di−1 , x̂ci−1 ]) (7)
where β1 , ..., βT is a fixed variance schedule rather than learned
 where d0 = eL is the output hidden state from the encoder and
parameters [21]. Equation (1) is a process finding zt by adding
 ci−1 is the index of the selected node at the time step i − 1.
a small Gaussian noise to the latent variable zt−1 . Given clean
 GPNN computes the attention vectors over the input sequence
data z0 , sampling of zt can be expressed in a closed form
 as following:
 √
 q(zt |z0 ) := N (zt ; ᾱt z0 , (1 − ᾱt )I) (2)
 uij = β T tanh(W1 ej + W2 di ), j ∈ (1, 2, . . . , L) (8)
 t
where αt := 1 − βt and ᾱt := s=1 αs . Therefore, zt is ex- p(ci |c1 , c2 , ...ci−1 , s) = softmax(ui ) (9)
pressed as a linear combination of z0 and 
 where β T , W1 , and W2 are learnable parameters of the decoder
 √ 
 zt = ᾱt z0 + 1 − ᾱt  (3) model, and softmax normalizes the vector ui (of length L) to be
 an output distribution over the L nodes of the input sequence.
where  ∼ N (0, I) has the same dimensionality as data z0 and With the probability distribution ui , GPNN uses uij as pointers
latent variables z1 , ..., zT . to select the ith node of output sequence, until all top-k nodes
7558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 neighbors, we duplicate one neighbor repeatedly until reaching
 L and, after obtaining the attention scores, the duplicated ones
 will be deleted. Then, we apply a GCN layer [27] to compute
 local embeddings, which captures the local information of each
 node. With the input nodes feature X, the output embedding is
 denoted as
 X̂ = GCN(X) (10)
 where we embed the feature vectors into hidden representations.
 Next, we use a pointer network to calculate the attention
 scores for the node sequence. A sequence-to-sequence architecture based on LSTMs is adopted for the pointer network,
Fig. 2. Sketch of CAGAD. Heterophilic nodes are defined as most of their composing an encoder and a decoder. For the target node vi
neighbors having different properties or labels from themselves.
 and one of its neighbors vj , the attention score uij is computed
 as follows:
are selected step by step. After k output time steps, GPNN uij = β T tanh(W1 ej + W2 di ) (11)
obtains the sequence of top-k relevant nodes as: {x̂c1 , x̂c2 , . . . ,
x̂ck }(∈ Rk×d ), which is ranked with the output order. where β T , W1 , and W2 are learnable parameters of the model
 and ej and di are the hidden states of the encoder and decoder,
 respectively (see Section II-C for details).
 III. CAGAD: DETAILED METHODOLOGY
 Then, we are able to compute the desired heterophily de-
 We now discuss the CAGAD framework in detail. We first gree hd to determine whether the target node is a heterophilic
present the heterophilic node detector that identifies nodes one via
with heterophily dominant neighbors in an unsupervised manner. Then, we introduce the DDPM-based anomaly generator, hd = |Viη |/|ViS | (12)
which aims to translate the source embedding into the ones where Viη = {v : uij < η} is the set of the neighbors whose
with anomalous labels. Last, we incorporate the generator into attention scores are less than the threshold η, and ViS is the set
GNNs to manufacture counterfactual augmented representa- of vi ’s neighbors that are included in the sequence. Obviously,
tions by aggregating generated unseen neighbor embeddings. hd represents the percentage of heterophilic neighbors among
These augmented representations will be used for enhancing all neighbors of the target node. For example, hd = 60% means
anomaly detection. A sketch of CAGAD is shown in Fig. 2. that 60% of its neighbors have different class labels from it. If
 heterophily degree hd of a node is greater than a given value
A. Heterophilic Node Detector α, that node is considered heterophilic.
 Based on the above, we can extract all the heterophilic nodes
 We first present the heterophilic node detector to identify of a graph. For each of them, we select a given fraction of
the nodes whose neighbors are heterophily dominant without neighbors with lower attention scores and translate them into
requiring labeled data. The GPNN [20] is used to build the de- anomalous nodes. These generated anomalous neighbors are
tector, which calculates the heterophily degree for heterophilic used to replace the original ones for neighborhood aggregation.
node detection via attention scores. Here, we aim to distin- If the heterophilic target node is anomalous, most of its neighguish crucial information from distant nodes while filtering out bors should be normal. Some normal neighbors will be replaced
irrelevant or noisy ones in the nearest neighborhood. To this with generated anomalous ones. This replacement can make the
end, we leverage a pointer network to compute attention vectors representations more distinguishable. If the heterophilic target
(scores) and then select the most relevant nodes from multihop node is normal, most of its neighbors should be anomalous.
neighborhoods according to these scores. Since the attention Again, some anomalous neighbors will be replaced with generscores can denote the relevant relationship with the target node ated anomalous ones. This replacement will hardly influence the
[20], we use them to identify heterophilic nodes: a node is target node, since the number of anomalous neighbors remains
regarded as the heterophilic one if most of its neighbors have unchanged. Thus, manipulating heterophilic node neighbors
lower attention scores than a given threshold, say η. The optimal will not impact normal node representations but can benefit
threshold η can be determined by the existing training data. anomaly representations to boost performance.
 Specifically, we first construct a node sequence for each
target node that contains neighbors within a given hop, such
as one hop. As the number of neighbors varies from node B. DDPM-Based Anomaly Generator
to node, we set a fixed maximum length L of the sequence Having identified nodes with heterophily dominant neighand stop sampling when we meet this limitation. Note that bors, we now introduce how the node embeddings are translated
truncating neighbors will not impact detection results since the into anomalous ones. Inspired by the superiority of diffusion
heterophilic nodes are determined by the ratios instead of ab- models in image generation and translation [28], [29], [30],
solute node number. When some nodes have a small number of we design a graph-specific probabilistic diffusion model as
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7559

Fig. 3. Anomalous generator Gano : red arrows → indicate forward diffusion,
and blue ones → refer to the reverse diffusion; ⊕ is the concatenation
operation. Fig. 4. Original GNN versus counterfactual GNN. (a) Original aggregation.
 (b) Aggregation via counterfactuals.

the anomaly embedding generator. This model can iteratively
extract distinct features from anomalies and then exert them generated by (14) will be inclined to possess the anomalous
on the generative process to manufacture anomalous nodes. information (label). Since the transition of (14) starts with the
This generator takes a source embedding zsrc without label prior zT (derived from zsrc ), the generated embedding also has
information and a reference embedding zref with the anomalous the characteristics of source embedding zsrc .
label as inputs and translates the source embedding into an According to (14), in each transition from zt to zt−1 , the
anomalous one. The source embedding can be either normal or distinct features of anomalies fh (zt−1 ref ) are extracted from the
anomalous one. Here, the reference embedding can be obtained corrupted reference embedding zt−1 ref and then injected into the
by using the aforementioned GCN layer [27] or a trained GNN- latent variable. To this end, we first adopt the forward process
based classifier. (3) to compute zt−1
 ref from zref , and then adopt the reverse process
 Fig. 3 presents the framework of the anomaly embedding (4) to calculate the latent variable ẑt−1 from zt . Since high-filter
generator Gano . The generator first adopts the forward operation fh (·) maintains the dimensionality of the input, we
process to add noise into zsrc to form a prior zT . Then, refine the latent variables by matching fh (ẑt−1 ) of ẑt−1 with
the prior zT is fed into the reverse diffusion process to that of zt−1
 ref as follows:
generate a clean embedding through gradual denoising, i.e.,
 ref ∼ q(zref |zref )
 zt−1 t−1
zT → zt → ẑt−1 → zt−1 → z0 . During this denoising process,
the distinct features of anomalous nodes are extracted from ẑt−1 ∼ pθ (ẑt−1 |zt )
  
zref and iteratively injected into the latent variable ẑt−1 . In this zt−1 = ẑt−1 + γ fh (zt−1 ) − f (ẑ t−1
 ) (15)
 ref h
way, the generated embedding z0 not only has the anomalous
label of the reference embedding zref but also keeps the where γ is a weight parameter to adjust the importance of
characteristics of the source embedding zsrc . the high-frequency information. The matching operation by
 Concretely, we first utilize the forward process q(zt |z0 ) to (15) ensures the condition cano in (14), which further enables
generate a prior zT by adding noise the conditional generation based on DDPM. In this way, by
 √  injecting distinct features of anomalies into the latent variable
 zT = ᾱT zsrc + 1 − ᾱT  (13)
 in the generative process, the generated embedding can possess
 T
where ᾱT = t=1 (1 − βt ) and β1 , ..., βT is a fixed variance the anomalous label of zref . At the same time, the input of
schedule [21]. Then, we feed the prior zT into the reverse the generative process is the prior derived from zsrc ; thus, the
diffusion process and exert the condition cano on this reverse generated embedding still has characteristics of zsrc .
process to generate an embedding with the anomalous label.
We approximate the Markov transition under the condition cano C. Counterfactual GNN
as follows: We here incorporate the anomaly embedding generator Gano
  
 pθ (zt−1 |zt , cano ) ≈ pθ zt−1 |zt , fh (zt−1 ) = fh (zt−1
 ref ) (14) into a GAT to build the counterfactual GNN, which can generate effective augmented data by involving generated anomaly
where zt−1
 ref is sampled by (3) and fh (·) is a high-pass filter. embeddings into the neighborhood aggregation process. Fig. 4
 In each Markov transition, (14) tries to incorporate the high- presents the neighborhood aggregation process. For the original
frequency information extracted from zref by fh (·) into the GNN in Fig. 4(a), the representation of the target node v0 is obgenerated embedding. Since anomalies tend to have different tained by aggregating the embeddings of its neighbors directly.
features from their neighbors (high-frequency information), and For the counterfactual GNN in Fig. 4(b), before neighborhood
normal nodes tend to share common features with their nor- aggregation, we first select the node with heterophily dominant
mal neighbors (low-frequency information) [10], [11] high- neighbors (such as v0 ) and translate a part of its neighbors
frequency information can be regarded as the distinct features (e.g., v1 and v5 ) into anomalous ones (e.g., v1 and v5 ) by using
of the anomalies. Hence, we utilize the high-pass filter fh (·) Gano . Then, the generated nodes are used to replace the original
to extract it from zt−1
 ref (corrupted zref ), and inject this informa- neighbors for GNN neighborhood aggregation to compute the
tion into the generated embedding. As a result, the embedding representation z0 of the target node v0 .
7560 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 A representation computed by the counterfactual GNN is counterfactual representations of anomalies are enhanced by
regarded as counterfactual data because its generation process involving information of generated anomalous neighbors. The
involves unseen nodes. Moreover, the counterfactual represen- proposed data augmentation method scarcely requires labeled
tation will have the same label as the one calculated by the data since its main components—the heterophilic node detector
original GNN, as changing a few edges/neighbors will not and DDPM-based generator—are unsupervised. At the same
greatly impact the node identification (label) information [22], time, this method can also be used to enhance node representa-
[23]. Hence, this counterfactual GNN can be applied to test data tions of test data because it requires no labels for the test data,
to obtain better node representations. and the computed counterfactual representations have the same
 We use the GATs [9] as the backbone of the counterfactual labels as the source ones.
GNN, which introduces the masked attention mechanism to
represent the importance of different adjacent nodes. Formally,
in each layer l − 1, the node vi integrates the features of neigh- D. Discussions
boring nodes to obtain representations of layer l via In this section, we show the connection between our model
 ⎛ ⎞ and GNNs as well as causal representation learning on graphs.
 1) Relation to GNNs: GNN has been a mainstream techhi = σ ⎝
 (l) (l−1) ⎠
 aij W · hj (16)
 nique for graph anomaly detection due to its ability to learn
 j∈Vi ∪Vi ∪{vi }
 expressive node representations by aggregating node’s local
where σ refers to a nonlinear activation function (e.g., ReLU), neighborhoods [8], [31]. One of the key components in CAGAD
Vi is the set of neighbors for vi (excluding the neighbors se- is the counterfactual GNN which manipulates the neighborhood
lected as the source ones), Vi is the set of neighbors corre- aggregation to produce counterfactual node representations. In
sponding to the embeddings generated by Gano , and aij is the the following, we present a detailed comparison between the
attention coefficient between node vi and node vj , which can vanilla GNN and the proposed counterfactual GNN.
be computed as a) The original GNN: Given the adjacency matrix A indi-
 (l) (l) cating connections between nodes in V and the node attributes
 exp(σ(aT [Whi ⊕ Whj ]))
 aij = (17) X, the original GNN computes the node representations by
 (l) (l)
 k∈Vi ∪Vi ∪{vi } exp(σ(a [Whi ⊕ Whk ]))
 T aggregating features from the local neighborhoods iteratively
where ⊕ is the concatenation operation and attention vector H1 = GNN1 (A, X)
a is a trainable weight vector that assigns importance to dif-
 H2 = GNN2 (A, H1 )
ferent neighbors of node vi , allowing the model to highlight
the features of the important neighboring node that is more ...
task-relevant. Z = GNNL (A, HL−1 ) (20)
 To incorporate high-order neighborhood, multiple layers are
adopted to build the graph-attentive encoder where GNNL is the last aggregation layer and Z = [z1 , ..., zn ]
 ⎛ ⎞ is the final learned node representations from the GNN. The
 learned representations Z can be adopted to identify anomahi = σ ⎝ aij W(1) · xj ⎠
 (1) (1)
 lies from normal nodes by classification-based models or
 j∈Vi ∪Vi ∪{vi } reconstruction-error-based methods.
 ...... b) The counterfactual GNN: In the proposed model, ac-
 ⎛ ⎞
 cording to the detection results obtained by the heterophilic
 zi = σ ⎝
 (L) (l−1) ⎠
 aij W(L) · hj (18) node detector (whether  nodes are the heterophilic
  ones), node
 j∈Vi ∪Vi ∪{vi } representations Z = zo1 , ..., zom , zhm+1 , ..., zhn are split into two
 groups: one for nonheterophilic node representations Zo =
where zi is the latent representation of node vi . In this way, the [zo1 , ..., zom ] and another for heterophilic node representations
graph-attentive encoder is able to map the learned node repre-  
 Zh = zhm+1 , ..., zhn . For the nonheterophilic nodes, their representations by capturing the nonlinearity of topological structure
 sentations Zo are still computed by using the original GNN (20).
and node attributes.
 On the other hand, for the heterophilic nodes, their repre-
 The aggregated representations zi are then fed into another
 sentations Zh are learned by the counterfactual GNN, where
MLP with a Sigmoid function to compute the abnormal proba part of neighbors will be translated into the new ones with
ability pi . The weighted cross-entropy loss is then used for the
 anomalous labels. The aggregating process is expressed as
model training
 L= (ϕyi log(pi ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − pi )) (19) H1 = GNN1 (A, X)
 i  1s = Gano (H1s , Zref )
 H
where ϕ is the proportion of anomaly labels (yi = 1) to normal  s) 1
 H2 = GNN2 (A, (H1 − H1s ) ∪ H
labels (yi = 0).
 This model can improve the detection performance by con- ...
sidering augmented counterfactual representations because the Zh = GNNL (A, HL−1 ) (21)
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7561

where H1s is the embedding set of selected neighbors to be TABLE II
 STATISTICS OF DATASETS
translated into anomalous ones. The counterfactual GNN still
takes the adjacency matrix A and the node attributes X as Datasets # Node # Edge # Feature Anomaly (%)
inputs. But during iterative aggregation, a part of the neighbor
 PubMed 19 717 44 338 500 20.81%
embeddings of the heterophilic nodes are translated into the T-finance 39 357 21 222 543 10 4.58%
ones with anomalous labels by our designed generator Gano , Amazon 11 944 4 398 392 25 6.87%
and these generated embeddings are involved for learning node YelpChi 45 954 3 846 979 32 14.53%
representations. By manipulating the neighborhood aggregation, we can manufacture counterfactual representations that
are more distinguishable from normal node representations and general GNN models [8], [9], [35], [36], graph data augmensubsequently improve the detection performance. tation approaches [22], [37], and state-of-the-art methods for
 2) Relation to Causal Representation Learning on Graph: graph-based anomaly detection [10], [12], [13], [14]. GAT [9] is
Causal representation learning aims to learn a representation a graph attention network that employs the attention mechanism
exposing the causal relations that are invariant under different for neighbor aggregation. GIN [8] is a GNN model connecting
interventions. Generating counterfactual data are an effective to the Weisfeiler–Lehman graph isomorphism test. GraphSAGE
way to remove spurious correlations, help learn better repre- [35] is a GNN model based on a fixed sample number of
sentations, and further improve the classification performance. the neighboring nodes. GWNN [36] is a graph wavelet neural
Existing data augmentation methods for graph data mainly fo- network using heat kernels to generate wavelet transforms. LAcus on manipulating edges or node attributes, and then they GNN [37] is an efficient data augmentation strategy to genutilize GNNs to generate counterfactual augmented data. As- erate more features in the local neighborhood to enhance the
suming that A  and X denote the manipulated adjacency matrix expressive power of GNNs. GCA [22] is a contrastive frameand attribute matrix individually, general augmentation meth- work that performs data augmentation on both topology and
ods adopt the plain GNN to produce augmented data by con- attribute levels to enhance node representations. GraphConsis
sidering the manipulated adjacency matrix: Z = GNN(A,  X), [14] is a heterogeneous GNN that tackles context, feature, and
 
or the manipulated attribute matrix: Z = GNN(A, X), or both: relation inconsistency problems in graph anomaly detection.
Z = GNN(A, 
  X). CAREGNN [12] is a camouflage-resistant GNN that enhances
 By contrast, our model CAGAD differentiates them in two the aggregation process with the designed modules against
aspects: 1) instead of simply changing edges and attributes, CA- camouflages. PC-GNN [13] is a GNN-based imbalanced learn-
GAD manipulates the neighborhood aggregation process to pro- ing method to solve the class imbalance problem in graphduce counterfactual augmented data, which can generate more based fraud detection via resampling. BWGNN [10] is a beta
flexible augmented data; and 2) unlike these methods, which wavelet GNN, which can better capture anomaly information
principally focus on enhancing training data, our model can be on a graph.
applied to test data in boosting representation of anomalies. 3) Experiment Setup: We use 1000 diffusion steps for the
 DDPM-based generators, considering both efficiency and effectiveness. For each heterophilic node, we empirically select
 IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 70% of its neighbors as the source nodes and translate their
 In this section, we conduct empirical evaluations to demon- embeddings into anomalous embeddings. We set the length L
strate the efficacy of our approach concerning anomaly detec- of the sequence to the average of one-hop neighbors. We train
tion performance, and the impact of the translated neighbor the detection models for 100 epochs by Adam optimizer with a
number and the counterfactual augmentation technique. learning rate of 0.01, and save the model with the best macro-F1
 on validation data for testing. We use 1% labeled data (both for
 normal and anomalous nodes) as the training set, the remaining
A. Experimental Settings
 data are split as validation and test sets by a ratio of 1:2. We
 1) Datasets: We perform experiments on four datasets in- use the following three metrics to present a comprehensive
troduced in Table II. PubMed [32] is a citation network of evaluation: Macro-F1 is the unweighted mean of the F1-score
biomedical science, where the nodes and edges denote the of two classes. AUC-ROC is the area under the ROC curve,
scientific publication and citation connections between publi- referring to the probability that a randomly chosen anomaly
cations. T-Finance [10] is a transaction network. The nodes receives a higher score than a randomly chosen normal object.
are unique anonymized accounts with 10-D features related to AUC-PR is the area under the curve of precision against recall
registration days, logging activities, and interaction frequency. at different thresholds. The models are implemented based on
The edges in the graph are transaction records of accounts. PyTorch and DGL. We conduct all the experiments on Ubuntu
Amazon [33] is a review network, where nodes represent users, 20.04 with an Intel Core i9-12900K CPU, an NVIDIA GeForce
and the edges indicate that two users have reviewed or rated the RTX 3090 GPU, and 64 GB memory.
same product. YelpChi [34] is a review network collected from
yelp.com, where nodes represent reviewers and links suggest
 B. Anomaly Detection Performance
two reviewers have commented on the same product.
 2) Baselines: We compare the proposed framework with We report the anomaly detection performance of CAGAD
three types of baselines with different techniques, including and the baselines in Table III, and we have the following
7562 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN CAGAD AND BASELINES

 Method PubMed T-Finance Amazon YelpChi
 F1 AUC-ROC AUC-PR F1 AUC-ROC AUC-PR F1 AUC-ROC AUC-PR F1 AUC-ROC AUC-PR
 GAT 55.15 53.24 46.24 53.15 52.04 43.10 60.84 73.45 68.97 50.27 50.95 24.06
 GIN 59.25 69.48 60.35 58.25 68.86 57.03 68.69 78.83 70.22 57.57 64.73 30.57
 GraphSAGE 59.63 66.35 57.63 59.03 66.35 54.95 70.78 75.37 70.10 58.41 67.58 31.92
 GWNN 71.64 87.68 76.16 70.64 86.68 71.79 87.01 85.37 79.40 59.10 67.16 31.72
 LA-GNN 73.15 89.05 77.35 72.15 88.05 72.92 65.15 84.15 78.26 57.25 68.05 34.57
 GCA 74.54 90.28 78.89 73.54 88.28 73.11 66.54 86.62 80.56 59.34 68.28 34.71
 GraphConsis 73.39 90.56 78.66 71.73 90.28 74.75 68.59 74.11 68.92 56.79 66.41 37.46
 CAREGNN 75.47 90.83 75.98 73.32 90.50 71.95 68.78 88.69 80.47 62.18 75.07 39.26
 PC-GNN 63.06 91.37 79.36 62.06 90.76 75.17 79.86 90.40 84.07 59.82 75.47 40.58
 BWGNN 84.49 93.51 81.22 84.89 91.15 75.49 90.92 89.45 83.19 67.02 76.95 43.41
 CAGAD 86.61 95.52 84.39 87.65 93.34 76.70 92.30 92.43 85.23 68.44 78.67 44.78

 Note: The best results are highlighted in bold and the second-best are underlined.

Fig. 5. Ablation study results on four datasets.

observations: 1) For overall detection results, CAGAD yields their suspiciousness under “vanilla” neighborhood aggregation.
uniformly better performance than all the baselines across four BWGNN, which is the best baseline, introduces the graph
datasets. In particular, CAGAD obtains on average 2.35%, wavelet theory to remedy this issue, significantly improving the
2.53%, and 2.79% improvements over the state of the art, performance compared to others. However, by incorporating
BWGNN, in terms of F1, AUC-ROC, and AUC-PR, respec- counterfactual augmented data, CAGAD can more effectively
tively. 2) The improvements of CAGAD are more significant capture the anomaly information on the graph and outperform
on T-Finance. We speculate this is because the anomalies in BWGNN by a large margin.
T-Finance are more sparse, and the normal neighbors of anomalies may hinder the vanilla GNN from learning distinguish-
 C. Ablation Study
able representations. Instead, CAGAD can generate augmented
counterfactual data to acquire better anomaly representations Here, we investigate the contributions of the essential
and further advocate for anomaly detection performance. 3) The components in CAGAD, i.e., the generated anomalous emtwo graph data augmentation methods, LA-GNN and GCA, beddings and the attention mechanism, taking into account
have better performances than the general GNN models (e.g., different components: 1) CAGAD-two, which removes the gen-
GraphSAGE and GWNN). These two models are even com- erated embeddings and the attention mechanism of the model;
petitive with the models that are specifically designed for graph 2) CAGAD-ano, which removes the generated anomalous emanomaly detection (e.g., CAREGNN and PC-GNN). The reason beddings produced by Gano during neighborhood aggregation;
is that only 1% of nodes are adopted as labeled data for model 3) CAGAD-att, which removes the attention mechanism of
training, and data augmentation can effectively complement the neighborhood aggregation; and (4) CAGAD-ori, which keeps
limited training data. This result justifies our motivation that the original embedding from being replaced by the generated
the proposed counterfactual data augmentation can enlarge the one for neighborhood aggregation.
training data and be more effective than other augmentation- The results are shown in Fig. 5. We summarize our observabased or sampling-based GNN methods for anomaly detection. tions as follows.
 Not surprisingly, the three anomaly detection baselines, 1) When removing the generated embeddings and attent-
GraphConsis, CAREGNN, and PC-GNN, outperform general ion mechanism, CAGAD-two becomes a plain GNN
GNN models. However, they ignore the problem that the and performs the worst, suggesting that without the
anomalies with numerous benign neighbors might attenuate counterfactual augmented data, traditional neighborhood
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7563

Fig. 6. F1 performance with different numbers of translated neighbors.

Fig. 7. AUC-ROC performance with different numbers of translated neighbors.

 aggregation mechanisms cannot effectively capture node, we translate a different proportion of its neighbors into
 anomalous information, resulting in poor performance. anomalous ones and observe the results when selecting p =
 Nevertheless, our designed data augmentation method [40, 60, 80, 100]% of all the obtained heterophilic nodes for
 can address this issue and boost detection performance. neighbor manipulation.
 2) CAGAD-ano suffers from significant performance degra- The F1 and AUC-ROC of the four datasets are presented
 dation due to the removal of the DDPM-based gener- in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. For all the p values, the perator, indicating that involving the generated anomalous formance of CAGAD consistently improves with the increase
 embeddings for the neighborhood aggregation yields an of translated neighbors on all datasets in terms of F1 and
 obvious performance gain. The generated anomalous em- AUC-ROC. The performance improvement is more significant
 beddings can make the representations of anomalies more for T-Finance and Amazon datasets when we increase the ratio
 distinguishable from normal nodes, and further improve of translated neighbors, as the ratios of anomalies to all neighdetection performance. bors in T-Finance and Amazon datasets are lower. For example,
 3) After eliminating the attention mechanism, the perfor- the ratio on Amazon is only 6.8%, while the ratio of anomalies
 mance of CAGAD-att drops significantly, which shows on PubMed is around 20.8%. When there are only a few anomathat the attention mechanism can enhance the detection lies, for an anomalous node, the proportion between normal and
 performance. This is particularly true for our case as anomalous neighbors is relatively high. Hence, we need more
 the counterfactual GNN requires adaptively adjusting the anomalous neighboring nodes to balance the neighborhoods.
 weights of the generated embeddings to obtain better This observation demonstrates that our proposed counterfacrepresentations. Hence, it is also essential to include the tual data augmentation is more effective on graphs with scarce
 attention mechanism in CAGAD. anomalies. Besides, when the selected neighbor ratio exceeds
 4) Involving the source embeddings for neighborhood ag- 70% the performance keeps stable, which indicates that just a
 gregation lowers the performance slightly, which indi- given number of anomalous neighboring nodes are required to
 cates that the designed replacement strategy is effective obtain expected performance. Also, selecting more heterophilic
 for anomaly detection. By combining all the components, nodes for neighbor manipulation (p) improves anomaly de-
 CAGAD achieves the best performance. tection performance, which indicates that the heterophilic
 node detector can accurately identify nodes with heterophily
D. Influence of Translated Neighbors dominant neighbors, and manipulating them can benefit
 anomaly detection.
 The number of translated neighbors for heterophilic nodes
is a critical hyperparameter that affects the distinguishability
of the learned representations and, subsequently, influences E. The Effect of Detection Models
the anomaly detection performance. We investigate the per- We further investigate the effectiveness of the proposed counformance change by altering the number of translated neigh- terfactual augmentation when applying it to other GNN-based
bors. In these experiments, for each obtained heterophilic detection methods: GCN and GraphSAGE. We evaluate the
7564 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 that for anomaly detection tasks, there are only two categories,
 making the identification of heterophilic nodes feasible. The
 weight parameter γ in (15) is used to scale the different anomaly
 features for embedding generation. As shown in the right of
 Fig. 9, a higher value of γ around 1.1 is preferable to obtain a
 good performance since higher γ enables the generator to excessively amplify the anomalous characteristics in the generated
 embeddings.

 V. RELATED WORK
 This work is mainly related to three research areas: graph
 anomaly detection, graph data augmentation, and diffusion
 probabilistic models. Here, we will present an overview of the
Fig. 8. Effect of the augmented data. (a) Detection performance using GCN most closely related works in each area and highlight the major
model. (b) Detection performance using GraphSAGE model. differences between our study and these works.

 A. Anomaly Detection on Graphs
 Since graph-structured data are ubiquitous and have the capacity to model a wide range of real-world complex systems,
 identifying anomalies in graphs has drawn increased research
 interest [38], [39], [40]. Due to their demonstrated superior
 modeling power for graphs, various GNN-based methods have
 been proposed to detect anomalies on graphs. The pioneer used
 GNNs to build an autoencoder to reconstruct the attribute and
 structure information simultaneously, and the abnormality is
Fig. 9. Effect of the hyperparameters. evaluated by reconstruction errors [41]. Based on this framework, a tailored deep GCNN is designed to detect local, global,
 and structural anomalies by capturing community structure in
model performance with and without the augmented data for the graph [42]. Contrastive learning and self-supervised learngraph anomaly detection and denote the two schemes as Mod- ing with GNNs are also introduced to identify the anomalies in
elName w/ aug and ModelName w/o aug. Fig. 8 shows the F1 attributed networks [23], [43]. Metalearning and hypersphere
and AUC-ROC for the GCN and GraphSAGE models on four learning are incorporated into GNNs to leverage the labeled
datasets. The augmented data are generated by our designed samples for anomaly detection [44], [45], [46], [47].
DDPM-based generator. We observe that for both the GCN and To remedy the problem that numerous neighbors with nor-
GraphSAGE models, the one with the augmented data performs mal labels might make the anomaly representations learned
better. For example, the AUC of GCN w/ aug is around 2.6% by GNNs less distinguishable, multiple resampling (e.g., overhigher than that of GCN w/o aug on average. The results suggest sampling and under-sampling) strategies are designed in [12],
that the augmented data generated by our method can improve [13], and [14]. Researchers also utilized reweighting methods
the detection performance, and the proposed counterfactual data to assign different weights to different samples [15], [16], [17].
augmentation strategy can be applied to other graph anomaly More recently, spectral filters are explored to enhance the exdetection frameworks. pressive power of GNNs for learning better anomaly representations [10], [11].
F. Hyperparameter Sensitivity The resampling and reweighting strategies generally require
 a number of labeled samples and can only manipulate the train-
 We now evaluate the impact of two important hyperparam- ing data for building a robust model and ignore the manipueters α and γ. In the heterophilic node detector, a heterophilic lation of test data where there still exists the phenomenon of
node is identified by comparing its heterophily degree hdi with imbalanced neighbors. We also aim to change the neighbors
α, which directly influences the results of the identification. As of anomalies to enhance node representation but with a more
shown on the left of Fig. 9, the detection performance improves proper neighborhood generation process for learning anomaly
with the increase of α and then starts to decrease when α > 0.6. representations instead of sampling existing ones.
When α is too small, many nodes might be incorrectly identified
as heterophilic. In contrast, larger α prevents our designed het-
 B. Graph Data Augmentation
erophilic node detector from taking effect since too few nodes
are identified. This indicates that a proper α can obtain expected These techniques aim to generate extra data by applyidentification results. The reason may be attributed to the fact ing label-preserving transformations on inputs to improve the
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7565

model’s generalization capability. A widely used scheme is VI. CONCLUSION
related to edge operations, such as edge dropping and subgraph
 In this article, we proposed a CAGAD that can produce counsampling [48], [49]. One of the early works [50] randomly
 terfactual data by steering the process of GNN neighborhood
drops a fixed fraction of edges to generate new graph views
 aggregation. In this framework, we designed a graph-specific
for node classification. Following this, task-irrelevant edges
 diffusion model, which can translate a node embedding to the
are identified and removed by the MLP-based graph sparsione with the anomalous label. This model was incorporated
fication model [51] and the nuclear norm regularization loss
 into GNN neighborhood aggregation to build a counterfactual
[52] to improve the generalization performance. These aug-
 GNN, which can learn distinguishable node representations to
mentation methods are also applied to contrastive learning and
 boost anomaly detection performance. The experiments on four
self-supervised learning for node classification and anomaly
 real-world datasets showed that CAGAD achieved state-of-thedetection [22], [53]. Recently, feature augmentation has been
 art performance compared to many strong baselines, and the
adopted for graph data augmentation, which aims to improve
 counterfactual graph augmentation strategy can be applied to
the node feature quality by learning additional task-relevant
 other anomaly detection frameworks.
features. Feature augmentation is generally utilized to initiate
 There were two limitations to our proposed model, which can
node features on plain graphs to smoothly incorporate into GNN
 become fruitful directions for further investigation. First, our
models and supplement additional node features that are hard to
 counterfactual data augmentation method was only applicable
capture by downstream models [37], [54]. Besides, counterfacto binary classification scenarios. Hence, we are interested in
tual data augmentation is exploited to improve the performance
 extending the model to accommodate situations involving mulof node classification and link prediction [55], [56], [57]. The
 ticlass classification. Second, we only investigated the effecresearchers either generate counterfactual data by injecting intiveness of static graphs. Thus, more evaluation is needed to
terventions on the sensitive attribute of nodes [55], [57] or find
 understand the feasibility in the context of more complex graph
out counterfactual links which are the most similar node pairs
 data, e.g., heterogeneous graphs, spatial–temporal graphs, and
with different treatments (neighborhood relations) [56] to boost
 dynamic graphs.
the performance.
 The above-mentioned graph data augmentation methods focus on increasing training set by creating label-preserving data
or seeking existing counterfactual samples. By contrast, we aim REFERENCES
to alleviate the problem that GNNs produce indistinguishable [1] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
representations for extremely imbalanced node distribution in with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
anomaly detection. Correspondingly, our model translates nor- pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
 [2] K. Liu et al., “Bond: Benchmarking unsupervised outlier node detection
mal nodes into the ones with opposite labels and steers GNN on static attributed graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
neighborhood aggregation to manufacture effective counterfac- (NIPS), vol. 35, 2022, pp. 27021–27035.
tual data. Also, our method can produce counterfactual data [3] X. Shen, W. Lv, J. Qiu, A. Kaur, F. Xiao, and F. Xia, “Trust-aware
 detection of malicious users in dating social networks,” IEEE Trans.
in an unsupervised way, which can be applied to test data for Comput. Social Syst., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2587–2598, Oct. 2023.
enhancing node representations. [4] Y. Yang, Y. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Dong, F. Wu, and Y. Zhuang, “Mining fraudsters and fraudulent strategies in large-scale mobile social networks,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 169–179, Jan. 2021.
 [5] J. Cui, C. Yan, and C. Wang, “ReMEMBeR: Ranking metric embedding-
C. Diffusion Probabilistic Models based multicontextual behavior profiling for online banking fraud de-
 Diffusion probabilistic models aim to generate high-quality tection,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 643–654,
 Jun. 2021.
data samples by reversing the diffusion process via a Markov [6] W. Hu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, X. Huang, and Z. Cheng, “Understanding
chain with discrete timesteps [21] and have acquired state-of- electricity-theft behavior via multi-source data,” in Proc. Web Conf.,
the-art generation instances for many real-world applications. 2020, pp. 2264–2274.
 [7] H. Chen, H. Yin, T. Chen, Q. V. H. Nguyen, W.-C. Peng, and X. Li,
For example, image generation is one of the major applications “Exploiting centrality information with graph convolutions for network
where diffusion models are exploited to produce high-quality representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2019,
images [28], [58], speed up the sampling process [25], [59], pp. 590–601.
 [8] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
conduct image super-resolution [60], [61], and image-to-image neural networks?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019.
translation [29], [62]. Waveform synthesis is another main ap- [9] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
plication where the diffusion models are utilized to manufac- Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Representations, 2018.
ture time-domain speech audio from the prior noise [63], [64]. [10] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks
Diffusion models have also been applied to voice conversion for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022,
[65], shape generation [66], and time series forecasting [67]. pp. 21076–21089.
 [11] Z. Chai et al., “Can abnormality be detected by graph neural networks?”
Different from these methods that use diffusion models for in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 1945–1951.
regular data types (e.g., image and waveforms), we present a [12] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing
graph-specific diffusion model, which can iteratively extract graph neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 315–324.
distinct features of anomalies and exert them on the generative [13] Y. Liu et al., “Pick and choose: A GNN-based imbalanced learning
process to manufacture anomalous nodes. approach for fraud detection,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021, pp. 3168–3177.
7566 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 11, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

[14] Z. Liu, Y. Dou, P. S. Yu, Y. Deng, and H. Peng, “Alleviating the [39] L. He, G. Xu, S. Jameel, X. Wang, and H. Chen, “Graph-aware deep
 inconsistency problem of applying graph neural network to fraud de- fusion networks for online spam review detection,” IEEE Trans. Comput.
 tection,” in Proc. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2020, Social Syst., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2557–2565, Oct. 2023.
 pp. 1569–1572. [40] X. Li, C. Xiao, Z. Feng, S. Pang, W. Tai, and F. Zhou, “Controlled
[15] D. Wang et al., “A semi-supervised graph attentive network for finan- graph neural networks with denoising diffusion for anomaly detection,”
 cial fraud detection,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019, Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 237, 2024, Art. no. 121533.
 pp. 598–607. [41] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
[16] L. Cui, H. Seo, M. Tabar, F. Ma, S. Wang, and D. Lee, “DETERRENT: on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019,
 Knowledge guided graph attention network for detecting healthcare pp. 594–602.
 misinformation,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data [42] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
 Mining, 2020, pp. 492–502. detection,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022,
[17] C. Liu, L. Sun, X. Ao, J. Feng, Q. He, and H. Yang, “Intention-aware pp. 657–665.
 heterogeneous graph attention networks for fraud transactions detection,” [43] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2021, contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
 pp. 3280–3288. Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
[18] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for [44] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 2, detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
 pp. 1–38, 2021. pp. 2448–2456.
[19] D. He, C. Liang, H. Liu, M. Wen, P. Jiao, and Z. Feng, “Block modeling- [45] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int.
 guided graph convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020.
 Intell., 2022, pp. 4022–4029. [46] A. Kumagai, T. Iwata, and Y. Fujiwara, “Semi-supervised anomaly
[20] T. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Yue, Y. Yang, Y. Tong, and J. Bai, “Graph detection on attributed graphs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
 pointer neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, 2021, pp. 1–8.
 pp. 8832–8839. [47] S. Zhou, X. Huang, N. Liu, Q. Tan, and F.-L. Chung, “Unseen anomaly
[21] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” detection on networks via multi-hypersphere learning,” in Proc. SIAM
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851. Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 262–270.
[22] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Graph con- [48] K. Ding, Z. Xu, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Data augmentation for deep
 trastive learning with adaptive augmentation,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021, graph learning: A survey,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newslett.,
 pp. 2069–2080. vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 61–77, 2022.
[23] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, [49] T. Zhao, Y. Liu, L. Neves, O. Woodford, M. Jiang, and N. Shah, “Data
 “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly augmentation for graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220– Intell., 2021, pp. 11015–11023.
 12233, Dec. 2023. [50] Y. Rong, W. Huang, T. Xu, and J. Huang, “DropEdge: Towards deep
[24] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep graph convolutional networks on node classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in Proc. Learn. Representations, 2020.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 2256–2265. [51] C. Zheng et al., “Robust graph representation learning via neural
[25] Z. Xiao, K. Kreis, and A. Vahdat, “Tackling the generative learning sparsification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 11458–11468.
 trilemma with denoising diffusion GANs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [52] D. Luo et al., “Learning to drop: Robust graph neural network via
 Representations, 2022. topological denoising,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
[26] Q. Gao, F. Zhou, K. Zhang, F. Zhang, and G. Trajcevski, “Adversarial 2021, pp. 779–787.
 human trajectory learning for trip recommendation,” IEEE Trans. Neural [53] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly de-
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1764–1776, Apr. 2023. tection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
[27] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
 convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907. Jun. 2022.
[28] C. Meng, Y. Song, J. Song, J. Wu, J.-Y. Zhu, and S. Ermon, “SDEdit: [54] K. Kong et al., “Robust optimization as data augmentation for large-
 Image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations,” in scale graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. pp. 60–69.
[29] A. Sinha, J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “D2c: Diffusion-decoding [55] J. Ma, R. Guo, M. Wan, L. Yang, A. Zhang, and J. Li, “Learning fair
 models for few-shot conditional generation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. node representations with graph counterfactual fairness,” in Proc. Int.
 Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 12533–12548. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022, pp. 695–703.
[30] C. Xiao, Z. Gou, W. Tai, K. Zhang, and F. Zhou, “Imputation-based time- [56] T. Zhao, G. Liu, D. Wang, W. Yu, and M. Jiang, “Learning from
 series anomaly detection with conditional weight-incremental diffusion counterfactual links for link prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 models,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Learn., 2022, pp. 26911–26926.
 2023, pp. 2742–2751. [57] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
[31] X. Xu, F. Zhou, K. Zhang, and S. Liu, “CCGL: Contrastive cas- graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
 cade graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 5, Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
 pp. 4539–4554, May 2022. [58] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and
[32] P. Sen, G. Namata, M. Bilgic, L. Getoor, B. Galligher, and T. Eliassi- B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differ-
 Rad, “Collective classification in network data,” AI Mag., vol. 29, ential equations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
 no. 3, pp. 93–93, 2008. [59] T. Dockhorn, A. Vahdat, and K. Kreis, “Score-based generative modeling
[33] J. J. McAuley and J. Leskovec, “From amateurs to connoisseurs: with critically-damped Langevin diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Modeling the evolution of user expertise through online reviews,” in Representations, 2022.
 Proc. Web Conf., 2013, pp. 897–908. [60] C. Saharia, J. Ho, W. Chan, T. Salimans, D. J. Fleet, and M. Norouzi,
[34] S. Rayana and L. Akoglu, “Collective opinion spam detection: Bridging “Image super-resolution via iterative refinement,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 review networks and metadata,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4713–4726, Apr. 2023.
 Discovery Data Mining, 2015, pp. 985–994. [61] H. Li et al., “SRDiff: Single image super-resolution with diffusion
[35] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation probabilistic models,” Neurocomputing, vol. 479, pp. 47–59, 2022.
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, [62] H. Sasaki, C. G. Willcocks, and T. P. Breckon, “UNIT-DDPM: Unpaired
 pp. 1025–1035. image translation with denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” 2021,
[36] B. Xu, H. Shen, Q. Cao, Y. Qiu, and X. Cheng, “Graph wavelet neural arXiv:2104.05358.
 network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019. [63] N. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Zen, R. J. Weiss, M. Norouzi, and W. Chan,
[37] S. Liu et al., “Local augmentation for graph neural networks,” in Proc. “WaveGrad: Estimating gradients for waveform generation,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 14054–14072. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021.
[38] Y. Gao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Liu, H. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Addressing [64] M. W. Lam, J. Wang, D. Su, and D. Yu, “BDDM: Bilateral denoising
 heterophily in graph anomaly detection: A perspective of graph spec- diffusion models for fast and high-quality speech synthesis,” in Proc.
 trum,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 1528–1538. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.
XIAO et al.: COUNTERFACTUAL DATA AUGMENTATION WITH DENOISING DIFFUSION 7567

[65] V. Popov, I. Vovk, V. Gogoryan, T. Sadekova, M. Kudinov, and Xuan Li received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 J. Wei, “Diffusion-based voice conversion with fast maximum likelihood in software engineering from Sichuan University,
 sampling scheme,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. Chengdu, Sichuan, China, in 2009 and 2012, re-
[66] L. Zhou, Y. Du, and J. Wu, “3D shape generation and completion spectively, where he is currently working toward the
 through point-voxel diffusion,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, Ph.D. degree in electronic information.
 pp. 5826–5835. He is currently a Teacher with Sichuan Post
[67] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive and Telecommunication College, Chengdu, Sichuan,
 denoising diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series China. His research interests include anomaly detecforecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8857–8868. tion, data analytics, social network data mining, and
 knowledge discovery.
 Chunjing Xiao received the Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from the University
 of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Goce Trajcevski (Member, IEEE) received the
 Chengdu, Sichuan, China, in 2013. B.Sc. degree in informatics and automation from
 He is currently an Associate Professor with the the University of Sts. Kiril i Metodij, Skopje, North
 School of Computer and Information Engineering, Macedonia, in 1989, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 Henan University, Kaifeng, China. He was a Vis- in computer science from the University of Illinois
 iting Scholar with the Department of Electrical at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, in 1995 and 2002,
 Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern respectively.
 University, Evanston, IL, USA. His research inter- He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 ests include anomaly detection, recommender sys- Department of Electrical and Computer Engineertems, and Internet of Things. ing, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA. His
 research has been funded by the NSF, ONR, BEA,
 and Northrop Grumman Corporation. In addition to a book chapter and three
 Shikang Pang received the B.E. degree in software
 encyclopedia chapters, he has coauthored over 140 publications in refereed
 engineering from the School of Computer and Inconferences and journals. His research interests include the areas of spatiotemformation Engineering, Huanghuai University, Zhuporal data management, uncertainty and reactive behavior management in
 madian, China, in 2019. He is currently working
 different application settings, and incorporating multiple contexts.
 toward the M.S. degree in computer science with the
 Dr. Trajcevski was the General Co-Chair of the IEEE International Con-
 School of Computer and Information Engineering,
 ference on Data Engineering 2014 and ACM SIGSPATIAL 2019, the PC
 Henan University, Kaifeng, China.
 Co-Chair of the ADBIS 2018 and ACM SIGSPATIAL 2016 and 2017, and
 His research interests include anomaly detection,
 has served in various roles in organizing committees in numerous conferences
 data analytics, and social network data mining.
 and workshops. He is an Associate Editor of ACM Transactions on Spatial
 Algorithms and Systems and Geoinformatica journals.

 Xovee Xu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re- Fan Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. deceived the B.S. and M.S. degrees in software en- gree in computer science from Sichuan University,
 gineering from the University of Electronic Sci- Chengdu, China, in 2003, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
 ence and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, degrees in computer science from the University
 Sichuan, China, in 2018 and 2021, respectively, of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
 where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. Chengdu, Sichuan, China, in 2006 and 2012, redegree in computer science. spectively, where he is currently a Professor with the
 His research interests include social network School of Information and Software Engineering.
 data mining and knowledge discovery, primarily fo- His research interests include machine learning,
 cuses on information diffusion in full-scale graphs, neural networks, spatiotemporal data management,
 human-centered data mining, representation learn- graph learning, recommender systems, and social
ing, and their novel applications in various social and scientific scenarios. network data mining.