240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

 Coupled Attention Networks for Multivariate
 Time Series Anomaly Detection
Feng Xia , Senior Member, IEEE, Xin Chen , Shuo Yu , Member, IEEE, Mingliang Hou , Mujie Liu ,
 and Linlin You , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Multivariate time series anomaly detection I. INTRODUCTION
(MTAD) plays a vital role in a wide variety of real-world
 ENSORS of various types have been deployed in the real
application domains. Over the past few years, MTAD
has attracted rapidly increasing attention from both
academia and industry. Many deep learning and graph
 S world to perceive the state of entities or systems. The prevalence of smart sensors has enabled advanced infrastructures
learning models have been developed for effective anomaly such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and cyber-physical systems
detection in multivariate time series data, which enable
advanced applications such as smart surveillance and risk (CPS), which in turn have led to a technological revolution
management with unprecedented capabilities. Neverthe- in many domains, including smart cities, automated factories,
less, MTAD is facing critical challenges deriving from the digital twins, public security, self-driving vehicles, and epidependencies among sensors and variables, which often demic disease control. With increased sensing, computing, and
change over time. To address this issue, we propose a communication capabilities, smart sensors continue to generate
coupled attention-based neural network framework (CAN)
for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data large amounts of time series data in many real-world systems.
featuring dynamic variable relationships. We combine Detecting various anomalies in these time series data in an
adaptive graph learning methods with graph attention automatic and timely manner is critical to intelligent systems
to generate a global-local graph that can represent both and services [1]. Over these years, a great number of machine
global correlations and dynamic local correlations among learning models and algorithms have been developed to fulfill
sensors. To capture inter-sensor relationships and temporal dependencies, a convolutional neural network based this demand [2]. For instance, many researchers [3], [4] have
on the global-local graph is integrated with a temporal made use of deep learning and/or graph learning to achieve
self-attention module to construct a coupled attention real-time and accurate anomaly detection.
module. In addition, we develop a multilevel encoder- Despite significant advancements in deep anomaly detection,
decoder architecture that accommodates reconstruction multivariate time series data, which have become ubiquitous
and prediction tasks to better characterize multivariate time
series data. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets due to the use of a large number of smart sensors, cause
have been conducted to evaluate the performance of the unprecedented challenges for anomaly detection [5], [6], [7].
proposed CAN approach, and the results show that CAN In systems that feature multivariate time series data, tradisignificantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. tional anomaly detection methods might become inapplicable
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, multivariate time se- due to their inability to address multidimensional data and
ries, graph learning, graph attention networks. complex/temporal relationships. As a consequence, multivariate time series anomaly detection (MTAD) has attracted much
 attention in recent years [8], [9], [10]. In particular, deep learning
 Manuscript received 14 July 2022; revised 8 May 2023; accepted 21 provides a basis for learning complex multidimensional depen-
May 2023. Date of publication 2 June 2023; date of current version 15 dencies in multivariate time series [11], [12].
March 2024. This work was partially supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102060 and in part by the
 Another promising line of research in MTAD is the use of
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant graph learning (i.e., machine learning on graphs) [13]. Graph
DUT22RC(3)060. (Corresponding author: Shuo Yu.) learning is applicable to a variety of tasks (such as node classi-
 Feng Xia is with the School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: f.xia@ieee.org).
 fication, graph classification, link prediction, and clustering) in
 Xin Chen and Mingliang Hou are with the School of Software, many domains (such as medical diagnosis, knowledge graphs,
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116620, China (e-mail: xin.chen. drug discovery, computer vision, natural language processing,
jx@outlook.com; teemohold@outlook.com).
 Shuo Yu is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
 and recommender systems). In particular, graph neural networks
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail: shuo. (GNNs) are widely used to capture the dependencies among variyu@ieee.org). ables [14]. A popular trend is to represent relationships between
 Mujie Liu is with the Institute of Innovation, Science and Sustainability,
Federation University Australia, Ballarat, VIC 3353, Australia (e-mail:
 variables in the form of a graph [15]. In practice, there is often a
mujie.liu@ieee.org). lack of a priori knowledge about variable correlations in multi-
 Linlin You is with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, variate time series, and consequently, the corresponding graphs
Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China (e-mail: youllin@
mail.sysu.edu.cn).
 are missing. Some researchers (e.g., [16]) have used adaptive
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TETC.2023.3280577 learning methods to learn static graph structures from data.

 2168-6750 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 241

However, it has been recognized that the relationship in time se- r Comprehensive experimental evaluation: We conducted
ries data is dynamic transformation [17], and using a static graph extensive experiments on three real-world multivariate
to represent dynamic variable relationships is impracticable. To time series datasets. The experimental results demonstrate
address this challenge, graph attention networks (GATs) [18], the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed approach,
[19] have been used to detect dynamic variable interactions CAN, in comparison with state-of-the-art baselines.
while ignoring global correlations between variables. Although The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: We review
GNNs have demonstrated strong representational capabilities in related work on time series anomaly detection in Section II.
non-euclidean space [20], [21], GNNs and their variants lack the Section III provides relevant preliminaries in which the problem
ability to comprehensively construct dynamic graphs without a statement is given. The details of the proposed framework CAN
priori knowledge. are presented in Section IV, and in Section V, the performance
 To address the above knowledge gap in MTAD, this paper evaluation of CAN is discussed, and the experimental results are
proposes a novel coupled attention network (CAN), which takes analyzed. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.
advantage of graph learning, attention mechanisms, and convolutional neural networks. A global-local graph is established to
describe the dynamic correlations between variables in multi- II. RELATED WORK
variate time series. Specifically, learnable embedding vectors Time series can be univariate or multivariate. Accordingly,
are used to represent variable features, and embeddings can we categorize time series anomaly detection into univariate (time
learn global correlations between variables from training data. series) anomaly detection and multivariate (time series) anomaly
The global graph represents the correlations in the entire time detection. Univariate anomaly detection models each variable
series. Furthermore, the local correlations are obtained through independently, while multivariate anomaly detection considers
the attention mechanism, and the local graph represents the the connection between multiple variables to detect anomalies.
relationships between variables in the current input local time
series. Therefore, the relationships in the global graph are used
as candidate neighbors to filter the local graph. The global-local A. Univariate Anomaly Detection
graph convolution module and the temporal self-attention mod- Before deep learning became popular, various mathematical
ule are combined to construct the coupled attention layer, which and statistical models were developed to analyze time series
is the primary layer of the model. This layer has the ability data, most of which have already been used for anomaly detecto model complex dependencies among variables and temporal tion. For example, the autoregressive integrated moving average
dependencies. To fully utilize time series data, we use a novel (ARIMA) [22] is used to forecast future states based on past
multilevel encoder-decoder framework that facilitates recon- states. The discrepancy between the forecasted value and the
struction and prediction. The proposed framework consists of an ground truth is used to deduce anomalies. In [23], the matheencoder and two decoders for prediction and reconstruction. To matical analysis of time series data generates a statistical model
minimize the risk of overfitting, reconstructed models are only by calculating statistical measures, such as the mean, variance,
used to assist in learning multivariate time series representations and quantile. The statistical model can detect the tested data to
during training, while predictive models are ultimately used for determine whether it belongs to the normal boundary. Recently,
anomaly detection. machine learning and deep learning methods have achieved
 The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: remarkable improvements in time series anomaly detection [2],
 r Global-local graph convolutional network: To capture [4], [24]. In particular, autoencoders (AEs) [25] and variational
 complex and dynamic variable correlations in multivariate autoencoders (VAEs) [26] are widely used as reconstruction
 time series data, we propose a novel global-local graph models that employ reconstruction errors as anomaly scores.
 convolutional network. This network can represent both For example, DAGMM [27] combines Gaussian mixture models
 global correlations and dynamic local correlations among and AEs to obtain reconstruction models for anomaly detection.
 sensors (or variables). In addition, long short-term memory (LSTM) has also been
 r Coupled attention network: We present a coupled attention frequently utilized in time series modeling, and researchers have
 network based on the proposed global-local graph convo- introduced LSTM-based autoencoders for reconstruction-based
 lutional network and the attention mechanism. Specifi- anomaly detection [28].
 cally, a temporal self-attention module is exploited. The
 integration of graph learning and attention mechanisms
 ensures our CAN approach has the ability to model com- B. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
 plex dependencies among variables and temporal depen- In the context of MTAD, there are often correlations between
 dencies in the absence of prior knowledge. variables in the same entity or system in the real world. Many
 r Multilevel encoder-decoder framework for anomaly de- researchers have started using multivariate time series data as intection: We propose a novel multilevel encoder-decoder put to improve anomaly detection accuracy [9], [11], [12], [19].
 framework to solve the problem of multivariate time series MTAD methods based on deep learning can be roughly classified
 anomaly detection. The framework is a prediction-based into two categories: reconstruction-based and prediction-based.
 anomaly detection method and uses reconstruction tasks Reconstruction-based methods learn low-dimensional repreto jointly represent time series data. sentations of multivariate time series, reconstruct normal values,
242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

and detect anomalies based on reconstruction errors. For exam- TABLE I
 REVIEW OF EXISTING SOLUTIONS
ple, LSTM-VAE [29] combines LSTM with a VAE to fuse signals and reconstruct the expected distribution. The LSTM-based
encoder projects multivariate observations into a latent space.
The decoder then reconstructs the expected distribution of the
multivariate inputs. OmniAnomaly [30] uses a stochastic recurrent neural network to avoid potential misguidance by uncertain
instances. Its core idea is to build robust representations of multivariate data to capture their normal patterns and reconstruct the
input data. The above methods reconstruct the input sequence but
also reconstruct the constructed features. MSCRED [31] detects
anomalies by reconstructing the signature matrices of multiscale
relationships between variables. These methods are good at
capturing global data distributions. Prediction-based methods
attempt to predict the normal values of indicators based on
historical data and detect anomalies based on prediction errors.
For example, LSTM-NDT [10] uses an LSTM-based prediction
approach with unsupervised nonparametric dynamic thresholding for anomaly detection. These methods are specialized for TABLE II
feature engineering in the prediction of the next timestamp. NOTATIONS
Reconstruction-based and prediction-based methods have their
own advantages, but few methods consider joint reconstruction
and prediction tasks to simultaneously characterize multivariate
time series data [32], [33]. In addition to reconstruction-based
and prediction-based anomaly detection, many novel anomaly
detection methods have emerged, including base classification
anomaly detection [34] and contrast learning-based anomaly
detection [8].
 Although these methods use multivariate time series as input,
none of them explicitly learn or demonstrate the relationship
between different time series. This relationship is critical for the
diagnosis of anomalies. Graph-structured data have been widely
utilized to describe variable relationships in a variety of domains,
such as smart cities, transportation, and finance. In addition,
graph convolutional networks (GCNs) [35] and GATs [18] are
widely used in various fields. For instance, the GDN [36] depends on sensor embedding to flexibly capture the characteristics
of each sensor and learns the relationships between sensors
by cosine similarity. MTAD-GAN [19] concatenates two graph that depend on the characteristics of variables and local relationattention layers in parallel to learn the complex dependencies in ships that change over time are not considered simultaneously.
temporal and feature dimensions. GTA [16] uses a transformer- In this paper, we propose an effective approach to address these
based architecture to model temporal correlation and proposes challenges.
a self-learning graph structure to capture bidirectional links
between sensors. DVGCRN [33] designs adaptive variational III. PRELIMINARIES
graph convolutional recurrent networks to model spatial and
 The main focus of the paper is on MTAD at the entity level.
temporal fine-grained correlations and capture multilevel infor-
 This section introduces the definitions and then formalizes the
mation at different layers.
 MTAD problem.
 Table I provides an evaluation of the relevant models, where
KNN [37], PCA [38], and IF [39] stand for k-nearest neighbors,
principal component analysis, and isolated forests, respectively. A. Notations and Definitions
Almost all existing methods use only one task to train the Regarding notations, lowercase letters (e.g., a) represent
model, and rarely do they combine both tasks to train the model. variables, while uppercase letters (e.g., A) represent constants.
However, the reconstruction and prediction tasks actually have Moreover, letters in bold (e.g., a, A) represent vectors or mathe potential to complement each other. In addition, although trices. For the sake of readability, the notations used throughout
many researchers use GNNs to capture the correlation between the paper are listed in Table II.
variables, constructing the graph and representing the dynamics Definition 1. Multivariate Time Series (MTS): A time series is
of the graph for MTAD has not been solved. Global relationships a collection of observations recorded at equal-space timestamps.
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 243

In this paper, assuming that an entity or system A contains state y t according to (4) as follows:
multiple features or sensors, the characteristics of entity A over
 y t = C(Fθ (X :,t−K:t−1 ), X :,t ), (4)
a period of time can be expressed as MTS X ∈ RN ×L , where
L is the sequence length and N is the number of features To make the final determination on the anomaly, C can be imor sensors. Moreover, X n,: ∈ RL represents the nth feature plemented with two steps: first, the anomaly score is computed,
(n ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}) of A throughout all timestamps, and and then, it is compared with a chosen threshold to obtain the
X :,t ∈ RN represents all features of A at the tth timestamp final result.
(t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , L − 1}).
 Definition 2. Sensor Graph (SG): The SG is represented as IV. METHODOLOGY
G = {V, A}, where V = {0, 1, . . . , N − 1} is a set of nodes
 As shown in Fig. 1, a multilevel coupled attention network
(in terms of sensors or their features) and A ∈ RN ×N is the
 (CAN) is proposed to support MTAD with the three following
adjacency matrix of N nodes in which a cell ai,j is used to
 components:
record the edge weight between the ith and j th nodes. r An encoder network Encoder: The Encoder consists of
 multiple layers of coupled attention modules to process
B. Problem Statement
 training samples with position encodings;
 In general, MTAD determines whether an entity or system r A decoder network for prediction Decoderpre : The
is anomalous at the tth timestamp based on the corresponding Decoderpre consists of multiple layers of mask selfobservation X :,t : attention modules to make the prediction based on training
 samples with position encoding and the representation
 y t = C(X :,t ), (1)
 vectors of Encoder;
where y t is a Boolean value indicating the state of the system at r A decoder network for reconstruction Decoderrec :
the tth timestamp (if y t = 1, the system is anomalous at the tth Decoderrec has a structure similar to Decoderpre , but
timestamp; otherwise not) and C denotes the anomaly detection it is used to reconstruct the input processed by Encoder.
function. These three components make up the CAN framework. In
 Moreover, as historical data are beneficial in terms of analyz- general, the model input is first expanded with a new dimension,
ing the current state of the system, a period of historical data can and a positional embedding is added in the dimension, similar to
be utilized to support MTAD. Accordingly, (1) can be rewritten other multivariate time series models [40]. Second, the encoder
as (2): represents the input multivariate time series data using layered coupled attention modules and transmits the representation
 y t = C(X :,t−K:t−1 , X :,t ), (2) vectors to two decoders. The encoder and two decoders form
where K represents the length of the historical data and encoder-decoder structures for prediction and reconstruction,
X :,t−K:t−1 is the observation of K historical timestamps. By respectively. Third, based on this multilevel structure, the model
comparing X :,t with the patterns presented by X :,t−K:t−1 , the is trained by minimizing the joint loss of prediction and recondetection function C generates the detection result. struction. Finally, the trained model is used on the test set to infer
 To compare the current observation with the historical ob- the predictions and detects anomalies based on the predicted and
servations for MTAD, a prediction-based approach is studied actual values.
in this paper; it determines the anomaly based on prediction
bias. Specifically, following the unsupervised anomaly detection A. Coupled Attention Module
formulation [16], [30], [36], the prediction model is trained Based on attention mechanisms, the coupled attention modbased on normal data X and used to make predictions about ule (CAM) is designed to learn the complex temporal and
data containing anomalies X  . According to the definition of variable-dependent relationships in multivariate time series data.
K, X and X  can be transformed into two windowed series As shown in Fig. 2, CAM consists of a set of temporal self-
W = {[X :,0:K−1 , X :,K ], [X :,1:K , X :,K+1 ], . . .} and W  with attention layers to learn temporal correlations in time series and a
the same sliding window (i.e., K + 1). Furthermore, during the global-local graph convolutional layer to learn macro and micro
training process, given a sample [X :,t−K:t−1 , X :,t ] from W, correlations between variables. In addition, the input to CAM
X :,t−K:t−1 are used to predict X :,t , which can be expressed in is a 3D tensor, denoted as H ∈ RN ×K×dt , with dt channels for
(3) as follows: N sensors at K timestamps. Layer normalization and residual
 Y :,t = Fθ (X :,t−K:t−1 ), (3) connections are applied to solve the gradient disappearance
 problem and improve the learning performance.
where Y :,t denotes the prediction result at the tth timestamp, 1) Temporal Self-Attention Layer: The self-attention mechaand θ denotes the parameters of the predicting model. Note that nism can effectively and efficiently learn temporal dependencies
the training goal is to find a function Fθ to minimize the gap due to its superior capability for sequential data. Regarding MTS
between Y :,t and X :,t . data H ∈ RN ×K×dt , N parallel self-attention layers are used
 During the testing/detecting process, the same function Fθ is to learn the temporal dependence of each sensor separately.
used to predict Y :,t based on X :,t−K:t−1 . Then, the predicted Particularly, for the nth sensor, a single layer input is represented
value and the actual value are passed to C to calculate the system by H n ∈ RK×dt .
244 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

Fig. 1. Overall CAN framework with one encoder and two decoders. The rounded rectangles represent neural networks, and the sharp rectangles
represent tensors. The normal linear layers are hidden. The last layer of the two decoders intercepts the tensor to obtain a tensor of target length 1
and K. During training, the model is jointly trained by the outputs of the two decoders. Only the predicted decoder operates to calculate the anomaly
score when detecting anomalies.

 To compute temporal dependencies, first, the input H n is
 passed to three full connection layers separately. Then, H n is
 projected into three high-dimensional latent subspaces, namely,
 a query subspace Qn ∈ RK×dk , a key subspace by K n ∈
 RK×dk and a value subspace by V n ∈ RK×dv according to (5):
 Qn = H n W q ,
 K n = H nW k , (5)
 V n = H nW v ,
 dt ×dk
 where W q ∈ R , W k ∈ Rdt ×dk , and W v ∈ Rdt ×dv are
 learnable parameters.
 Second, the scaled dot-product of Qn and K n is used to
 compute the temporal dependencies, and then, the related results
 are used to update V n for the layer output. Accordingly, the
 procedure can be described by (6):
  
 Qn (K n )T
 Attention (Qn , K n , V n ) = Softmax √ V n . (6)
 dk
 Finally, to capture richer information from the three representational subspaces, the multi-head attention mechanism is
 applied, and it can be expressed by (7) and (8):
  
 Headi = Attention H n W iq , H n W ik , H n W iv , (7)
 h 
Fig. 2. Coupled attention module consisting of N parallel temporal
self-attention layers and a global-local graph convolutional layer. MultiHead(H n ) =  Headi W o , (8)
 i=1
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 245

where h is the number of heads,  denotes the concatenation Second, the information propagation step is defined as foloperation, and W o contains parameters to be learned. Both lows:
static global correlation and dynamic local correlation between g
 Agl = Am (Al + Ã ),
variables exist in multivariate time series. From a global view,
the correlation among sensors of the same type can be easily H = (βH + (1 − β)Agl H)W , (14)
established over a long time series because the curves of the
same senor type are similar. However, when the correlation where β denotes a hyperparameter controlling the ratio that
 g
changes, employing local information is critical. For example, in retains the original states, Ã is the normalized Ag , and W
a water treatment system, we can easily establish the connection represents a learnable parameter matrix.
between two water quality sensors in close proximity. However,
the connection may be broken by the closing of a particular B. Encoder
gate. To learn about such complex dependencies, we represent The encoder is the most important part of the whole framethem with a global-local graph. The global graph is used to work. Regarding the input, the encoder’s input is X f eed_en =
represent static relationships based on sensor similarity, and the {X, X 0 }, where X is equivalent to X :,t−K:t−1 denoting the
local graph is employed to dynamically adjust the global graph given historical data, and X 0 represents the virtual placeholder
based on the local sequence. In other words, the local graph filters time node that collects information about the whole sequence
out potential neighbors that are first identified by the global graph using zero initialization. As shown in Fig. 1, the encoder handles
to establish and formulate a real-time relationship. temporal dependence and sensor dependence based on CAMs.
 We define a learnable embedding en representing the inherent Specifically, a CAM compresses MTS information into the vircharacteristics of the nth sensor. We initialize the vector using tual placeholder time node to update X 0 to obtain the sequence
random initialization (using prior knowledge to initialize the embedding X e .
vector when prior knowledge exists). Accordingly, an undirected Moreover, the encoder consists of multiple layers of CAMs,
adjacency matrix Ag representing the relationship among global which are stacked to improve the model capacity, and each CAM
sensors can be created by calculating the similarity of their computes and transfers the corresponding X e to the decoder.
embeddings as defined in (9): Since anomalies tend to have a low reconstruction probability
 Ag = Relu(E × E T ), (9) when the model is trained on normal data only [30], X e is further
 embedded into the low-dimensional space through a series of
where E represents the sensor embedding vector matrix (con- fully connected layers to improve the detection performance.
sisting of en ). Then, it is reconstructed through a series of opposite fully
 The global adjacency matrix Ag represents the general simi- connected layers and transmitted to the decoder.
larity of the sensors, but it cannot measure their time-varying
local relationships [17]. Inspired by GAT, a local adjacency
 C. Decoder
matrix Al is created based on an enhanced attention mechanism,
which processes the temporal input together with the intrinsic As shown in Fig. 1, to make efficient use of the time series
features of the sensor to calculate the attention coefficient ali,j data, two distinct decoders for reconstruction and prediction are
as follows: created. Both decoders consist of temporal self-attention layers
 reshape with a lower triangular form mask. In this way, self-attention is
 W H (size=(N,K,ds )) −→ V (size=(N,K×ds )) , (10) bidirectional in the encoder and unidirectional in both decoders.
 eli,j = LeakyReLU (c ([v i v j ])) , (11) Furthermore, both decoders have the same number of network
   layers as the encoder, and each layer in the decoder corresponds
 exp eli,j to a layer in the encoder. Each layer in the encoder transmits an
 ai,j = N
 l
  l , (12)
 embedding X e to the decoders, and the corresponding layer of
 l=1 exp ei,j
 the decoders accepts the embedding X e and concatenates it to
where W is a weight matrix that transforms the feature dimen- the original sequence. The difference between the two decoders
sion, “” represents the concatenation of two nodes’ representa- is that one is used to predict the next value of the temporal
tions, c ∈ R2Kds is a column vector of learnable parameters, and data, while the other is used to reconstruct the entire historical
LeakyReLU denotes a nonlinear activation function. Since Al sequence.
depends on the current input, it can reflect the local inter-sensor In the prediction decoder, the input to the decoder X f eed_pre
dependencies. is X 0 because only one-step prediction is required. The last
 Based on the synergistic relationship between the two graphs, timestamp of the output sequence is a prediction of the next mo-
Ag and Al are used to design a new graph convolution layer ment, which can observe the entire historical series. Therefore,
to further model the influence propagation process and update we intercept the last timestamp and obtain the prediction result
the representation of each node by combining information from Y :,K+1 using a fully connected layer as follows:
neighboring nodes. Specifically, first, the mask adjacency matrix
Am of the neighbor candidates is selected from Ag by filtering Y :,K+1 = FC(Cropping(H M
 pre , −1)), (15)
the K m most significant values according to (13):
 where −1 denotes cropping from the end to obtain a sequence
 m g
 i,j = 1{i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }, j ∈ argtopK (ai,: )}.
 am (13) M
 of length 1, Hpre indicates the output of the stacked multiple
246 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

attention layers in the decoder, and F C denotes a fully connected
 Algorithm 1: Training Process.
layer.
 The prediction loss is calculated using the root mean square Require: Training set X of datasets, the number of
error (RMSE) as follows: attention module layers M , the batch size is B, and the
  window length is K + 1;
  Ensure: Well Trained model;
 1 N
 Lpre = (X n,K+1 − Y n,K+1 )2 , (16) 1: Divide the dataset X into W according to the sliding
 N n=1 window.
 2: Initialize embedding vectors E for all sensors.
where X n,K+1 and Y n,K+1 are the actual and predicted values
 3: repeat
of sensor n at timestamp K + 1, respectively.
 4: Sample a batch (X ∈ RB×(K+1)×N ) from W.
 In the reconstruction decoder, a placeholder X 0 is added to
 5: Construct model inputs X f eed_en , X f eed_pre and
the original sequence to reconstruct the entire series. The input
 X f eed_rec .
to the reconstructed decoder can be expressed as X f eed_rec =
 6: Add positional embedding into model inputs to
{X 0 , X :−1,: }. Since the attention matrix in the decoder has
 obtain H 0 , H 0pre and H 0rec .
a lower triangular form mask, the input and output will be
 7: Ag ← Relu(E × E T ).
misaligned by one timestamp. After multiple attention layers,
 8: for i = 1, 2, . . . , M do
we obtain a sequence of length K by cropping from the tail and
 9: // Encoder layer
transform it to obtain the reconstruction result Y :,:K as follows:
 10: H i ← Self-Attention(H i−1 )
 Y :,:K = FC(Cropping(H M
 rec , −K)), (17) 11: Compute Al by H i according to (10) and (12).
 12: H i ← Global-localGraphConv(H i , Ag , Al ).
where −K denotes cropping from the end to obtain a sequence of 13: X ie ← H i [: −1].
 M
length K, and Hrec indicates the output of the stacked multiple 14: // AE between encoder layer and decoder layers
attention layers in the decoder. 15: X̂ e ← AE(X e ).
 The RMSE was also selected to calculate the reconstruction 16: // Decoder layer for prediction
loss. The equation is expressed as follows: H i−1
 pre ← Concat(X̂ e , H pre ).
 i−1
 17:
 
  18: H pre ← MaskSelf-Attention(H i−1
 i
 pre ).
  1 K N
 Lrec = (X n,t − Y n,t )2 , (18) 19: // Decoder layer for reconstruction
 KN t=1 n=1 20: rec ← Concat(X̂ e , H rec ).
 H i−1 i−1

 21: H rec ← MaskSelf-Attention(H i−1
 i
 rec ).
where X n,t and Y n,t are the actual and reconstructed values of 22: end for
sensor n at timestamp t, respectively. 23: // Obtain the prediction result Y :,K+1 and
 reconstruction result Y :,:K through cropping and
D. Joint Optimization the fully connected layer
 When representing MTS data, the prediction loss is mostly 24: Y :,K+1 ← FC(Cropping(H M pre , −1)).
used to predict a point in time, while the reconstruction loss 25: Y :,:K ← FC(Cropping(H M rec , −K)).
is primarily used to capture the distribution of the time period. 26: Optimize the parameters by minimizing the loss
The combination of the two can reduce the difficulty of model function defined in (19).
training, which better characterizes temporal data and captures 27: until convergence
hidden features between sensors. Therefore, in the CAN model,
the loss function is defined as the weighted sum of the two
optimization objectives as follows: The reconstruction-based method is more suitable for describing anomalies over the entire period. In point-in-time anomaly
 L = φLpre + ϕLrec , (19)
 detection based on reconstruction, the target timestamp can
where φ and ϕ denote the hyperparameters used to make a be at a different position in the time window, and it becomes
tradeoff between the prediction and reconstruction models, re- difficult to utilize multiple reconstruction results. In addition, the
spectively, and φ + ϕ = 1. In general, the reconstruction task reconstruction-based model may neglect sudden perturbations
is considered to be easier than the prediction task. Thus, ϕ is to disrupt periodicity in a time series, especially when the
greater than φ during the first few training epochs, and then, φ values still follow the normal distribution [19]. Therefore, only
becomes more significant than ϕ during the last few training the predicted results of the timestamps are used for MTAD.
epochs. The corresponding training algorithm is described in Accordingly, the predicted deviation for each sensor can be
Algorithm 1. calculated according to (20):

 Errn (t) = |X n,t − Y n,t | , (20)
E. Model Inference
 The prediction decoder is utilized to detect anomalies, and where Errn (t) denotes the deviation of sensor n in the t timesthe reconstruction module is only used to assist in the training. tamp.
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 247

 As different sensors may possess significantly different char- TABLE III
 DATASET DESCRIPTION AND STATISTICS
acteristics, their deviation values may have different scales. To
prevent the overall anomaly score from being overly dominated
by the deviation values produced by a particular sensor, the
deviation values are normalized for each sensor. Normalization
based on mean and interquartile range is used as defined in the
following equation:
 Errn (t) − μn
 S n (t) = , (21)
 IQRn A. Datasets
where μn is the mean of Errn , IQRn is the interquartile range Three real-world MTS datasets, namely, the Secure Water
of Errn , and S n (t) denotes the normalized deviation of sensor Treatment (SWaT) dataset [41], Water Distribution (WADI)
n at the t timestamp. dataset [41] and Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite (SMAP)
 To calculate the anomaly score at the t timestamp, the K s dataset [10], were used for the evaluation. Specifically, SWaT
sensor aggregation with the largest deviation value is selected, was collected from a water treatment testbed for cybersecurity,
as anomalies tend to affect only a small number of sensors, which where the testbed was a fully operational scaled-down water
is expressed by the following equation: treatment plant with a small footprint. The dataset consists of 11
 days (7 days under normal operation and 4 days with attacks)
 idxt = argtopK s (S(t)),
 of continuous operation, and every second of the testbed’s
 (22) physical properties (25 sensors and 26 actuators) was recorded.
 st = S i (t),
 i∈idxt
 The transducer names define their roles, e.g., MV denotes a
 motorized valve, P denotes a pump, FIT denotes a flow mes
where idxt is a set of K sensors with large deviation val- ter, and LIT denotes a level transmitter. The dataset contains
ues. The larger the anomaly score, the more likely it is to 946,719 samples, of which 496,800 were collected under normal
be an anomaly. According to a threshold defined by meth- operation, while 449,919 were collected with attack scenarios.
ods, such as the dynamic error threshold [10] and peaks-over- More details are available on the website.1 WADI is a natural
threshold [30], when the anomaly scores of a timestamp are extension of SWaT. WADI has a more complex composition
greater than the threshold, the timestamp is inferred to be an and is equipped with more analytical equipment. It consists of
anomaly. 789,371 samples from 14 days of continuous normal operation
 and 172,801 samples from two days collected in attack scenarios.
F. Complexity Analysis Similar to SWaT, WADI is a collection of all 103 sensor and
 The time complexity of the main components of the pro- actuator data during the data collection period. Compared with
posed CAN model is analyzed. We skip the batch dimension SWaT, WADI contains attacks on PLC and the network and
and analyze the complexity involved in multivariate temporal simulated physical attacks (such as water leakage and malicious
data of temporal length K with N sensors. The hidden di- chemical injection). More details are available on the website.2
mension size of the temporal self-attention layer is {dt , dk }, The SMAP dataset is a public dataset published by NASA. The
the hidden dimension size of the global-local graph convolu- dataset is a record of telemetry data from sensors in individual
tional layer is ds , and the sensor embedding dimension size spacecraft with a set of relevant telemetry values labeled by
is de . The main complex computation of the temporal self- experts at NASA [10]. Table III summarizes the three datasets.
attention layer contains the computation of feature mapping
of Q, K, V and the attention coefficients. Their complexity B. Evaluation Metrics
is O(K × dt × dk ) and O(K 2 × dk ) for each sensor, respec- The precision, recall, and F1-score were used as the evaluation
tively. The temporal self-attention layer has a complexity of metrics, which are defined in the following equations:
O(N × K 2 × dk ). In addition, the global-local graph convolu- TP
tional layer incurs O(N 2 (de + K × ds )) time complexity. The Precision = , (23)
 TP + FP
computational complexity of the global graph is O(N 2 × de ),
and the computational complexity of the local graph compu- TP
 Recall = , (24)
tation is O(N 2 × K × ds ). The remainder no longer involves TP + FN
high-complexity multiplication operations. 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 = , (25)
 Precision + Recall
 V. EXPERIMENTS where TP denotes the truly detected anomalies, FP represents the
 In this section, first, the datasets and evaluation metrics are falsely detected anomalies, TN denotes the truly detected normal
introduced. Second, we describe the experimental setup and the samples, and FN represents the falsely detected normal samples.
prepared MTS data, selected baselines, and configuration of the
proposed model. Finally, dedicated analyses are performed to 1 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/secure-water-treatment-swat/

illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed model. 2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/water-distribution-wadi/
248 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

Moreover, the related metric scores may vary along with the 7) OmniAnomaly [30]: OmniAnomaly uses the VAE as
anomaly score threshold. Hence, an optimal global threshold is the main structure, and a GRU is utilized to capture
defined based on a grid search. the complicated temporal correlation of multivariate
 In practice, an anomaly is often within a segment of con- observations. The anomaly scores are calculated based
secutively observed anomalies marked by corresponding times- on the sample reconstruction errors.
tamps. A segment anomaly is correctly detected if any timestamp 8) MTAD-GAN [19]: MTAD-GAN learns the temporal
in the time segment of the marked anomaly is detected as an dependencies and interdependencies between variables
anomaly. In the proposed model, a point-adjust [42] strategy is using the attention mechanism and then trains using a
used to transform the anomaly detection results. Specifically, for combination of reconstruction and prediction models.
a continuous anomaly segment, if there is an observation in it that The anomaly scores are composed of the reconstruction
is correctly identified as an anomaly, then the anomaly segment error and prediction error.
has observations that are considered to be correctly detected 9) GDN [36]: The Graph Deviation Network learns the
by the model. If the ground truth is observed to be normal, no graphic relationship between sensors and performs
adjustments are made to the detection results. single-step prediction using an attention mechanism; the
 prediction error is treated as the anomaly score.
C. Experimental Setup 10) GTA [16]: GTA learns the relationship between sensors
 and combines graph convolution and a transformer to
 1) Data Processing: Since the SWaT and WADI datasets build a single-step time series prediction model; the
have a huge sample size, to speed up the model training, the prediction error is considered an anomaly score.
datasets were downsampled every ten seconds by taking the 11) DVGCRN [33]: DVGCRN combines a probabilistic
median value. Moreover, to improve the stability, the raw data generative network with a variational graph convowere standardized using min-max normalization. Specifically, lutional recurrent network to model both spatial and
the maximum and minimum values of each sensor feature in temporal fine-grained correlations and considers both
the training set were calculated and then used to standardize the reconstruction-based and forecasting-based losses to optraining set and testing set as follows: timize MTS representations.
 xn − min X ntrain 3) Implementation Details: The proposed method was imx̃n = , (26) plemented based on PyTorch 1.9.0 with CUDA 10.2. All expermax X ntrain − min X ntrain
 iments were conducted on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080Ti.
where min X ntrain and max X ntrain denote the minimum value The model input was a historical time series with a window
and the maximum value of sensor n in the training set, respec- size of 5 (50 in SMAP) for single-step prediction and sequence
tively. reconstruction. The dimension size of the sensor embedding was
 2) Baselines: To highlight the performance of the proposed set to 10 for SWaT and SMAP and 20 for WADI. The number
method, it is compared with several baselines, which are listed of relations extracted K m was set to 10, and the number of
as follows: sensors extracted K s was set to 2. The AE module was set up as
 1) PCA [38]: Principal component analysis obtains a low- a two-layer linear layer with the hidden layer dimension {8, 4,
 dimensional projection by extracting the main feature 8}. The encoder and two decoders both have three self-attention
 components of the data. The anomaly score is the re- layers. For the multi-head attention mechanism, the number of
 construction error of this projection. heads was set to 8. The α and β parameters were initialized to
 2) KNN [37]: K-nearest neighbors uses the observation’s 0.2 and 0.8 during training and transformed to 0.8 and 0.2 after
 distance to its k nearest neighbors as the anomaly score. four epochs. The models were trained using the Adam optimizer
 3) AE [25]: The autoencoder reconstructs the observation with a learning rate of 1e-4, which decays with the number of
 using an encoder and decoder composed of MLPs. training epochs. The early stopping strategy was also applied
 Anomalies are frequently difficult to recreate, and the during training, and the patience was set to 5, which means
 reconstruction errors are used as anomaly scores to that training stopped if there were five consecutive decreases in
 detect anomalies. performance.
 4) IF [39]: Isolated forests use a binary search tree structure To implement the baseline methods, the number of neighbors
 called iTree to isolate samples and then detect anomalies was 5 in the KNN method, and the hidden layer dimension was
 by using isolating sample points. {64, 32, 32, 64} in the AE method. DAGMM,3 OmniAnomaly,4
 5) DAGMM [27]: The Deep Autoencoding Gaussian MATD-GAT,5 GDN6 and DVGCRN7 were implemented and
 Model combines a deep autoencoder and a Gaussian reused in the evaluation. As the current implementation of GDN
 mixture model to generate a low-dimensional represen- does not use a point adjustment policy, to ensure fairness, a point
 tation of the samples and reconstruction results. The adjustment policy was added. Finally, for GTA, its paper does
 samples’ reconstruction errors are considered anomaly
 3 https://github.com/tnakae/DAGMM/
 scores. 4 https://github.com/NetManAIOps/OmniAnomaly
 6) LSTM-VAE [29]: LSTM-VAE replaces the feed-forward 5 https://github.com/ML4ITS/mtad-gat-pytorch
 network in the VAE with LSTM and uses the reconstruc- 6 https://github.com/d-ailin/GDN

 tion error as the anomaly score. 7 https://github.com/SigmaLab01/DVGCRN
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 249

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE ON SWAT, WADI AND SMAP DATASETS

not provide the source code. However, it uses the same dataset using traditional methods. To improve the performance, temas ours. Hence, its reported performance is directly used for poral dependencies should be properly measured. However,
comparison. DAGMM directly detects each observation independently, completely ignoring the relationship between sensors. LSTM-VAE
 and OmniAnomaly accept multivariate continuous observations
 as input and use recurrent neural networks (LSTM, GRU) to
D. Experimental Results
 model the temporal dependency. However, they do not ex-
 Table IV reports the overall performance of the baselines plicitly learn the dependencies between sensors. Thus, they
and the proposed method on SWaT, WADI and SMAP. Since have less competitive performance than graph learning-based
different methods have different threshold selection mecha- detection methods. Specifically, MTAD-GAN uses an attention
nisms, we tested the possible thresholds for each model and mechanism to model the dependencies between sensors, and
report the results with the highest F1-scores. On all datasets, it represents the relationships as a complete graph, which is
CAN outperforms all previous techniques by achieving the best unrealistic. GDN uses adaptive learning to learn the relationship
F1-score of 0.9266 for SWaT, 0.8955 for WADI and 0.9428 for between sensors but weakly models time series, leading to poor
SMAP. On the SWaT dataset, many methods achieved high de- results on the SMAP dataset. GTA designs a directed graph
tection performance, but the best CAN F1-score still improves by structure learning approach to automatically learn the adjacency
approximately 2% compared to the second-best method (GTA). matrix among sensors, and within the model, dilated convolution
While most approaches perform poorly on WADI, which has and a transformer are used to learn the time dependence in
more complicated sensors, the best CAN F1-score is 6% better time series. However, training such a complicated model is
than those of the second-best approach (DVGCRN). Addition- difficult. DVGCRN focuses on the robustness of the model under
ally, because of the simpler sensor relationships in the SMAP noise and does not model sensor correlations more accurately.
dataset, the effect enhancement is less. On the precision index, CAN employs a global-local graph convolutional network to
the proposed model is marginally inferior to other techniques. learn the correlation between variables in a comprehensive
Because we use the traversal strategy to obtain the threshold for manner. CAN thus performs better when handling datasets that
all models, some models choose a lower threshold to increase have complicated relationships. In addition, the proposed CAN
precision and thus obtained a better F1-score. However, models method reduces the difficulty of model training by combining
with a low threshold, such as KNN and OmniAnomaly, have the reconstruction and prediction tasks.
an extremely low recall. When considering the three indicators
simultaneously, the effect of our approach remains ideal with
balanced performance. E. Parameter Sensitivity
 The traditional methods, i.e., PCA, KNN, and AE, perform In this section, the effect of the CAN parameters is analyzed.
worse than deep learning-based methods. These machine learn- Specifically, parameter sensitivity experiments were conducted
ing methods are simple and fast, but their ability to process on SWaT for the three parameters: dimension size of the sencomplex time series data is limited. There is no efficient way sor embedding, number of relations extracted, and number of
to model temporal correlation in multivariate time series data encoder (or decoder) layers.
250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

Fig. 3. Effect of parameters.

 The sensor embedding records the global dependencies be- TABLE V
 ABLATION EXPERIMENTS ON THE WADI DATASET
tween sensors, and its dimension size is one key parameter.
Fig. 3 shows the model performance results when the dimensions
are 2, 5, 10, 15, and 20. The results show that the model
performs optimally with a dimension size of 10. Too small of a
dimension makes it difficult to include all the dependencies,
while too large of a dimension makes it more challenging
to learn the embedding vectors due to increased parameters.
The number of extracted relations determines the number of
dependencies established between sensors, which is crucial for
learning dependencies between sensors. The most appropriate
K m for SWaT is 10, which indicates that the dataset may have
approximately ten dependencies for each sensor. Finally, pa- 5) CAN + : The method considers the reconstruction error
rameter sensitivity experiments were performed on the number when the target timestamp is the last timestamp of the
of layers in the model’s encoder. The model performs poorly input sequence to detect anomalies, and we fuse the
when the number of layers is 2, as it is difficult to simulate the reconstruction error and the prediction error in a certain
complex dependencies in multivariate time series data. When the proportion (0.1 is used in the paper) as the anomaly
number of layers is increased to 3, the model’s learning ability score.
is improved, and the performance is significantly enhanced. The results are summarized in Table V. Comparing the five
However, when the number of layers continues to increase to 4 variants, the complete model has the best performance. The
and 5, the model training difficulty increases, and the detection performance degradation from the absence of both a local graph
accuracy starts to decline slowly. In general, the model is robust and graph convolution illustrates the necessity of inter-sensor
in retaining a strong performance level across a wide range of dependencies for multivariate time series anomaly detection.
parameters. The effectiveness without the local graph is reduced, demonstrating the local graph’s significance in capturing the dependencies
 between sensors. The AE module has the effect of filtering some
F. Ablation Studies
 anomalies through reduction and reconstruction. A significant
 To investigate the effectiveness of each component in CAN, decrease in model effectiveness is observed when the model
we exclude the elements to observe how the related performance lacks the reconstruction decoder. This observation illustrates the
declines on WADI. Accordingly, five variant models of CAN effectiveness of the reconstruction decoder on multivariate time
were designed as follows: series data for encoder-assisted training. The reconstruction de-
 1) Without a local graph: The model only uses an adaptive coder helps the encoder represent multivariate time series data by
 static graph for graph convolution and removes the graph reconstructing the task properly. In addition, the reconstruction
 attention module. error is typically influenced by the full input sequence and is not
 2) Without graph convolution: The graph convolution layer appropriate for timestamp anomaly detection directly; hence,
 in CAN is replaced with a fully connected layer. the performance of CAN + is not improved in comparison with
 3) Without AE: CAN without autoencoder between the en- CAN.
 coder and decoders. Sequence embedding is transferred
 directly from the encoder to the prediction decoder and
 reconstruction decoder. G. Visualization
 4) Without Decoderrec : The model is simplified to a 1) Effect of the Global Graph: To evaluate the effect of
 prediction-based multivariate time series anomaly detec- the model global graph, the sensor embedding vectors learned
 tion model. through training on SWaT are visualized based on t-SNE [43],
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 251

Fig. 4. t-SNE plot of the sensor embeddings.

which is used to draw a scatter plot projecting the embedding Fig. 5. The attacked sensor with three other sensors. The abscissa
 represents the timestamp, and the ordinate represents the sensor value.
vector into two-dimensional space. Accordingly, six different
types of sensors with six different colors are presented in Fig. 4.
It can be observed that sensors of the same type tend to be close VI. CONCLUSION
to each other. This observation also verifies that the learned In this work, we propose CAN, an anomaly detection frameembedding vectors can respond to a particular global feature work based on self-attention and global-local graph convolution.
of the sensors. It combines the advantages of predictive models and recon-
 2) Case Study: A case study is prepared on an anomalous struction models. In detail, to capture the dynamic inter-sensor
segment with a known attack in WADI to further evaluate dependencies in multivariate time series data, we propose to use
our model. WADI’s log file records an anomalous segment a global graph to capture the static dependencies that depend on
located between 19:25:00 and 19:50:16 on October 17. Dur- the features of the sensor itself and use graph attention to capture
ing this attack period, the attacker caused motorized valve the dynamic sensor dependencies over time. Then, we combine
1_MV_001 to turn on maliciously to overflow the raw water temporal self-attention and graph convolution based on global
tank. and local graphs into a multilevel encoder-decoder framework.
 The WADI test distribution treatment is divided into three To better represent multivariate time series data, we jointly
stages: the water supply P1, distribution network P2, and return use reconstruction and prediction tasks to implement model
water system P3. P1 consists of two raw water tanks with a optimization. When performing anomaly detection, we only
capacity of 2500 liters. Water intake into these two tanks can be compute anomaly scores that pass from the predictive model. A
from the water treatment plant named SWaT, from the public complex reconstructed model is prone to overfitting and ignores
utility board inlet, or from the return water grid in WADI. anomalies, and it is not suitable for anomaly detection at a single
Therefore, when the 1_MV_001 motorized valve is turned on, time point. Comprehensive experiments on three real datasets
water flows into the raw water tank. The sensor 1_FIT_101 demonstrate that our model outperforms other state-of-the-art
inflow meter increases rapidly, and the sensor 1_LT_101 level methods.
transmitter gradually climbs. At the same time, the attack on Most state-of-the-art methods use prediction-based methods
the motorized valve will also be transmitted to the P2 stage. for time series anomaly detection because of the overfitting prob-
For example, the pressure meter 2_PIT_001 sensor will change lem in the reconstructed model. However, the reconstruction
due to the increase in the P1 stage water level. In the global task is a crucial unsupervised task in time series data. In the
graph learned from training, 1_MV_001 and 1_FIT_101 are representation learning of time series data, the reconstructionneighbors, and 1_LT_101 and 2_PIT_001 are neighbors to each based model has advantages that the prediction-based model
other. The learned relationship is consistent with the actual does not have, such as robustness to perturbations and noise. This
relationship, which proves the effectiveness of the global graph paper also demonstrates the effect of the reconstructed model on
we learned. Fig. 5 visualizes the transformation of the four anomaly detection systems. However, the reconstruction task in
sensors 1_MV_001, 1_FIT_101, 1_LT_101, and 2_PIT_001 in our work only plays a role that is similar to pretraining. There
the anomaly segment; the green line represents the ground truth, must be a more appropriate method that can perfectly combine
the orange line represents the value calculated by the prediction the predictive model and the reconstructed model for anomaly
model, and the red shading indicates the attack period. After detection. Therefore, solving the overfitting of the reconstructed
1_MV_001 was maliciously turned on, the values of 1_MV_001, model and better combining prediction and reconstruction tasks
1_FIT_101, and 1_LT_101 were still in a normal range, but the will be a new direction for time series anomaly detection.
2_PIT_001 sensor in P2 was clearly out of the normal range and
detected by the model. These results indicate that graph learning REFERENCES
implemented in CAN is critical, and the proposed framework
 [1] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT time-series
is effective and efficient in detecting multivariate time series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494,
anomalies. Jul. 2020.
252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTING, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY-MARCH 2024

 [2] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on [28] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G. M.
 outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detecno. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021. tion,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
 [3] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,” [29] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
 Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021. for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 [4] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, Mar. 2021, [30] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 Art. no. 38. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 [5] A. P. Ruiz, M. Flynn, J. Large, M. Middlehurst, and A. J. Bagnall, network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 “The great multivariate time series classification bake off: A review and Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 experimental evaluation of recent algorithmic advances,” Data Mining [31] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detec-
 Knowl. Discov., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 401–449, 2021. tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 [6] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An evaluation Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,” IEEE [32] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517, Jun. 2022. anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD
 [7] X. Kong et al., “Spatial-temporal-cost combination based taxi driving Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986.
 fraud detection for collaborative internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [33] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep variational
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3426–3436, May 2022. graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series anomaly
 [8] Y. Jiao, K. Yang, D. Song, and D. Tao, “TimeAutoAD: Autonomous detection,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 3621–3633.
 anomaly detection with self-supervised contrastive loss for multivariate [34] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal
 time series,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1604–1619, hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 May/Jun. 2022. Syst., H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds.,
 [9] T. Huang, P. Chen, and R. Li, “A semi-supervised VAE based active 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
 anomaly detection framework in multivariate time series for online sys- [35] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 tems,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1797–1806. convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017,
[10] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- pp. 1–14.
 strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric [36] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. pp. 4027–4035.
[11] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer [37] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., 2002,
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. pp. 15–27.
[12] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, [38] S. Li and J. Wen, “A model-based fault detection and diagnostic method-
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in ology based on PCA method and wavelet transform,” Energy Buildings,
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, vol. 68, pp. 63–71, 2014.
 pp. 3395–3404. [39] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
[13] F. Xia et al., “Graph learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 2, 8th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 no. 2, pp. 109–127, Apr. 2021. [40] L. Bai, L. Yao, C. Li, X. Wang, and C. Wang, “Adaptive graph convolu-
[14] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, and H. Tang, “Graph neural networks for anomaly tional recurrent network for traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things J., Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 17804–17815.
 vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9214–9231, Jun. 2022. [41] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multi-
[15] H. Liang, L. Song, J. Du, X. Li, and L. Guo, “Consistent anomaly detection variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
 and localization of multivariate time series via cross-correlation graph- networks,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 703–716.
 based encoder-decoder GAN,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, 2022, [42] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
 Art. no. 3504210, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3139696. for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
[16] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph 2018, pp. 187–196.
 structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection [43] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” J. Mach.
 in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, 2008.
[17] M. Li and Z. Zhu, “Spatial-temporal fusion graph neural networks
 for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, Feng Xia (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 pp. 4189–4196. BSc and PhD degrees from Zhejiang University,
[18] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio, Hangzhou, China. He is a professor with the
 “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, School of Computing Technologies, RMIT Uni-
 2018, pp. 1–12. versity, Australia. He has published two books
[19] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph atten- and more than 300 scientific papers in intion network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850. ternational journals and conferences (such as
[20] F. Xia et al., “CenGCN: Centralized convolutional networks with vertex the IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence,
 imbalance for scale-free graphs,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Enno. 5, pp. 4555–4569, May 2023. gineering, IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
[21] M. Lin, W. Li, D. Li, Y. Chen, and S. Lu, “Resource-efficient training works and Learning Systems, IEEE Transacfor large graph convolutional networks with label-centric cumulative sam- tions on Computers, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE
 pling,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2022, pp. 1170–1180. Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE Transactions on
[22] G. E. Box and D. A. Pierce, “Distribution of residual autocorrelations in Big Data, IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, IEEE
 autoregressive-integrated moving average time series models,” J. Amer. Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions
 Statist. Assoc., vol. 65, no. 332, pp. 1509–1526, 1970. on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on
[23] M. Markou and S. Singh, “Novelty detection: A review—Part 1: Statistical Emerging Topics in Computing, IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine
 approaches,” Signal Process., vol. 83, no. 12, pp. 2481–2497, 2003. Systems, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transac-
[24] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multi- tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on Auperspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, pp. 64–79, 2021. tomation Science and Engineering, ACM Transactions on Knowledge
[25] S. Agarwal, “Data mining: Data mining concepts and techniques,” in Proc. Discovery from Data, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
 Int. Conf. Mach. Intell. Res. Advance., 2013, pp. 203–207. Technology, ACM Transactions on the Web, ACM Transactions on Mul-
[26] D. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in Proc. timedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, WWW, AAAI,
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–14. SIGIR, WSDM, CIKM, JCDL, EMNLP, and INFOCOM). His research
[27] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- interests include data science, artificial intelligence, graph learning, and
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, systems engineering. He is a senior member of the ACM and an ACM
 2018, pp. 1–19. distinguished speaker.
XIA et al.: COUPLED ATTENTION NETWORKS FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 253

 Xin Chen received the BSc degree in informa- Mujie Liu received the BSc degree from Ningbo
 tion security from Harbin Engineering University, Tech University, Ningbo, China, in 2021. She is
 Harbin, China, in 2020. He is currently work- currently working toward the PhD degree with
 ing toward the master’s degree with the School the Institute of Innovation, Science and Sustainof Software, Dalian University of Technology, ability, Federation University Australia, Ballarat,
 China. His research interests include spatiotem- Australia. Her research interests include graph
 poral graph learning, urban science, and social learning, anomaly detection, and artificial intellicomputing. gence.

 Shuo Yu (Member, IEEE) received the BSc
 and MSc degrees from the School of Science,
 Shenyang University of Technology, China, and
 the PhD degree from the School of Software, Linlin You (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 Dalian University of Technology, China. She is degree in computer science from the University
 currently an associate professor with the School of Pavia, in 2015. He is an associate professor
 of Computer Science and Technology, Dalian with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineer-
 University of Technology. She has published ing, Sun Yat-sen University, and a research afmore than 50 papers and received several aca- filiate with the Intelligent Transportation System
 demic awards, including the IEEE DataCom Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He
 2017 Best Paper Award, IEEE CSDE 2020 Best was a senior postdoc with the Singapore-MIT
Paper Award, and ACM/IEEE JCDL 2020 The Vannevar Bush Best Alliance for Research and Technology and a
Paper Honorable Mention. She has served as the track chair and PC research fellow with the Architecture and Susmember of several international conferences. Her research interests tainable Design Pillar of Singapore University
include data science, graph learning, and knowledge science. of Technology and Design. He has published more than 40 journal
 and conference papers in the research fields of smart cities, service
 orchestration, multisource data fusion, machine learning, and federated
 Mingliang Hou received the BSc degree from learning.
 Dezhou University, and the MSc degree from
 Shandong University, Shandong, China. He is
 currently working toward the PhD degree in software engineering with the Dalian University of
 Technology, Dalian, China. His research interests include graph learning, city science, and
 social computing.