IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 3537

 Credible Link Flooding Attack Detection and
 Mitigation: A Blockchain-Based Approach
 Xiaofeng Jiang , Member, IEEE, Qianbao Shi, Hengkun Miao, Wanqin Cao , Huasen He , Member, IEEE,
 Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE, and Jian Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Due to the concentrated distribution of network threaten the normal network communications, such as the
traffic, the Internet is highly vulnerable to link flooding attack in 1.35 Tbps attack against Github in 2018 [3], and the 2.3 Tbps
Distributed Denial-of-Service attacks (DDoS-LFA), which utilizes attack against Amazon cloud service in 2020 [4]. To avoid
the legitimate low-rate attack traffic to block the selected
network area. In recent years, building trusted networks has being defended by anomaly detection measures [5], DDoS
been considered as a promising strategy to address the security attack has developed a Link Flooding Attack (DDoS-LFA)
issues. Nevertheless, deploying a trusted link defense mechanism mechanism, which can cut off the connection between selected
in the attacked network area faces many challenges imposed by invasion area and the Internet by flooding specific upstream
the smart scheme and legitimate disguise of DDoS-LFA. In order links, and hence escape the inspection of end-hosts [6]. For
to overcome these challenges, we propose a blockchain-based
DDoS-LFA detection and mitigation scheme, named CREDIT, example, the Coremelt attack [7] can flood the backbone
to guarantee the security of attacked area, while existing works links and cause the network to be paralyzed. The Crossfire
only use blockchain to share the detection results of traditional attack [8] can flood only a few network links to cut off network
solutions. CREDIT uses blockchain to record and share the connections of a large number of publicly accessible servers.
information of links and flows in real time, which enables Since the flow density of the Internet follows a power-law
routers in the protected area to easily trace the paths of all
active flows and capture the fragile links. On the basis of link distribution [9], most of the Internet traffic are concentrated
features, a credible deep learning method performed on randomly on a small number of links, which will lead to serious
selected nodes is proposed to detect DDoS-LFA against data vulnerability to DDoS-LFA [10]. For instance, the attack
spoofing. When an attack alarm is raised, CREDIT performs targeting NetEase resulted in a five-hour outage of service in
similarity analysis to locate attackers and migrate suspicious 2015 [11], and the one targeting Spamhaus congested links
traffic based on the flow features of alarm links. Experimental
results based on real implementation and attack testbed show of four major Internet exchange points in Europe and Asia
that, by integrating blockchain, CREDIT performs better than in 2013 [12]. As DDoS-LFA attacks can easily cause huge
traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA defense methods impacts such as long-time out of service (especially for large
when faced with data tampering. corporations and important departments), proposing a trusted
 Index Terms—DDoS-LFA, trusted link defense mecha- link defense mechanism to protect the important area in the
nism, blockchain, distributed attack detection, attack sources network and mitigate the impact of the DDoS-LFA attacks
identification. is a meaningful and attractive topic. In a protected area, link
 information is recorded and shared among trusted nodes. The
 aggregation of correlated abnormal traffic can be seen as an
 I. I NTRODUCTION expression of DDoS-LFA, and thus the defense mechanism
 UE TO the simple principles, diverse schemes and
D significant effects [1], [2], Distributed Denial-of-Service
(DDoS) attack has long been one of the attack methods that
 can detect attacks and identify suspicious sources.
 However, designing a trusted link defense mechanism
 against DDoS-LFA is confront with three main challenges.
 The first challenge is to identify the potential target
 Manuscript received 20 April 2023; revised 30 November 2023; accepted
15 January 2024. Date of publication 23 January 2024; date of current links before DDoS-LFA occurs. The dynamic characterisversion 12 July 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural tics of DDoS-LFA make attack flows easily bypass the
Science Foundations of China (Grant No. 62341113, 62173315, 62101525, countermeasures deployed in fixed network locations [13].
62201543, 62021001 and U23A20275), by the Youth Innovation Promotion
Association CAS (Grant No. 2020450), by the China Postdoctoral Science Woodpecker proposed by [14] can locate the congested
Foundation (Grant No. 2023M733422), by Anhui Provincial Major Science links and detect DDoS-LFA based on a judgment algoand Technology Project (Grant No. 202103a05020024), by the Fundamental rithm [15]. When the suspicious target links were identified,
Research Funds for the Central Universities, and by the China Environment
for Network Innovations (CENI). The associate editor coordinating the Aydeger et al. [16] and Lee et al. [17] provided collabreview of this article and approving it for publication was A. Veneris. orative rerouting methods between several network regions
(Corresponding author: Huasen He.) to cope with the elusiveness of target links, and mitigated
 The authors are with the Department of Automation, University of Science
and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China, and also with the Institute link congestion. However, the rerouting mechanism introduced
of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, an additional server in each network region to maintain
Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: jxf@ustc.edu.cn; shiqianbao@iai.ustc.edu.cn; routing control messages, which greatly increased the deploymiaohengkun@mail.ustc.edu.cn; lccwq@mail.ustc.edu.cn; hehuasen@
ustc.edu.cn; chensw@ustc.edu.cn; jianyang@ustc.edu.cn). ment cost and end-to-end latency. Therefore, it is critical
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3357660 to identify the underlying target links before DDoS-LFA
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3538 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

occurs, so that the network can take defensive measures of conventional methods in the realm of network security.
promptly. By integrating blockchain technology into cybersecurity and
 The second challenge is to capture the low-rate attack utilizing it for real-time recording and sharing of information
flow of DDoS-LFA, which may be legitimate and does not pertaining to links and traffic flows, it facilitates efficient
contain malicious packets. Hirayama et al. [18] utilized the tracking and identification of network traffic while minimizing
ChangeFinder scheme [19] to analyze the changing packet the impact caused by DDoS-LFA. Thus, CREDIT offers
patterns of different Autonomous Systems (ASes) suffering a dependable, adaptable, and cost-effective mechanism for
from DDoS-LFA. Their experimental results showed that the safeguarding the network. The fundamental contributions of
distinguish ability declined rapidly with the growth of network this work are summarized as follows.
scale. Kang et al. [20] performed a rate change test, which 1) Blockchain-based link information collection: CREDIT
temporarily increased the bandwidth of core links and then leverages blockchain technology to document and disseminate
observed the response to discern attack traffic. Nevertheless, real-time information about connections and data movement.
this scheme was designed against cost-sensitive attackers, This capability allows routers within a protected area to
and failed to handle core links. Some other schemes used effortlessly track the routes of all currently active data streams.
the Software Defined Networking (SDN) to capture attack Hence, the suspicious target links and sources can be located
flows [21], [22], while DDoS-LFA may isolate the switch by conducting correlation analysis based on the reliable and
policy from other data plane devices, resulting in routing real-time record collection. To save computing and storage
inconsistencies [23]. resources of the routers, as well as minimizing the amount of
 Finally, it is challenging to identify the malicious sources, content stored in the blockchain, only a few nodes are selected
when attackers of DDoS-LFA typically utilize real IP to deploy CREDIT by solving a Vertex Cover Problem (VCP).
addresses. Zargar et al. [24] proposed a route-based packet Based on the real-time blockchain record, we can discover the
filtering scheme to identify unexpected source addresses potential target links by calculating the flow density of every
(i.e., spoofed addresses) and drop relevant packets. However, link, and figure out the target links before the attack. Thus,
when an attacker used genuine IP addresses, the routers were the attack detection will be more efficient.
unable to filter such IP packets. To track attack flows using To the best of our knowledge, it is the first work that
genuine source addresses, Zheng et al. [22] proposed a SDN- applies blockchain to detect sophisticated DDoS-LFA, while
based DDoS-LFA locator for networks enabled by OpenFlow the existing works only use blockchain to share the blacklisted
specification. The locator initially treated all addresses as IP addresses provided by traditional detection schemes.
suspicious source addresses, and categorized them according 2) Credible intelligent DDoS-LFA detection and
to their prefixes. After performing multiple rounds of prefix mitigation: The artificial intelligence and blockchain are
analysis, the number of suspicious flows can be shrank and combined to endow CREDIT with attack detection and
the attacker can be finally located. However, this SDN-based mitigation capabilities. The blockchain collects real-time link
scheme will be ineffective when the control channel is blocked, information of the protected area to capture the attack patterns
and the adaptive changes of target links will lead to failure and identify suspicious sources. Traditional intelligent attack
of prefix analysis. The comparison of existing systems is detection algorithm uses historical data and is vulnerable to
summarized in TABLE I. false past data, the developed credible deep learning attack
 The blockchain technologies including both permissioned detection method can still predict normal data even if an
and permissionless blockchain [25], [26] provide a promising attack is occurring. The trustworthiness of the historical data
solution for handling DDoS-LFA, since information recorded is evaluated via the deviation between the prediction and
in blockchain is non-tampering, verifiable, traceable and actual value, and then the historical data is modified according
highly secure [27]. to its trustworthiness to improve the input of the detection
 In order to overcome the above three challenges caused by module.
the elusiveness of DDoS-LFA, we develop a blockchain-based Hence, CREDIT can overcome the attack destruction of
DDoS-LFA detection scheme, called CREDIT, which builds collected data, and locate attackers by identifying the hidden
blockchain into the network to establish a trusted link defense attack features in suspicious flows.
mechanism and protect the connectivity of the network. In 3) Real implementation: The CREDIT prototype is implethe built-in blockchain, the consensus processes are used to mented on China Environment for Network Innovations
monitor the fragile links and extract features to discover (CENI) platform with Ethereum. Its performance is evaluated
abnormality, which are straightforwardly utilized to identify on a typical DDoS-LFA testbed in terms of efficiency, security
suspicious sources and mitigate the congestion. The smart and cost effectiveness. Our experimental results show that
contract writes the detection and identification results into CREDIT has a significant performance raise compared with
the blockchain to provide a decentralized secure, flexible and the traditional non-blockchain-based methods when facing
low-cost collaboration among routers in the protected area. DDoS-LFA attacks. It produces a more sensitive detection of
By integrating the blockchain, CREDIT performs much bet- attack links and a more accurate identification of the DDoS
ter than traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA defense attackers. Furthermore, if the data of our system is tempered by
methods. mistake or maliciously, the performance of the system is still
 The CREDIT solution presents an innovative approach stable without any huge decline. While achieving the benefits
for mitigating DDoS-LFA attacks, surpassing the limitations above, the necessary resource for CREDIT’s algorithm is
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3539

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF E XISTING S YSTEMS W ITH CREDIT

slight. Our system thus provides a solution which has excellent
performance for preventing and mitigating DDoS-LFA attacks
at a low network resource cost. It also provides a new mind
that combine blockchain with network attack detection and
mitigation.
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we give a brief description of blockchain and
our threat model, as well as present some existing work
of blockchain-based defense schemes against DDoS attack.
We detail the design and key technology of CREDIT in
Section III and Section IV, respectively. In Section V, we
conduct experiments to evaluate the efficiency and overhead Fig. 1. Structure of blockchain.
of CREDIT. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.

 other nodes will verify it and append the valid block to the
 previous one to update the blockchain.
 II. P RELIMINARY
 Except for Bitcoin, the merits of blockchain have promoted
A. Blockchain the development of various blockchain systems, such as
 Blockchain technology was first introduced in Bitcoin [28], Ethereum [36], a platform for developing decentralized appliwhere it was used as a secure public ledger to achieve Bitcoin cations using smart contract; Hyperledger [37], an architecture
transactions without a central authority. In blockchain, the for customizing networking rules. These systems provide us
data stored by applications are confirmed by all the nodes with an opportunity to develop our distributed applications for
in the network to ensure authenticity and consistency. Since defending network attacks.
blockchain is a decentralized system where each node stores As for the consensus algorithms, PBFT [38] is a practical
complete data, an attacker is unable to tamper with the Byzantine fault tolerance (BFT) solution for asynchronous
data unless it has more than 51% of the entire network’s networks, used by Hyperledger Fabric as its consensus
computing power [29]. Recently, through smart contract [30], protocol. However, PBFT has quadratic message complexthe application of blockchain is no longer limited to digital ity [39], which limits its scalability under many failures.
cryptocurrency, but expands to other fields, such as decentral- Several new BFT algorithms have been proposed to achieve
ized Internet of Things (IoT) [31], smart healthcare [32], smart high-throughput and low-latency consensus under faults and
grid [33], smart city [34], etc. asynchrony. HotStuff [40] uses threshold signature to reduce
 The consistency, immutability, traceability, and security of message complexity to linear, but it suffers from frequent
blockchain mainly come from the chain structure. As shown leader changes under failures. Prosecutor [41] penalizes
in Fig. 1, blockchain combines data blocks in chronological suspected faulty replicas to improve consensus efficiency,
order, and each block generally includes a block header and avoiding performance degradation from repeated attacks by
a block body. The header encapsulates the hash value of the faulty servers in HotStuff. Narwhal [42] adopts a DAG-based
parent block, timestamp, the current version number, difficulty, consensus mechanism, which allows parallel processing of
the Merkle root [35] and a nonce value. The body includes transactions that are sequential in blockchain. It achieves
transactions between different entities and the Merkle tree fully asynchronous consensus and significant improvement in
generated by these transactions through a double hash process. transaction efficiency compared with Hotstuff. However, we
In a blockchain network, all the nodes and devices are called did not employ BFT consensus algorithms because they tend
as miners, which are constantly competing with each other for to be centralized, posing a risk of single-point attacks. In
transaction-packaging rights through a consensus algorithm. contrast, Proof of Work (PoW) permissionless blockchains are
This process is called as mining. The node successfully decentralized, comprising a network of numerous nodes, each
winning the right to package block is referred to as winning holding an identical copy of the data. This structure ensures
miner. When a new block is generated by the winning miner, that if one node is compromised, the others can still function
3540 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 2. Pattern of the Crossfire attack.

 Fig. 3. Deployment strategy of CREDIT.

seamlessly. Furthermore, it’s difficult for attackers to focus
their efforts on a specific location or node in such a network. Three characteristics of DDoS-LFA [8] can be observed
To significantly disrupt the network, attackers would need from the above attack procedure. 1) The attacker selects links
to target multiple nodes simultaneously, which is a complex with high flow density to flood, so as to congest the vital links
task. Considering the advantages in terms of tamper resistance with the least cost. 2) The attacker controls bots to send much
due to decentralization and distributed PoW consensus mech- low-rate traffic to congest target links, leading to a sudden
anisms, we select a PoW permissionless blockchain instead of increase in the number of packets. 3) The attacker installs
a permissioned blockchain. the same attack program on bots, hence the sending rates
 and packet size of bots are analogous. Taking these features
 into account, we design the CREDIT system to discover the
B. Attack Model potential target links of DDoS-LFA, detect attack with low-rate
 In contrast to traditional DDoS attack, the target of DDoS- traffic, identify suspected sources and mitigate the congestion.
LFA is not the selected servers, but specific links around the
selected area. We choose the Crossfire attack shown in Fig. 2 C. Existing Blockchain-Based Works for DDoS Defence
as an example. It mainly contains four elements: target area, There have been some studies [43], [44], [45], [46], [47],
target link, public server (the victim of DDoS-LFA) and decoy [48] using blockchain to defend DDoS attack. Meng et al. [43]
server, whose flows are imitated to ensure the rates of attack have provided a review of blockchain-based intrusion detecflows are similar to these of legitimate flows. The attacker uses tion, which indicated that these two technologies can
Pay-Per Install services [18] to control bots (devices controlled complement each other, and pointed out two challenges for
by the attacker and used in attack) to send a large amount of data sharing and trust computation. Alexopoulos et al. [44]
low-rate traffic to decoy servers through the target links. As presented a collaborative defense mechanism, which utilized
a result, the target links are congested and the target area is blockchain to mitigate DDoS. Spathoulas et al. [49] proposed
completely disconnected from the Internet. a scheme of sharing malicious IP addresses in blockchain.
 The detailed attack procedure is as follows. Firstly, the Essaid et al. [50] used blockchain and deep learning methods
attacker will select two sets of servers as public servers and to identify illegal traffic. The existing works were designed to
decoy servers after determining the target area. The former detect traditional DDoS attacks, such as Synchronize Sequence
are located within the target area and denoted as Ps = Numbers (SYN) flooding and User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
{Ps1 , Ps2 , . . . , PsN }, while the latter are located around the flooding, by analyzing the traffic arriving at the end-hosts
target area and represented by Ds = {Ds1 , Ds2 , . . . , DsM }. and sharing blacklisted IP in blockchain. However, these
Next, the attacker instructs a set of bots, denoted as B = schemes failed to tackle DDoS-LFA, which utilizes legitimate-
{B1 , B2 , . . . , BO }, to run multiple traceroutes to find all paths like flows and can not be detected at the end-hosts. Therefore,
to Ps and Ds. Each path of a bot-server pair (i.e., (Bi , Psj ) it is in urgent need to propose a solution which can be easily
or (Bi , Dsj )) includes a list of IP addresses assigned to the deployed and defend DDoS-LFA.
interfaces of routers on this path, where the two IP addresses
of adjacent routers’ interfaces identify a link. With these IP
addresses and link information, the attacker then builds a link III. D ESIGN OF CREDIT
map containing all the links between adjacent routers and In this section, we give a system overview of CREDIT.
servers. After that, the attacker calculates the flow density and Since the attack flows of DDoS-LFA are always aggregated
selects target links with high flow density for flooding. We in the links that are not far from the target area, it is feasible
denote the target links by L = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lK }. Finally, the to deploy CREDIT around the protected area to gain an
attacker assigns each bot a list of decoy servers, denoted as appropriate tradeoff between the security and efficiency. Fig. 3
Dsl ⊆ Ds, and the packet sending rates to the servers in shows the deployment strategy. As the number of blockchain
Dsl are denoted as Vsl . The bots ensure that the rates of nodes increases, the number of transactions and the required
attack flows are similar to these of legitimate flows, and the computing resources also increase. Thus, the deployment
aggregated flow rates are slightly higher than the bandwidths. of CREDIT should balance system efficiency and resource
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3541

Fig. 4. System overview.

consumption. Because the protected area (or target area) lies in blockchain uses status table and neighbour table to select
a local network, and the routing radius usually does not exceed CREDIT nodes, which are responsible for detecting and
ten hops, we choose the public and decoy servers around the mitigating attacks. Next, the CREDIT nodes analyze fragile
protected area, and routers that are less than ten hops away links and monitor these links to find a clue to DDoS-LFA.
from the area to deploy CREDIT. They periodically extract features of fragile links and various
 The CREDIT system consists of 7 modules as shown in sources, and utilize these features to conduct attack detection
Fig. 4. The work flow is as follows: Firstly, the network and source identification. At last, the CREDIT nodes mitigate
administrator conducts initialization process to generate the congestion caused by DDoS-LFA by exploiting the list of
status table, neighbour table and link table. Then, the identified bots. Once the system is set and started up properly,
3542 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

it can detect the attacks and protect the devices and data overhead and improve data verification efficiency. In addition,
in the designated network area effectively. With the help of the selection of C-NODEs should ensure that each link
blockchain technology which can provide highly reliable data, connects to at least 1 C-NODEs. The blockchain first picks
the routers are able to trace the active flows, share real-time out the neighbours of all nodes except the gateway router and
data of the network status between each other, analyze the routers connected to servers. Then, a greedy algorithm detailed
data correlatedly and identify the attack links by their flow in Section IV-A is employed to select the C-NODEs, which
density. The characteristic of the attacks can be captured and are responsible for monitoring the links and extracting features
the attacker can be precisely located from these data with to facilitate detecting and mitigating of DDoS-LFA. Then, the
the participation of artificial intelligence, and the routers can C-NODE selection result will be synchronized to all nodes.
quickly restrict the flows and mitigate the impact of the attack
while not intercepting normal links and data flows. Experiment C. Fragile Link Analysis Module
results mentioned in the remainder will show that with the
 This module aims to discern fragile links, which have high
combination of blockchain and AI, our system is significantly
 flow density and are the most likely to be congested. In DDoSmore effective in attack detection and mitigation compared
 LFA, the adversary builds an accurate link map and flood the
with the traditional algorithms. As mentioned in the former
 fragile links. If the fragile links can be identified before DDoSchapter of this paper, only part of the routers in the protected
 LFA occurs, one just need to monitor certain links instead of
area need to deploy the CREDIT algorithm, and the cost of the
 all links, thus increasing detection efficiency and reducing data
system, including computing resource, storage and network
 storage.
bandwidth, are slight.
 In this module, each C-NODE first initializes an empty
 source space (SS) and an empty destination space (DS),
A. Initialization Module and then periodically reads packet information including the
 This module is used to initialize the whole system. Firstly, source and destination IPs, followed by adding the IPs to
the local network administrator selects the gateway router corresponding spaces. Next, each C-NODE calculates link
and routers connected to servers as CREDIT nodes. The weights in the manner described in Section IV-B, and updates
CREDIT nodes locate at the edge of the local network, hence their values on blockchain. The blockchain ranks them in a
providing a coverage of the target network. Next, the network decreasing order and picks a few links with the highest weights
administrator initializes a status table on blockchain. The status as fragile links. This result is listened by all C-NODEs, then
table containing C-NODE, N-NODE and U-NODE is used they can deploy the detection and mitigation strategies.
to record the status of each node, where C-NODE denotes
CREDIT node responsible for fragile link monitoring and D. Link Monitoring and Feature Extraction Module
information verification, N-NODE represents normal node,
 In this module, C-NODEs monitor the fragile links and
and U-NODE refers to the node whose state is unknown. The
 extract features to discover abnormality and identify bots.
administrator also initializes an empty neighbour table and an
 Although the traffic launched by the adversary resembles
empty link table on blockchain. The neighbour table is used to
 legitimate traffic, the features of links and traffic sources are
record neighbours of each node. The link table records weights
 still different from those in normal network environment. On
of different links, while each weight represents the number of
 one hand, the link features of a local network are highly
flows that may be transmitted through the corresponding link
 time-dependent in normal environment. However, the attack is
and is initialized to 0. Then each node of the network uploads
 sudden and unpredictable. To indicate whether the congestion
its neighbors and the corresponding links to the neighbour
 is caused by DDoS-LFA, we adopt 3 link features, including
table and the link table, respectively.
 Link Bandwidth Utilization (LBU), Packet Count (PKT) and
 Take Fig. 4(a) as an example, node 1 has 2 neighbours,
 Round-Trip Time (RTT). When LBU, PKT and RTT unconnamely node 2 and node 3. Correspondingly, node 1 maintains
 ventionally increase, it should be alert for attacks. On the other
2 links, namely link e12 and link e13. Therefore, in the
 hand, in normal network, the traffic triggered by a generic
neighbour table the neighbours of node 1 has 2 elements,
 source is ruleless. However, during the attack, the adversary
namely 2 and 3. The link table contains e12 and e13, which
 installs similar programs on bots, so the flows sent by those
are initialized to 0. The status table and neighbour table will be
 bots are correlated. We use 4 standard deviations to identify
used by the CREDIT Node Selection module to select nodes
 the bots: Standard Deviation of average Size of Packets sent
to inspect links, while the link table will be used by the Fragile
 (SDSP), Standard Deviation of Packets sent (SDP), Standard
Link Analysis module to obtain potential target links.
 Deviation of Bytes sent (SDB) and Standard Deviation of
 Time interval of packets sent (SDT). When the packets sent by
B. CREDIT Node Selection Module different sources show similar characteristics, we mark these
 This module aims to select minimun C-NODEs to moni- sources as bots.
tor all links. C-NODEs upload important traffic information To ensure the correctness of raw data mentioned above,
to blockchain and participate in verifying the information we use blockchain to store them. In the CREDIT network,
received from other C-NODEs, resulting in a great many each record must be confirmed by all C-NODEs before being
interactions between these nodes. Therefore, lessening the written on blockchain. The consensus algorithm picks out a
number of C-NODEs can reduce network synchronization C-NODE to package all transactions and generate the next
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3543

block. This is a decentralized process, since the node chosen
as the bookkeeping node is completely random in each round,
making it challenging for an attacker to tamper data.

E. Attack Detection Module
 This module is used to detect DDoS-LFA. The traffic
features change in an irregular way during DDoS-LFA, which
is quite different from features in normal network. Therefore,
we can find abnormality through detecting the change point.
The selected features are shown below:
 • LBU: When congestion occurs, LBU increases sharply,
which can be easily calculated through dividing the receiv-
 Fig. 5. Vertex Cover Problem and Set Cover Problem.
ing/sending packet rate by link bandwidth.
 • PKT: PKT can be easily obtained from receiving/sending
interface. It will rise when the attack occurs.
 • RTT: By sending ping packets to neighbors periodically,
 the traffic sent by the suspicious sources to the alternative
 link. Otherwise, it drop the packets. By employing these rules,
RTT can be obtained. It will increase when links are blocked.
 the congestion can be controlled without affecting the packets
Since the ping packet size is small, it won’t affect the link
 from normal sources.
bandwidth.
 The running process of this module is divided into the startup and smooth-running phases. In start-up, the C-NODE uses IV. K EY A LGORITHMS OF CREDIT
the LBU (or PKT) obtained from blockchain to train a credible A. Node Selection Algorithm Based on Greedy Strategy
prediction model, so that it can predict the link features of
a normal network. In smooth-running, the C-NODE utilizes 1) Problem Definition: Recalling Section III-B, we aim to
the well-trained model to make prediction. Once the extracted select a few nodes as C-NODEs, so as to save computing and
LBU (or PKT) is significantly different from the predicted storage resources of routers, as well as minimize the amount of
data, an LBU (or PKT) alarm will be raised. If both the LBU content stored in the blockchain. The selection strategy must
and PKT alarms are raised and the RTT value goes up, an guarantee that each link is connected to at least 1 C-NODE.
attack alarm is triggered. The detection and prediction process The selection problem is a Vertex Cover Problem (VCP). Take
is elaborated in Section IV-C. Fig. 5(a) as an example, there are 5 vertexes and 5 edges. The
 goal of VCP is to find out the minimum set of nodes that can
 cover all links. It is observed that choosing b and d is the
F. Source Identification Module
 optimal solution.
 This module is used to identify suspicious bots. The packet A VCP can be solved by formulating it into a Set
sending rates, receiving interval and bandwidth consump- Cover Problem (SCP), which contains a set of elements,
tion are semblable during DDoS-LFA, because the adversary E = {e1 , e2 , . . . , en }, and a set of subsets of E, S =
launches traffic at a constant rate with an army of bots. Since {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }, where Si = {ek , ek +1 , . . .} and the union
standard deviation measures the dispersion of a set of values, of Si will give E. The SCP is to find a collection C, which
a low standard deviation indicates that the values tend to be is the smallest subset of S and covers all elements in E. To
close to the average value, while a high standard deviation translate VCP into SCP, each vertex n is regarded as a subset
indicates that the values are spread out over a wide range. Sn , and the edge en linked to n is added to the corresponding
Bots will show similar characteristics, which means they have subsets Sn . For example, as shown in Fig. 5, the vertex a
similar standard deviations and the values of these standard and b are regarded as subset Sa and Sb , respectively. Both of
deviations are small. Therefore, we choose standard deviation them have an edge e1 , hence the element 1 is added to Sa
to facilitate the identification of bots. and Sb . Repeat the above steps until all the edges are added
 When an attack alarm is triggered, each C-NODE calculates to the corresponding subsets. At last, Fig. 5(a) is transferred
the SDSP, SDP, SDB and SDT of all sources. Then, the to Fig. 5(b).
potential bot list can be obtained by analyzing the similarity 2) Selection Strategy: The SCP has a greedy solution,
of pairwise sources. After that, each C-NODE uploads its list i.e., if E contains elements not covered by C, the set Sn which
to the blockchain, and the blockchain will take the intersection contains the largest number of elements should be obtained
of all source lists as the final result. The calculation process and added to C. We apply this solution to our node selection
is elaborated in Section IV-D. scheme.
 The solution is illustrated based on a more complicated
G. Attack Mitigation Module example in Fig. 6. Firstly, the edge nodes of the local network
 Given the final list of suspicious sources, the blockchain are marked as C-NODEs (n3 , n15 , n16 and n17 ), which make
delivers it to all C-NODEs, which will mitigate congestion up the initial CREDIT network and will participate in the
according to the following rules: If the C-NODE linked to the later consensus process. Then, the smart contract calculates
congested link has an alternate link with low LBU, it reroutes the number of neighbors of the remaining nodes (hereinafter
3544 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Algorithm 1 C-NODE Selection Strategy
 Input:
 Status Table (ST );
 Neighbour Table (NT );
 Output:
 Final Status Table (FST ): A table indicating the final
 status of all nodes;
 1: ST ← Edge nodes marked as C-NODEs;
 2: Calculate degree of all nodes except for edge nodes;
 3: Rank the nodes in a decreasing order based on their
Fig. 6. C-NODE selection strategy. degree, pick the top one node n;
 4: if ST (n) == U-NODE then
 5: ST ← n marked as C-NODE;
referred to as degree, e.g., the degree of n11 is 8), and 6: end if
ranks them in a decreasing order based on their degrees. 7: Check n  s neighbours list NLn ← NT ;
Next, the smart contract marks the node with the highest 8: for each node m in NLn do
degree as C-NODE if its status is U-NODE, or ignores it 9: check m  s neighbours list NLm ← NT ;
otherwise (e.g., n11 is marked as C-NODE). Later, check 10: if ST (m) == U-NODE then
C-NODE’s neighbours from neighbour table. If the status of 11: for each node q in NLm do
a neighbouring node is U-NODE and that node has at least 12: if ST (q) == C-NODE then
one other neighbour with the status of C-NODE, then mark 13: ST ← m marked as N-NODE;
it as N-NODE (n5 is a neighbour of n11 and is adjacent to 14: break;
another C-NODE n3 , hence n5 is categorized as an N-NODE). 15: end if
Similarly, if the status of a neighbour is C-NODE and it has 16: end for
only one neighbour which is a C-NODE, also classify it as an 17: else if ST (m) == C-NODE then
N-NODE (when both n4 and n7 are labeled as C-NODE, n4 18: if NLm has only one element and ST (e) == Cwill be updated to a N-NODE). In other cases, the neighbour NODE then
node is ignored, with its original status unchanged. Repeat 19: ST ← m marked as N-NODE;
the process until all remaining nodes have been selected and 20: end if
marked as C-NODE or N-NODE. Thus, no U-NODE will be 21: end if
left. Then, all the selected nodes have a connection to every 22: end for
link. We detail the strategy in Algorithm 1. Note that once a 23: Repeat above process until all links are involved;
node is marked as C-NODE, it gets involved in the consensus 24: Return Final Status Table.
process.
 The consensus process consists of two steps. First, all the
edge nodes, which are the initial C-NODEs, use Proof of Stake
 be divided into two cases. In one case, n is the sender. It will
(PoS) for consensus. PoS is a widely used consensus mechacheck whether the next-hop is a C-NODE. If not, it records the
nism in blockchain, which allocates the block creation rights
 source IP and destination IP of the flow; Otherwise, it ignores
based on stakes of the nodes rather than their computational
 it. In the other case, n is the receiver. It records the source IP
power. Next, the smart contract selects new C-NODEs, and
 and destination IP. Then the C-NODE adds those IPs to the
the selected nodes participate in the consensus process. After
 Source Space (called SSi , where i means link number) and
the selection process is finished, all the C-NODEs that have
 Destination Space (called DSi ) respectively. At the end of this
passed the consensus verification are obtained.
 time slot, the weight of linki is calculated by
 It has been proved that the greedy algorithm has a polynomial time complexity [51]. In the topology shown in Fig. 6, Wi = |SSi | × |DSi |, (1)
it only takes about 1 second to select C-NODEs.
 where |SSi | represents the cardinality of SSi . Consider the
B. Fragile Link Analysis Algorithm Based on Traffic Density example in Fig. 6, n8 has three links, linkn3 −n8 , linkn6 −n8
 and linkn8 −n11 . In time slot t, n8 receives three flows from
 Since the links with high flow density are more likely to linkn3 −n8 , the flows’ IP space is as follows:
be attacked, the potential target links can be identified by
calculating the flow density of all links. Then, monitoring SSn3 −n8 = {32.0.0.25, 32.0.0.181},
module can be deployed on these links. The flow density of DSn3 −n8 = {240.0.0.9, 240.0.0.41},
a link is defined as the number of flows that can be created
through that link. It can be computed as follows. hence the weight of linkn3 −n8 is 4. The greater the weight
 In the time slot t, when a C-NODE n sends a flow to a port value of a link, the more likely it is to be a target link. We
(i.e., to a link) or receives a flow from a port (i.e., from a link), detail the strategy in Algorithm 2. By analyzing the flows,
it checks whether the destination IP matches the IPs of our the potential target links can be quickly identified before the
protected zone. If it matches, go to the next step, which can attack, hence improving attack detection efficiency.
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3545

Algorithm 2 Fragile Link Analysis Strategy divided into two phases: start-up and smooth running. In the
Input: following paragraph, we take the prediction process of LBU
 Link Table (LT ); as an example.
 C-NODE Table (CT ): A table indicating all C-NODEs; 1) Start-Up: In this phase, we collect the real-time data
 Flow Table (FT ): A table indicating flows recorded by to train the model parameter of the prediction module.
 each C-NODE; The training process is running based on the data batch
Output: denoted by X = [X1 , X2 , . . . , XN ], where the element Xt =
 Fragile Link List (FL): A list of potential target links; [LBUt , LBUt+1 , . . . , LBUt+τ −1 ] is a data sample of the
 1: for each C-NODE n in CT do actual LBU values from the time slot t to t + τ − 1, N is the
 2: for each flow f in FT do number of samples used in each iteration, and τ is the length of
 3: n sends f to linki or receives f from linki ; a sample. Further, we define the label Y = [Y1 , Y2 , . . . , YN ],
 4: if f .destination == protected zone then where the element Yt = [LBUt+1 , LBUt+2 , . . . , LBUt+τ ]
 5: if n is the sender then represents the actual values from the time slot t + 1 to t + τ .
 6: if ST (n.next_hop) = C-NODE then It is expected that the output value of the C-LSTM-based
 7: SSi ← f .source; prediction module is approximately equal to the label value,
 8: DSi ← f .destination; their difference thus can be used to reflect the accuracy of the
 9: end if prediction.
10: else LBUt is the input of C-LSTM, yt = f (LBUt , W ) is the
11: SSi ← f .source; output value, where W is the model parameter that should
12: DSi ← f .destination; be optimized in each iteration, and f (·) is the function of
13: end if a C-LSTM cell. The closer yt value is to the actual value
14: end if LBUt+1 , the better C-LSTM is trained. Therefore, the goal
15: end for of the training process is to reduce the difference between yt
16: end for and LBUt+1 , and the loss function (also acts as the objective
17: for each link i in LT do function) can be defined as follows,
18: Wi = |SSi | × |DSi |; N
 LT ← Wi ; 1 
19: F (W ) = L(f (Xt , W ), Yt ), (2)
20: end for N
 t=1
21: Ranks LT in decreasing order based on W;
 where
22: FL ← LT (top_l );
 t+τ −1
23: Return Fragile Link List. 1 
 L(f (Xt , W ), Yt ) = (f (LBUi , W ) − LBUi+1 )2 .
 τ
 i=t
 (3)
 After calculating link weights, the C-NODE uploads them
to the blockchain, and the smart contract pick out the top_l We use the same way to train model for PKT prediction.
links as potential target links for monitoring. This result is Note that in the CREDIT network, all the nodes should share
achieved by consensus algorithm among all C-NODEs, which the same model so that the prediction result will not be affected
is credible and tamper-resistant. no matter which node is selected to conduct prediction.
 2) Smooth Running: With successfully trained C-LSTM,
 CREDIT system starts the attack detection in this phase. The
C. LFA Detection Algorithm Based on Link Features prediction performance of C-LSTM is greatly affected by the
 We develops a credible deep learning method, called input data. Using the real LBU as input during DDoS-LFA
Credible Long Short-Term Memory (C-LSTM), to predict the will lead to an unfaithful result. To guarantee that the model
LBU (link bandwidth utilization) and PKT (packet count) can make correct prediction when the attack occurs, we make
value of next time slot. Traditional LSTM is a kind of modification to the real LBU. In the time slot t, the winning
recurrent neural network [52], which performs well with time- C-NODE first calculates LBUt , and then fetches the predicted
varying sequences by selectively remember or forget some value LBUt from the block of the time slot t −1. The modified
information. However, since LSTM uses historical data to value is calculated by
predict the future, it is vulnerable to false past data. To LBU ∗t = ηLBU t + (1 − η)LBUt , (4)
guarantee that the module can still predict normal data even
if an attack is occurring, we make certain modifications to where η ∈ [0, 1] represents the trustworthiness of LBUt . If
improve the credibility of the input. We first define some the network is more likely to be normal and LBUt is thus
symbols about LBU and PKT: credible, η should be set larger. When the attack is occurring
 • LBUi / PKTi : Real value of the time slot i; and LBUt is no longer trustworthy, η should be set smaller.
 • LBU  / PKT  : Predicted value of the time slot i; The value of η is adaptively updated as follows,
 i i
 • LBU ∗ / PKT ∗ : Modified value of the time slot i.  δt
 i i 1 if LBU  ≤ μ,
 The symbols are stored on the blockchain to ensure the η= LBUt
 t (5)
correctness. The prediction process based on C-LSTM can be μ × δt otherwise,
3546 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Algorithm 3 LFA Detection and Link Feature Prediction determines that an attack is in progress. There is not a central
(LBU) Strategy node in CREDIT. In each time slot, the bookkeeping node
 Input: selected by the consensus algorithm implements the detection
 LBUt ; mechanism. This process is completely random. Therefore,
 [LBUt−1 ∗ , ..., LBU ∗
 t−τ +1 ]; unless the attacker has the ability to know the selected node or
 Fragile Link List (FL); has enough computing power to control the majority of nodes
 μ: Control factor of sensitive degree; in the network, it is difficult to destroy the detection system.
 t : Number of times the abnormality occurs;
 ε: Threshold of whether an attack occurs; D. Bots Identification Algorithm Based on Source Features
 Output: When the C-NODE raises the attack alarm, DDoS-LFA
 blockt : Latest block; Mitigation is triggered. In Section III we elaborate that the
 ALBU : Attack alarm of LBU; packets sent by botnets have similar size and rates. If two
 1: All C-NODEs compete for packaging right. The winning
 hosts send traffic with similar characteristics, they’re probably
 C-NODE will do: controlled bots. Therefore, we can estimate the randomness
 2: for each link l in FL do of traffic sent by various sources and identify the DDoS-LFA
 3: Calculate LBU t of l; bots.
 4: δt = |LBU t − LBUt | For each source, we select 4 standard deviations to analyze.
 δt
 5: if LBU  ≤ μ then The symbols used are as follows.
 t
 6: η ← 1; • bytesi : bytes sent by a source during the time slot i;
 7: t ← 0; • pakcetsi : packets sent by a source during the time slot i;
 8: else • timei : time interval of 2 packets sent by a source.
 LBU 
 9: η ← μ × δt t ; SDSP (standard deviation of average size of packets sent):
 10: t ← t + 1; Bots continually send packets with similar size, hence result
 11: end if in a small SDSP. Its computational formula is as follows,
 12: end for t
 13: if t ≥ ε then 1  bytesi
 AVGsp = , (7)
 14: Raise an attack alarm ALBU ; t packetsi
 i=1
 t ← 0; 
 15:   2
  t bytes
 16: end if  i=1 packetsi i − AVGsp
 17: LBUt∗ ← ηLBU t + (1 − η)LBUt ; SDSP = . (8)
 X̃t ← [LBUt∗ , LBUt−1 ∗ , ..., LBU ∗ t −1
 18: t−τ +1 ]
 19: 
 LBUt+1 ← clstm(X̃t , W ) ; SDP (standard deviation of packets sent): Bots continually
 20: blockt ← LBUt , LUBt∗ , LBUt+1  . send traffic with the similar amount of packets in time
 intervals, thus result in a small SDP. Its computational formula
 is as follows,
 t
where δt = |LBU t − LBUt | is the deviation and μ ∈ [0, 1] 1
 AVGp = packetsi , (9)
is an attack threshold. The value of δt is used to determine t
 i=1
whether an attack is occurring, since LBUt approximately
 δt t 2
equals LBUt in a normal network. If LBU  ≤ μ, the i=1 packetsi − AVGp
 t SDP = . (10)
network is secure and η is set as 1. Otherwise, η is inversely t −1
proportional to δt . With LBU ∗t , we can guarantee the correct SDB (standard deviation of bytes sent): Bots continually
input of C-LSTM, so that it can continue making right send traffic with the similar size in time intervals, thus result
prediction. in a small SDB. Its computational formula is as follows,
 The winning C-NODE takes the τ modified values X̃t =
 t
[LBUt∗ , LBUt−1∗ , . . . , LBU ∗
 t−τ +1 ] as the input of C-LSTM to 1
  AVGb = bytesi , (11)
predict LBU t+1 . The process can be defined by t
 i=1
  
 
 LBUt+1 = clstm X̃t , W . (6) t 2
 SDB = i=1 (packetsi − AVGb ) . (12)
To improve the fault tolerance, an indicator t is used to keep t −1
track of the number of times that δt exceeds the threshold. SDT (standard deviation of time interval of packets sent):
When δt exceeds the threshold consecutively, CREDIT will Bots continually send traffic with a fixed period, thus result in
regard this phenomenon as the omen of attack. a small SDT. Different from the first three metrics, it does not
 Algorithm 3 describes the LBU prediction process in detail. count the packets or bytes, but uses the sending time interval
When t exceeds the threshold ε, it raises an attack alarm of of several packets. Its computational formula is as follows,
LBU. Note that we use the same way to predict PKT. When N
CREDIT raises both LBU alarms and PKT alarms, it checks 1 
 AVGt = timei , (13)
the RTT value. If the RTT value rises abnormally, CREDIT N
 i=1
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3547

Algorithm 4 Suspicious Source Identification Strategy
Input:
 SD List: [SDSP, SDP, SDB, SDT], calculated standard
 deviations of various sources;
 μ: Threshold of whether 2 sources are bots;
Output:
 Suspicious Source List (SL): A list of suspicious sources;
 1: Gap List ← ∅;
 2: for each item in SD List do
 3: if item.SDs in range (G1, G7) then
 4: Gap List ← item;
 Fig. 7. Network topology for our experiments.
 5: end if
 6: end for
 7: for each element e1 in Gap List do
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 8: for each element e2 in Gap List do
 9: if e1 = e2 then In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the
10: Calculate Se1 ,e2 ; performance of CREDIT. First, we introduce our experimental
11: if Se1 ,e2 ≤ μ then environment, including building test range, generating normal
12: SL ← e1 ; traffic and attack traffic, as well as displaying the result of
13: SL ← e2 ; CREDIT Node Selection and Fragile Link Analysis. Then,
14: end if we evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms and
15: end if compare them with some existing works. At last, we interpret
16: end for the overhead of the CREDIT system.
17: end for
18: Return Suspicious Source List. A. Experimental Environment
 1) Testbed: Fig. 7 is the topology of our testbed, which
 is the campus network topology of the University of Science
 and Technology of China (USTC). In Fig. 7, the green nodes
 N 2
 SDT = i=1 (timei − AVGt ) . (14) are routers that are connected to other terminals or network
 N −1 devices. For example, the node of New Campus denotes the
 core router in the New Campus of USTC, which is connected
 The four metrics are normalized to the range of [0, to thousands of personal computers and cell phones. In our
1]. To make it easier to obtain the similarity of differ- experiment, this node is re-built via a virtual machine using
ent sources, we divide the range into 10 Gaps, which are the system of ubuntu 16.04 with 8-core CPU, 16GB memory,
[0,0.1), [0.1, 0.2), . . . , [0.9, 1], respectively, and mark them as and 40GB disk space. The connected devices are simulated
(G1, G2, . . . , G10). Then put the metric to the appropriate by the captured traffic shown in ns4.ustc.edu.cn. The white
Gap. For example, if a source’s four metrics are (0.15, 0.22, nodes are primary routers that gather traffic, and router 3 is
0.67, 0.8), its metrics are marked as (G1, G2, G6, G8). the gateway directly connected to the Internet. The gray nodes
 After calculating the 4 metrics, each C-NODE first seeks out are hosts that send traffic to the campus network, where n = 6
the sources whose 4 metrics are between G1 and G7 because and hosts 1, 2, . . . , 6 are CREATE2(IPv6), CREATE(IPv4),
the randomness of these sources is small. Then it calculates ChinaTelCom, ChinaUnionCom, ChinaMobileCom and
the similarity of pairwise sources by CSTNET, respectively.
 We build the blockchain system based on Ethereum in
 4 x1 x2 2
 CENI platform. On this platform, users can create real nodes
 i=1 Gapi − Gapi (virtual machines or VSR routers) located on different regional
 Sx1 ,x2 = , (15)
 4 servers. They can configure system settings, CPUs, storage,
 network segments, and establish connections between nodes
where Gapix means the x-th source’s i-th metric. If S is by configuring bandwidth, packet loss rate, latency, and other
less than the threshold, the two sources x1 and x2 are parameters. Tcpdump and “/proc/net/dev” are used for nodes
likely to be bots. To save the calculation time, it no longer to monitor network traffic. Tcpdump is a packet capture and
calculates Sx1 ,x3 if both Sx1 ,x2 and Sx2 ,x3 are small, which analysis tool that can capture packets in real-time, providing
means that if x1 and x2 are alike, x2 and x3 are alike, it information about the time, type, and length of the received
estimates that x1 and x3 are alike. The detailed calculation packets on the network interface. “/proc/net/dev” is a tool
scheme is shown in Algorithm 4. After each C-NODE finishes for reading network statistics information, allowing real-time
calculation and gets the suspicious sources, the smart contract monitoring of traffic and providing information about the
will take the intersection of all the sources, which ensures that number of packets received, bytes transferred, and packet loss
some legitimate sources will not be mistakenly identified as of the network within a certain period. The iptables is used to
malicious ones. filter packets. When a packet enters the network card, iptables
3548 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 8. The LBU and PKT of some links.

will processes the packet based on the method defined by the to the CREDIT nodes, which are responsible for detecting
rules. and mitigating attacks. Next, the CREDIT nodes conduct
 2) Generation of Traffic: We extract the real world traffic Fragile Links Analysis module, pick out L1 and L2 as fragile
of USTC campus network and apply it as the normal traffic links to be monitored. Afterwards, all C-NODEs periodically
in the testbed. The LBU and PKT of some links are shown extract features of L1 and L2, upload them to blockchain
in Fig. 8. We also generate attack traffic to flood the link. and utilize these features to identify potential attacks. Once
We define 2 variables, host-server pair (pair for short) DDos-LFA attacks from identified bots are detected on L1
to characterize the scale of the attack, λ to represent the and L2, the CREDIT nodes connected to them (i.e., Router
incremental speed at which each host sends packets to the 1 and Router 3) mitigate congestion by reroute or drop
server, that is, each host will increase the sending traffic at packets.
the speed of λ until the aggregated flows are slightly higher
than the link bandwidth. For example, if pair = 100, λ = 4, it
means that there are 100 host-server pairs in total. Each host B. Existing Work
sends traffic at the rate of 4 Kbps until the target link congests. We compare the performance of CREDIT with
 3) CREDIT Node Selection Result: In our testbed, the Balance [53], Woodpecker [14] and LFADefender [54]. The
green nodes, Router 1 and Router 3 are C-NODEs, who are existing algorithms are introduced as follows:
responsible for detecting and mitigating the attack. 1) Balance: It uses SDN switches to collect 9 metrics
 4) Fragile Link Analysis Result: In our testbed, L1 and L2 of each source and calculates the Shannon’s entropy. If the
are recognized as fragile links. Router 1 and Router 3 will entropy is lower than the attack threshold, Balance determines
conduct detection and mitigation schemes in these 2 links. that the congestion is due to DDoS-LFA. Then Balance selects
 5) Other Parameters: The learning rate and epoch of the sources with similar characteristics and records them as
LSTM are set as 0.006 and 500 respectively. The difficulty bots.
in the genesis block is set as 0x400000. When configuring 2) Woodpecker: It evaluates the importance of links on
a private blockchain, the difficulty value can be adjusted the current flow path, and calculates the weight of each link
according to the needs. when congestion occurs. If the weight is greater than the
 6) Workflow: The CREDIT deployed on our testbed works attack threshold, Woodpecker decides that there is an attack.
as follows: Firstly, the network administrator performs initial- Then Woodpecker identifies the IP addresses which appear on
ization process, selects the edge nodes marked in green in several congested links as bots.
Fig. 7 as C-NODEs, and generate the status table, neighbour 3) LFADefender: It first analyzes the links that may be
table and link table on smart contract of the blockchain. regarded as targets, then records the number of traceroute
Then, with the help of CREDIT Node Selection module, packets sent by each source and determines whether the source
the blockchain selects Router 1 and Router 3 to add them is a bot based on the attack threshold.
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3549

Fig. 9. Precision, false positive rate, recall and F measure varying with λ and pair.

C. Performance of CREDIT that the CREDIT detection algorithm has a high accuracy.
 1) Result of DDoS-LFA Detection: We adopt the precision Fig. 9(b) is false positive rate varying with λ and pair. A high
(P), false positive rate (FPR), recall (R) and F measure (F) to FPR means that the system is likely to mistakenly identify a
measure the detection accuracy of CREDIT. The formulas are normal flow as an attacked one. When the pair value is low,
as follows: FPR is high when λ = 4. This is because when the number
 of hosts is small, link congestion occurs after a long period
 TP
 P = , (16) of time. However, CREDIT misjudges the traffic as an attack
 TP + FP before congestion, resulting in a high FPR. Fig. 9(c) is the
 FP
 FPR = , (17) change in recall over λ and pair. A low recall indicates that
 FP + TN the system is unresponsive, which means that it takes longer
 TP
 R= , (18) to detect the attack. As can be seen from the result, when the
 TP + FN λ value is small, the recall is very high. The reason is that
 2 × TP
 F = , (19) the abnormal traffic lasts for a long time, so CREDIT can
 2 × TP + FP + FN quickly detect attacks. In addition, even if the λ value is large,
where TP means the system correctly discerns an abnormal recall can maintain 90% and above, indicating that CREDIT
event as attack, FP means the system misjudges a legal event system is sensitive to attacks. Fig. 9(d) is F measure varying
as attack, TN means the system accurately recognizes an with λ and pair. F value goes up with the increase of the
abnormal event as legitimate traffic, and FN means the system pair value, and finally tends to 100%. Similar to precision,
falsely recognizes an abnormal event as legitimate traffic. when the pair and λ value is large, the traffic is more likely
 We use different (λ, pair) to test the 4 metrics of CREDIT. to appear abnormal, so it is easier to be detected by CREDIT.
Fig. 9(a) shows the change pattern in precision over λ and LFA adversary uses many bots to send low-rate traffic to
pair. When the λ value is settled, the precision rises with flood target links, which means that the λ value is small while
the increase of the pair value. This is because the larger the pair value is large in the attack. As can be seen from the
the pair value is, the more attack flows there are. Hence experimental results, the CREDIT system has high precision,
the traffic will increase in a short period of time, making recall and F1 measure, as well as low false positive rate.
it easier to detect the attack. Analogously, when the pair We test the detection performance between CREDIT,
value is settled, the larger the λ value is, the larger the traffic Balance and Woodpecker. Since the traffic rate sent by the
sent by each pair is, making it easier to find out exceptions. DDoS-LFA attacker is low, we set the λ value to 4kbps in
In addition, precision eventually approaches 100%, indicating this experiment, and evaluate the influence of the pair value
3550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 10. Comparison of precision, false positive rate, recall and F measure between CREDIT, Balance and Woodpecker.

Fig. 11. Identification rate and false identification rate between CREDIT, Balance, Woodpecker and LFADefender.

on the 3 mechanisms. In addition, a small amount of data Fig. 10(b) shows the comparison of false positive rate. FPR
used by Balance and Woodpecker is tampered randomly in of CREDIT is higher than any other schemes when the
this experiment to evaluate the effect of data reliability on the pair value is small. When the pair value increases, the
detection mechanism. FPR of CREDIT tends to 0, while that of Balance and
 Fig. 10(a) shows the comparison of precision. When the Woodpecker keep large. Besides, if the data is tampered
pair value is small, the effect of Balance and Woodpecker with, the FPR of Balance has a sharp increase, and the
is slightly better than that of CREDIT. However, when FPR of Woodpecker keeps large too, which indicates that the
the pair value increases, the precision of CREDIT is sig- 2 mechanisms have a high demand for data reliability, while
nificantly higher than that of Balance and Woodpecker. the CREDIT is not affected by tampering due to the use of
Besides, when we randomly tamper with the data used by blockchain. Fig. 10(c) and Fig. 10(d) show the comparison
Balance and Woodpecker, their precision drop dramatically. between recall and F measure, and it can be seen that the
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3551

Fig. 12. Time cost of functions in each module.

detection effect of CREDIT is superior than Balance and Fig. 11(a) and Fig. 11(b) show the comparison results
Woodpecker. of attack source identification between CREDIT, Balance,
 2) Result of Source Identification: We adopt the attack Woodpecker and LFADefender. It can be seen from the results
source identification rate (IR) and false identification rate that the IR of 4 schemes reach over 80%, and the performance
(FIR) to evaluate the performance. High IR and low FIR of CREDIT is better than that of Balance and LFADefender,
indicate that the system has good attack source identification but is worse than that of Woodpecker when pair value is large.
performance and can discard attack traffic in time to alleviate The reasons are as follows: Balance extracts nine features,
congestion. The calculation formulas are as follows: analyzes the possible attack sources for each feature, and takes
 intersection of the suspicious sources to obtain the bots list.
 IB
 IR = , (20) This method may omit some bots. Because there may be a
 TB malicious source that exhibits the characteristics of a bot under
 MIH
 FIR = , (21) one feature, and display the characteristics of a normal host
 TH under another. LFADefender uses the number of traceroute
where IB means the number of identified bots, TB means the packet to identify attack sources. While the adversary can
total number of bots, MIH means the number of normal hosts deliberately reduce the number of packets to avoid being found
misjudged as bots, and TH means the total number of normal out. Therefore, this method is hard to achieve 100% accuracy.
hosts. Woodpecker recognizes the IP addresses that simultaneously
3552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Fig. 14. Comparison of TPS and blocks forming latency between CREDIT
Fig. 13. Extra traffic generated by blockchain. and BiLSTM.

 size of a block is around 640 bytes. The memory consumption
appears in many congested links as bots. This method is
 for a scheme execution is approximately 90kb. For a machine
effective when there are numerous sources. Hence the result
 with 1GB of memory, ideally, its memory can support over
of Woodpecker shows a significant rise. Although the IR of
 ten thousand detections. Therefore, the influence of the block
Woodpecker is higher than that of CREDIT, its FIR shows a
 size is negligible.
bad performance, which means Woodpecker is likely to regard
 4) Performance of Blockchain: We compare the TPS of
legitimate users as bots. Based on the 2 results, we conclude
 blockchain and latency in forming blocks between CREDIT
that CREDIT has a good effect on identifying bots.
 and BiLSTM [55], as illustrated in Fig. 14. TPS means
 3) Overhead: We test the execution delay of each functransactions per second which is an important metric for
tion of algorithm, as illustrated in Fig. 12. Execution time
 measuring the throughput of a blockchain. Latency indicates
of each algorithm is primarily consumed by functions that
 the time it takes for a block to be confirmed and added to the
involve multiple iterations of loops or complex computations,
 blockchain. It can be seen that the two algorithm have similar
such as the select_node function in the node deployment
 performance, the maximum TPS of blockchain is about 60
module, which consumes 774 milliseconds of latency, the
 and the latency of forming blocks ranges from 1 second to
sort_link function in the link analysis module with a delay
 7 seconds.
of 442 milliseconds, and the identify_link function taking
657 milliseconds. Additionally, the attack_judge function in
the attack detection module and bot_judge function in the VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
attack source identification module consume 370 milliseconds In this paper, we propose a link flooding attack defense
and 713 milliseconds respectively. These functions require scheme, CREDIT, that leverages blockchain and LSTM to
numerous steps to execute and consequently result in longer perform target-link analysis, DDoS-LFA detection, dangerous
processing times. Another significant factor contributing to source identification and DDoS-LFA mitigation. By exploitexecution time is data writing operations performed by set ing the fact of DDoS-LFA that the adversary will control
functions depicted in the figure; for instance, set_status within multiple bots to send legitimate-like flows, leading to a sudden
the node deployment module incurs a delay of 45 milliseconds. increase of LBU and PKT, we design the LSTM model
Such functions necessitate modification of contract variables so that all computing nodes in the CREDIT network can
which adds additional processing time. Conversely, simple conduct detection schemes. Moreover, we use correlation
data reading tasks take minimal time as observed with get analysis to infer the potential target links and suspected
functions illustrated in this figure; for example, get_RTT sources, so that the protected region can take timely prewithin the attack detection module only requires 7 millisec- cautions and mitigate the congestion. CREDIT is the first
onds for completion. These types of functions do not modify application of blockchain to the detection of complex DDoScontract variables nor involve complex operations hence their LFA, which can both detect and migrate suspicious traffic
shorter execution times are evident. Overall results demon- based on the blockchain, even in the presence of deceptive
strate that even for highly time-consuming functions, they attackers. CREDIT is more reliable, flexible, effective and
only require a few hundred milliseconds indicating efficiency low-cost than traditional non-blockchain-based DDoS-LFA
achieved through our proposed algorithm. defense methods, which demonstrates the huge potential of the
 The extra traffic introduced by blockchain is shown in combination of blockchain and AI in the field of cybersecurity
Fig. 13. The synchronization of transactions and blocks defense. We implement CREDIT in CENI with Ethereum to
imposes a small amount of traffic to the network, which evaluate its efficiency and overhead. The result demonstrates
is about 3kbps averagely, demonstrating that the impact on that CREDIT can effectively detect DDoS-LFA with a low
bandwidth is negligible. Moreover, during a scheme execution, false positive rate and high detection rate, as well as low
145 transactions are used to upload data to blockchain. The overhead.
JIANG et al.: CREDIBLE LINK FLOODING ATTACK DETECTION AND MITIGATION: A BLOCKCHAIN-BASED APPROACH 3553

 R EFERENCES [27] D. Puthal, N. Malik, S. P. Mohanty, E. Kougianos, and G. Das,
 “Everything you wanted to know about the blockchain: Its promise,
 [1] H. Luo, Z. Liu, and S. Zhang, “Preventing DDoS flooding attacks with components, processes, and problems,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag.,
 cryptographic path identifiers in future Internet,” IEEE Trans. Netw. vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 6–14, Jul. 2018.
 Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1690–1704, Jun. 2022. [28] S. Nakamoto. “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.” 2008.
 [2] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “Multiplexed asymmetric attacks: Next- [Online]. Available: https://git.dhimmel.com/bitcoin-whitepaper/
 generation DDoS on HTTP/2 servers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics [29] H. Hellani, A. E. Samhat, M. Chamoun, H. El Ghor, and A. Serhrouchni,
 Security, vol. 15, pp. 1790–1800, 2019. “On blockchain technology: Overview of bitcoin and future insights,”
 [3] S. Kottler. “February 28th DDoS incident report.” 2018. [Online]. in Proc. IEEE Int. Multidiscip. Conf. Eng. Technol. (IMCET), 2018,
 Available: https://github.blog/2018-03-01-DDoS-incident-report/ pp. 1–8.
 [4] C. Cimpanu. “AWS said it mitigated a 2.3 Tbps DDoS attack, the [30] C. K. Frantz and M. Nowostawski, “From institutions to code: Towards
 largest ever.” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.zdnet.com/article/ automated generation of smart contracts,” in Proc. 1st Int. Workshops
 aws-said-it-mitigated-a-2-3-tbps-ddos-attack-the-largest-ever Found. Appl. Self-Syst., 2016, pp. 210–215.
 [5] M. Geva, A. Herzberg, and Y. Gev, “Bandwidth distributed denial of
 [31] J. Zhou, G. Feng, and Y. Wang, “Optimal deployment mechanism of
 service: Attacks and defenses,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 12, no. 1,
 blockchain in resource-constrained IoT systems,” IEEE Internet Things
 pp. 54–61, Feb. 2014.
 J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8168–8177, Jun. 2022.
 [6] J. Xing, J. Cai, B. Zhou, and C. Wu, “A deep ConvNet-based coun-
 [32] P. P. Ray, D. Dash, K. Salah, and N. Kumar, “Blockchain for IoT-based
 termeasure to mitigate link flooding attacks using software-defined
 healthcare: Background, consensus, platforms, and use cases,” IEEE
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
 Syst. J., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 85–94, Mar. 2021.
 [7] A. Studer and A. Perrig, “The coremelt attack,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res.
 [33] M. Baza, M. Nabil, M. Ismail, M. Mahmoud, E. Serpedin, and
 Comput. Security, 2009, pp. 37–52.
 M. Ashiqur Rahman, “Blockchain-based charging coordination mech-
 [8] M. S. Kang, S. B. Lee, and V. D. Gligor, “The crossfire attack,” in Proc.
 anism for smart grid energy storage units,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 IEEE Symp. Security Privacy, 2013, pp. 127–141.
 Blockchain, 2019, pp. 504–509.
 [9] M. S. Kang and V. D. Gligor, “Routing bottlenecks in the Internet:
 [34] O. B. Mora, R. Rivera, V. M. Larios, J. R. Beltrán-Ramírez, R. Maciel,
 Causes, exploits, and countermeasures,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 and A. Ochoa, “A use case in Cybersecurity based in blockchain
 Comput. Commun. Security, 2014, pp. 321–333.
 to deal with the security and privacy of citizens and smart cities
[10] C. Liaskos, V. Kotronis, and X. Dimitropoulos, “A novel framework for
 Cyberinfrastructures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Smart Cities Conf. (ISC), 2018,
 modeling and mitigating distributed link flooding attacks,” in Proc. 35th
 pp. 1–4.
 IEEE INFOCOM, 2016, pp. 1–9.
 [35] H. Li, R. Lu, L. Zhou, B. Yang, and X. Shen, “An efficient Merkle-
[11] “DDoS impact survey reveals the actual cost of DDoS attacks.”
 tree-based authentication scheme for smart grid,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 8,
 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.freebuf.com/articles/network/
 no. 2, pp. 655–663, Jun. 2014.
 67107.html
[12] M. Prince. “The DDoS that knocked spamhaus offline (and how we [36] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction
 mitigated it).” 2013. [Online]. Available: https://blog.cloudflare.com/the- ledger,” Ethereum, Zug, Switzerland, Yellow Paper, 2013. [Online].
 DDoS-that-knocked-Spamhaus-offline-and-ho/ Available: http://gavwood.com/paper.pdf
[13] L. Xue, X. Ma, X. Luo, E. W. W. Chan, T. T. N. Miu, and G. Gu, [37] E. Androulaki et al., “Hyperledger fabric: A distributed operating system
 “LinkScope: Toward detecting target link flooding attacks,” IEEE Trans. for permissioned blockchains,” 2018, arXiv:1801.10228.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 2423–2438, 2018. [38] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in Proc.
[14] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Jia, and J. Wu, “Woodpecker: Detecting OSDI, 1999, pp. 173–186.
 and mitigating link-flooding attacks via SDN,” Comput. Netw., vol. 147, [39] G. Zhang et al., “Reaching consensus in the Byzantine empire:
 pp. 1–13, Dec. 2018. A comprehensive review of BFT consensus algorithms,” 2022,
[15] L. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, and J. Wu, “Towards mitigating link flooding arXiv:2204.03181.
 attack via incremental SDN deployment,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput. [40] M. Yin, D. Malkhi, M. K. Reiter, G. G. Gueta, and I. Abraham,
 Commun. (ISCC), 2016, pp. 397–402. “HotStuff: BFT consensus with linearity and responsiveness,” in Proc.
[16] A. Aydeger, N. Saputro, K. Akkaya, and M. Rahman, “Mitigating ACM Symp. Princ. Distrib. Comput., 2019, pp. 347–356.
 crossfire attacks using SDN-based moving target defense,” in Proc. 41st [41] G. Zhang and H.-A. Jacobsen, “Prosecutor: An efficient BFT consensus
 Conf. Local Comput. Netw. (LCN), 2016, pp. 627–630. algorithm with behavior-aware penalization against Byzantine attacks,”
[17] S. B. Lee, M. S. Kang, and V. D. Gligor, “CoDef: Collaborative defense in Proc. 22nd Int. Middleware Conf., 2021, pp. 52–63.
 against large-scale link-flooding attacks,” in Proc. 9th ACM Int. Conf. [42] G. Danezis, L. Kokoris-Kogias, A. Sonnino, and A. Spiegelman,
 Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol., 2013, pp. 417–428. “Narwhal and tusk: A DAG-based mempool and efficient BFT consen-
[18] T. Hirayama, K. Toyoda, and I. Sasase, “Fast target link flooding attack sus,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Conf. Comput. Syst., 2022, pp. 34–50.
 detection scheme by analyzing traceroute packets flow,” in Proc. IEEE [43] W. Meng, E. W. Tischhauser, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, and J. Han, “When
 Int. Workshop Inf. Forensics Security, 2015, pp. 1–6. intrusion detection meets blockchain technology: A review,” IEEE
[19] J. Takeuchi and K. Yamanishi, “A unifying framework for detecting Access, vol. 6, pp. 10179–10188, 2018.
 outliers and change points from time series,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data [44] N. Alexopoulos, E. Vasilomanolakis, R. N. Ivánkó et al., “Towards
 Eng., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 482–492, Apr. 2006. blockchain-based collaborative intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. Int.
[20] M. S. Kang, V. D. Gligor, and V. Sekar, “SPIFFY: Inducing cost- Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastruct. Security, 2017, pp. 107–118.
 detectability tradeoffs for persistent link-flooding attacks,” in Proc. 23rd [45] B. Rodrigues, T. Bocek, A. Lareida, D. Hausheer, S. Rafati, and
 Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp. (NDSS), 2016, pp. 53–55. B. Stiller, “A blockchain-based architecture for collaborative DDoS
[21] P. Xiao, Z. Li, H. Qi, W. Qu, and H. Yu, “An efficient DDoS detection mitigation with smart contracts,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Auton. Infrastruct.,
 with bloom filter in SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Security Priv. Manage. Security, 2017, pp. 16–29.
 Comput. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–6. [46] L.-Y. Yeh, J.-L. Huang, T.-Y. Yen, and J.-W. Hu, “A collaborative DDoS
[22] J. Zheng, Q. Li, G. Gu, J. Cao, D. K. Y. Yau, and J. Wu “Realtime DDoS defense platform based on blockchain technology,” in Proc. 12th Int.
 defense using COTS SDN switches via adaptive correlation analysis,” Conf. Ubi Media Comput., 2019, pp. 1–6.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 1838–1853, 2018. [47] A. E. Z. Houda, S. A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Cochain-SC: An intra-
[23] W. Rafique, X. He, Z. Liu, Y. Sun, and W. Dou, “CFADefense: A and inter-domain DDoS mitigation scheme based on blockchain using
 security solution to detect and mitigate crossfire attacks in software- SDN and smart contract,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 98893–98907, 2019.
 defined IoT-edge infrastructure,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform. [48] Z. Abou El Houda, A. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “Co-IoT: A collaborative
 Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 500–509. DDoS mitigation scheme in IoT environment based on blockchain using
[24] S. T. Zargar, J. Joshi, and D. Tipper, “A survey of defense mechanisms SDN,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
 against distributed denial of service (DDoS) flooding attacks,” IEEE [49] G. Spathoulas et al., “Towards reliable integrity in blacklisting: Facing
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2046–2069, 4th Quart., 2013. malicious IPs in GHOST smart contracts,” in Proc. IEEE (SMC) Int.
[25] M. N. M. Bhutta et al., “A survey on blockchain technology: Evolution, Conf. Innov. Intell. Syst. Appl. (INISTA), 2018, pp. 1–8.
 architecture and security,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 61048–61073, 2021. [50] M. Essaid, D. Kim, S. H. Maeng, S. Park, and H. T. Ju, “A collaborative
[26] M. Ul Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Anomaly detection in DDoS mitigation solution based on Ethereum smart contract and RNNblockchain networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Survey LSTM,” in Proc. Asia Pac. Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Manag. Cyber
 Tut., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 289–318, 1st Quart., 2023. Phys. World (APNOMS), 2019, pp. 1–6.
3554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

[51] B. Augustin, T. Friedman, and R. Teixeira, “Measuring load-balanced Wanqin Cao received the M.S. degree in
 paths in the Internet,” in Proc. 7th ACM SIGCOMM Internet Meas. Conf. information science and technology from the
 (IMC), 2007, pp. 149–160. University of Science and Technology of China,
[52] Y. Li and Y. Lu, “LSTM-BA: DDoS detection approach combining Hefei, China, in 2022. Her research interests include
 LSTM and Bayes,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Adv. Cloud Big Data (CBD), the blockchain technology and networks security.
 2019, pp. 180–185.
[53] N. Ravi, S. M. Shalinie, and D. D. J. Theres, “BALANCE: Link flooding
 attack detection and mitigation via hybrid-SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1715–1729, Sep. 2020.
[54] J. Wang, R. Wen, J. Li, F. Yan, B. Zhao, and F. Yu, “Detecting and
 mitigating target link-flooding attacks using SDN,” IEEE Trans. Depend.
 Secure Comput., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 944–956, Dec. 2019.
[55] O. Alkadi, N. Moustafa, B. Turnbull, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A deep
 blockchain framework-enabled collaborative intrusion detection for protecting IoT and cloud networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12,
 pp. 9463–9472, Jun. 2021. Huasen He (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 degree in automation from the University of Science
 and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
 in 2013, and the M.S. degree in signal processing
 and communications and the Ph.D. degree in digital
 Xiaofeng Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the communications from the University of Edinburgh,
 B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in information science Edinburgh, U.K., in 2014 and 2018, respectively.
 and technology from the University of Science He is currently an Associate Research Fellow with
 and Technology of China, Hefei, China, in the School of Information Science and Technology,
 2008 and 2013, respectively, where he is cur- USTC. He is also with the Institute of Artificial
 rently an Associate Professor with the School of Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science
 Information Science and Technology. He is also Center. His research interests include future networks, network modeling, and
 with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei optimization.
 Comprehensive National Science Center. His recent
 research interests include discrete event dynamic
 system, tensor analysis and big data, future network,
and cognitive communications.

 Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
 Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
 Qianbao Shi received the M.S. degree in in 2011 and 2016, respectively, where he is curinformation science and technology from the rently an Associate Professor with the School
 University of Science and Technology of China, of Information Science and Technology. He is
 Hefei, China, in 2013, where she is currently pur- also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
 suing the Ph.D. degree. She is with the Department Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center. His
 of Automation, USTC and the Institute of Artificial research interests include multimedia communica-
 Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science tions, future network, and stochastic optimization.
 Center, Hefei. Her research interests include aod hoc
 networks and unmanned aerial vehicle networks.

 Jian Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Hengkun Miao received the B.S. degree in B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
 aircraft manufacturing engineering from the Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
 Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, in 2001 and 2006, respectively, where he is cur-
 Nanjing, China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing rently a Professor with the School of Information
 the M.S. degree in electronic and information Science and Technology. He is also with the Institute
 engineering with the University of Science of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive
 and Technology of China, Hefei, China. He is National Science Center. His research interests
 also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, include future network, distributed system design,
 Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center. modeling and optimization, multimedia over wired
 His research interests include edge computing, and wireless, and stochastic optimization. Dr. Yang
 blockchain, space-air-ground network, computation received the Lu Jia-Xi Young Talent Award from the Chinese Academy of
offloading, and resource allocation. Sciences in 2009.