Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for fine-grained
encrypted traffic classification
Xinbo Han a,b , Guizhong Xu c , Meng Zhang a,b , Zheng Yang a,b , Ziyang Yu a,b , Weiqing Huang a,b ,
Chen Meng a ,∗
a
 Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
b School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
c Information Science Academy of China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Beijing, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Nowadays, most network traffic is encrypted, which protects user privacy but complicates the task of analyzing
Encrypted traffic classification and classifying encrypted traffic. Identifying the specific categories of encrypted traffic, such as application
Deep learning type or even the specific application, is of great significance for advanced network services and network
Graph neural networks
 security management. Many existing methods for encrypted traffic classification rely on machine learning
Dual-embedding
 and deep learning techniques, but they exhibit certain shortcomings. A considerable number of these methods
Traffic interaction graph
 rely on statistical features, which may lose their relevance as networks evolve and lead to the loss of important
 information. Additionally, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) face
 limitations in extracting features from encrypted traffic, specifically, their inability to learn traffic interaction
 information within a network flow.
 To address these challenges, we propose a model called Dual Embedding with Graph Neural Networks
 (DE-GNN) for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification. Based on the byte-packet-flow structure of network
 traffic, we present a dual embedding layer that encodes the packet header and payload separately using raw
 bytes, which allows subsequent processes to run separately and in parallel. Then, we develop the PacketCNN
 to extract packet-level features from both the header and payload. Afterwards, we construct a network
 flow as a Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIG) and utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to extract flow-level
 features. Finally, an adaptive deep feature fusion process is applied to combine flow-level features from the
 header and payload, creating a robust representation for classification. Extensive experiments are conducted
 on two well-known datasets, ISCX-VPN2016 and ISCX-Tor2016, to verify our approach. The experimental
 results demonstrate that DE-GNN effectively identifies the type of encrypted traffic, outperforming baselines
 significantly.

1. Introduction classifying encrypted traffic. Consequently, the task of extracting valuable information from encrypted traffic presents a formidable challenge
 Identifying traffic types is a fundamental and critical ability for in the pursuit of accurate classification.
network research. Traffic classification, the categorization of network Early traffic classification methods included port-based techniques
traffic into appropriate classes, is important to many applications, such
 and Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) [4–6]. However, with the proliferas quality of service (QoS) control, pricing, resource usage planning,
malware detection, and intrusion detection [1]. In recent times, to ation of applications utilizing non-standard interfaces or dynamically
protect user privacy and anonymity, various encryption techniques assigned ports, the effectiveness of port-based methods has significantly
are used to encrypt the transmission of network traffic [2]. While waned. The Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) method involves a thorough
this ensures the privacy and anonymity for users, it complicates the examination and analysis of network packets to detect and identify spetask of analyzing and classifying network traffic. Furthermore, privacy- cific protocols, applications, content, or behaviors within network trafenhanced tools, such as VPN and Tor [3], are employed to circumvent fic. While DPI has outperformed port-based detection methods, it does
Internet censorship measures, which further increase the difficulty of

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail addresses: hanxinbo@iie.ac.cn (X. Han), xuguizhong@cetc.com.cn (G. Xu), zhangmeng@iie.ac.cn (M. Zhang), yangzheng@iie.ac.cn (Z. Yang),
yuziyang@iie.ac.cn (Z. Yu), huangweiqing@iie.ac.cn (W. Huang), mengchen@iie.ac.cn (C. Meng).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110372
Received 21 November 2023; Received in revised form 26 February 2024; Accepted 25 March 2024
Available online 27 March 2024
1389-1286/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

incur substantial computational overhead and faces certain limitations • We utilize a CNN structure to learn packet-level representations
when dealing with encrypted traffic [7]. To address these challenges, from raw bytes, reducing the impact of noise and redundant data
some have proposed a two-step approach, combining traffic decryption compared to using the original byte vectors directly.
with DPI [8–11]. Nevertheless, this approach undeniably amplifies the • We construct network flows in the form of a Traffic Interaccomputational load and raises concerns about privacy implications, tion Graph, incorporating information on behavioral patterns and
which contradicts the original purpose of traffic encryption. packet-level features, and leverage Graph Neural Networks to
 The advancement of artificial intelligence technology has ushered acquire flow-level features.
in a new era of traffic classification methods, primarily centered on the • To assess the effectiveness of our model, we perform a series of
utilization of machine learning and deep learning algorithms. Machine experiments. The experimental results affirm the efficacy of our
learning approaches employing statistical features have shown promis- approach.
ing outcomes for both encrypted and non-encrypted traffic [12–14].
However, these algorithms heavily rely on manually crafted features by The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents
 the task description and the related works on encrypted traffic clasdomain experts. As network dynamics evolve, previously designed feasification; Section 3 describes our model in detail; Section 4 introduces
tures may lose their effectiveness, thus imposing significant constraints
 relevant experiments and analyzes the results; We discuss limitations
on machine learning-based traffic classification methods. Additionally,
 and future works in Section 5 and conclude the paper in Section 6.
statistical features often necessitate observing the entire network flow,
making them incapable of classifying traffic during the initial stages
 2. Task description and related works
of network traffic generation [1]. As a branch of machine learning,
deep learning has demonstrated substantial potential in the realm of
 At present, a significant volume of research in the field of encrypted
encrypted traffic classification [15–17]. Deep learning techniques no
 traffic classification centers on the utilization of machine learning
longer depend on manual feature engineering, as they can automatiand deep learning models. In the subsequent section, we describe the
cally extract relevant features from raw data. Embracing an end-to-end
 encrypted traffic classification task and briefly review existing studies.
learning paradigm, deep learning directly learns from the original input
data to produce the desired output, bypassing traditional practices of
 2.1. Task description
decomposing the problem into smaller subproblems such as feature
selection and classification. This characteristic empowers deep learning
 The encrypted traffic classification task aims to differentiate the
algorithms to comprehensively tackle the complexities associated with
 traffic generated from various sources (e.g., applications, web pages,
traffic classification tasks [1]. In light of the instability of statistical
 or services) by using the information of traffic packets captured by
features, we use raw bytes as the input of the model in this paper.
 professional software or programs. In this paper, our focus is on clas-
 The current encrypted traffic classification methods based on deep sifying in-app traffic behavior, distinguishing fine-grained encrypted
learning have demonstrated remarkable capabilities. Many of these traffic actions such as video, chat, and file transfer.
methods harness the power of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) We define a flow as an sample, a common practice in many traffic
and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to capture spatial and temporal classification studies [18–21]. A flow comprises request and response
features within traffic data. Nevertheless, two primary flaws persist packets exchanged between two communicating entities in a network,
in current deep learning-based approaches: (1) Limited information sharing the same quintuple (src_ip, src_port, dst_ip, dst_port, protocol)
capture. Due to the encryption of information, CNN and RNN ex- over a specific period. Assume that there are 𝑀 training samples and
hibit constraints in effectively extracting data from encrypted traffic. 𝑁 categories in total, let a flow sample be a sequence 𝑙 = [𝑝1 , 𝑝2 , … , 𝑝𝑛 ],
Additionally, CNN and RNN focus on temporal and spatial character- where n is the packet sequence length and 𝑝𝑖 is the 𝑖th packet of the
istics, often overlooking traffic interaction mode. (2) Mix usage of flow. The 𝑖th packet is represented as 𝑝𝑖 = [𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝑚 ], where m is the
the header and payload. Approaches employing packet bytes con- byte sequence length and 𝑏𝑗 is the 𝑗th byte value of 𝑖th packet. In other
sider the header and payload as a unified entity for learning, without words, network traffic exhibits a hierarchical structure: byte-packetdifferentiating their distinct representations and functions. flow. According to the definition above, the encrypted classification
 In this paper, we propose a model called Dual Embedding with task can be described formally as predicting the category 𝐶𝑠 of an
Graph Neural Network (DE-GNN) for encrypted traffic classification. unseen test sample 𝑓𝑠 with a designed and well-trained end-to-end
DE-GNN primarily comprises four main components, as illustrated model 𝐹 (𝑓𝑠 ) on M training samples, where 𝐶𝑠 = 0, 1, … , 𝑁 − 1.
in Fig. 1: Dual Embedding, Packet-level Traffic Learning, Flow-level
Graph Construction and Learning, and Adaptive Deep Feature Fusion. 2.2. Related works
Based on the byte-packet-flow structure of network traffic, the dual
embedding treats the header and payload bytes of a packet separately Machine learning based encrypted traffic classification. Numerous
and encodes them using one-hot encoding. Subsequently, two separate methods within the realm of encrypted traffic classification leverage
PacketCNNs are employed to extract packet-level features for both the statistical features to characterize packet or flow properties, employing
header and payload. Following this, flow-level features are obtained classical machine learning models for the task of traffic classification.
through the construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and Taylor et al. [22] introduced AppScanner, a classification model that
learning from GNN. The flow-level features of the header and payload utilizes the random forest algorithm to distinguish mobile apps based
are then integrated into a comprehensive vector for the entire flow us- on statistical features extracted from flow data. Liu et al. [23] proposed
ing adaptive deep feature fusion, which is used for traffic classification. a multi-attribute Markov probability model, which integrates message
In the experimental section, we employ two publicly available datasets, type sequence and packet length, to classify traffic applications. Ede
namely, ISCX-VPN and ISCX-Tor, to conduct a series of experiments et al. [24] provided a method called FlowPrint for identifying moaimed at demonstrating the validity and effectiveness of our model. bile applications, which combines destination-based clustering, browser
 In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows: isolation, and pattern recognition in a semi-supervised manner to perform application fingerprinting. Taylor et al. [25] explored how a
 • We propose DE-GNN, a model that separately processes packet passive eavesdropper can discern smartphone apps by analyzing the
 headers and payloads and employs a hierarchical structure for a network traffic they transmit. The authors employ machine learning
 comprehensive study of fine-grained encrypted traffic classifica- techniques to identify smartphone apps based on side-channel data,
 tion. including packet size and direction, despite the payload of packets

 2
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

being concealed by SSL/TLS encryption. Shen et al. [20] introduced (2) Separate learning of packet headers and payloads: Most methods
a webpage fingerprinting method called FineWP, which involves the overlook the distinction between packet headers and payloads. Our
accumulation of packet lengths and extraction of block, sequence, and method independently learns both headers and payloads.
statistical features. These features are subsequently input into machine (3) Traffic behavioral patterns: In addition to utilizing CNN for
learning algorithms such as random forest, decision tree, and k-nearest learning information from raw bytes, we also focus on the interaction
neighbors to create webpage fingerprints. Saber et al. [26] proposed behavior between both parties. We construct a Traffic Interaction Graph
a combination of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and support and apply GNN for graph learning.
vector machines for traffic classification, focusing exclusively on timebased flow features. Anderson et al. [27] proposed the utilization of
 3. Methodology
the logistic regression algorithm to jointly analyze flow-level features,
header information, and additional features for the purpose of classifying encrypted traffic into either malicious or normal traffic categories. In this section, we will provide a comprehensive description of
These methods typically necessitate manual feature selection and face our model. The overall model is shown in Fig. 1, which mainly inchallenges due to feature instability. cludes dual embedding, packet-level traffic learning, flow-level graph
 construction and learning, and adaptive deep feature fusion.
Deep learning based encrypted traffic classification. Deep learning
has gained extensive prominence in traffic classification tasks owing to
 3.1. Dual embedding
its inherent capability for automated feature extraction. Liu et al. [28]
introduced FS-Net, a framework designed for encrypted traffic clas-
 In our classification task, we focus on network flows. We opt for
sification via deep neural networks. FS-Net takes the packet length
 raw bytes to represent packets rather than employing statistical features
sequence as its input, employs bi-directional GRU [24] for feature
encoding, and incorporates a reconstruction mechanism within an Au- because raw bytes contain richer and more comprehensive information.
toEncoder to guarantee the validity of the learned features. Shapira In general, distinct byte values convey distinct meanings. Two bytes
et al. [29] proposed a novel approach for encrypted Internet traffic with different values correspond to two distinct embedding vectors.
classification and application identification by transforming basic flow However, in the context of encrypted traffic, the interpretation of a byte
data into an intuitive picture, a FlowPic, and then using Convolutional is not solely contingent upon its value but also its position within the
Neural Networks to identify the flow category and the application in packet, specifically, whether it belongs to the header or payload.
use. Liu et al. [30] introduced a model named BGRUA to identify the Encrypted traffic exhibits notable disparities between the header
web services running on HTTPS connections. BGRUA employs a bidi- and payload. These differences manifest in several ways. Different
rectional gated recurrent unit (GRU) to capture both forward and back- representations: The header of a packet is typically plaintext informaward features from the byte sequences within a session. Additionally, tion that remains unencrypted, whereas the payload contains ciphertext
an attention mechanism is utilized to assign weights to features based information resulting from encryption. Different functions: Packet
on their respective contributions to the classification task. Lin et al. [31] headers primarily include information such as the five-tuple and proproposed a new traffic representation model called Encrypted Traffic tocol type, serving a control and descriptive role during transmission.
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformer (ET-BERT), In contrast, payloads predominantly carry user data, constituting the
which pre-trains deep contextualized datagram-level representation specific content of communication between both parties. Given these
from large-scale unlabeled data. They proposed two pre-training tasks distinctions, it becomes apparent that identical byte values in the
capture the contextual relationship between traffic bytes by predict- header and payload carry different meanings. If we were to mix the
ing the masked token as well as the correct transmission order by header and payload and learn together, it would introduce difficulties
predicting the Same-origin BURST. Mohammad et al. [32] proposed for a model to converge to optimal values. This is due to the ambiguity
a deep learning-based approach called ‘‘Deep Packet’’ for encrypted in the meaning associated with these bytes when they have identical
traffic classification, which utilizes two deep neural network structures, representations. For the aforementioned reasons, we opt to learn the
stacked autoencoder (SAE) and convolution neural network (CNN) for header and payload separately, with the aim of reducing confusion
application identification tasks. Aceto et al. [33] proposed a multi- throughout the data learning process.
modal deep learning method called MIMETIC. They exploited CNN One-hot encoding. While each byte can be quantified as a numeriand GRU respectively to learn two different modalities, the first 576 cal value, it is essential to note that these values within network traffic
bytes of payload and informative protocol fields, for mobile encrypted
 lack specific numeric meaning or continuity. Consequently, we employ
traffic classification. Wang et al. [34] also introduced a similar model
 one-hot encoding to represent each byte. One-hot encoding generates a
called App-Net, which use LSTM and CNN to learn sequence of packet
 unique vector representation for each byte value, where only a single
lengths and payload bytes of the initial packet respectively. Graph neubit in the vector is set to 1, while all other bits are set to 0. This
ral networks (GNN) have strong potential in processing unstructured
 encoding technique is widely utilized in machine learning to represent
data and demonstrate promising performance in many fields. Shen
 discrete values. Given that there are 256 possible values for a byte, we
et al. [35] proposed GraphDApp, which can identify encrypted traffic
 represent each byte as a vector with a dimensionality of 256.
of Decentralized Applications (DApps) using GNNs. They constructed
the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) of encrypted flows based on the Dual embedding layer. For the packet header, we select the first
packet length and packet direction and turned the DApp identification 𝐾ℎ bytes from each packet header and employ one-hot encoding to
into a graph classification problem. Huoh et al. [36] proposed a graph represent it, denoted as 𝐸ℎ ∈ R𝐾ℎ ×256 . Concerning the packet payload,
construction method, which directly create edges based on the chrono- we choose 𝐾𝑝 bytes and obtain its representation, denoted as 𝐸𝑝 ∈
logical relationship of packets among a flow and leverage the geometric R𝐾𝑝 ×256 . To address situations where the length is insufficient, we apply
learning model [37] to learn the node, edge, and global features. zero-padding, and in cases where the length exceeds the expected value,
 We summarize related deep learning based works in Table 1 and list we perform truncation. Consequently, we have now obtained the dual
our main novelty compared with these methods: embedding of the header and payload, represented as 𝐸ℎ and 𝐸𝑝 , where
 (1) Hierarchical structure: Previous research commonly utilizes sta- each row signifies an individual byte.
tistical features or raw bytes directly to represent network traffic and Since we process the header and payload separately, all subseemploys various learning models. In this paper, we conduct hierarchi- quent modules are likewise treated independently. While the network
cal learning on raw bytes, exploring rich information following the structures are the same, they do not share parameters and can be
sequence of byte-packet-flow. concurrently processed in parallel.

 3
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 Table 1
 Comparison with recent related works.
 Reference Algorithm Network Input Raw Separate learning of
 bytes header and payload
 Liu et al. [28] AE+GRU Packet length – –
 Shapira et al. [29] CNN IP packet length, time of arrival – –
 Liu et al. [30] GRU Payload bytes ✔ –
 Lin et al. [31] Bert Packet bytes ✔ –
 Mohammad et al. [32] SAE+CNN Packet bytes ✔ –
 Aceto et al. [33] CNN+GRU Payload bytes, protocol fields ✔ –
 Wang et al. [34] CNN+LSTM Payload of the initial packet, packet length ✔ –
 Shen et al. [35] GNN Packet length, packet direction – –
 Huoh et al. [36] GNN Raw bytes, inter-arrival time, meta features of a flow ✔ –
 This paper GNN+CNN Header raw bytes, payload raw bytes ✔ ✔

Fig. 1. DE-GNN model architecture. (a) Dual embedding: Encode packet header and payload separately using raw bytes; (b) Packet-level traffic learning: Learn package-level
features using PacketCNN; (c) Flow-level graph construction and learning: Build traffic interaction graphs and learn flow-level features using GNN; (d) Adaptive deep feature fusion:
Fuse the packet header and payload features; (e) Traffic classification: Obtain the label of encrypted traffic.

3.2. Packet-level traffic learning

 Given the hierarchical structure inherent in network flow data
(i.e., byte-packet-flow), our objective is to perform a deep analysis
of the rich content within network traffic flow. To achieve this, we
commence by learning network traffic at the packet level.
 Network traffic packets are composed of bytes, and We have successfully represented the packet using bytes. To extract abstract features within a packet, we employ a byte extraction model, enabling us
to learn the packet-level representation of network traffic. At this stage,
every byte within the packet is represented in a word-like manner.
Drawing inspiration from the TextCNN model [38], we design a similar
structure, PacketCNN, to process each packet. The model’s architecture
 Fig. 2. The structure of PacketCNN. PacketCNN uses three different convolution
is visually depicted in Fig. 2.
 operations to extract information from packets.
 We employ three different convolutional kernels to extract the
underlying content within each packet respectively. Each convolution
operation consists of a convolutional layer, the ReLU activation functional, and a max pooling layer. To illustrate, let us consider the cessing of the header follows a similar approach.
payload 𝐸𝑝 as an example: As of now, we have obtained packet-level representations for both
 the packet header and payload, denoted as 𝐹ℎ𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 and 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 , each
h(1)
 𝑝 = MaxPool(ReLU(Conv(𝐸𝑝 ))) (1) with dimensions of (M, 1). M is the dimension of the obtained packet-
Using three convolution kernels, we obtain three vectors, denoted as level representation from PacketCNN learning. These acquired packet-
ℎ(1) (2) (3) 𝑑
 𝑝 , ℎ𝑝 , ℎ𝑝 ∈ R . Subsequently, we utilize the concatenation operalevel representations will subsequently serve as the feature representation and a fully connected layer for amalgamating the outcomes from tions for nodes within the Graph.
three convolutional kernels, with the ReLU activation function applied. In contrast to directly utilizing the original byte values to represent
h𝑓𝑝 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = CONCAT(h(1) (2) (3)
 (2) the header and payload, this method enables us to delve deeper into
 𝑝 , h𝑝 , h𝑝 )
 the effective characteristics of the packet. As a result, it mitigates the
 influence of noise and redundant information, culminating in a more
𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 = ReLU(FC(ℎ𝑓𝑝 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 )) (3)
 robust and informative representation. This is further supported by the
where 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 is the packet-level representation of payload. The pro- results of the ablation experiment.

 4
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 vertex 𝑎 and vertex 𝑑, as well as between vertex 𝑐 and vertex 𝑑. It is
 worth noting that as burst 𝑛 comprises only one vertex, both its first and
 last vertices are represented by vertex 𝑑. It is important to emphasize
 that in order to facilitate bidirectional information propagation, we
 employ undirected edges within the Graph.
 Below, we provide the symbol definitions and algorithm descriptions for TIG.

 Definition 1 (Traffic Interaction Graph). A TIG is defined by a fourtuple (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 , 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙):

 – 𝑉 is a set of vertices, where each vertex 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 represents an
 individual packet within the network flow.
 – 𝐸 is a set of edges used to depict the connectivity relationships
 among vertices, including two kinds of edges: intra-burst edges
 and inter-burst edges. Each edge 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 can be categorized into
Fig. 3. Construction of traffic interaction graph. Fig. 3(a) illustrates the communication
 one of these two types.
process between parties A and B. Each line represents a packet, and the arrow indicates
the direction of transmission. Fig. 3(b) depicts the traffic interaction graph constructed – 𝐹 represents the set of vertex features, which constitutes the
based on (a), where each node represents a packet. Different boxes represent different packet-level representations that we previously obtained.
bursts. – 𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙 stands for the label of the TIG, which corresponds to the
 category assigned to the network flow.

3.3. TIG construction and flow-level traffic learning
 Algorithm 1 Construction of Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG)
3.3.1. Traffic interaction graph (TIG) construction Input: The sequence of packet direction 𝐷 = {𝑑1 , 𝑑2 , … , 𝑑𝑁 }, packet
 Due to the reduction in effective features within encrypted traffic, arrival time 𝑆 = {𝑠1 , 𝑠2 , … , 𝑠𝑁 }, packet-level feature representation
traditional traffic classification methods reliant on plaintext content 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 = {𝑓1 , 𝑓2 , … , 𝑓𝑁 } and 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑
have experienced a decline in performance. However, it is imperative Output: The traffic interaction graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝐹 )
to recognize that while encryption protocols secure the content of 1: Initialize 𝑉 , 𝐸, and 𝐹 as empty sets
traffic, they do not alter the interaction mode of the communicating {Add vertices and corresponding node features}
parties. Each type of traffic retains its distinct interaction pattern. Each 2: for all 𝑑𝑖 ∈ 𝐷, 𝑓𝑖 ∈ 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 do
traffic flow, consisting of a series of packets resulting from client– 3: Add a vertex 𝑑𝑖 in V and configure its node feature 𝑓𝑖 in F
server interactions, can be represented by an information-rich graph 4: end for
structure named Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) [35]. Through the {Separate V into bursts set 𝐵 = {𝑏1 , 𝑏2 , … , 𝑏𝐾 } according to packet
construction of the TIG, we can effectively depict the traffic interaction direction and timestamp}
mode between the two communicating parties. 5: Create an empty burst, denoted as 𝑏, and add vertex 𝑑1 to it. Set
 As depicted in Fig. 3(a), it provides a schematic representation both the first and last vertices of 𝑏 to 𝑑1 .
of communication between the two sides of the network. In this de- 6: for 𝑖 = 2 to 𝑁 do
piction, each line within the graph symbolizes a traffic packet, with 7: if 𝑑𝑖 == 𝑑𝑖−1 and (𝑠𝑖 − 𝑠𝑖−1 ) < 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 then
the direction of the arrow indicating the transmission direction of the 8: Add vertex 𝑑𝑖 to burst 𝑏 and update the last vertex to 𝑑𝑖
packet. This depiction is further transformed into a graph structure, 9: else
as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). First, we introduce the concept of burst. A 10: Burst 𝑏 is complete and add it to 𝐵
burst is defined as a sequence of consecutive packets transmitted along 11: Create a new empty burst and add vertex 𝑑𝑖 to it. Set both the
the same direction during a short time interval [39], and the current first and last vertices to 𝑑𝑖
packet occurs within a threshold of time, the burst threshold, of the 12: end if
previous packet [25]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), each box represents a burst. 13: end for
Although burst-a and burst-b are the same continuous packet sequence, {Add intra-burst edges and inter-burst edges}
their temporal distance exceeds the burst threshold, so they are divided 14: for all 𝑏𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 do
into two bursts. 15: Add intra-burst edges inside 𝑏𝑖 and inter-burst edges between 𝑏𝑖
 TIG is represented by vertices and edges: and 𝑏𝑖+1 in 𝐸
 Vertices: In a network flow, each packet is treated as an individ- 16: end for
ual entity. Consequently, each vertex in the graph signifies a packet. 17: return 𝐺
Specifically, we consistently utilize the previously acquired packet-level
representation to signify each packet, i.e., 𝐹ℎ𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 or 𝐹𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 .
 Edges: TIG involves segmenting a network flow into multiple bursts The construction of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) follows the
and then employing the relationships between these bursts to represent outlined procedure as presented in Algorithm 1. The packet direction
the connections of vertices. There are two types of edges: (1) Intra- sequence 𝐷 = {𝑑1 , 𝑑2 , … , 𝑑𝑁 }, where 𝑑𝑖 ∈ {1, −1} (1 indicating the
Burst Edges. This type of edge is used to link multiple vertices within sending direction and −1 indicating the receiving direction), packet
the same burst. It establishes connections between these vertices in arrival time 𝑆 = {𝑠1 , 𝑠2 , … , 𝑠𝑁 }, where 𝑠𝑖 indicates the packet arrival
chronological order according to their respective timestamps. For ex- time in a flow, the previously obtained packet-level features 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 ,
ample, in burst 𝑚, there exist two intra-burst edges, connecting vertices along with 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑠𝑡_𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 serves as the input. The algorithm proceeds
𝑎 and 𝑏, as well as vertices 𝑏 and 𝑐. (2) Inter-Burst Edges. These edges to build the vertex set and configure vertex features using 𝐹 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑡 (lines
are employed to establish connections between two consecutive bursts. 2–4). Subsequently, it segments the network flow into multiple bursts
More specifically, the first and last vertices in each burst are linked (lines 5–13) and introduces two types of edges connecting the vertices:
to the corresponding first and last vertices in its preceding burst. For intra-burst edges and inter-burst edges (lines 14–16).
instance, between burst 𝑚 and burst 𝑛, there is a connection between TIG encapsulates two critical types of information:

 5
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 Behavioral pattern information: Each category of encrypted traffic exhibits unique behavioral patterns. TIG effectively represents the
interaction behavior between both parties engaged in network communication. This includes behavioral details such as packet burst characteristics and packet sequence information. These patterns are amenable
to extraction and analysis using graph neural networks to derive effective features. Packet-level traffic information: This involves using
the previously acquired packet-level features as vertex features. These Fig. 4. Structure of GNN. We stack 4 GAT layers, with each GAT layer generating a
features encapsulate valuable information gleaned from the packets. In graph feature vector. These 4 graph feature vectors are concatenated together to form
contrast to using packet length and packet direction as vertex attributes, the flow-level features.

this approach offers a more comprehensive and information-rich representation.

3.3.2. Learning flow-level features using graph neural network
 We leverage TIG to characterize the behavioral patterns of network traffic and employ Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for feature
extraction. In contrast to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), which predominantly focus on
spatial and temporal features, GNNs offer the advantage of more effectively capturing structural information from graphs. Additionally,
CNNs and RNNs often necessitate alignment in the number of packets, which can lead to the introduction of redundant zero elements
when handling short flows, potentially obscuring valuable information.
In contrast, graph-based representations do not require such packet
number completion, thereby reducing the introduction of noise.
 More specifically, we utilize the Graph Attention Network (GAT) Fig. 5. Adaptive-weighted sum for packet header.
[40] for information extraction from the TIG. Given that each vertex
in the TIG represents a packet and holds varying significance within
the overall graph structure, GAT leverages the attention mechanism Fig. 4. Following each layer, we apply the ReLu activation function and
to assign distinct weights to different nodes in the neighborhood. This BatchNorm. We acquire four graph feature vectors: 𝑔 (1) , 𝑔 (2) , 𝑔 (3) , 𝑔 (4) ,
enables neighboring nodes to carry varying degrees of importance dur- and subsequently concatenate them as the flow-level features:
ing the message propagation process, thereby accentuating information
from critical nodes while dampening the influence of less relevant F𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 = CONCAT(𝑔 (1) , 𝑔 (2) , 𝑔 (3) , 𝑔 (4) ) (8)
nodes. At this point, we have obtained flow-level representations for both
 Given a TIG, its node features are 𝐡 = {ℎ1 , ℎ2 , … , ℎ𝑁 }, ℎ𝑖 ∈ R𝑀 , the packet header and payload, denoted as 𝐹ℎ𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 and 𝐹𝑝𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , with diwith 𝑁 as the number of nodes and 𝑀 as the dimension of features in mensions of (𝑆, 1) both. 𝑆 is the dimension of flow-level representation
each node. Firstly, an attentional mechanism, 𝑎, is used to calculate the from GNN learning.
attention coefficients:
 3.4. Adaptive deep feature fusion
𝑒𝑖𝑗 = 𝑎(𝐖ℎ𝑖 , 𝐖ℎ𝑗 ) (4)

that indicate the importance of node 𝑗’s features to node 𝑖, where 𝐖 Via the construction of TIG and the learning of GNN, we have
is a learnable weight matrix. We only compute 𝑒𝑖𝑗 for nodes 𝑗 ∈ 𝑖 , acquired the flow-level feature representations for both the packet
where 𝑖 represents all neighbors of node 𝑖 in the graph. header and payload. These features are subsequently employed for
 To ensure that coefficients are easily comparable across different traffic classification. While header and payload contribute differently
nodes, GAT normalizes them across all possible choices of 𝑗 using the to the classification, it is necessary to use a feature fusion strategy to
softmax function: jointly learn the features from them to accurately and robustly classify
 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑒𝑖𝑗 ) traffic. However, most of the existing feature fusion strategies are based
𝛼𝑖𝑗 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥𝑗 (𝑒𝑖𝑗 ) = ∑ (5) on fixed combination weights, including direct concatenation [41],
 𝑘∈𝑖 𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑒𝑖𝑘 ) and weighted concatenation [42]. To combine the features from the
 Subsequently, the obtained attention coefficients are employed to packet header and payload, we employ adaptive deep feature fusion
update the node features. (ADFF) [43].
 ∑ Let us take the header as an example. As shown in Fig. 5, the ADFF
ℎ(1)
 𝑖 = 𝜎( 𝛼𝑖𝑗 𝐖ℎ𝑗 ) (6) mechanism first calculates a query vector 𝑄𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ×𝑊𝑄𝑖 , a key vector
 𝑗∈𝑖
 𝐾𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 × 𝑊𝐾𝑖 , and a value vector 𝑉𝑖 = 𝐹𝑖𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 × 𝑊𝑉𝑖 for each feature
where 𝜎 is the activation function, and 𝑊 is a learnable weight matrix. (i = {h, p}, denoted as header and payload). Then, ADFF calculates the
Furthermore, the utilization of multi-head attention mechanisms can dot products of 𝑄ℎ (representing the query vector of header) with all
contribute to the stabilization of the learning process. keys 𝐾𝑖 to generate two corresponding scores, labeled as 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 . To
 The GAT layer produces a new set of node features (of potentially obtain a normalized weight score, ADFF applies the softmax function
different cardinality 𝑀 ′ ), 𝐡(𝟏) = {ℎ(1) , ℎ(1) , … , ℎ(1) }, ℎ(1) 𝑀′ .
 1 2 𝑁 𝑖 ∈R to the scores. Finally, ADFF computes the dot products of the value
 Finally, we apply mean pooling on all nodes to get a graph feature vectors with their respective weights and then sums them to obtain the
vector 𝑔: weighted header feature vector, denoted as 𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ :
 ∑
 ℎ(1)
 1
 ⊕ ℎ(1)
 2
 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ ℎ(1)
 𝑁 𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ = Sof tmax(𝑄ℎ ⋅ 𝐾𝑖 )𝑉𝑖 (9)
𝑔 (1) = (7)
 𝑁 𝑖={ℎ,𝑝}

 To thoroughly extract information from the TIG, we employ a stack Similarly, we get the weighted payload feature vector 𝐴𝑊 𝐹𝑝 . Finally,
of multiple GAT layers (in this paper, 4 layers are utilized), as shown in as demonstrated in Fig. 6, the fused feature vector 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 is obtained by

 6
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 Table 2
 Labeled ISCX-VPN2016 and ISCX-Tor2016 datasets. This table illustrates the traffic
 types we divide the datasets into and the content contained in different categories.
 Dataset Traffic type Content
 VPN-Email Email, Gmail(SMTP, POP3,IMAP)
 VPN-Chat ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook, Hangouts
 VPN-Streaming Vimeo, Youtube, Netflix, Spotify
 ISCX-VPN
 VPN-File transfer Skype, FTPS, SFTP
 VPN-VoIP Facebook, Skype, Hangouts, Voipbuster
 VPN-P2P uTorrent, Bittorrent
 Email Email, Gmail(SMTP, POP3,IMAP)
Fig. 6. Adaptive deep feature fusion. We utilize adaptive deep feature fusion to merge Chat ICQ, AIM, Skype, Facebook, Hangouts
the header and payload. Streaming Vimeo, Youtube, Netflix, Spotify
 ISCX-nonVPN
 File transfer Skype, FTPS, SFTP
 VoIP Facebook, Skype, Hangouts, Voipbuster
 P2P uTorrent, Bittorrent
concatenation of the two weighted feature vectors:
 Tor-Browsing Firefox, Chrome
𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 = CONCAT(𝐴𝑊 𝐹ℎ , 𝐴𝑊 𝐹𝑝 ) (10) Tor-Email Thunderbird (SMTP/S, POP3/SSL, IMAP/SSL)
 Tor-Chat Facebook, Hangouts, Skype, IAM, ICQ
 Tor-Audio Spotify
 ISCX-Tor
 Tor-Video YouTube, Vimeo
3.5. Classification
 Tor-FTP Skype, SFTP and FTPS
 Tor-VoIP Facebook, Hangouts, Skype
 We obtain the final flow representation, denoted as 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 , and Tor-P2P Bittorrent
employ it for multiple classification tasks. We conduct a fully connected
layer followed by a softmax operation on it to obtain the predicted
results. Subsequently, we utilize cross-entropy as the loss function to
 nonTor dataset utilizes traffic from the VPN project, and detailed label
calculate the loss, which is subsequently employed for the backward
 allocation instructions are lacking. To ensure experimental rigor, we
pass during training.
 only use the Tor dataset, which is subdivided into 8 distinct category
𝑦̂ = Sof tmax(𝑊 ⋅ 𝐹𝑓 𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 + 𝑏) (11) labels. The labels are shown in Table 2.

 ∑
 𝐾
 4.1.2. Pre-processing
𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = − 𝑦𝑖 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑦̂𝑖 (12)
 The datasets provide original traffic files (Pcap format). We need
 𝑖=1
 to preprocess the Pcap files in the datasets. Our operations on the
where {𝑊 , 𝑏} are the parameters of the corresponding fully connected
 dataset can be mainly summarized as: (1) PCAP segmentation. The
layer, 𝑦̂ is the predicted probability values, and 𝐾 is the number of
 traffic classification task is finally carried out on the unit of flow,
traffic categories.
 so we split the Pcap files into bi-flows using a flow segmentation
 tool (such as Splitcap) according to the quintuple information (source
4. Experiments and analysis
 IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol). Following
 segmentation, data cleaning is carried out to remove duplicates and
 In this section, we introduce our experimental setup, including
 invalid samples [41]. (2) Header and payload extraction. We extract
dataset, traffic pre-processing, and evaluation metrics. Then, we conthe header and payload of each packet separately and convert each byte
duct a series of experiments, including model sensitivity analysis, cominto one-hot encoding. The purpose is to process flow into a pattern
parison experiments, ablation experiments, GNN architecture variants
 acceptable to the neural network. (3) Labeling. We assign labels
study, TIG structure study, and model complexity analysis which evalto each sample by referring to the official instructions and previous
uate the performance of DE-GNN fully and specifically.
 research.
4.1. Experimental setup During this process, we exclude the Ethernet header, as it only
 contains irrelevant information for classification purposes. Addition-
4.1.1. Dataset ally, the source and destination IP addresses and ports are all removed
 To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our model, we for the purpose of eliminating interference with sensitive information
utilize multiple public datasets, namely ISCX-VPN2016 [44] and ISCX- deriving from them. Furthermore, we perform truncation on excessively
Tor2016 [45]. long data and apply zero-padding to data with an insufficient quantity.
 ISCX-VPN2016 contains encrypted traffic encompassing various
types, including VoIP, P2P, and more. It is divided into two parts: 4.1.3. Implementation details
ISCX-VPN and ISCX-nonVPN datasets. The ISCX-VPN dataset com- There are some critical hyperparameters that need to be set in
prises traffic collected over virtual private networks (VPNs), which are the model. Table 3 shows our hyperparameter values for the best
commonly used to access blocked websites or services. Recognizing classification performance. We use a grid search and conduct the 5-fold
VPN traffic can be challenging due to obfuscation technologies. In cross-validation on the training set to select the best hyperparameters.
contrast, the ISCX-nonVPN dataset consists of regular encrypted traffic During the model training, we use the EarlyStopping which ensures
not collected over VPNs. It is worth noting that due to label confusion that the learning is terminated without reaching the extreme fit of the
of traffic files, we categorize both VPN and nonVPN datasets into 6 model.
distinct category labels as referenced in [46]. The labels are shown in To conduct the 5-fold cross-validation, the training datasets are
Table 2. randomly split into 5 equal-size subsets. In each fold of the cross-
 Similarly, ISCX-Tor2016 is another public dataset, comprising ISCX- validation, 4 subsets (80%) of the data are used for training a brand
Tor and ISCX-nonTor datasets. The ISCX-Tor dataset contains traffic new model, and the rest subset (20% of the data), different in each
collected over the onion router (Tor), which can be difficult to trace. fold, is used to evaluate the resultant model. For a particular set of
The ISCX-nonTor dataset consists of regular encrypted traffic not col- model parameters, when all 5 training-validation folds are finished, we
lected over Tor. Please note that, according to official instructions, the compute the final validation loss by averaging the 5 validation losses

 7
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

Table 3
Hyperparameter values of DE-GNN.
 HyperParameter Value
 The convolution kernel sizes of PacketCNN (2,3,4)
 The number of convolution kernels of PacketCNN 32
 The dimension of the resulting packet-level features, M 64
 The layer number of GNN 4
 The multi-head number of attention 4
 The dimension of the resulting flow-level features, S 256
 Burst-threshold 1 s

over the 5 folds. The final validation loss is treated as the score of this
model and is further used as the criterion for comparing with different
hyperparameter settings. Finally, we choose the best model with the
minimum average validation loss.
 We use Adam optimizer to minimize the loss, with its initial learning
rate of 0.001, mini-batch size of 64, and decay rate of 0.01. We adopted Fig. 7. The sensitivity analysis of packet number.
a 7:2:1 split ratio for training, validation, and test sets, respectively.
We implemented our model with Pytorch and run each experiment on
a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.

4.1.4. Evaluation metrics
 In the classification task, commonly used evaluation indicators are
Accuracy (AC), Precision (PR), Recall (RC), and F1-score. We calculate
the number of true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN),
and false negative (FN) on the test set. The metrics are calculated as
follows:
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
𝐴𝐶 = (13)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑁

 𝑇𝑃
𝑃𝑅 = (14)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃

 𝑇𝑃
𝑅𝐶 = (15)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁

 𝑃 𝑅 × 𝑅𝐶 Fig. 8. The sensitivity analysis of byte number.
𝐹1 = 2 ⋅ (16)
 𝑃 𝑅 + 𝑅𝐶

4.2. Model sensitivity analysis 4.3. Comparison experiments

 The results of sensitivity analysis are shown in Figs. 7 and 8. We We use five traditonal deep learning models and two GNN models
choose F1-score, which takes into account both the precision and recall as baselines:
of the classification model, as our observation metrics. (1) 1D-CNN: The raw packet bytes are transformed into grayscale
 (1) The Impact of Packet Number. graphs, and a CNN model is used for learning. We followed the imple-
 The number of packets directly impacts the size of the constructed mentation from [46].
Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG), i.e. the number of nodes in the graph. (2) LSTM: The packets within the network flow exhibit temporal
The results are illustrated in Fig. 7. It can be observed that as the characteristics. We implemented an LSTM model with reference to [41]
number of packets increases, the model’s performance initially shows for traffic classification.
an upward trend, followed by stabilization. Specifically, when the (3) FS-Net: FS-Net [28] uses a packet length sequence as input.
 It employs bi-directional GRU for feature encoding and introduces a
number of packets exceeds 15, the model’s performance nearly reaches
 reconstruction mechanism within an AutoEncoder to ensure the validity
an optimal point. We classify traffic by learning the structure of the
 of the learned features.
graph. Therefore, when the number of nodes in the graph reaches a
 (4) MIMETIC: MIMETIC [33] is a multimodal learning method
certain threshold, it contains sufficient information to support effective
 which uses CNN and GRU respectively to learn the first 576 bytes of
learning.
 payload and informative protocol fields.
 (2) The Impact of Byte Number. (5) App-Net: App-Net [34] is also a multimodal method which uses
 The number of bytes extracted from each packet primarily influ- LSTM and CNN to learn sequence of packet lengths and payload bytes
ences packet-level learning. While the number of bytes in the packet of the initial packet respectively.
header remains small and consistent, our attention is focused on as- (6) GraphDAPP: GraphDAPP [35] constructs the network flow as a
sessing the impact of varying the number of bytes in the payload on the Traffic Interaction Graph, using packet direction and packet length as
model’s performance. It can be observed from Fig. 8 that when using node features to achieve traffic classification.
the first 400 bytes of a payload for modeling, the model’s performance (7) FB-GNN: FB-GNN [36] proposed a graph construction method,
is better than with other settings. As the number of bytes continues which directly create edges based on the chronological relationship of
to increase, more noise is introduced, which can adversely affect the packets among a flow and leverage the geometric learning model to
model’s learning performance. learn the node, edge, and global features.

 8
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

Table 4
Experimental results on ISCX datasets. The table presents the results of different models on three datasets.

 Dataset ISCX-VPN ISCX-nonVPN ISCX-Tor
 Model AC PR RC F1 AC PR RC F1 AC PR RC F1
 1D-CNN 0.8359 0.8604 0.8242 0.8308 0.7871 0.7927 0.7960 0.7919 0.5814 0.4608 0.4366 0.4349
 LSTM 0.9336 0.9321 0.9172 0.9240 0.7539 0.7928 0.7070 0.7306 0.7442 0.7120 0.7036 0.7048
 FS-Net 0.9121 0.9117 0.9268 0.9179 0.7539 0.8021 0.7183 0.7413 0.8140 0.8574 0.8176 0.8187
 MIMETIC 0.8047 0.8559 0.8352 0.8387 0.6406 0.7115 0.6015 0.6086 0.2857 0.0688 0.1578 0.0925
 App-Net 0.9609 0.9464 0.9573 0.9495 0.8711 0.8779 0.8760 0.8760 0.7143 0.5192 0.5374 0.5168
 GraphDAPP 0.6585 0.5028 0.4148 0.4276 0.3809 0.3454 0.3363 0.2634 0.5272 0.3359 0.2370 0.2292
 FB-GNN 0.8431 0.8293 0.8141 0.8184 0.6503 0.6558 0.6541 0.6391 0.4286 0.2381 0.3136 0.2581
 DE-GNN 0.9688 0.9659 0.9594 0.9624 0.8984 0.9110 0.9007 0.9048 0.9872 0.9943 0.9939 0.9905

 The comparison results on the ISCX datasets are presented in Table 4. Based on the results, we can draw the following conclusions: (1)
DE-GNN achieves the best performance compared to several baselines
across all four metrics. This comprehensive performance demonstrates
the effectiveness of our method. (2) Neither the 1D-CNN model nor
the LSTM model delivers satisfactory results. As previously mentioned,
encrypted traffic conceals the original content, resulting in limited
extraction of effective information by both CNN and RNN models. Furthermore, the LSTM outperforms the 1D-CNN, which can be attributed
to the LSTM’s capacity to capture temporal information within the
network flow, which plays a crucial role in the context of encrypted
traffic. (3) FS-Net employs the packet length sequence for end-toend classification and achieves performance similar to the LSTM. This
outcome can be attributed to the fact that both FS-Net and LSTM
focus on learning temporal information. (4) The multimodal methods
MIMETIC and App-Net utilize multiple modalities in their learning
processes. Their performance shows significant variability across dif-
 Fig. 9. The result of different GNN architectures. The F1-score results for employing
ferent datasets, particularly on the Tor dataset. The limited number of
 different GNN architectures in the flow-level learning stage are presented in the figure.
samples in the Tor dataset contributes to overfitting issues, impacting
performance outcomes. (5) Compared with the two GNN-based methods, our method outperforms both in all aspects. GraphDAPP also uses
the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) for classification but does not yield payloads. Moreover, different datasets exhibit varying degrees of the
satisfactory results. The main reason for this lies in its use of packet importance of headers and payloads. For example, when switching
length and packet direction as node features. However, the presence of from using headers to payloads, the F1-score decreases by 12.53% on
technologies such as packet fragmentation, VPN, and Tor introduces the ISCX-VPN dataset and by 0.19% on the ISCX-Tor dataset. Second,
significant interference with packet lengths, consequently leading to the omission of packet-level learning has the most significant negative
performance degradation. FB-GNN is unstable on different datasets. impact on model performance. This is particularly noticeable in the
The main reason is that their graphs are constructed according to time ISCX-Tor dataset, where the F1 score dropped by 47.38%. When using
series, which means that graphs with the same number of nodes have the raw byte values directly as node features, the data contains conthe same structure, significantly reducing performance stability. siderable noise and redundant information, making it challenging for
 the model to learn effectively. By subjecting the original byte data to
4.4. Abaltion experiments deep feature extraction through PacketCNN, packet-level information
 can be more efficiently represented, facilitating further learning. Third,
 TIG and GNN outperform CNN and LSTM in terms of performance
 To investigate the effect of each component of the DE-GNN model,
 improvement. Constructing the traffic interaction graph allows for the
we also perform the ablation test of DE-GNN in terms of:
 acquisition of not only information from the original bytes but also
 (1) Dual-embedding: Instead of using both the header and payload,
 information related to traffic interactions. Additionally, the application
we use only one of them. This method is denoted as All-h (only header)
and All-p (only payload), respectively. of adaptive weight fusion proves to enhance model performance.
 (2) Packet-level learning: We discard the packet-level learning and Analyzing the complexity of ablation models reveals that All-h,
directly use the original byte value of the packet as the features of the All-p, All-packet, and All-adff effectively reduce both parameters and
nodes in the graph. This method is denoted as All-packet (packet). FLOPS, as they only encompass a subset of the original model. Notably,
 (3) Graph neural networks: To illustrate the effectiveness of the All-h achieves a notable reduction in model complexity while ensur-
Graph, instead of using TIG and GNN, we learn directly with CNN or ing limited performance degradation. Conversely, the other models
LSTM in the flow-level learning phase, called All-cnn and All-lstm, increase complexity due to changing the structures, without yielding
respectively. any performance improvements.
 (4) Adaptive deep feature fusion: Instead of using ADFF for the
feature fusion of header and payload, we directly concatenate them, 4.5. GNN architecture variants study
denoted as All-adff (ADFF).
 The results of the ablation tests are presented in Tables 5 and To demonstrate the effectiveness of GAT for learning TIG, we select
6. Several key observations can be made. First, it is evident that some classical GNN architectures as variants (i.e., GCN [47], GIN [48],
packet headers are more influential in classification compared to packet GraphSAGE [49]) for comparison.

 9
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

Table 5
Ablation test results on ISCX datasets.

 Dataset ISCX-VPN ISCX-nonVPN ISCX-Tor
 Model AC PR RC F1 AC PR RC F1 AC PR RC F1
 All-h 0.9492 0.9415 0.9472 0.9418 0.8750 0.8779 0.8828 0.8794 0.9744 0.9563 0.9815 0.9666
 All-p 0.8438 0.8329 0.8544 0.8165 0.7402 0.7572 0.7158 0.7258 0.9487 0.9593 0.9762 0.9647
 All-packet 0.8672 0.8719 0.8497 0.8595 0.7344 0.7911 0.6981 0.7163 0.6154 0.5501 0.5942 0.5167
 All-cnn 0.9219 0.8999 0.9171 0.9017 0.8887 0.8998 0.8875 0.8918 0.9487 0.9583 0.9696 0.9588
 All-lstm 0.9492 0.9338 0.9568 0.9443 0.8633 0.8660 0.8631 0.8645 0.9231 0.9045 0.9449 0.9125
 All-adff 0.9531 0.9475 0.9508 0.9482 0.8730 0.8736 0.8963 0.8831 0.9744 0.9631 0.9815 0.9696
 All 0.9688 0.9659 0.9594 0.9624 0.8984 0.9110 0.9007 0.9048 0.9872 0.9943 0.9939 0.9905

Table 6
Model FLOPs and parameters of ablation test.
 Model FLOPS(M) Parameters(M)
 All-h 3.3e+1 1.3e−1
 All-p 4.4e+2 1.3e−1
 All-packet 2.4e+0 5.1e−1
 All-cnn 4.8e+2 1.4e+0
 All-lstm 4.9e+2 1.9e+0
 All-adff 4.7e+2 2.6e−1
 All 4.7e+2 6.2e−1

 Fig. 11. The result of different graph structure.

Fig. 10. The fully connected variant of TIG. We connect all nodes between adjacent hinder the network’s ability to extract meaningful features. (3) Combursts to each other.
 plexity of Learning: The goal of using a graph neural network is to
 understand the structure and relationships within the entire graph and
 ultimately derive a comprehensive feature representation of the graph.
 As shown in Fig. 9, our findings suggest that the Graph Attention When the graph becomes excessively complex due to full connectivity,
Network (GAT) outperformed other variants. This superiority is due to
 the learning process also becomes intricate, making it more challenging
the attention mechanism integrated into GAT. As previously explained,
 to capture essential patterns.
GAT can evaluate the importance of different neighboring nodes near
a given node and utilize this information in node feature propagation.
This feature effectively reduces the influence of less important nodes 4.7. Model complexity analysis
during the information transfer process within the graph.
 To comprehensively evaluate the trade-of between model perfor-
4.6. Structure of the Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) mance and model complexity, we present the floating point operations
 (FLOPs) and the model size of all baselines and our model. The result
 In the construction of the TIG, the process begins by segmenting is shown in Table 7.
bursts and then establishing connections between nodes using intra- From Tables 7 and 4, we can draw a conclusion that DE-GNN
burst and inter-burst mechanisms, as outlined in Algorithm 1. This
 achieves the most significant improvement on public datasets with
approach facilitates the exchange of node information within and berelatively slight model complexity increasing. It can be observed from
tween bursts during the graph neural network learning process. To
 Table 7 that DE-GNN has the second-fewest number of parameters
gain a deeper understanding of the rationale behind TIG’s structure, we
 among different methods. The significant advantage of having fewer
create a fully connected variant of TIG. In this version, the nodes of two
 parameters is the lower cost for transferring the model for further
adjacent bursts are connected to each other, as opposed to connecting
 studies or deployment. However, conversely, DE-GNN requires more
the start and end nodes. This is illustrated in Fig. 10.
 The results are depicted in Fig. 11. It is evident that employing a floating-point computations. This is mainly due to the sophisticated
fully connected graph does not yield improvement; in fact, it led to structure: (1) We use raw bytes as the input to the model and design
a decrease in performance. This outcome can be attributed to several a multi-step information extraction process based on the hierarchical
reasons: structure, which increases the computation. By reducing the number of
 (1) Increased Computational Load: Connecting every node in the input packets and bytes, we can effectively reduce FLOPS and obtain
graph results in a substantial increase in computational demands. This an acceptable drop in accuracy. (2) We treat the packet header and the
additional load affects the efficiency of the learning process. (2) Re- payload separately, using two identical neural network structures to
dundancy of Information Transmission: In the learning process of a learn them, which also leads to an increase in computation. However, it
multi-layer graph neural network, full connectivity can introduce re- should be noted that for the processing of packet headers and payloads,
dundancy in the transmission of information. This redundancy can we can handle them in parallel.

 10
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

Table 7 Data availability
Model FLOPs and parameters.
 Model FLOPS(M) Parameters(M)
 Data will be made available on request.
 1D-CNN 1.9e+1 5.8e+0
 LSTM 3.4e+1 2.4e+0
 FS-NET 1.0e+2 3.2e+0
 Acknowledgments
 MIMETIC 3.4e+1 2.3e+0
 App-Net 5.6e+2 2.1e+0 This research has been partially funded by the Institute of Informa-
 GraphDAPP 2.4e−2 2.5e−2 tion Engineering, Chinese Academy of Science, Project 2021YFB29101-
 FB-GNN 5.0e+2 9.5e+0
 10, and is supported by the University of Chinese Academy of Science.
 DE-GNN 4.7e+2 6.2e−1

 References

5. Limitations and future works [1] S. Rezaei, X. Liu, Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: An overview,
 IEEE Commun. Mag. 57 (5) (2019) 76–81, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/mcom.
 2019.1800819.
 In this section, we further discuss the limitations as well as the [2] R. Sharma, S. Dangi, P. Mishra, A comprehensive review on encryption based
future work of our approach. open source cyber security tools, in: 2021 6th International Conference on
 Signal Processing, Computing and Control, ISPCC, IEEE, 2021, pp. 614–619,
 A restricted graph structure. In this paper, we employ the concept
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ispcc53510.2021.9609369.
of ‘‘burst’’ to segment network flows and build a Traffic Interaction [3] E. Ramadhani, Anonymity communication VPN and Tor: a comparative study, in:
Graph (TIG) for network flow representation. While the TIG effectively Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 983, IOP Publishing, 2018, 012060,
represents the interactive information within the network flow, it does http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/983/1/012060.
have some limitations in terms of information transmission within [4] T. Nelms, R. Perdisci, M. Ahamad, {ExecScent}: Mining for new {C&C} domains
 in live networks with adaptive control protocol templates, in: 22nd USENIX
the graph. Specifically, transferring information between non-adjacent Security Symposium, USENIX Security 13, 2013, pp. 589–604, http://dx.doi.org/
bursts requires multiple layers of graph neural networks and cannot be 10.5555/2534766.2534817.
achieved in a single learning step. We acknowledge these limitations [5] J. Su, S. Chen, B. Han, C. Xu, X. Wang, A 60Gbps DPI prototype based on
and intend to refine the graph structure in our future work. memory-centric FPGA, in: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference,
 2016, pp. 627–628, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2959079.
 Multiple flows detection. Although the main emphasis of this
 [6] W. Melo, P. Lopes, R. Antonello, S. Fernandes, D. Sadok, On the performance
paper is on classifying individual network flows, it is essential to of DPI signature matching with dynamic priority, in: 2014 IEEE Symposium on
acknowledge that real-world activities frequently involve multiple net- Computers and Communications, ISCC, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6, http://dx.doi.org/
work flows. In our future research, we plan to investigate methods 10.1109/ISCC.2014.6912553.
 [7] E. Papadogiannaki, S. Ioannidis, A survey on encrypted network traffic analysis
for leveraging the relationships between multiple network flows to
 applications, techniques, and countermeasures, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (6) (2021)
improve traffic classification in these intricate scenarios. 1–35, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3457904.
 [8] J. Jarmoc, SSL/TLS interception proxies and transitive trust, 2012, URL https:
6. Conclusion //api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9485779.
 [9] J. Han, S. Kim, J. Ha, D. Han, Sgx-box: Enabling visibility on encrypted
 traffic using a secure middlebox module, in: Proceedings of the First Asia-
 In this paper, we introduce DE-GNN, a deep learning-based model Pacific Workshop on Networking, 2017, pp. 99–105, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
designed for the fine-gained classification of encrypted network traffic. 3106989.3106994.
Capitalizing on the inherent hierarchical structure of network traffic, [10] B. Trach, A. Krohmer, F. Gregor, S. Arnautov, P. Bhatotia, C. Fetzer, Shieldbox:
 Secure middleboxes using shielded execution, in: Proceedings of the Symposium
specifically, the byte-packet-flow hierarchy, DE-GNN delves deep into
 on SDN Research, 2018, pp. 1–14, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3185467.3185469.
encrypted traffic to extract meaningful information. Our approach com- [11] D. Goltzsche, S. Rüsch, M. Nieke, S. Vaucher, N. Weichbrodt, V. Schiavoni,
mences by encoding the raw bytes and utilizes PacketCNN to acquire P.-L. Aublin, P. Cosa, C. Fetzer, P. Felber, et al., Endbox: Scalable middlebox
packet-level representations of the traffic. Subsequently, we represent functions using client-side trusted execution, in: 2018 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP
 International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN, IEEE,
network flows as Traffic Interaction Graph (TIG) and employ Graph
 2018, pp. 386–397, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/dsn.2018.00048.
Neural Networks (GNN) for flow-level learning. Given the distinction [12] O. Salman, I.H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, A. Chehab, A review on machine learning–
between packet headers and payloads, we apply the same process based approaches for Internet traffic classification, Ann. Telecommun. 75 (2020)
separately to both packet headers and payloads as described above. 673–710, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12243-020-00770-7.
Finally, the adaptive weighted feature fusion (ADFF) mechanism is [13] S. Dong, Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network traffic
 classification, Expert Syst. Appl. 176 (2021) 114885, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
employed to combine the features extracted from packet headers and j.eswa.2021.114885.
payloads. Experimental results on two public datasets demonstrate the [14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Toward effective mobile eneffectiveness of DE-GNN. crypted traffic classification through deep learning, Neurocomputing 409 (2020)
 306–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2020.05.036.
 [15] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, Z. Sun, A survey of techniques for mobile service
CRediT authorship contribution statement encrypted traffic classification using deep learning, IEEE Access 7 (2019)
 54024–54033, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2912896.
 Xinbo Han: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, In- [16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, DISTILLER: Encrypted traffic
 classification via multimodal multitask deep learning, J. Netw. Comput. Appl.
vestigation, Conceptualization. Guizhong Xu: Validation, Software,
 183 (2021) 102985, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2021.102985.
Investigation. Meng Zhang: Resources, Methodology. Zheng Yang: [17] J. Lan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Li, T. Geng, DarknetSec: A novel self-attentive deep
Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Ziyang Yu: Resources. learning method for darknet traffic classification and application identifica-
Weiqing Huang: Validation. Chen Meng: Writing – review & editing, tion, Comput. Secur. 116 (2022) 102663, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2022.
Methodology. 102663.
 [18] H. Zhang, L. Yu, X. Xiao, Q. Li, F. Mercaldo, X. Luo, Q. Liu, TFE-GNN: A
 temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks for fine-grained encrypted
Declaration of competing interest traffic classification, in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, 2023,
 pp. 2066–2075, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583227.
 [19] X. Yun, J. Xie, S. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Sun, Detecting unknown HTTP-based malicious
 The authors declare that they have no known competing financommunication behavior via generated adversarial flows and hierarchical traffic
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to features, Comput. Secur. 121 (2022) 102834, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.
influence the work reported in this paper. 2022.102834.

 11
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

[20] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, J. Hu, Fine-grained webpage fingerprinting using [43] Y. Li, L. Liu, H. Qin, S. Deng, M.A. El-Yacoubi, G. Zhou, Adaptive deep feature
 only packet length information of encrypted traffic, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics fusion for continuous authentication with data augmentation, IEEE Trans. Mob.
 Secur. 16 (2020) 2046–2059, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2020.3046876. Comput. (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tmc.2022.3186614.
[21] J. Xing, C. Wu, Detecting anomalies in encrypted traffic via deep dictionary [44] G. Draper-Gil, A.H. Lashkari, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization
 learning, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communica- of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related, in: Proceedings of the 2nd
 tions Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 734–739, http://dx.doi. International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy, ICISSP,
 org/10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162940. 2016, pp. 407–414, http://dx.doi.org/10.5220/0005740704070414.
[22] V.F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, Appscanner: Automatic fin- [45] A.H. Lashkari, G.D. Gil, M.S.I. Mamun, A.A. Ghorbani, Characterization of tor
 gerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network traffic, in: 2016 IEEE traffic using time based features, in: International Conference on Information
 European Symposium on Security and Privacy, EuroS&P, IEEE, 2016, pp. Systems Security and Privacy, Vol. 2, SciTePress, 2017, pp. 253–262, http:
 439–454, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/eurosp.2016.40. //dx.doi.org/10.5220/0006105602530262.
[23] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, L. He, Mampf: Encrypted traffic [46] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, End-to-end encrypted traffic
 classification based on multi-attribute markov probability fingerprints, in: 2018 classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks, in: 2017 IEEE
 IEEE/ACM 26th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS), IEEE, International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI, IEEE,
 2018, pp. 1–10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/iwqos.2018.8624124. 2017, pp. 43–48, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISI.2017.8004872.
[24] T. Van Ede, R. Bortolameotti, A. Continella, J. Ren, D.J. Dubois, M. Lindorfer, [47] T.N. Kipf, M. Welling, Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
 D. Choffnes, M. van Steen, A. Peter, Flowprint: Semi-supervised mobile-app networks, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1609.02907, arXiv preprint
 fingerprinting on encrypted network traffic, in: Network and Distributed System arXiv:1609.02907.
 Security Symposium, NDSS, Vol. 27, 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss. [48] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, S. Jegelka, How powerful are graph neural
 2020.24412. networks? 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.00826, arXiv preprint
[25] V.F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, I. Martinovic, Robust smartphone app identi- arXiv:1810.00826.
 fication via encrypted network traffic analysis, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. [49] W.L. Hamilton, R. Ying, J. Leskovec, Inductive representation learning on large
 13 (1) (2017) 63–78, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2017.2737970. graphs, 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.02216, arXiv:1706.02216.
[26] A. Saber, B. Fergani, M. Abbas, Encrypted traffic classification: Combining overand under-sampling through a pca-svm, in: 2018 3rd International Conference
 on Pattern Analysis and Intelligent Systems, PAIS, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5, http:
 //dx.doi.org/10.1109/pais.2018.8598480. Xinbo Han received bachelor’s degree from Taiyuan Uni-
[27] B. Anderson, S. Paul, D. McGrew, Deciphering malware’s use of TLS (without versity Of Technology, in 2020. He is presently pursuing
 decryption), J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Tech. 14 (2018) 195–211, http://dx.doi. the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, University
 org/10.1007/s11416-017-0306-6. of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research in-
[28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, Z. Li, Fs-net: A flow sequence network for terests include network attack detection, encrypted traffic
 encrypted traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on classification and deep learning.
 Computer Communications, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1171–1179, http://dx.doi.org/10.
 1109/infocom.2019.8737507.
[29] T. Shapira, Y. Shavitt, FlowPic: A generic representation for encrypted traffic
 classification and applications identification, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 18
 (2) (2021) 1218–1232, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tnsm.2021.3071441.
[30] X. Liu, J. You, Y. Wu, T. Li, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Ge, Attention-based bidirectional Guizhong Xu received master’s degree from Communication
 GRU networks for efficient HTTPS traffic classification, Inform. Sci. 541 (2020) University Of China. He is now an senior engineer in the In-
 297–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2020.05.035. formation Science Academy of China Electronics Technology
[31] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, J. Yu, Et-bert: A contextualized datagram Group Corporation. His research interests include anomaly
 representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic classification, detection and network traffic analysis.
 in: Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 633–642, http:
 //dx.doi.org/10.1145/3485447.3512217.
[32] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, M. Saberian, Deep
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,
 Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00500-019-
 04030-2. Meng Zhang received Ph.D. degree from University of Chi-
[33] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapè, MIMETIC: Mobile encrypted nese Academy of Sciences. He is a research professor,Ph.D.
 traffic classification using multimodal deep learning, Comput. Netw. 165 (2019) supervisor of Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 106944, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2019.106944. Academy of Sciences. His research interests include signal
[34] X. Wang, S. Chen, J. Su, App-net: A hybrid neural network for encrypted mobile processing theory and technology, electromagnetic acoustic
 traffic classification, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer and optical detection and protection.
 Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 424–429,
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162891.
[35] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, Accurate decentralized application
 identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural networks, IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 16 (2021) 2367–2380, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
 tifs.2021.3050608.
 Zheng Yang received master’s degree from Beijing Uni-
[36] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, T. Zhang, Flow-based encrypted network traffic
 versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.
 classification with graph neural networks, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. (2022)
 He is now an associate senior engineer in the institute of
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2022.3227500.
 information engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
[37] P.W. Battaglia, J.B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Zambaldi, M.
 research interests include moving target defense.
 Malinowski, A. Tacchetti, D. Raposo, A. Santoro, R. Faulkner, et al., Relational
 inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks, 2018, http://dx.doi.org/10.
 48550/arXiv.1806.01261, arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261.
[38] Y. Kim, Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification, 2014, http:
 //dx.doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1408.5882, arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882.
[39] K. Al-Naami, S. Chandra, A. Mustafa, L. Khan, Z. Lin, K. Hamlen, B. Thuraisingham, Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi-directional dependence, in: Ziyang Yu received bachelor’s degree from Huazhong Uni-
 Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference on Computer Security Applications, versity Of Science And Technology, in 2018. He is presently
 2016, pp. 177–188, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2991079.2991123. pursuing the Ph.D. degree at School of Cyber Security, Uni-
[40] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, Y. Bengio, et al., versity of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research
 Graph attention networks, stat 1050 (20) (2017) 10–48550, http://dx.doi.org/ interests include APT attack detection and investigation
 10.48550/arXiv.1710.10903. based on provenance graph.
[41] K. Lin, X. Xu, F. Xiao, MFFusion: A multi-level features fusion model for
 malicious traffic detection based on deep learning, Comput. Netw. 202 (2022)
 108658, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108658.
[42] Q. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Sun, T. Tan, Deep feature fusion for iris and periocular
 biometrics on mobile devices, IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 13 (11) (2018)
 2897–2912, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tifs.2018.2833033.

 12
X. Han et al. Computer Networks 245 (2024) 110372

 Weiqing Huang is a research professor,Ph.D. supervisor
 of Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy Chen Meng received master’s degree from Beijing Univerof Sciences. He is also a professor in the School of Cy- sity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China. He is
 ber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. now an engineer in the institute of information engineering,
 His research interests include signal processing theory and Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests include
 technology, electromagnetic acousto-optical detection and encrypted traffic classification.
 protection.

 13