IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 3

 Deep Contrastive Representation Learning
 With Self-Distillation
Zhiwen Xiao , Member, IEEE, Huanlai Xing , Member, IEEE, Bowen Zhao , Rong Qu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Shouxi Luo , Member, IEEE, Penglin Dai , Member, IEEE, Ke Li , and Zonghai Zhu

 Abstract—Recently, contrastive learning (CL) is a promising way valvular heart diseases detection [7], colorectal polyp diagof learning discriminative representations from time series data. nosis [8] and motion detection [9]. To achieve accurate time
In the representation hierarchy, semantic information extracted series classification, it is essential for an algorithm to effecfrom lower levels is the basis of that captured from higher levels.
Low-level semantic information is essential and should be con- tively capture both local and global patterns of the input time
sidered in the CL process. However, the existing CL algorithms series [10].
mainly focus on the similarity of high-level semantic information. Deep learning algorithms on time series classification have
Considering the similarity of low-level semantic information may achieved promising performance because they can discover the
improve the performance of CL. To this end, we present a deep intrinsic connections among representations by unfolding the
contrastive representation learning with self-distillation (DCRLS)
for the time series domain. DCRLS gracefully combine data aug- internal representation hierarchy of data. For instance, Wang
mentation, deep contrastive learning, and self distillation. Our data et al. [11] tested three deep learning architectures, including
augmentation provides different views from the same sample as the fully convolutional network (FCN), residual network (ResNet),
input of DCRLS. Unlike most CL algorithms that concentrate on and multilayer perceptron (MLP) for time series classification.
high-level semantic information only, our deep contrastive learning Fawaz et al. [12] proposed a multi-head neural network, called
also considers the contrast similarity of low-level semantic information between peer residual blocks. Our self distillation promotes InceptionTime, to extract multi-scaled features from the input.
knowledge flow from high-level to low-level blocks to help regular- Xiao et al. [13] presented a robust temporal feature network
ize DCRLS in the knowledge transfer process. The experimental integrating an LSTM-based attention network and a temporal
results demonstrate that the DCRLS-based structures achieve ex- feature network for supervised classification and unsupervised
cellent performance on classification and clustering on 36 UCR2018 clustering. The algorithms above heavily rely on a massive
datasets.
 amount of labeled data, making it challenging to adapt them
 Index Terms—Contrastive learning, knowledge distillation, to scenarios with limited labeled data.
representation learning, time series classification, time series Recently, there has been a surge of interest in self-supervised
clustering.
 learning as a means of generating effective representations from
 unlabelled data for use in downstream tasks. Among the most
 I. INTRODUCTION
 popular trends in this area are algorithms that incorporate con-
 IME series data is of significant importance to various
T areas in the real world, such as electroencephalogram
(EEG) analysis [1], cardiotocography (CTG) interpretation [2],
 trastive learning (CL) [14], [15], [16]. CL is a discriminative
 approach to similar group samples closer. For instance, He
 et al. [17] proposed MoCo using a momentum encoder to learn
symbolic sequence classification [3], automated damage detec- representations of the negative pairs obtained from a memory
tion [4], anomaly detection [5], regime change detection [6], bank. Chen et al. [18] devised SimCLR to replace the momentum
 encoder with a large batch of antagonistic pairs. Chen et al. [19]
 Manuscript received 31 March 2023; revised 2 July 2023; accepted 4 August developed SimSiam ignoring the negative samples for feature
2023. Date of publication 29 August 2023; date of current version 23 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science extraction. Jin et al. [20] designed a multi-scale contrastive
Foundation of China under Grants 62172342 and 62202392, in part by the approach with self-distillation that achieved decent performance
Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province under Grant F2022105027, on a number of benchmark datasets. A self-supervised learnin part by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province under Grants
2022NSFSC0568, 2022NSFSC0944, and 2023NSFSC0459, and in part by the ing paradigm that utilizes single-stage online knowledge dis-
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China. (Correspond- tillation to enhance the quality of model representations was
ing author: Huanlai Xing.) proposed [21]. Hu et al. [22] designed an unsupervised cross-
 Zhiwen Xiao, Huanlai Xing, Bowen Zhao, Shouxi Luo, Penglin Dai, Ke Li,
and Zonghai Zhu are with the School of Computing and Artificial Intelligence, modal hashing method to achieve decent retrieval performance.
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China, also with the Tangshan Li et al. [23] put forward an online clustering approach for
Institute of Southwest Jiaotong University, Tangshan 063000, China, and also instance- and cluster-level CL. Shu et al. [24] introduced an
with the Engineering Research Center of Sustainable Urban Intelligent Transportation, Ministry of Education, China (e-mail: xiao1994zw@163.com; hxx anchor-contrastive representation learning approach for semi-
@home.swjtu.edu.cn; cn16bz@icloud.com; sxluo@swjtu.edu.cn; penglindai supervised skeleton-based action recognition. Xu et al. [25]
@swjtu.edu.cn; keli@swjtu.edu.cn; zzhu@swjtu.edu.cn). devised an X-invariant contrastive augmentation and represen-
 Rong Qu is with the School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham,
NG7 2RD 455356 Nottingham, U.K. (e-mail: rong.qu@nottingham.ac.uk). tation learning method for skeleton-based action recognition.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TETCI.2023.3304948 Lin et al. [26] presented a contrastive matching method with

 2471-285X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

momentum distillation to address the bi-level noisy correspon- information and that of low-level semantic information
dence problem in graph matching. Yu et al. [27] designed a between peer residual blocks to mine instance-level features
contrastive instance learning method with self-distillation for between different perspectives from the same sample. Inspired
audio-visual violence detection. Wang et al. [28] introduced by BYOT [34], self distillation transfers knowledge from
a CL-based transformer model with label-free distillation for high-level to low-level blocks for self regularization purpose.
feature extraction in remote sensing. Unlike BYOT’s KL divergence-based knowledge distillation
 CL has been applied to the time series field. For example, (KD) loss function, DCRLS uses the L2 function to measure
Mohsenvand et al. [29] extended the SimCLR model [18] to cap- the difference between high-level and low-level feature vectors.
ture representations from EEG data. Eldele et al. [30] introduced Fig. 1 illustrates the overview of DCRLS.
an unsupervised time series representation learning framework Our major contributions are summarized as follows:
via temporal and contextual contrasting to learn representa- r We present DCRLS that ensembles data augmentation,
tions from unlabeled data. Yue et al. [31] designed a universal deep contrastive learning, and self distillation techniques,
framework for understanding time series representations at an to mine the intrinsic connections between the internal
arbitrary semantic level. Different from computer vision (CV), representational hierarchy of data for downstream tasks.
CL in the time series domain develops slowly. The following r Unlike other CL-based algorithms, DCRLS considers the
lists some notable limitations in this domain. contrast similarity of high-level semantic information and
 First, the time series domain lacks large-scale datasets, e.g., that of low-level semantic information between peer residunlike ImageNet in CV, to provide models with rich semantic ual blocks via deep contrastive learning.
features in the data [30], [31]. As a result, time series models r DCRLS is applied to time series classification and clususually have little prior knowledge to help handle real-world tering with 36 UCR2018 datasets considered. On classitasks, such as anomaly detection. fication, DCRLS outperforms six existing classification
 Second, data augmentation is crucial for CL to understand algorithms on 28 datasets in terms of mean accuracy,
the similarity of different views from the same sample and the ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank; on clustering,
similarity with the views from different samples [14]. Unlike DCRLS wins on 8 out of 36 datasets when compared with
image data, time series data is a series of time-ordered data points 13 clustering algorithms with respect to average rand index,
associated with single or multiple time-dependent variables [13]. ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank.
Typical augmentation methods for image data, such as crop, The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In
are not directly applicable to time series domain. Meanwhile, Section II, we review related work on time series classification
time series data augmentation has not received enough research and clustering. In Section III, we provide a detailed description
attention [29], [30], [31]. of the problem formulation and our proposed approach, DCRLS.
 Third, a deep neural network aims at learning multiple levels Section IV presents an analysis of our experimental results, and
of feature representations with increasing abstraction. Its perfor- finally, we draw our conclusion in Section V.
mance is dependent on high- and low-level semantic information
obtained from the data [32]. As known, the quality of the II. RELATED WORK
obtained high-level semantic information is based on that of the
 This section reviews time series classification and clustering
low-level semantic information already extracted. On the other
 algorithms.
hand, most learning models update their parameters using the
backpropagation (BP) [33] method. High-level semantic information influences low-level semantic information to a certain A. Time Series Classification
extent according to BP. Hence, low-level semantic information Time series classification algorithms can be roughly classified
is also important and should be considered in the CL process. into two categories: traditional and deep-learning algorithms.
To the best of our knowledge, most of the existing CL-based 1) Traditional Algorithms: Distance- and feature-based alalgorithms in the time series field, such as SimCLR on EEG [29] gorithms are two main streams for time series classification.
and temporal and contextual contrasting [30], mainly focus Combining the nearest neighbor (NN) and dynamic time warpon the similarity of high-level semantic information. Ignoring ing (DTW) is a commonly used as distance-based method.
the similarity of low-level semantic information may lead to a This method focuses on calculating the similarities between
deteriorated CL performance. Unfortunately, this issue has not spatial features of data, e.g., DT WI , DT WA , DT WC and
been well studied in the literature. DT WD [10]. Besides, researchers have devoted their effects
 To tackle the problems above, we propose a deep contrastive on ensemble approaches for time series classification. Lines
representation learning with self-distillation (DCRLS). To and Bagnall [35] introduced an elastic ensemble (EE) algorithm
be specific, DCRLS gracefully integrates data augmentation, hybridizing 11 1-NN-based elastic distances for various time
deep contrastive learning, and self distillation to explore the series classification tasks. Lines et al. [36] proposed a collective
representations hidden in time series data. Data augmentation of transformation-based ensemble (COTE) algorithm that used
provides different views from the same sample as the input of multiple standard classifiers to achieve decent performance. The
DCRLS. The feature extractor for DCRLS is a residual network hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles
(ResNet) containing three residual blocks. Deep contrastive (HIVE-COTE) [37], HIVE-COTE 2.0 [38], and local cascade
learning provides the contrast similarity of high-level semantic ensemble (LCE) [39] are also ensemble-based.
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 5

Fig. 1. Overview of DCRLS. The feature extractor is a residual network (ResNet) including three residual blocks, an average pooling layer, and two dense (i.e.,
fully-connected) layers. Each residual block consists of a 1-dimensional convolutional neural network (Conv), a batch normalization (BatchNorm) module, and a
rectified linear unit (ReLU) function, where “Conv 8x128” stands for a 1-dimensional Conv with a kernel size of 8 and a channel number of 128.

 Feature-based algorithms aims at capturing representative streams in the time series clustering community are traditional
features from time series data. For example, Karlsson et al. [40] and deep learning algorithms. Traditional clustering algorithms
designed a generalized random shapelet forest algorithm with use dissimilarity measure or time series representation methods
shapelets and bag-of-words methods used for feature extraction. to distinguish the differences in data structures. For example,
The learned pattern similarity [41], hidden state conditional Yang et al. [58] introduced a combination of discriminative
random field [42] and interpretable representation learning [43] analysis and l2,1 -norm minimization for unsupervised feature
are feature-based as well. selection. Li et al. [59] proposed an unsupervised feature se-
 2) Deep Learning Algorithms: Deep learning algorithms lection algorithm for non-negative spectral analysis. The rolearn the underlying relationships among data representations bust unsupervised feature selection [60], robust local learning
by constructing an internal hierarchy of data representation. method [61], K-spectral centroid clustering [62], DTW-based
Currently, there are two branches of work in the commu- barycenter averaging method [63], K-shape [64], U-shape [64]
nity: single-network-based and dual-network-based models. and fuzzy-based clustering [65] all belong to traditional clus-
A single-network-based model is based on one (usually hy- tering methods. On the contrary, deep learning clustering ones
bridized) network that concentrates on the significant con- provide rich representations for standard clustering, e.g., the
nections within the hierarchy. For example, Xiao et al. [44] deep temporal clustering [66], unsupervised deep embedding
introduced a multi-process collaborative architecture using a algorithm [67], improved deep embedding algorithm [67], deep
multi-head capsule network to extract multi-scale features from temporal clustering representation algorithm [68], and Clusterthe input. Other examples of single-network-based models in- GAN [69].
clude MLP, ResNet, FCN [11], InceptionTime [12], ResNet with
random vector functional link [45], residual channel attention III. THE PROPOSED DCRLS
network [46], CNN-based federated distillation learning [47], First of all, the problem formulation is introduced. Then, the
deep echo state network [48], ROCKET [49], MiniRocket [50], three key components of DCRLS, namely data augmentation,
and ConvTimeNet [51]. In contrast, dual-network-based models deep contrastive learning, and self distillation, are described. Fitypically consist of two parallel networks: one for local-feature nally, the DCRLS-based classification and clustering structures
extraction and one for global-relation extraction. The former are given.
typically uses CNNs to extract local features, while the latter focuses on capturing the connections among the extracted features. A. Problem Formulation
Examples of dual-network-based models include RTFN [13],
robust neural temporal search [52], FCN-LSTM [53], ResNet- Let an arbitrary time equidistant time series sequence denoted
 (i) (i) (i) (i)
Transformer [54], SelfMatch [55] and attentional prototype by xi = {{x1,1 , . . ., x1,d }, . . ., {{xl,1 , . . ., xl,d }} ∈ X , where
network [56]. X ⊆ Rl×d is the input space, and l and d are the length and
 number of covariates of xi , respectively. xi is univariate if d
 = 1, and xi is multivariate, otherwise. The goal is to learn a
B. Time Series Clustering
 nonlinear embedding function fθ , which maps xi ∈ X to its
 Time series clustering algorithms are used to group similar representation ri that interprets itself for downstream tasks, e.g.,
data together for better analysis of its structure [57]. Two main time series classification.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 2. Example raw data and its jitter-and-scale and Cutout-modified data on the Wafer dataset.

B. Data Augmentation augmented views above. Assume there are N input samples.
 The DeepCL method thus obtains 2N feature vectors. Let zti be
 Data augmentation is a widely-used regularization method in +

deep learning that can significantly improve a model’s robust- the i-th feature vector, i ∈ {1, 2, . . ., 2N }. Let zti denote the
 i
 positive sample of zt that comes from the other augmented view
ness. DCRLS leverages two augmentation methods to produce +

different views from the same sample as the input. To be specific, of the same input. (zti , zti ) is a positive pair. In the meanwhile,
the first method is based on a jitter-and-scale strategy through we consider (2N − 2) feature vectors from other inputs within
 the same batch as the negative samples of zti . In other words, zti
adding the Gaussian function to the raw data. The second method
is a variant of Cutout [70], where a small piece of the raw has (2N − 2) negative pairs with its negative samples. We use
data is randomly replaced without changing its overall trend. the contrasting loss function in [18], [29], LCL , to maximize the
 similarity between the positive pair and minimize that between
Fig. 2 illustrates examples of the raw data and the resulting
jitter-and-scale and Cutout-modified data generated from the negative pairs, as defined in (1).
Wafer dataset.
   +
  
 
 2N exp sim zti , zti /τCL
C. Deep Contrastive Learning (DeepCL) LCL = − log 2 N   i m 
 i=1 m=1 1[m=i] exp sim zt , zt /τCL
 DeepCL aims at understanding the contrast similarity of (1)
high-level semantic information and that of low-level semantic uT v
 where, sim(u, v) = ||u||||v|| represents the dot product between
information between peer residual blocks to capture the disl2 normalized u and v (i.e., cosine smilarity). 1[m=i] ∈ {0, 1}
criminative representations from unlabeled data. As illustrated
 is an indicator function, equal to 1 iff [m = i] and τCL is a
in Fig. 1, there are four parts involving CL, including Residual
 temperature parameter of LCL . In this article, we set τCL = 1.0
Block 1, Residual Block 2, Residual Block 3, and the output of
 (more details are found in Section IV-C).
ResNet (i.e. the whole model).
 The loss function of DeepCL, LDCL , is defined in (2):
 CL understands the similarity of different views from the
same sample via a contrasting loss function [18]. To be specific,
it obtains two feature vectors for every sample from the two LDCL = LResblk1
 CL + LResblk2
 CL + LResblk3
 CL + Loutput
 CL (2)
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 7

where, LResblk1
 CL , LResblk2
 CL , LResblk3
 CL and Loutput
 CL are the con- the k-means loss in the overall loss function [66], [68], [73],
trasting loss functions of Residual Block 1, Residual Block 2, the DCRLS-based clustering method solely relies on the loss
Residual Block 3, and the output of ResNet, respectively. function of DCRLS for parameter updating.

D. Self Distillation IV. EXPERIMENTS AND ANALYSIS
 Self-distillation, a special teacher-student model, transfers its This section first introduces the experimental setup and perforknowledge from high-level to low-level blocks [34]. Let V1 , V2 , mance metrics. Then, it focuses on the hyper-parameter sensitiv-
V3 represent the output feature vectors of the first, second and ity and ablation study. Finally, the performance of DCRLS-based
third residual block, respectively. To match each vector with classification and clustering is evaluated.
ResNet’s soft label (i.e., output feature vector), q, a temporal
classifier, ψ, is employed. This classifier comprises an average A. Experimental Setup
pooling layer and a dense (i.e., fully-connected) layer. After 1) Data Description: In accordance with [66], [68], we evalpassing through the classifier, Vi ’s output is represented as qi , uate the efficacy of DCRLS-based classification and clustering
which is defined in (3). on 36 commonly used datasets from the UCR2018 archive [74].
 qi = fsoftmax (ψ(Vi )/τSD ) i ∈ {1, 2, 3} (3) The number of categories varies from 2 to 25, and the length
 of the time series varies from 65 to 637, encompassing various
where, the activation function fsoftmax is used to compute the domains such as ECG and motion. For additional information,
probability distribution of a given matrix, and the temperature please refer to Table I.
parameter τSD is used for self-distillation. As the previous work 2) Implementation Details: To prevent overfitting during
suggested [34], [71], we set τSD = 1.0. training, we apply L2 regularization and dropout techniques.
 The L2 loss function is utilized to quantify the disparity Additionally, we set the decay value of batch normalization to
between qi and q and is expressed as follows: 0.9 to ensure the stability of the training process, following
 LiKD = ||qi − q||2 i ∈ {1, 2, 3} (4) the approach in [11], [13]. Meanwhile, we adopt the Adam
 optimizer, where the momentum term is fixed to 0.9 and the
 The self-distillation loss for DCRLS, LKD , is the summation learning rate is initialized with 0.001 and tuned with a decay
of LiKD , shown in (5) value of 0.9. All experiments are run on a computer with Ubuntu
 3
  18.04 OS, an Nvidia GTX 1070Ti GPU with 8 GB, an Nvidia
 LKD = LiKD (5) GTX 1080Ti GPU with 11 GB, and an AMD R5 1400 CPU with
 i=1 16 G RAM.
 Based on LKD and LDCL , the loss function of DCRLS, L,
is written in (6). B. Performance Metrics

 L = LKD + LDCL + ||θ||2 (6) To compare the performance of various algorithms for time
 series classification and clustering, we adopt a number of wellwhere, θ stands for the parameters of DCRLS, and  the coeffi- known performance metrics.
cient of ||θ||2 (i.e., L2 regularization). Following [12], [13], we 1) Metrics for Classification: Based on the top-1 accuset  = 0.0005. racy, three metrics, namely, ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’, mean accuracy
 (MeanACC), and AVG_rank, are used to rank different super-
E. DCRLS-Based Classification vised algorithms. To be specific, for an arbitrary algorithm, it
 To reflect the effectiveness of the instance-level features is associated with ‘win’, ‘tie’, and ‘lose’ values, revealing on
extracted by DCRLS for classification tasks, this article adds how many datasets it is better than, equivalent to, and worse
a classifier behind the first dense (i.e., fully-connected) layer than the other algorithms, respectively. Its ‘best’ value is the
in ResNet. Like most existing time series classification algo- summation of the corresponding ‘win’ and ‘tie’ values. As
rithms [29], [30], [31], [72], DCRLS-based classification uses the previous work [11], [12], [13], [44], [52], [53], [56], we
a two-step method. Firstly, unsupervised learning is applied to use the AVG_rank score based on the Wilcoxon signed-rank
extract informative features from the data. Subsequently, these test with Holm’s alpha (5%) correction to ranking various clasfeatures are supplied to the classifier for classification. Following sification algorithms.
the previous work in [72], we embed a one-nearest-neighbor (1- 2) Metrics for Clustering: We use a commonly adopted per-
NN) classifier into the DCRLS-based classification framework. formance indicator, rand index (RI) [66], [68], as defined in (7).

F. DCRLS-Based Clustering PTP + NTP
 RI = (7)
 To handle clustering tasks, this article adds a k-means algo- S(S − 1)/2
rithm behind the first dense layer in ResNet. The DCRLS-based where, P T P and N T P represent the numbers of positive and
clustering extracts rich representations from data through unsu- negative time series pairs in the clustering, respectively, and S
pervised learning and then sends them to the k-means algorithm is the dataset size. Note that AVG_RI is the average RI value of
for clustering. Unlike some previous approaches that include a certain algorithm.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
 DETAILS OF THE 36 UCR2018 DATASETS SELECTED

 TABLE II TABLE III
 MEANACC RESULTS WITH DIFFERENT PARAMETER SETTINGS AVG_RI RESULTS WITH DIFFERENT PARAMETER SETTINGS ON 36 DATASETS
 ON 36 DATASETS

 clustering result in 0.7565 and 0.6947, the highest MeanACC
 score and highest AVG_RI value, respectively. It means τCL = 1
 is suitable for DCRLS to capture representations from the input.
C. Hyper-Parameter Sensitivity 2) Effectiveness of KD Loss: A teacher-student model needs
 We use the 36 UCR2018 datasets above to study the impact to choose an appropriate KD loss to measure the difference
of hyper-parameter settings on DCRLS. between high- and low-level features. Tables II and III also
 1) Effectiveness of τCL : τCL is a threshold value for DCRLS show the impact of KD loss on DCRLS. One can observe that
to distinguish the similarity of different views from the same self distillation improves the performance of DCRLS mainly
sample. Tables II and III show the MeanACC results obtained because supervising low-level semantics with high-level ones
by DCRLS-based classification and AVG_RI results obtained helps regularize the model itself. Besides, L2 outperforms the
by DCRLS-based clustering with different τCL values, respec- other losses in both classification and clustering. Therefore, we
tively. When τCL = 1, the DCRLS-based classification and choose L2 to promote the knowledge flow within the model.
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 9

 TABLE IV
 MEANACC AND AVG_RI RESULTS OBTAINED BY VARIOUS DEEPCL-BASED VARIANTS FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING VARIANTS ON 36 DATASETS

D. Ablation Study TSD with KL, and TSD with L2 . These self distillation methods
 are listed below.
 We investigate the effectiveness of two important components r BYOT: the best your own teacher method with the Kullof DCRLS on 36 datasets. back Leibler (KL) function used to measure the difference
 1) Effectiveness of Deep Contrastive Learning (DeepCL): between high- and low-level feature vectors [34].
As aforementioned, our DeepCL has four parts involving CL, r SAD: the layer-wise attention self-distillation method
i.e. Residual Blocks 1, 2, and 3, and the output of ResNet, transferring knowledge from high levels to low levels [75].
i.e., the whole model, as shown in Fig. 1. Let ContrBlock1, r TSD with KL: the transitive self-distillation method with
ContrBlock2, ContrBlock3, and ContrOutput denote the con- the Kullback Leibler (KL) function as its loss function [76].
trastive learning at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1, 2, 3, and r TSD with L2 : the transitive self-distillation method with
ResNet, respectively. the L2 function as its loss function [76].
 To evaluate the impact of low-level semantic information on r Self Distillation (Ours): using the L2 function to measure
extraction of high-level semantic information, we compare a the difference between high- and low-level feature vectors.
number of DeepCL-based variants for classification and clus- As shown in Fig. 1, DCRLS consists of DeepCL and the protering variants on 36 datasets. posed self distillation. To validate the impact of self distillation
 r Baseline: It uses the proposed ResNet structure (i.e. the
 on DCRLS, we compare it with a number of DeepCL variants
 whole model) for feature extraction and enables CL at the listed below.
 outputs of ResNet. r DeepCL-BYOL: DeepCL with the best your own teacher
 r Baseline-ContrBlock1: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
 method.
 the outputs of Residual Block 1. r DeepCL-SAD: DeepCL with the layer-wise attention selfr Baseline-ContrBlock2: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
 distillation method.
 the outputs of Residual Block 2. r DeepCL-TSD with KL: DeepCL with the transitive selfr Baseline-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra CL enabled at
 distillation method, where the KL function is adopted.
 the outputs of Residual Block 3. r DeepCL-TSD with L2 : DeepCL with the transitive selfr Baseline-ContrBlock1-ContrBlock2: Baseline with extra
 distillation method, where the L2 function is used.
 CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1 and 2. r DCRLS: DeepCL with the proposed self distillation
 r Baseline-ContrBlock1-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra
 method.
 CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 1 and 3. The MeanACC and AVG_RI results obtained by DeepCL
 r Baseline-ContrBlock2-ContrBlock3: Baseline with extra
 with various self distillation techniques for classification and
 CL enabled at the outputs of Residual Blocks 2 and 3. clustering on 36 datasets are shown in Table V. Clearly, DeepCL
 r DeepCL: Baseline with extra CL enabled at the outputs of
 results in the worst performance on both classification and clus-
 Residual Blocks 1, 2 and 3. tering. This is because self distillation can effectively promotes
 As shown in Table IV, with continuous addition of CL on knowledge flow within the model, enhancing its robustness. In
low-level outputs, the accuracy values of classification and clus- addition, DCRLS outperforms DeepCL-BYOT, DeepCL-SAD,
tering are both increasing. For example, the MeanACC value DeepCL-TSD with KL, and DeepCL-TSD with L2 with reof Baseline is 0.6674 while that of the Baseline-ContrBolck2 is spect to MeanACC and AVG_RI, which means the proposed
0.6882. This, to a certain extend, reflects the importance of low self distillation achieves better performance than a number of
level semantic information to representation learning. DeepCL well-known methods when working with DeepCL on time series
understands the contrast similarity of high-level semantic infor- classification and clustering tasks.
mation and that of low-level semantic information between peer
Residual Blocks, enhancing the ability of representation learning
 E. Evaluation of DCRLS-Based Classification
on DCRLS. This is why DeepCL achieves the best performance
among all compared variants. To evaluate the performance of DCRLS-based classification,
 2) Effectiveness of Self Distillation: To evaluate the proposed we compare it with a number of existing CL-based classiself distillation method, we select four advanced self-distillation fication algorithms against ‘win’/‘lose’/‘tie’, MeanACC, and
methods for performance comparison, including BYOT, SAD, AVG_rank, as listed below.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE V
 MEANACC AND AVG_RI RESULTS OBTAINED BY DEEPCL WITH VARIOUS SELF DISTILLATION TECHNIQUES FOR CLASSIFICATION AND CLUSTERING ON 36
 DATASETS

 r T-Loss: a method based on random sub-series technique
 ResNet as its feature extractor [72].
 r SimCLR: a modified version of SimCLR adapted to time
 series classification with ResNet as its feature extractor [18].
 r CRL with KL: a contrastive representation leaning method
 with the Kullback Leibler (KL) function as its selfdistillation loss function and ResNet as its feature extractor [20].
 r CRL with L2 : a contrastive representation leaning method
 with the L2 function as its self-distillation loss function
 and ResNet as its feature extractor [20].
 r KNCRL with KL: a KD-based contrastive leaning method
 with the KL function as its KD loss function and ResNet Fig. 3. Accuracy plot showing the performance difference between DCRLSbased classification and 1-NN.
 as its feature extractor [21].
 r KNCRL with L2 : a KD-based contrastive representation
 leaning method with the L2 function as its KD loss function conducive for the 1-NN classifier to distinguish the similarity
 and ResNet as its feature extractor [21]. between different samples.
 Note that the algorithms above all take 1-NN as their classifier
for classification. The top-1 accuracy results obtained with dif- F. Evaluation of DCRLS-Based Clustering
ferent algorithms on 36 selected UCR2018 datasets are shown To evaluate the performance of DCRLS-based clustering,
in Table VI . The DCRLS-based classification is the best among we compare it with a number of existing clustering algorithms
all algorithms as it obtains the highest MeanACC and ‘best’ against three performance metrics: ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’, AVG_RI,
values, 28 and 0.7565, and the smallest AVG_rank score, 1.7639. and AVG_rank. These algorithms are listed blow:
Rather than focusing on the contrastive similarity of high-level r K-means: a simple yet elegant approach that partitions a
semantic information only, DCRLS-based classification consid- dataset into K distinct, non-overlapping clusters [68].
ers the contrast similarity of multi-level semantic information, r UDFS: a combination of discriminative analysis and l2,1 -
especially that of low-level semantic information between peer norm minimization for unsupervised feature selection [58].
Residual Blocks, which is beneficial for mining instance-level r NDFS: an unsupervised feature selection algorithm using
features between different perspectives from the same sample. non-negative spectral analysis [59].
KNCRL with L2 takes advantage of CL and KD to distinguish r RUFS: a robust unsupervised feature selection algorithm
the similarity of different views from the same sample and the using local learning regularized robust nonnegative matrix
similarity with the views from different samples. That brings it factorization [60].
second in terms of MeanACC and AVG_rank, namely 0.7009 r RSFS: a robust local learning method for graph Laplacian
and 3.7361. On the contrary, it is difficult for T-Loss to generate and spectral regression construction [61].
proper random sub-series as positive samples when mining r KSC: a K-spectral centroid clustering algorithm to mine
discriminate shapelets from the input, resulting in its performing patterns of temporal variation [62].
the worst among all the algorithms. r KBDB: a dynamic time warping-based barycenter averag-
 To further study the performance of DCRLS on classification, ing method [63].
we compare it with a separate 1-NN algorithm on 36 datasets. r K-shape: a domain-independent, highly accurate, and effi-
Fig. 3 depicts the accuracy plot of DCRLS-based classifica- cient clustering approach for partitional, hierarchical, and
tion against 1-NN for each dataset. The results indicate that spectral clustering [64].
DCRLS-based classification outperforms 1-NN in 30 cases, ties r U-shapelet: a shapelet method for time series clusterin one case, and underperforms in five cases, with a p-value ing [64].
less than 0.5 (about 0.0034). The performance of DCRLS-based r DTC: a deep temporal clustering algorithm that integrates
classification outstrips significantly that of 1-NN. That is be- dimensionality reduction and temporal clustering into endcause the instance-level features extracted by DCRLS are more to-end learning [66].
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 11

 TABLE VI
 THE TOP-1 ACCURACY RESULTS OF DIFFERENT CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS ON 36 DATASETS WHEN USING 1-NN

 r DEC: an unsupervised deep embedding algorithm for clustering analysis that learns feature representations and clustering assignments using deep neural network [67].
 r IDEC: an improved version of DEC [67].
 r DTCR: a deep temporal clustering representation algorithm integrating the temporal reconstruction and K-means
 objective into the seq2seq model [68].
 Table VII shows the RI results of different clustering algorithms on 36 datasets. DTCR and DCRLS-based clustering
are the best and second-best among all compared algorithms.
DTCR integrates the temporal reconstruction and K-means into
the seq2seq model, jointly optimizing its parameters for cluster structure improvement and temporal representation mining.
However, DTCR is mainly used for addressing cluster-specific
problems and it has complicated model structure. On the other Fig. 4. RI plot showing the performance difference between DCRLS-based
hand, DCRLS-based clustering updates the model’s parameters clustering and K-means.
via self-supervised learning and it adopts a K-means algorithm
for feature classification. Despite its simple structure, DCRLS- To further study the effectiveness of DCRLS in time series
based clustering achieves decent performance on the 36 datasets, clustering, we compare DCRLS-based clustering with a separate
thanks to the DCRLS’s strong ability for feature extraction. K-means algorithm on 36 datasets. Fig. 4 depicts the RI plot of
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE VII
 THE RI RESULTS OF DIFFERENT CLUSTERING ALGORITHMS ON 36 DATASETS

DCRLS-based clustering against K-means for each dataset. The DCRLS-based classification and clustering result in significant
results show that DCRLS-based clustering achieves ‘win’/‘tie’/ performance improvement when compared with separate 1-NN
‘loss’ in 30/1/5 cases, respectively, with a p-value less than 0.5 and K-mean algorithms, respectively. Meanwhile, DCRLS is
(about 0.0048). The performance of DCRLS-based clustering is generic and has potential to be applied to other domains.
significantly better than that of K-means. That is because the Due to the limited GPU resources for training, this work
DCRLS-based clustering is provided with sufficient features considered 36 out of 128 UCR2018 datasets for model evalcaptured by DCRLS, especially those hiding deeply in the uation and comparison. In the future, we will validate DCRLS
input data. on all UCR2018 datasets in the time series domain and on larger
 datasets in other domains, such as ImageNet.
 V. CONCLUSION
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 In the proposed DCRLS, deep contrastive learning pays
attention to the contrast similarity of multi-level semantic The authors thank the editors and reviewers for their valuable
information to mine instance-level features between different suggestions to improve the quality of this work.
perspectives from the same sample, while self distillation
transfers knowledge from high-level to low-level blocks to REFERENCES
regularize DCRLS during knowledge transfer. Experimental re- [1] S. Supriya, S. Siuly, H. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “Eeg sleep stages analysis and
sults demonstrate that DCRLS obtains promising results in both classification based on weighed complex network features,” IEEE Trans.
classification and clustering tasks. Specifically, DCRLS-based Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 236–246, Apr. 2021.
 [2] P. Fergus, C. Chalmers, C. C. Montanez, D. Reilly, P. Lisboa, and B.
classification wins on 28 datasets in terms of mean accuracy, Pineles, “Modelling segmented cardiotocography time-series signals using
‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, and AVG_rank, compared with six one-dimensional convolutional neural networks for the early detection of
classification algorithms. DCRLS-based clustering wins on 8 abnormal birth outcomes,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
 vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 882–892, Dec. 2021.
datasets and takes the second best position among 14 clustering [3] Y. Yao, H. Chen, and X. Yao, “Discriminative learning in the model space
algorithms regarding AVG_RI, ‘win’/‘tie’/‘lose’ measure, for symbolic sequence classification,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput.
and AVG_rank. on With 36 UCR2018 datasets considered, Intell., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 154–167, Apr. 2021.
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 13

 [4] A. M. Roy and J. Bhaduri, “Densesph-yolov5: An automated damage [29] M. Mohsenvand, M. R. Izadi, and P. Maes, “Contrastive representation
 detection model based on densenet and swin-transformer prediction head- learning for electroencephalogram classification,” in Proc. Mach. Learn.
 enabled yolov5 with attention mechanism,” Adv. Eng. Inform., vol. 56, Health NeurIPS Workshop, 2020, pp. 238–253.
 pp. 1–16, 2023. [30] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
 [5] P. Jain, S. Jain, O. R. Zaïane, and A. Srivastava, “Anomaly detection contextual contrasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 in resource constrained environments with streaming data,” IEEE Trans. pp. 2352–2359.
 Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 649–659, Jun. 2022. [31] Z. Yue et al., “TS2VEC: Towards universal representation of time series,”
 [6] E. Tsang and J. Chen, “Regime change detection using directional change in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, pp. 8980–8987.
 indicators in the foreign exchange market to chart Brexit,” IEEE Trans. [32] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
 Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 185–193, Jun. 2018. review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 [7] S. Jamil and A. M. Roy, “An efficient and robust phonocardiography vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
 (PCG)-based valvular heart diseases (VHD) detection framework using [33] P. Munro, “Backpropagation,” in Encyclopedia of Machine Learning, C.
 vision transformer (VIT),” Comput. Bio. Med., vol. 158, pp. 1–15, 2023. Sammut and G. I. Webb Eds., 2011, p. 73.
 [8] S. Wang, Y. Yin, D. Wang, Z. Lv, Y. Wang, and Y. Jin, “An interpretable [34] L. Zhang, J. Song, A. Gao, J. Chen, C. Bao, and K. Ma, “Be your own
 deep neural network for colorectal polyp diagnosis under colonoscopy,” teacher: Improve the performance of convolutional neural networks via self
 Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 234, pp. 1–14, 2022. distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pp. 3712–3721,
 [9] A. R. Shirazi and Y. Jin, “A strategy for self-organized coordinated motion 2019.
 of a swarm of minimalist robots,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. [35] J. Lines and A. Bagnall, “Time series classification with ensembles of elas-
 Intell., vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 326–338, Oct. 2017. tic distance measures,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 29, pp. 565–592,
[10] H. Fawaz, G. Forestier, J. Weber, L. Idoumghar, and P.-A. Muller, “Deep 2015.
 learning for time series classification: A review,” Data Mining Knowl. [36] J. Lines, S. Taylor, and A. Bagnall, “Time-series classification with COTE:
 Discov., vol. 33, pp. 917–963, 2019. The collective of transformation-based ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
[11] Z. Wang, W. Yan, and T. Oates, “Time series classification from scratch Data Eng., vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 2522–2535, Sep. 2015.
 with deep neural networks: A strong baseline,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint [37] J. Lines et al., “Time series classification with HIVE-COTE: The hier-
 Conf. Neural Netw., 2017, pp. 1578–1585. archical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles,” ACM Trans.
[12] H. Fawaz et al., “Inceptiontime: Finding alexnet for time series classifica- Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 21, no. 52, pp. 1–35, 2018.
 tion,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, pp. 1936–1962, 2020. [38] M. Middlehurst, J. Large, M. Flynn, J. Lines, A. Bostrom, and A. Bagnall,
[13] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Xing, S. Luo, P. Dai, and D. Zhan, “Rtfn: A robust “Hive cote 2.0: A new meta ensemble for time series classification,” Mach.
 temporal feature network for time series classification,” Inform. Sci., Learn., vol. 110, pp. 3211–3243, 2021.
 vol. 571, pp. 65–86, 2021. [39] K. Fauvel, É. Fromont, V. Masson, P. Faverdin, and A. Termier,
[14] A. Jaiswal, A. R. Babu, M. Zadeh, D. Banerjee, and F. Makedon, “A “Local cascade ensemble for multivariate data classification,” 2020,
 survey on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9, no. 1, arXiv:2005.03645.
 pp. 1–22, 2021. [40] I. Karlsson, P. Papapetrou, and H. Bostrôm, “Generalized random shapelet
[15] Y. Lin, Y. Gou, X. Liu, J. Bai, J. Lv, and X. Peng, “Dual contrastive pre- forests,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1053–1083, 2016.
 diction for incomplete multi-view representation learning,” IEEE Trans. [41] M. G. Baydogan and G. Runger, “Time series representation and similarity
 Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4447–4461, Apr. 2023. based on local autopatterns,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 30, no. 2,
[16] Y. Li, M. Yang, D. Peng, T. Li, J. Huang, and X. Peng, “Twin contrastive pp. 476–509, 2016.
 learning for online clustering,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 9, [42] A. Quattoni, S. Wang, L. Morency, M. Collins, and T. Darrell, “Hidden
 pp. 2205–2221, Sep. 2022. conditional random fields,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 29, no. 10,
[17] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for pp. 1848–1852, Oct. 2007.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [43] F. Baldán and J. Benítez, “Multivariate times series classification through
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9726–9735. an interpretable representation,” Inform. Sci., vol. 569, pp. 596–614, 2021.
[18] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework [44] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Zhang, and E. Szczerbicki, “A new multi-process
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. collaborative architecture for time series classification,” Knowl. Based
 Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. Syst., vol. 220, pp. 1–11, 2021.
[19] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple siamese representation learn- [45] W. Cheng, P. Sunganthan, and R. Katuwal, “Time series classification
 ing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, using diversified ensemble deep random vector functional link and resnet
 pp. 15745–15753. features,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 112, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[20] M. Jin, Y. Zheng, Y. Li, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and S. Pan, “Multi-scale [46] H. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Cui, K. Wang, and Q. Tang, “TCRAN: Multivariate
 contrastive siamese networks for self-supervised graph representation time series classification using residual channel attention networks with
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 1477–1483. time correction,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 114, pp. 1–10, 2022.
[21] P. Bhat, E. Arani, and B. Zonooz, “Distill on the go: Online knowledge [47] H. Xing, Z. X. R. Qu, Z. Zhu, and B. Zhao, “An efficient federated
 distillation in self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. distillation learning system for multi-task time series classification,” IEEE
 Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2021, pp. 2672–2681. Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, 2022, Art. no. 2517012.
[22] P. Hu, H. Zhu, J. Lin, D. Peng, Y.-P. Zhao, and X. Peng, “Unsupervised [48] Z. Huang et al., “Functional deep echo state network improved by a bi-level
 contrastive cross-modal hashing,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., optimization approach for multivariate time series classification,” Appl.
 vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3877–3889, Mar. 2023. Soft Comput., vol. 106, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[23] Y. Li, P. Hu, Z. Liu, D. Peng, J. Zhou, and X. Peng, “Contrastive clustering,” [49] A. Dempster, D. Petitjean, and G. Webb, “Rocket: Exceptionally fast and
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8547–8555. accurate time series classification using random convolutional kernels,”
[24] X. Shu, B. Xu, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “Multi-granularity anchor- Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, pp. 1454–1495, 2020.
 contrastive representation learning for semi-supervised skeleton-based ac- [50] A. Dempster et al., “Minirocket: A very fast (almost) deterministic transtion recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 7559–7576, form for time series classification,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
 Jun. 2023. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 248–257.
[25] B. Xu, X. Shu, and Y. Song, “X-invariant contrastive augmentation and [51] K. Kashiparekh, J. Narwariya, P. Malhotra, L. Vig, and G. Shroff, “Conrepresentation learning for semi-supervised skeleton-based action recog- vtimenet: A pre-trained deep convolutional neural network for time series
 nition,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 3852–3867, 2022. classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[26] Y. Lin, M. Yang, J. Yu, P. Hu, C. Zhang, and X. Peng, “Graph matching [52] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Xing, R. Qu, F. Song, and B. Zhao, “RNTS: Robust
 with bi-level noisy correspondence,” 2022, arXiv: 2212.04085. neural temporal search for time series classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
[27] J. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Cheng, R. Feng, and Y. Zhang, “Modality-aware contrastive Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
 instance learning with self-distillation for weakly-supervised audio-visual [53] F. Karim, S. Majumdar, H. Darabi, and S. Harford, “Multivariate LSTMviolence detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2022, FCNS for time series classification,” Neural Netw., vol. 116, pp. 237–245,
 pp. 6278–6287. 2019.
[28] X. Wang et al., “LaST: Label-free self-distillation contrastive learning with [54] S. H. Huang, L. Xu, and C. Jiang, “Residual attention net for superior crosstransformer architecture for remote sensing image scene classification,” domain time sequence modeling,” in Fintech With Artificial Intelligence,
 IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, 2022, Art. no. 6512205. Big Data, and Blockchain.Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2021.
14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

[55] H. Xing, Z. Xiao, D. Zhan, S. Luo, P. Dai, and K. Li, “Selfmatch: Robust Huanlai Xing (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 semisupervised time-series classification with self-distillation,” Int. J. degree in computer science from the University of
 Intell. Syst., vol. 37, pp. 8583–8610, 2022. Nottingham (Supervisor: Dr Rong Qu), Nottingham,
[56] X. Zhang, Y. Gao, J. Lin, and C.-T. Lu, “Tapnet: Multivariate time series U.K., in 2013. During 2020–2021, he was a Visitclassification with attentional prototypical network,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. ing Scholar of computer science, The University of
 Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 1–8. Rhode Island (Supervisor: Dr. Haibo He), Kingston,
[57] B. Lafabregue, J. Weber, P. Gançarski, and G. Forestier, “End-to-end deep RI, USA. He is currently with the School of Comrepresentation learning for time series clustering: A comparative study,” puting and Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong
 Data Mining Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, pp. 29–81, 2022. University (SWJTU), Chengdu, China, and Tangshan
[58] Y. Yang, H. Shen, Z. Ma, Z. Huang, and X. Zhou, “L2, 1-norm regularized Institute, SWJTU. He was on Editorial Board of Scidiscriminative feature selection for unsupervised,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. ence China Information Sciences. He was a Member
 Artif. Intell., 2011, pp. 1589–1594. of several international conference program and senior program committees,
[59] Z. Li, Y. Yang, J. Liu, X. Zhou, and H. Lu, “Unsupervised feature selection such as ECML-PKDD, MobiMedia, ISCIT, ICCC, TrustCom, IJCNN, and
 using nonnegative spectral analysis,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., ICSINC. His research interests include semantic communication, representa-
 2012, vol. 26, pp. 1026–1032. tion learning, data mining, reinforcement learning, machine learning, network
[60] M. Qian and C. Zhai, “Robust unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc. function virtualization, and software defined networking.
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2013, pp. 1621–1627.
[61] L. Shi, L. Du, and Y. Shen, “Robust spectral learning for unsupervised feature selection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2014,
 pp. 977–982.
[62] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Patterns of temporal variation in online media,”
 in Proc. 4th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2011, pp. 177–186.
[63] F. Petitjean, A. Ketterlin, and P. Gancarski, “A global averaging method for dynamic time warping, with the applications
 to clustering,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 678–693,
 2011.
[64] J. Paparrizos and L. Gravano, “K-shape: Efficient and accurate clustering
 of time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2015,
 pp. 1855–1870. Bowen Zhao received the B.Eng. degree in com-
[65] H. Kamalzadeh, A. Ahmadi, and S. Mansour, “Clustering time-series puter science and technology in 2020 from Southwest
 by a novel slope-based similarity measure considering particle swarm Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, where he is
 optimization,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 96, pp. 1–16, 2020. currently working toward the master’s degree with the
[66] N. Madiraju, S. Sadat, D. Fisher, and H. Karimabadi, “Deep temporal School of Information Science and Technology. His
 clustering: Fully unsupervised learning of time-domain features,” 2018, research interests include deep reinforcement learnarXiv:1802.01059. ing, cloud computing, and deep learning.
[67] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering
 with local structure preservation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 2017, pp. 1753–1759.
[68] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. Cottrell, “Learning representations for
 time series clustering,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019,
 pp. 3781–3791.
[69] K. Ghasedi, X. Wang, C. Deng, and H. Huang, “Balanced selfpaced learning for generative adversarial clustering network,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
 pp. 4391–4400.
[70] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Improved regularization of convolutional
 neural networks with cutout,” 2017, arXiv:1708.04552.
[71] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531. Rong Qu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
[72] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable degree in computer science and its applications from
 representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1996 and the
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 4650–4661. Ph.D. degree in computer Science from The Univer-
[73] X. Guo, L. Gao, X. Liu, and J. Yin, “Improved deep embedded clustering sity of Nottingham, Nottingham, U.K., in 2003. She
 with local structure preservation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., is currently an Associate Professor with the School
 pp. 1753–1759, 2017. of Computer Science, University of Nottingham. Her
[74] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica research interests include the modelling and optimi-
 Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019. sation for logistics transport scheduling, personnel
[75] Y. Hou, Z. Ma, C. Liu, and C. C. Loy, “Learning lightweight lane detection scheduling, network routing, portfolio optimization
 CNNs by self attention distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., and timetabling problems by using evolutionary al-
 2019, pp. 1013–1021. gorithms, mathematical programming, constraint programming in operational
[76] L. Zhang, C. Bao, and K. Ma, “Self-distillation: Towards efficient and research and artificial intelligence. These computational techniques are intecompact neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal., vol. 44, no. 8, grated with knowledge discovery, machine learning and data mining to provide
 pp. 4388–4403, Aug. 2022. intelligent decision support on logistic fleet operations at SMEs, workforce
 scheduling at hospitals, policy making in education, and cyber security for connected and autonomous vehicles. Dr. Qu is an Associated Editor for Engineering
 Zhiwen Xiao (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IEEE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
 degree in network engineering from the Chengdu MAGAZINE, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION, Journal
 University of Information Technology, Chengdu, of Operational Research Society, and PeerJ Computer Science. She has been
 China, and the M.Eng. degree in computer science a Senior IEEE Member since 2012 and the Vice-Chair of Evolutionary Comfrom the Northwest AF University, Yangling, China. putation Task Committee since 2019 and Technical Committee on Intelligent
 He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in Systems Applications during 2015–2018 at IEEE Computational Intelligence
 computer science with Southwest Jiaotong Univer- Society. She has guest edited special issues on the automated design of search
 sity, Chengdu. His research interests include semantic algorithms and machine learning at the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN
 communication, federated learning (FL), representa- ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE and IEEE Computational Intelligence
 tion learning, data mining, and computer vision. Magazine.
XIAO et al.: DEEP CONTRASTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING WITH SELF-DISTILLATION 15

 Shouxi Luo (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s Ke Li received the master’s degree from Sichuan
 degree in communication engineering and the Ph.D. University, Chengdu, China, in 2008, and the Ph.D.
 degree in communication and information systems degree in communication and information systems
 from the University of Electronic Science and Tech- from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 2011 and 2016, nology of China, Chengdu, in 2012. She is currespectively. He is currently an Associate Professor rently a Lecturer with the School of Information
 with the School of Computing and Artificial Intel- Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong Univerligence, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu. sity, Chengdu. Her research interests include network
 His research interests include data center networks, optimization, network design, and future Internet.
 software-defined networking, and networked systems.

 Zonghai Zhu received the B.Sc. degree from the
 Department of Information, Mechanical and Electri-
 Penglin Dai (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. decal Engineer, Shanghai Normal University, Shanggree in mathematics and applied mathematics and the
 hai, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree from
 Ph.D. degree in computer science from Chongqing
 the Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
 University, Chongqing, China, in 2012 and 2017, reing, East China University of Science and Technolspectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with
 ogy, Shanghai, in 2021. He is currently an Assisthe School of Information Science and Technology,
 Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China. His tant Professor with the School of Computing and
 Artificial Intelligence, Southwest Jiaotong Univerresearch interests include intelligent transportation
 sity, Chengdu, China. His research interests include
 systems and vehicular cyber–physical systems.
 imbalanced problems, kernel-based methods, and
 graph-structured data.