IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 3249

 Detecting Cloud Anomaly via Broad
 Network-Based Contrastive Autoencoder
 Guoxiang Zhong , Fagui Liu , Member, IEEE, Jun Jiang , Member, IEEE,
 Bin Wang , Xi Yao, and C. L. Philip Chen , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is indispensable for achieving
higher availability and reliability in the cloud computing. The
traditional autoencoder-based method only models the historical
normal samples and then identifies the current online anomaly
samples by the fixed threshold of anomaly score. Although more
advances have been made in recent years, two main challenges
remain: (i) ignoring the historical anomaly samples, (ii) poor
self-adaptive ability for online detection. To address the above
challenges, we propose a unified detector, namely BroadCAE,
which integrates autoencoder with contrastive learning and broad
network. Specifically, the reconstruction loss is first replaced
by contrastive loss, which equally formulates both normal and
anomaly samples. These samples belonging to the same class
become closer in a lower-dimensional space. Conversely, different
classes of samples are far away from each other. Next, we apply
the anomaly-score-based pseudo thresholds to train the dynamic
threshold selection, which generates the threshold according to
the coming sample. The broad network in dynamic threshold
selection takes the place of the deep network, which overcomes
catastrophic forgetting and adapts to new online samples.
Finally, validation experiments are conducted on four benchmark
 Fig. 1. Faults of the server cluster in SMD benchmark dataset. The red
datasets. Our BroadCAE outperforms the comparative baseline metric curves in blue boxes indicate the faults. These faults are described as
methods by averaging over 4% of the f1-score. anomalies of 9-th, 13-th, 14-th, and 15-th metrics, which also are referred to
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, contrastive learning, broad as root causes.
network, cloud computing.

 I. I NTRODUCTION system must continuously improve the availability and reli-
 ITH the wide application of cloud computing, the ability of cloud services [1], [2]. However, accidental faults,
W scales of cloud services and their users are dramatically
increasing. For a better user experience, the cloud operation
 such as network delay [3], [4] and resource hog [5], [6],
 frequently pose a substantial threat to the system running.
 These faults cause the anomalous behaviors of the related
 Manuscript received 16 August 2023; revised 22 December 2023; accepted monitoring metrics [7], [8], which is shown in Fig. 1. The
10 January 2024. Date of publication 15 January 2024; date of current version
12 July 2024. This work was supported in part by the Guangdong Major operation system always discovers the faults by detecting
Project of Basic and Applied Basic Research under Grant 2019B030302002, in the anomaly of running data and then starts the correspondpart by the Science and Technology Major Project of Guangzhou under Grant ing fault tolerance solutions [9], [10], [11]. In other words,
202007030006, in part by the Science and Technology Project of Guangdong
Province under Grant 2021B1111600001, and in part by the Major Key Project anomaly detection is the first step to actively removing the
of PCL, China under Grant PCL2023A09. The associate editor coordinating faults [12], [13]. The powerful detection result maintains
the review of this article and approving it for publication was H. Lutfiyya. a solid foundation of higher availability and reliability in
(Corresponding authors: Fagui Liu; Jun Jiang.)
 Guoxiang Zhong, Xi Yao, and C. L. Philip Chen are with the School of cloud [14], [15].
Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, The autoencoder-based anomaly detection algorithm com-
Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: cszhongguoxiang111@mail.scut.edu.cn; bines the robust neural network to mine the intrinsic patterns,
201930330247@mail.scut.edu.cn; philip.chen@ieee.org).
 Fagui Liu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, South which has significantly been concerned [16], [17], [18], [19].
China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with More recent literature has also demonstrated that the encoderthe Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, decoder architecture outperforms traditional methods by a
China (e-mail: fgliu@scut.edu.cn).
 Jun Jiang is with the College of Information Science and Technology, large margin, such as Bagel [20] and USAD [21]. The
Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China (e-mail: junjiang@ autoencoder-based method adopts the historical normal data
ieee.org). to train the representation network. The reconstruction error
 Bin Wang is with the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng
Laboratory, Shenzhen 518000, China (e-mail: wangb02@pcl.ac.cn). provided by this representation is regarded as an anomaly
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3353772 score. The online testing data with a larger anomaly score
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

indicates the presented anomaly. More proposed works focus to empower the representation of cloud anomaly
on optimizing the above-mentioned procedures [22], [23]. detection.
However, there still exist two main challenges, which are in • The BroadCAE adopts the broad network without deep
the following: structure to dynamically generate thresholds in the light
 • The first challenge is related to feature representation, of the coming samples, which provides a different perwhich ignores the historical anomaly samples. For uni- spective to refine the anomaly detection system.
 versal anomaly detection applications, normal samples • In validation experiments, our BroadCAE outperforms
 constitute the majority of the training sample owing to the other comparative algorithms, which demonstrates the
 higher overhead of labeling scarce anomaly samples. The applicability of BroadCAE for cloud anomaly identificafeature representation rebuilds the normal sample, which tion. The open-source codes1 will continue to motivate
 only formulates the intra-class features. Both intra-class the research in cloud anomaly detection.
 features of anomalies and inter-class features between The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
 two kinds of samples are absent. The anomaly detection reviews the BroadCAE’s related work. The design details of
 in the cloud is a special case with complete running doc- BroadCAE are discussed in Section III, containing problem
 uments [11], [24], [25]. The recorded anomalous events formulation, BroadCAE’s overview, contrastive autoencoder,
 are abundant, which can provide feature representation broad network-based dynamic threshold selection, and
 with adequate and cheap labeled anomaly samples. BroadCAE’s pseudo code. The experiment in Section IV
 • The second challenge comes from poor self-adaptive validates the effectiveness of BroadCAE by answering three
 ability in online detection. Cloud resource utilization is research questions. Finally, the conclusion is presented in
 in a constant state of change due to various practical Section V.
 requirements. For example, if the computing-intensive
 task is uploaded, more computing nodes are in need. The II. R ELATED W ORK
 CPU available percentage becomes lower. Subsequently,
 A. Background of Cloud Anomaly
 the cloud user deploys network-intensive tasks. The
 network byte sent rate will be higher. In the meanwhile, The anomaly in the cloud is a running behavior that deviates
 the metrics about computing return to normal. Without from the normal system setting on account of fault. According
 the self-adaptive ability, anomaly detection identifies the to different fault locations, cloud anomaly can be divided into
 lower CPU available percentage and higher network byte internal and external behavior. The external factor caused by
 sent rate as anomaly behaviors. other services leads to an external anomaly. For example, the
 In this paper, we overcome these limitations and propose cloud SaaS application downloads a large file, which brings
an improved autoencoder framework BroadCAE, which inte- about network congestion [26]. Besides, cyber attack [27] is
grates contrastive learning and broad network. For the first the most common external fault. Internal processes induce
challenge, contrastive loss is introduced to formulate the internal anomalies, such as authentication failure and network
latent variable in the autoencoder. The anomaly samples in packet loss. The operation system uses several reactive and
an embedding space are closer to each other as possible, proactive fault tolerance methods, such as auto-scaling [5],
which is the same operation for normal samples. Inversely, to remove the presented fault [28], which avoids further
the training samples from different classes are separated. The affecting the regular cloud services. Before that, the operation
feature representation extracts both intra-class and inter-class system still needs to consider identifying the fault through
features, which further optimizes the margin between normal the anomaly. They always analyze the anomaly state by
and anomaly samples. To tackle the second challenge, the monitoring metric, log, and trace. Particularly, the monitoring
BroadCAE incorporates the broad network module to develop metric is easier to embed and reveal the most comprehensive
dynamic threshold selection. We first apply the anomaly scores data pattern. In this paper, we focus on the monitoring-metricto calculate the pseudo thresholds. Specifically, the anomaly based anomaly detection algorithm.
bias shrinks the anomaly scores of anomalies as their pseudo
thresholds, while the normal bias amplifies the anomaly scores B. Cloud Anomaly Detection Algorithm
of normal samples to develop the normal-sample thresholds. In the early stage, the cloud operation system primarily
Thus, the violation of the actual label would be minimal. adopts keyword-based [29] and statistics-based [30] anomaly
Then we attain the threshold pattern by feeding the pseudo detection methods. The keyword-based method identifies the
thresholds and initial samples into the broad network. In the anomaly recorded in the log by matching the related words,
online testing stage, this trained broad learning model outputs such as ERROR and FAILURE [31]. The statistics-based
the individual threshold according to the coming sample. A methods focus on several key performance indicators [32].
portion of the network weight is updated while the actual label If their values exceed a certain setting threshold, an alert is
of the testing sample is acquired, which fits the need for the triggered. The keyword-based and statistics-based methods are
new detection setting. only suitable for anomalies with relatively simple patterns.
 The major contributions of our proposed BroadCAE are: With the development of artificial intelligence operations in
 • The BroadCAE innovates anomaly samples into the the cloud, more machine-learning-based anomaly detections
 traditional normal-only encoder-decoder framework,
 which develops both inter-class and intra-class features 1 https://github.com/zhongguoxiang/BroadCAE
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3251

 TABLE I
 T HE C OMPARISON OF R ELATED A LGORITHMS AND O UR B ROAD CAE C. Broad Network
 The broad network [45] is an improved single-layer feedforward neuron model. Without the deep architecture, the
 broad network still has universal approximation properties [46]
 and is much faster with credible classification accuracy. The
 weight in the broad network is solved by the pseudoinverse
 rather than gradient-descent-based methods used in deep
 networks. The generalization ability of the broad network is
 improved through the broad expansion. More broad network
 variants are proposed. For example, fuzzy broad learning
 system [47] introduces the Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy approach
 into the feature node. Stacked broad learning system [48]
 develops the incremental flatted framework to deep network,
 which outperforms the deep residual network in experimental
 comparison. Although the broad network is still in the early
are deployed [31], [33], [34], [35]. They always depend developing stage, some application researches continuously
on the distribution divergence between normal and anomaly model this novel network. The broad network combines the
samples. For instance, the local outliers factor (LOF) [36] graph neural network to achieve the emotion recognition [49].
believes that the distribution density of normal is higher The semi-supervised broad network is built for spammer
than the anomaly sample’s. The one-class support vector detection in social communication networks [50].
machine (OCSVM) [37] considers that all normal samples Unlike the above broad network application, our BroadCAE
are in a hyper-sphere. However, these methods have lim- unifies the deep-network-based autoencoder and broad
ited feature modeling ability and are not robust enough. network for cloud anomaly detection. For the broad network,
As a result, they are even invalidated when the large- we apply the increment of input samples, which is designed
scale samples do not follow the corresponding assumed for self-adaptive ability in the online setting.
distribution.
 At the same time, the cloud architecture is becoming larger.
The coordination between cloud components steadily grows, III. M ETHODOLOGY
leading to more monitoring data. It is difficult for the classic A. Problem Formulation
machine-learning-based method to meet the practical applica-
 Suppose there are several metrics for monitoring cloud
tion requirements. The root cause is their weak modeling of
 components. We attain their labeled history running data as
mining data patterns. The autoencoder (AE) algorithm [38] is
an effective solution that formulates massive historical normal
 D = {(xi , yi )|i = 1, . . . , N },
sample data to obtain deep-level features. More potential
patterns can be employed to identify complex cloud anomalies. xi = [xi1 , xi2 , . . . , xid ]T ∈ Rd ,
Some proposed works improve the vanilla autoencoder, which yi ∈ {+1, −1}, (1)
has obvious advantages in terms of detection efficiency and
accuracy. For instance, Donut [39] formulates the anomalies where xi represents the i-th sample in D and yi is the label
and missing points into the ELBO of variational autoen- of xi . The N is the number of samples in D. The d indicates
coder (VAE) [40], which outperforms the random-forest-based the number of monitoring metrics. The “+1” and “−1” are
Opprentice [41]. As an improved method of Donut, Bagel [20] the label marks of normal and anomaly samples, respectively.
handles the time information based on the conditional VAE The autoencoder-based anomaly detection algorithm regards
(CVAE) [42]. The superiority of Bagel in detection accu- D as the training dataset and formulates the feature repreracy is also significant. Both Donut and Bagel modify the sentation with D. The representation of this anomaly detector
loss function. In addition, other approaches concentrate on contains encoder fe and decoder fd . For the normal sample
developing the network architecture. The VAE-LSTM [43] (xi , yi = +1) ∈ D, the encoder fe transforms xi into latent
introduces long short-term memory (LSTM) into the backbone variable Z.
network of VAE for modeling metric-based time series. The
UASD [21] inherits the encoder-decoder architecture and adds zi = fe (xi ), zi ∈ Z ,
one more decoder as a discriminator for adversarial training. yi = +1, (2)
The Anomaly Transformer [22] and TranAD [23] integrate
the attention mechanism [44], which enjoys long-term series where zi is the latent variable corresponding to xi . Then, the
modeling. decoder fd inversely transforms zi into xi :
 As displayed in Table I, our BroadCAE goes beyond
the previous autoencoder-based algorithm and considers the xi = fd (zi ), xi ∈ Rd , (3)
anomaly sample for formulating more features. It is also the
first time to unify anomaly and normal sample patterns under where xi is the reconstruction of xi . What is more, both fe
the autoencoder representation. and fd are in the form of deep neural networks. We optimize
3252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 2. The overview of BroadCAE. The training-use historical dataset includes the labeled normal and anomaly samples in cloud computing. Our BroadCAE
consists of contrastive-learning-based CAE and broad network-based dynamic threshold selection. The CAE improves the feature representation by adding
anomaly samples. The dynamic threshold selection has the powerful self-adaptive ability for online detection. The update procedure () empowers the
broad network.

the objective representation by minimizing the following if the threshold value is too small, the predicted anomaly
reconstruction loss function Lr : samples may contain more normal ones. The autoencoderbased methods need the self-adaptive threshold selection,
 1 
 N
   
 L = Lr X , X  = x i − x  2 , (4) which offers the dynamic threshold.
 i 2
 N
 i=1

where  · 22 denotes the metric of similarity in Euclidean B. Overview
distance. Because the normal sample is always far from the
 This paper focuses on the above challenge and proposes
anomaly ones, the reconstruction error of the normal sample is
 the BroadCAE that introduces contrastive learning and broad
smaller than the anomaly’s. This divergence in reconstruction
 network. The overview of BroadCAE is shown in Fig. 2.
error is the core of achieving the autoencoder-based anomaly
 The historical running data of normal and anomalous cloud
detector. The reconstruction error is referred to as the anomaly
 components are collected. The data preprocessing includes
score. Given the online testing sample xiu ∈ D u where D u
 padding and normalization, which is omitted in the overview.
represents the online testing dataset, ŷiu is the predicted label
 The contrastive autoencoder (CAE) innovates contrastive
of xiu . The autoencoder-based anomaly detector outputs the
 learning into the autoencoder. The autoencoder reconstruct
predicted label as
  X = [xi ]1×N as X  = [xi ]1×N . The feature representation
 u +1, ASiu ≤ θ; ignores the anomaly samples, which ascribes to the dimension
 ŷi =
 −1, ASiu > θ; reduction transformation in the encoder. For the latent variable
 ASiu = xiu − fd [fe (xiu )]22 , (5) Z = [zi ]1×N , the divergence of normal and anomaly samples
 should be more obvious. Thus, we add the contrastive loss Lc
where θ is a threshold and ASiu is the anomaly score to the latent variable. The contrastive loss uses the constraint
of xiu . about sample label Y = [yi ]1×N and latent variable Z.
 Challenges: (i) Ignoring the historical anomaly samples in The broad network combines dynamic threshold selection,
training the feature representation. From Equation (2), only the which is designed for self-adaptive online detection. The
normal sample is formulated by fe . Actually, anomaly samples combination of anomaly score X − X  22 and sample label
also can enlarge the reconstruction divergence. In detail, Y calculates the pseudo label Θ∗ for threshold selection. The
The inter-class feature between anomaly and normal samples predicted threshold Θu is provided while the online coming
requires that the latent variable of anomaly samples should be sample X u = [xiu ] is fed into the trained broad network.
separated as possible. The intra-class feature from anomaly Furthermore, the relationship between Θu and anomaly score
samples distinguishes the overlapping normal samples, which of X u decides the predicted label Ŷ u = [yiu ]. The broad
enhance the robustness of fe and fd . (ii) Poor self-adaptive network weight can be updated when the actual label Y u of
ability for online detection. In Equation (5), the threshold θ is X u is acquired. It is noteworthy that only the network weights
fixed, which does not enjoy dealing with the online continual related to the online coming samples are retrained. The broad
change samples. A small portion of anomaly samples will be network avoids updating the whole network weights, which is
detected if the threshold value is larger enough. In contrast, a great substitute for the deep network.
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3253

 Fig. 4. Distribution of anomaly score using different loss functions. In
Fig. 3. Potential deployment of BroadCAE in microservice. (a), the majority of anomaly samples are covered by normal samples, which
 indicates that the anomaly-score divergence is too smaller. However, in (b),
 more anomaly samples have larger anomaly scores than normal samples,
 For example, Fig. 3 describes our BroadCAE, which is which contributes to anomaly identification.
deployed into the cloud-based microservice system. The monitoring data of each microservice is collected and delivered to
 margin do not contribute to the contrastive loss. If xi and xj
the database. The detector BroadCAE identifies the anomaly
 are in the same classes, we annotate the pseudo label yij = 0.
data from the database and transmits the alert signal to
 While they belong to different classes, the pseudo label is
operations.
 shown as yij = 1.
 
C. Contrastive Autoencoder  0, yi = yj
 yij = , Y  = yij (8)
 The general autoencoder-based method builds up the rep- 1, yi = yj N ×N .
resentation by training with normal samples. The extracted
 In the first part of Lc , the fr strains every nerve to pull closer
features in the representation can be regarded as intra-class
 points, which are from the same class. The intra-class features
ones of normal samples. The anomaly samples are discovered,
 of normal and anomaly samples are extracted. The second part
which follows the principle “normal is not anomalous”. In
 aims at separating samples into different classes by a large
other words, the normal-sample intra-class features provide the
 margin. This operation enjoys the inter-class features between
manifold of normal. The testing sample far away from this
 normal and anomaly samples.
manifold is not normal. The approaches only model the seen or
 During the training stage, all labeled training samples are
occurred normal samples. However, the novel normal pattern
 fed into fe and fd , which are optimized by contrastive loss
constantly emerges in cloud operation. It is unachievable to
 rather than reconstruction loss.
model all types of normal samples under the evolving cloud.
The representation manifold only the training normal samples, L = Lc (X , Y ). (9)
which will gradually lose efficacy in the future. Besides, in the
cloud environment, the deployed cloud component needs more On the one hand, both contrastive loss and reconstruction loss
preliminary tests. The anomaly events supply more anomaly can formalize the normal-sample intra-class features. In the
samples to optimize the autoencoder. The anomaly-sample meanwhile, beyond the reconstruction loss, the contrastive loss
intra-class features indicate whether the sample is not normal. develops the anomaly-sample intra-class and anomaly-normal
The inter-class features between normal and anomaly samples inter-class features. On the other hand, the latent variable
lead to the margin for dividing the samples. The additional divergence between normal and anomaly samples achieves a
intra-class and inter-class features enhance the representation. more powerful effect than reconstruction divergence, using the
Thus, it is necessary to incorporate anomaly samples into identical decoder. For example, Fig. 4 displays the anomaly
the representation. The CAE in our BroadCAE introduces score of the first SMD subset. The contrastive loss enlarges
contrastive loss for formulating the anomaly samples. The con- the anomaly score of anomaly samples.
trastive loss focuses on the lower-dimensional latent variable,
which is compacted by the encoder fe . Suppose that (xi , yi ) ∈ D. Dynamic Threshold Selection Based on Broad Network
D and (xj , yj ) ∈ D are given, their latent variables are Suppose that G(·) is the dynamic threshold selection in our
   BroadCAE. As for different inputs xiu and xju , their output
 zi = fe (xi ), zj = fe xj . (6)
 thresholds are also different.
The contrastive loss is  
 θiu = G(xiu ), θju = G xju ,
 1    
 N
  2  2 θiu = θju .
 Lc = 1 − y S + y max 0, m − S , (7) (10)
 2N 2 ij ij ij ij
 i,j =1
 For the self-adaptive ability, G(·) should be update to reflect
where Sij = zi − zj 22 is the Euclidean-distance similarity the online coming sample. The classical deep-network-based
between zi and zj . The max(·, ·) returns the largest value. threshold selection algorithm repeats the training procedure
The m > 0 is the classification margin about distance. In our to update the network weights. After several above repliexperiments, m = 2. The pairs of samples far away from this cations, the knowledge about the previous training samples
3254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 5. The overview of broad network. This flattened network has only one input layer and one output layer. There are k feature mapped nodes and r
enhancement nodes in the input layer. The network weight is solved by pseudoinverse. The increment of xiu is in green.

will disappear, which is called as catastrophic forgetting [51]. As for Θ∗ = [θi∗ ]1×N , we can not directly attain from the
The G(·) addresses this problem by incorporating the broad previous problem setting. Instead, we develop the supervised
network, not the deep network. As shown in Fig. 5, the broad pseudo threshold.
network consists of two main components: feature mapped 
node and enhancement node. Given X = [xi ]1×N as the ∗ β+1 · ASi , yi = +1,
 θi =
training sample, the k-th feature mapped node projects X as β−1 · ASi , yi = −1,
  2
   ASi = xi − xi 2 , (17)
 Fk = φ XWfk + βfk , (11)
 where β−1 and β+1 are anomaly bias and normal bias,
where Wfk and βfk are the initial weights and bias of
 respectively.
Fk , respectively. The φ is a mapping function. The F k =
[F1 , . . . , Fk ] denotes all the first k-th feature mapped nodes 0 < β−1 < 1, β+1 ≥ 1. (18)
in the form of concatenation. The output of F k is mapped by
enhancement nodes. The r-th enhancement node is In this solution, it is not hard to show
  
 Hr = ξ F k W h r + βh r , (12) 
 N
 min |yi − yi∗ | = 0,
where Whr and βhr are the initial weights and bias of Hr , i=1
 
respectively. The ξ is a mapping function. The first r-th +1, ASi ≤ θi∗ ,
 s.t. yi∗ = (19)
enhancement nodes are also in the form of concatenation. −1, ASi > θi∗ ,

 H r = [H1 , . . . , Hr ]. (13) where yi∗ is the label of xi provided by pseudo threshold.
 Thus, the generative pseudo threshold is practicable.
The broad network has k feature mapped nodes and r enhance- After finishing the training of broad network, the dynamic
ment nodes, which is formulated as threshold selection G(·) will enter the online detection to
 identify the presented anomaly. Given the online coming
 Θ∗ = [F1 , . . . , Fk | H1 , . . . , Hr ]W
 sample xiu ∈ D u , the G(·) follows
 = Fk | Hr W , (14)
 θiu = G(xiu ),
 
where Θ∗ = [θi∗ ]1×N is the threshold training label of X in u +1, ASiu ≤ θiu ,
 ŷi =
G(·). The W is the network weight for the broad network. −1, ASiu > θiu .
Different from the deep network, the broad network attains the (20)
optimal W through Moore-Penrose generalized inverse theory.
 + while the predicted label ŷiu is equal to the actual label yiu ,
 k r ∗
 W = F |H Θ , (15) the accurate prediction offer the correct sample pattern. The
 broad network in G(·) can be updated. The increments of the
where [F k | H r ]+ denotes the pseudoinverse of [F k | H r ]. feature mapping node and enhancement node are
Suppose that Ark = [F k | H r ], we have  
 F̂k = φ xiu Wfk + βfk ,
  −1  
 (Ark )+ = lim λI + AAT AT . (16) Ĥr = ξ F̂ k Whr + βhr , (21)
 λ→0
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3255

Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm of BroadCAE Algorithm 2 Testing Algorithm of BroadCAE
Input: Encoder fe ; Decoder fd ; Training sample X; Training Input: Optimized encoder fe , Optimized decoder fd ; Broad
 label Y; Number of feature mapped node k; Number of network weight W and pseudoinverse (Ark )+ ; Random
 enhancement node r; Random mapping φ and ξ; Iteration mapping φ and ξ; Testing sample X u .
 limitation Ne . Output: Predicted label Ŷ u .
Output: Optimized encoder fe ; Optimized decoder fd ; Broad 1: Reconstruct X u through fe and fd ;
 network weight W; Network pseudoinverse (Ark )+ . 2: Compute the anomaly score of X u ;
 1: Initialize the network weights of fe and fd ; 3: Calculate the threshold of X u ;
 2: Initialize the weights and biases of φ and ξ; 4: Attain the predicted label Y u
 3: n ← 1; 5: while Ŷ u = Y u do
 4: repeat 6: Update pseudoinverse (Ark )+ as (Ârk )+ ;
 5: Feed X into fe and fd ; 7: Update network weight W as Ŵ ;
 6: Calculate the contrastive loss Lc ; 8: end while
 7: Optimize fe and fd with loss function L = Lc (X , Y );
 8: n ← n+1; TABLE II
 9: until (n = Ne ). T HE C HARACTERISTICS OF F OUR E XPERIMENTAL DATASETS
10: Generate the pseudo threshold Θ∗ ;
11: Fed X into feature mapped node Fk ;
12: Project F k = [F1 , . . . , Fk ] by enhancement node Hr ;
13: Deduce the pseudoinverse (Ark )+ and network weight W.

where F̂ k = [F̂1 , . . . , F̂k ] are the first k-th incremental O(N 2 ). The dynamic threshold selection is between Line 10
mapping features of xiu . The Ark in the initial network is and Line 13. The dot-product for computing the pseudoinverse
transformed as makes the time complexity of dynamic threshold selection
 Ark O(N 2 ). Thus, our BroadCAE achieves the quadratic time
 Ârk = , (22)
 ÂT complexity. In Algorithm 2, our goal is to predict the label of
 X u . Besides, the threshold selection adapts to the new coming
where ÂT = [F̂ k |Ĥ r ] and Ĥ r = [Ĥ1 , . . . , Ĥr ]. The update samples by updating the network weight and pseudoinverse,
pseudoinverse is which is presented from Line 5 to Line 8.
  +
 Ârk = (Ark )+ − B D T |B , (23)
 IV. E XPERIMENT
where D T = ÂT (Ark )+ , We first introduce the experimental setting, including
 + datasets, performance metrics, and experimental details. Then,
 (C ) , C = 0,
 BT =  −1   (24) the following research questions (RQ) about validating our
 +
 1+D D
 T Ak D , C = 0,
 r
 BroadCAE are answered by a series of experiments. Their
 experimental results and analysis are displayed.
and C = ÂT − D T Ark . The updated network weight is RQ1: How about the overall performance of BroadCAE
  
 in cloud anomaly detection?
 Ŵ = W + θiu∗ − ÂT W B, (25)
 RQ2: How about the impact of parameters in BroadCAE?
where θiu∗ is the pseudo threshold of xiu . From the RQ3: How about the effectiveness of each component in
Equation (25), we can apply the initial network weight W and BroadCAE?
initial pseudoinverse Ark to calculate the Ŵ . The previous
knowledge about W and Ark in the initial network are retained, A. Datasets
which avoids catastrophic forgetting. In the meanwhile, the
 We conduct the experiments on four benchmark datasets,
new pattern about the new xiu is described by ÂT , which
 including MBD [52], EMOS, SMD [53], and ASD [54]. These
adapts quickly to the new developing environment.
 datasets are collected from different cloud environments. The
 first dataset is from a Hadoop-based distributed cluster. The
E. Implementation second one is related to a benchmark microservice-based
 The implementation of our BroadCAE is composed of system.2 The last two datasets correlate with the server in the
training (Algorithm 1) and testing (Algorithm 2) blocks. All cloud. The characteristics of these datasets are in Table II.
of the input of these two Algorithms can be directly calculated The MBD reflects the running behavior of five cluster
in the neural network. In Algorithm 1, we consider the feature nodes, which process the big data batch. To imitate the
representation of CAE from Line 3 to Line 9. There are actual setting, the researchers randomly upload the large-scale
N 2 pairs training samples. The quadratic computation about
similarity in Lc causes the time complexity of CAE to be 2 https://github.com/FudanSELab/train-ticket
3256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE III
workload using HiBench.3 The faults of the CPU, network, T HE C HARACTERIZATIONS OF E XPERIMENTAL C OMPUTER S ERVER
and application are randomly injected into the file system.
There are 26 monitoring metrics for each node, including CPU,
disk, memory, network, and process.
 The EMOS presents the status of 41 microservices, which
service the train ticket booking application.4 The faults are
injected by Chaosblade5 and iPerf.6 These faults include CPU
hog, memory hog, disk input, disk output, DDOS delay, and
packet loss. We monitor four representative metrics, including
CPU usage, RAM usage, Net out, and Net in. All faults and with 10−3 initial learning rate and step-scheduler with step
metrics are used in some published works [5], [52]. For the size of 0.5. We run 100 epochs, where the size of the batch is
purpose of research, we encourage anyone to use this dataset. 256. The other hyper-parameters of our BroadCAE are listed
More details are provided here.7 in the following.
 The SMD is provided by a commercial computing cluster, • Number of feature mapped nodes k = 35.
which includes 28 machines. During the 5-week-long period, • Number of enhancement nodes r = 500.
the collected data consists of two subset components. The first • Anomaly bias β−1 = 0.01.
half is used for training, and the remaining half is regarded as a • Normal bias β+1 = 2.
testing subset. However, only the testing subset provides both For four datasets, we randomly split all samples into training
the label and the dimensions of the anomaly. For performance and testing subsets with a ratio of 5:5. Then, we follow the
evaluation, we adopt the testing subset in our experiments. above-mentioned parameters and repeat the identical proce-
 The ASD describes the status of 12 servers in a large dure for one hundred independent runs. The mean of these
Internet company. To avoid the concept drifts, the stable replications can be regarded as the final experimental results.
workloads run on each server during a 45-days-long period. The comparative baselines also follow the same operations.
We also utilize the testing subset of ASD. However, the ASD Some comparative anomaly detection methods only output the
contains fewer metrics, which differs from the SMD. The anomaly score of the testing sample. The threshold selection
monitoring metrics are related to CPU, memory, network, and is absent. We plot the ROC curve [58] and search for the best
virtual machine. detection result.
 The BroadCAE and other comparative anomaly detection
B. Performance Metrics algorithms are tested in the server computer, which equips with
 In general, recall (R), precision (P), and f1-score (F1) are one NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080. More details of experiment
used to evaluate anomaly detection algorithm performance. equipment are shown in Table III.
The R focuses on presenting the accuracy of identifying
the goal samples. The P considers that the presented goal D. Research Questions
samples are detected as more as possible. The F1 is introduced
to keep the balance between R and P. However, for more We conduct the experiments about three research questions.
comprehensive evaluation [21], [53], we import the macro R The experimental results and analysis should validate the
(R̄), macro P (P̄ ), and macro F1 (F¯1) in this paper. effectiveness of BroadCAE.
 RQ1: How about the overall performance of
 1 1 BroadCAE in cloud anomaly detection?
 R̄ = R, P̄ = P,
 2 2 The RQ1 is designed to demonstrate whether BroadCAE
 2 · R̄ · P̄
 F¯1 = . (26) can outperform the state-of-the-art baseline approaches in
 R̄ + P̄ cloud anomaly detection. There are 12 comparative algorithms
 used in this experiment. Among them, the LOF, OCSVM,
C. Experimental Details and iForest are proposed in the earlier period. With the rapid
 The BroadCAE is implemented in a Python program. development of deep learning, autoencoder-based methods are
Both encoder fe and decoder fd with deep architectures more and more applied because of their strong generalization.
are employed through the Pytorch package. The fe contains The AE, VAE, and CVAE are the baseline algorithms. The
a 4-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP), the size of output Bagel are adapted from CVAE. The USAD and SaVAE-SR
features of which are d → 1024 → 512 → 256. The ReLU [55] innovate the training style, which is inspired by the adversarial
and batch normalization [56] are added into each layer. The learning theory of GAN [62]. Both TranAD and Anomaly
fd is made up of a 3-layer MLP (256 → 128 → d ) with batch Transformer are developed from the improved autoencodernormalization. The ReLU is also added into the first layer of based architecture Transformer [44]. The CAE-M utilizes the
fd . The fe and fd are optimized by the ADAM optimizer [57] autoencoder-based architecture to mine the semantics features.
 3 https://github.com/Intel-bigdata/HiBench
 These comparative algorithms are introduced as follows:
 4 https://github.com/FudanSELab/train-ticket • LOF [36]: The local reachability density (LRD) about
 5 https://github.com/chaosblade-io/chaosblade nearest neighbor samples is first released to measure the
 6 https://iperf.fr/ anomaly degree. The higher values of LDR, the less
 7 https://github.com/zhongguoxiang/BroadCAE anomalous the sample is.
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3257

 TABLE IV
 T HE OVERALL P ERFORMANCE R ESULTS FOR O UR B ROAD CAE AND OTHER C OMPARATIVE M ETHODS IN F OUR B ENCHMARK DATASETS

 • OCSVM [59]: The hyper-sphere is optimized in the time-dependency relationship. Both the self-condition
 training dataset. The testing sample outside of the hyper- approach and adversarial learning stabilize the training
 sphere is anomalous. procedure.
 • iForest [60]: From its authors’ view, the anomaly is easier • Anomaly Transformer [22]: The Transformer architecture
 to be isolated. The iForest adopts isolation instead of is improved by developing a new anomaly-attention
 distance and density to identify anomaly samples. mechanism. The association discrepancy and minimax
 • AE [38]: Both the encoder and the decoder with a strategy enlarge the divergence between normal and
 deep network rebuild the samples. The back-propagation anomaly samples.
 algorithm with reconstruction loss optimizes the network • CAE-M [61]: The deep convolutional characterization
 weight. The reconstruction error presents the anomaly network is employed as a feature extractor. The attentionscore. based bidirectional LSTM and auto-regression provide
 • VAE [40]: Based on AE, the latent variable is described the final predicted result.
 in the form of Gaussian distribution. The reconstruction Table IV presents the overall performance results of our
 probability of KL divergence is added into the ELBO loss BroadCAE and 12 baseline algorithms in four benchfunction and further indicates how anomalous the testing mark datasets. The superiority of our BroadCAE can be
 sample is. observed, compared with other baseline comparative algo-
 • CVAE [42]: Being distinguished from AE and VAE, rithms. Especially our BroadCAE gets the highest score of F¯1
 CVAE formulates the model about the relationship and R̄ in all four datasets. However, the lower P̄ is recorded in
 between the input latent variable, input sample, and its the MBD (84.44%), SMD (94.90%), and ASD (74.46%). The
 label. In fact, the CVAE is one of the semi-supervised imbalance between anomaly and normal samples results in this
 encoder-decoder-based methods. situation. The proportion of correct identification of normal
 • Bagel [20]: Compared to Dount [39], Bagel includes time samples is larger than that of abnormal samples. The confusion
 information into CVAE and enhances the robustness in matrices of our BroadCAE detection results are displayed
 detecting the time-related anomaly. in Fig. 6, which provides more details. As for EMOS, our
 • USAD [21]: In the encoder-decoder architecture, it BroadCAE achieves the best P̄ (91.76%), which ascribes to
 imports the adversarial training by adding a decoder the less false negative samples.
 block. At the same time, it also avoids collapse and non- In the next step, we further discuss comparative anomaly
 convergence phenomena. detection algorithms. It is noteworthy that the deep encoder-
 • SaVAE-SR [14]: It draws its strength from combining decoder-based methods always outperform the traditional
 spectral residual technique and self-adversarial training machine-learning-based anomaly detection algorithms. For
 manner, which still follow the framework of VAE. example, Bagel attains the best P̄ in MBD (93.25%), SMD
 • TranAD [23]: The Transformer [44] is introduced. (96.16%), and ASD (83.62%), although the quantity of pre-
 The vanilla attention mechanism is designed for dicted anomaly samples is smaller. The CAE-M and Anomaly
3258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 performance metric, area under the ROC curve (AUC), to
 evaluate the impact of the latent variable dimensions. Fig. 8
 presents the experiment results of all the experimental datasets,
 which are achieved by different dimensions. We start from
 32 dimensions, keeping the interval of 32 and up to 320
 dimensions. As we increase the dimensions, the performance
 of BroadCAE does not improve by a larger margin. For
 example, the detection results about four evaluation metrics
 become poorer in MBD. As for SMD, the value of F¯1, R̄,
 and AUC are relatively steady. It is noteworthy that the AUC
 of MBD, EMOS, and ASD have dropped. However, the F¯1 of
 EMOS and ASD do not descend, which ascribes to dynamic
 threshold selection.
 The remaining parameters come from the dynamic threshold
 selection, of which the first two are related to broad network
 learning, and the others form the supervised pseudo threshold.
 Because the AUC is always considered for feature representation, we only use F¯1, R̄, and P̄ as performance metrics to
 evaluate the impact of these parameters.
 In Fig. 9, the impact of different numbers of feature mapped
 nodes is shown. We select up to 50 feature mapped nodes in
 each experiment, starting from only 5. The F¯1 about ASD
Fig. 6. Confusion matrices on four datasets. The normal and anomaly samples
belong to the positive and negative classes, respectively. A majority of normal
and anomaly samples are well identified, which results in the higher F¯1. achieves the maximum values and stops rising. As for MBD,
 the F¯1 also improves with the increase of feature mapped
 nodes. The P̄ of these two datasets keep the same pace as
Transformer acquire the second-best F¯1 and R̄ in SMD and well. In the view of R̄, the improvement is weak, although
ASD, respectively. For the EMOS, USAD attains the second- more feature mapped nodes are added. In other words, more
best F¯1 (84.06%) and P̄ (84.77%), which SaVAE-SR get the network parameters can not bring more powerful detection
second-best R̄ (84.94%). results. Considering the experiment setting, we recommend
 To illustrate the efficiency, we select six competitive that the number of feature mapped nodes is between 25
algorithms in detection accuracy, including Bagel, USAD, and 35.
SaVAE-SR, TranAD, Anomaly Transformer, and CAE-M. In Fig. 10, we pay attention to the influence of enhancement
The averaged training time, averaged testing time, and aver- nodes. The number of enhancement nodes is between 100 and
aged memory used by these algorithms are regarded as 1000 with an interval of 100. For the F¯1, the SMD presents
baseline results. As we know from Fig. 7, our BroadCAE a growing tendency from 100 to 300. The improvement of P̄
does not outperform the baseline about efficiency. Although in the SMD occurs again. For the R̄, the MBD also keeps an
the training procedure of BroadCAE takes less time, upward trend. However, the P̄ about MMS is in fluctuation.
BroadCAE needs more testing time and memory in SMD Besides, the EMOS in P̄ reaches the peak and then begins to
and ASD. This ascribes to the broad network-based threshold drop in the next stage. We deem the increasing feature mapped
selection. node is not good at broad network generalization for learning
 RQ2: How about the impact of parameters in threshold patterns. The overfitting still exists. Considering the
 BroadCAE? actual setting, we recommend that the number of enhancement
 The parameter always has an impact on BroadCAE’s nodes should be under 500.
performance. The following parameters are discussed for In Fig. 11, we analyze the effect of different anomaly
answering this RQ. biases. Before the anomaly bias is 0.2, all of the datasets
 • Dimension of latent variable. reach their peak of F¯1. After that, the ASD decreases. In
 • Number of feature mapped nodes. the meanwhile, MBD, EMOS, and SMD are still at the top.
 • Number of enhancement nodes. With the decreasing of anomaly bias, the increase of R̄ in four
 • Anomaly bias. benchmark datasets is in the range of 2% to 8%. Inversely, the
 • Normal bias. P̄ is down by about averaged 3% with the smaller anomaly
 We follow the advantage of the encoder-decoder architecture bias. The anomaly bias should be between 0.01 and 0.1.
to develop BroadCAE. The dimension of the latent variable Fig. 12 displays how the normal bias impacts the
is involved with the feature extractor. If the dimension is performance of BroadCAE. The value of normal bias starts
larger enough, information is abundant, and parameter tuning from 1.2 and is up to 3 with an interval of 0.2. For the
becomes time-consuming. In contrast, if it is in a lower- F¯1, MBD, SMD, and ASD present a growing tendency. The
dimensional space, limited features will be modeled, and EMOS achieves a peak and then decreases. The EMOS, MBD,
encoder representation may be invalidated. We apply one more and ASD are at the peak of R̄ while the normal bias is 1.4.
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3259

Fig. 7. Training time, testing time, and memory consumption of BroadCAE and baseline algorithm.

 TABLE V
 T HE E FFECTIVENESS OF DYNAMIC T HRESHOLD S ELECTION

Fig. 8. Impact of latent variable dimension. red “Lc ” indicate the reconstruction loss and contrastive
 loss, respectively. For F¯1, P̄ , and AUC, the “Lc ” outperforms the “Lr ” and “L”. However, the R̄ of “Lc ” in
After the best normal bias, they fall sharply, which leads to MBD does not attain the improvement. The reason for this
the decrease of EMOS’s F¯1. Similar to the F¯1, P̄ keeps an phenomena is that broad-learning-based threshold selection
upward trend with the larger normal bias. We suggest that the can cover the shortcoming of feature representation. Besides,
normal bias is between 1.8 and 2.8. in some benchmark datasets, the result of “L” is improved
 RQ3: How about the effectiveness of each component by a margin, which illustrates that the inter-class feature is
 in BroadCAE? effective.
 Our design of BroadCAE is to optimize the feature rep- 2) Effect of dynamic threshold selection. This part is
resentation and add the dynamic threshold selection. The directly related to the identification of anomalies. The F¯1,
reconstruction loss Lr is replaced by contrastive loss Lc , R̄, P̄ are used. In addition, we adopt detection accuracy
which extracts both intra-class and inter-class features in (Acc), a performance metric about the ground truth of normal
representation. The dynamic threshold selection generates the and anomaly samples in testing data. Table V displays the
different thresholds for different testing samples, instead of experiment results. The “Dynamic” is the dynamic threshold
the fixed value. To analyze the effect of the above-mentioned selection in our BraodCAE. The “Fixed A” denotes the
components, we conduct ablation experiments. threshold that comes from the best result in the ROC curve.
 1) Effect of contrastive loss. The experimental results The “Fixed B” denotes the 3-sigma criterion. Compared to
are displayed in Fig. 13. The F¯1, R̄, P̄ , and AUC are the " Fixed A” and “Fixed B”, the new “Dynamic” sees the
referred to as performance metrics. The brown “L” denotes maximum 10.01% jump in F¯1 and the maximum 3.07% leap
the combination of “Lr ” and “Lc ”. The green “Lr ” and in Acc. Form this reference’s view [46], broad learning is more
3260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 9. Impact of the number of feature mapped nodes.

Fig. 10. Impact of the number of enhancement nodes.

Fig. 11. Impact of anomaly bias.

Fig. 12. Impact of normal bias.

suitable to the online setting. In addition, we do not need to recommend broad-learning-based dynamic threshold selection.
consider the selection and combination of deep network blocs In addition, for ASD, the “Dynamic” only acquires the 0.37%
while adopting broad learning. This is the reason why we improvement of F¯1.
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3261

 [7] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A multi-stage automated online network
 data stream analytics framework for IIoT systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2107–2116, Feb. 2023.
 [8] G. Zhong, F. Liu, J. Jiang, and C. L. P. Chen, “CauseFormer:
 Interpretable anomaly detection with stepwise attention for cloud service,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., early access, Jul. 31, 2023,
 doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3299846.
 [9] Z. Zou, Y. Xie, K. Huang, G. Xu, D. Feng, and D. Long, “A docker
 container tnsm-zhong-3353772 isolation forest,” IEEE Trans. Cloud
 Comput., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 134–145, Jan.–Mar. 2022.
 [10] Y. Song, R. Xin, P. Chen, R. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Zhao, “Identifying
 performance anomalies in fluctuating cloud environments: A robust
 correlative-GNN-based explainable approach,” Future Gener. Comput.
 Syst., vol. 145, pp. 77–86, Aug. 2023.
 [11] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
 analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
 Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2023.
 [12] Y. Chen et al., “Outage prediction and diagnosis for cloud service
 systems,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2019, pp. 2659–2665.
 [13] G. Fan, L. Chen, H. Yu, and D. Liu, “Modeling and analyzing dynamic
 fault-tolerant strategy for deadline constrained task scheduling in cloud
 computing,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 50, no. 4,
Fig. 13. Effectiveness of contrastive loss.
 pp. 1260–1274, Apr. 2020.
 [14] Y. Liu, Y. Lin, Q. Xiao, G. Hu, and J. Wang, “Self-adversarial variational
 autoencoder with spectral residual for time series anomaly detection,”
 V. C ONCLUSION Neurocomputing, vol. 458, pp. 349–363, Oct. 2021.
 [15] M. S. Islam, W. Pourmajidi, L. Zhang, J. Steinbacher, T. Erwin, and
 In this paper, we propose the cloud anomaly detector, A. Miranskyy, “Anomaly detection in a large-scale cloud platform,” in
BroadCAE, which incorporates contrastive learning and broad Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Pract. (ICSE-SEIP), 2021,
 pp. 150–159.
network under the autoencoder framework. The contrastive [16] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time
loss enriches the representation by extracting additional series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,”
intra-class and inter-class features. The cloud anomaly and IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191,
 Mar. 2021.
normal sample are equally exploited. The broad network-based [17] A. Garg, W. Zhang, J. Samaran, R. Savitha, and C.-S. Foo, “An evaldynamic threshold selection aims at the changing cloud envi- uation of anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series,”
ronment. The learned threshold pattern provides the dynamic IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2508–2517,
 Jun. 2022.
threshold, instead of the fixed one. The experimental results
 [18] T. Zhao, T. Jiang, N. Shah, and M. Jiang, “A synergistic approach
in four datasets illustrate that our BroadCAE outperforms for graph anomaly detection with pattern mining and feature learning,”
the comparative method, and the improved components of IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2393–2405,
BroadCAE are practical. Jun. 2022.
 [19] G. Zhong, F. Liu, J. Jiang, B. Wang, and C. L. P. Chen, “Refining one-
 For cloud operation, the accuracy of the anomaly detector is class representation: A unified transformer for unsupervised time-series
essential to address the fault. The BroadCAE can be regarded anomaly detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 656, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 119914.
as one of the state-of-the-art methods. In future works, we will [20] Z. Li, W. Chen, and D. Pei, “Robust and unsupervised KPI anomaly
 detection based on conditional variational autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE
explore the following research points for application-driven 37th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf. (IPCCC), 2018, pp. 1–9.
anomaly detection: [21] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 1) the classification of anomaly or system fault, “USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2020,
 2) the location and cause root of anomaly or system fault. pp. 3395–3404.
 [22] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int.
 R EFERENCES Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022, pp. 1–20.
 [1] H. Jayathilaka, C. Krintz, and R. Wolski, “Detecting performance [23] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 anomalies in cloud platform applications,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 764–777, Jul.–Sep. 2020. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022.
 [2] D. Saxena, I. Gupta, A. K. Singh, and C.-N. Lee, “A fault tolerant [24] Q. Lin et al., “EDITS: An easy-to-difficult training strategy for cloud
 elastic resource management framework toward high availability of failure prediction,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 371–375.
 cloud services,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 3, [25] B. Li, D. Yu, J. Wu, P. Ju, and Z. Li, “Coordinated cloud-edge
 pp. 3048–3061, Sep. 2022. anomaly identification for active distribution networks,” IEEE Trans.
 [3] M. Soualhia, F. Khomh, and S. Tahar, “A dynamic and failure-aware Cloud Comput., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1204–1216, Apr.–Jun. 2023.
 task scheduling framework for Hadoop,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., [26] F. Schmidt et al., “IFTM-unsupervised anomaly detection for virtualized
 vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 553–569, Apr.–Jun. 2020. network function services,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services
 [4] M. Zoure, T. Ahmed, and L. Réveillère, “Network services anomalies in (ICWS), 2018, pp. 187–194.
 NFV: Survey, taxonomy, and verification methods,” IEEE Trans. Netw. [27] L. Yang et al., “Multi-perspective content delivery networks security
 Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1567–1584, Jun. 2022. framework using optimized unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE
 [5] T. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Xu, and Z. Gu, “Workflow-aware automatic Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 686–705, Mar. 2022.
 fault diagnosis for microservice-based applications with statistics,” IEEE [28] M. A. Mukwevho and T. Celik, “Toward a smart cloud: A review
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2350–2363, Dec. 2020. of fault-tolerance methods in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Services
 [6] S. Kardani-Moghaddam, R. Buyya, and K. Ramamohanarao, “ADRL: Comput., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 589–605, Mar./Apr. 2021.
 A hybrid anomaly-aware deep reinforcement learning-based resource [29] S. He, J. Zhu, P. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience report: System log
 scaling in clouds,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, analysis for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 27th IEEE Int. Symp. Softw.
 pp. 514–526, Mar. 2021. Rel. Eng., 2016, pp. 207–218.
3262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

[30] M. Smara, M. Aliouat, A.-S. K. Pathan, and Z. Aliouat, “Acceptance test [54] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and
 for fault detection in component-based cloud computing and systems,” interpretation using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,”
 Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 70, pp. 74–93, May 2017. in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2021,
[31] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering pp. 3220–3230.
 based problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. [55] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
 IEEE/ACM 38st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Companion (ICSE-Companion), Boltzmann machines,” in Proc. 27rd Int. Conf. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 2016, pp. 102–111. 2010, pp. 807–814.
[32] N. Zhao, J. Zhu, R. Liu, D. Liu, M. Zhang, and D. Pei, “Label-less: [56] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
 A semi-automatic labelling tool for KPI anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. 32rd Int.
 INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1882–1890. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[33] T. Huang et al., “An LOF-based adaptive anomaly detection scheme for [57] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “ADAM: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 cloud computing,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf. in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2015, pp. 1–15.
 Workshops (COMPSAC), 2013, pp. 206–211. [58] J. Davis and M. Goadrich, “The relationship between precision-recall
[34] J. Álvarez Cid-Fuentes, C. Szabo, and K. Falkner, “Adaptive and ROC curves,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2006,
 performance anomaly detection in distributed systems using online pp. 233–240.
 SVMs,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 17, no. 5, [59] M. Amer, M. Goldstein, and S. Abdennadher, “Enhancing one-class
 pp. 928–941, Sep./Oct. 2020. support vector machines for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc.
[35] N. Zhao et al., “Understanding and handling alert storm for online ACM SIGKDD Workshop Outl. Detec. Descr., 2013, pp. 8–15.
 service systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 42st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Softw. [60] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
 Eng. Pract. (ICSE-SEIP), 2020, pp. 162–171. detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39,
 2012.
[36] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF:
 [61] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 Identifying density-based local outliers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Manag. Data
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 (SIG-MOD), 2000, pp. 93–104.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
[37] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. [62] I. J. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv.
 Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
[38] S. Hawkins, H. He, G. Williams, and R. Baxter, “Outlier detection using
 replicator neural networks,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Data Ware. Knowl.
 Discov., 2002, pp. 170–180.
[39] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoencoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
 Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[40] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
 Guoxiang Zhong received the M.S. degree from the
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2014, pp. 1–14.
 Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou,
[41] D. Liu et al., “Opprentice: Towards practical and automatic anomaly
 China, in 2020. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 detection through machine learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Meas. Conf.,
 degree with the School of Computer Science and
 2015, pp. 211–224.
 Engineering, South China University of Technology,
[42] K. Sohn, H. Lee, and X. Yan, “Learning structured output representation Guangzhou. His research interests include cloud
 using deep conditional generative models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. computing and data mining.
 Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 3483–3491.
[43] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
 “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,” in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal, 2020, pp. 4322–4326.
[44] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Adv. Neural
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[45] C. L. P. Chen and Z. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective
 and efficient incremental learning system without the need for deep
 architecture,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1,
 pp. 10–24, Jan. 2018.
 Fagui Liu (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
[46] C. L. P. Chen, Z. Liu, and F. Shuang, “Universal approximation capabil- degree from Beihang University in 1991, and the
 ity of broad learning system and its structural variations,” IEEE Trans. Ph.D. degree from the South China University of
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 1191–1204, Apr. 2019. Technology, China, in 2006, where she is cur-
[47] S. Feng and C. L. P. Chen, “Fuzzy broad learning system: A novel neuro- rently a Professor with the School of Computer
 fuzzy model for regression and classification,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., Science and Engineering, South China University of
 vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 414–424, Feb. 2020. Technology. She is also with the Department of New
[48] Z. Liu, C. L. P. Chen, S. Feng, Q. Feng, and T. Zhang, “Stacked broad Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen. Her
 learning system: From incremental flatted structure to deep model,” current research interests include service computing,
 IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 209–222, Internet of Things, cloud computing, and big data.
 Jan. 2021.
[49] T. Song, W. Zheng, P. Song, and Z. Cui, “EEG emotion recognition using
 dynamical graph convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Affect.
 Comput., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 532–541, Jul.–Sep. 2020.
[50] T. Qiu, X. Liu, X. Zhou, W. Qu, Z. Ning, and C. L. P. Chen,
 “An adaptive social spammer detection model with semi-supervised
 broad learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 10,
 pp. 4622–4635, Oct. 2022. Jun Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[51] F. Zhou and C. Cao, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in graph neural degree in computer science and technology from the
 networks with experience replay,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
 2021, pp. 4714–4722. China, in 2022. He was a visiting student with Peng
[52] Z. He et al., “A spatiotemporal deep learning approach for unsupervised Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, in 2023. He is
 anomaly detection in cloud systems,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. currently a Lecturer with the College of Information
 Syst., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1705–1719, Apr. 2023. Science and Technology and the College of Artificial
[53] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Intelligence, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing,
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural China. His research interests include data stream
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data classification, anomaly detection, cloud computing,
 Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837. and Internet of Things.
ZHONG et al.: DETECTING CLOUD ANOMALY VIA BROAD NETWORK-BASED CONTRASTIVE AUTOENCODER 3263

 Bin Wang received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from C. L. Philip Chen (Fellow, IEEE) is the Chair
 the South China University of Technology in 2014 Professor and the Dean of the College of Computer
 and 2021, respectively. He is currently a Research Science and Engineering, South China University
 Scientist with the Department of New Networks, of Technology, Guangzhou, China. Been a Program
 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research Evaluator of the Accreditation Board of Engineering
 interests include cloud computing, edge computing, and Technology Education, USA, for computer
 and energy efficiency. engineering, electrical engineering, and software
 engineering programs, he successfully architects the
 University of Macau’s Engineering and Computer
 Science programs receiving accreditations from
 Washington/Seoul Accord through the Hong Kong
 Institute of Engineers, of which is considered as his utmost contribution in
 engineering/computer science education for Macau as the Former Dean of
 the Faculty of Science and Technology. His current research interests include
 cybernetics, computational intelligence, and systems.
 Dr. Chen received the IEEE Norbert Wiener Award in 2018 for his
 contribution in systems and cybernetics, and machine learnings and the
 IEEE Joseph Wohl Award in 2021. He received two times Best Transactions
 Paper Award from IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND
 L EARNING S YSTEMS for his papers in 2014 and 2018. He was a recipient of
 the 2016 Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineers Award from his alma
 mater, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 1988, after he graduated from the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor, MI, USA,
 in 1985. He is a Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics from 2018
 to 2021. He is a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement
 of Science, the International Association for Pattern Recognition, the Chinese
 Association of Automation, and HKIE, and a member of the Academia
 Europaea and the European Academy of Sciences and Arts. He was the
 Xi Yao received the B.S. degree from the South Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS from 2020
 China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, to 2021 after he completed his term as the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE
 in 2023. She will pursue the Ph.D. degree with T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS from
 the School of Computer Science and Engineering, 2014 to 2019, followed by serving as the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
 South China University of Technology. Her research Society President from 2012 to 2013. He is currently serving as the Deputy
 interests include anomaly detection and cloud Director for CAAI Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, an Associate
 computing. Editor for the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON A RTIFICIAL I NTELLIGENCE, IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON S YSTEMS , M AN , AND C YBERNETICS : S YSTEMS, IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YSTEMS, and China Sciences: Information
 Sciences.