1166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 Detecting Intentional AIS Shutdown in Open
 Sea Maritime Surveillance Using
 Self-Supervised Deep Learning
 Pierre Bernabé , Arnaud Gotlieb, Bruno Legeard, Dusica Marijan ,
 Frank Olaf Sem-Jacobsen, and Helge Spieker

 Abstract— In maritime traffic surveillance, detecting illegal rescue missions at sea, or more generally, regulating the
activities, such as illegal fishing or transshipment of illicit maritime traffic. In addition, modern VTS systems also support
products is a crucial task of the coastal administration. In the the detection of illegal activities such as piracy, fishing in
open sea, one has to rely on Automatic Identification System
(AIS) message transmitted by on-board transponders, which are protected zones, intrusion into economic exclusion zones,
captured by surveillance satellites. However, insincere vessels transshipment of narcotics, degassing at sea, etc. Most of the
often intentionally shut down their AIS transponders to hide time, the detection of these illegal activities rely solely on
illegal activities. In the open sea, it is very challenging to the visual observation of vessels, manual analysis of collected
differentiate intentional AIS shutdowns from missing reception data, and coastal administration officers’ intuition based on
due to protocol limitations, bad weather conditions or restricting
satellite positions. This paper presents a novel approach for their long-term experience [1].
the detection of abnormal AIS missing reception based on Among the sources of maritime surveillance information,
self-supervised deep learning techniques and transformer models. Automatic Identification System (AIS) messages play an
Using historical data, the trained model predicts if a message essential role. At sea, passenger ships or ships of sufficient
should be received in the upcoming minute or not. Afterwards, tonnage must transmit their identity, their position, their directhe model reports on detected anomalies by comparing the
prediction with what actually happens. Our method can process tion and speed, and additional information up to every two
AIS messages in real-time, in particular, more than 500 Millions seconds [2]. These messages are captured by various means,
AIS messages per month, corresponding to the trajectories of such as beacons at sea, coastal base stations, and satellites
more than 60 000 ships. The method is evaluated on 1-year dedicated to observing maritime traffic. However, it happens
of real-world data coming from four Norwegian surveillance that the transmission of AIS messages is absent for some
satellites. Using related research results, we validated our method
by rediscovering already detected intentional AIS shutdowns. vessels. It can be due to a failure of the AIS transponder,
 but it may also correspond to its intentional shutdown.
 Index Terms— Automatic identification systems (AISs), mar-
 Actually, shutting down the AIS transmission is a
itime surveillance, self-supervised machine learning, transformer
models, AIS shutdown, anomaly detection. simple action used by (a few) vessel captains to silently
 perform illegal actions at sea. For example, in order to
 fish in a prohibited area located in the open sea, a vessel
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 can stay invisible by intentionally shutting down the AIS

V ESSEL Traffic Service (VTS) aims at monitoring and
 controlling the activities of vessels in dedicated maritime
areas. The general objectives of VTS include identifying and
 transponder [3] during fishing. For instance, Oceana [4] reports
 that, from 2018 to 2021, it’s no less than 600 000 hours by
 800 fishing ships that occurred in an illegal fishing zone close
guiding ships, helping vessels to prevent collisions, launching to the Argentina’s national waters by using this technique.
 Manuscript received 15 September 2021; revised 22 February 2022, Noticeably, Agnew et al. [5] estimate that a total loss between
28 June 2022, 6 November 2022, and 25 February 2023; accepted 7 September $10 billion and $23.5 billion can be imputed annually to
2023. Date of publication 17 October 2023; date of current version 2 February illegal and unreported fishing activities worldwide, which
2024. This work was supported in part by the Norwegian Research Council
(RCN) TSAR Project [Experimental Infrastructure to Explore Exascale Calcu- shows that this problem has a huge economic impact. Desai
lus (eX3)] under Contract 287893 and Contract 270053. The Associate Editor and Shambaugh [6] further emphasize the negative impact of
for this article was B. Singh. (Corresponding author: Pierre Bernabé.) illegal fishing on local fishing industries and its destruction
 Pierre Bernabé is with the Simula Research Laboratory, 0164 Oslo,
Norway, and also with the Institut FEMTO-ST, Université de Bourgogne of the corresponding ecosystem and the environment.
Franche-Comté, 25030 Besançon, France (e-mail: pierbernabe@simula.no). The problem is considered serious by the coastal adminis-
 Arnaud Gotlieb, Dusica Marijan, and Helge Spieker are with the Simula tration all around the world and for prohibited maritime areas
Research Laboratory, 0164 Oslo, Norway (e-mail: arnaud@simula.no;
dusica@simula.no; helge@simula.no). close to the coast (typically within a 20km-zone from the
 Bruno Legeard is with the Institut FEMTO-ST, Université de Bourgogne coast), different sources of information (e.g., radars, human
Franche-Comté, 25030 Besançon, France (e-mail: bruno.legeard@femto-st.fr). visual control from ships or land stations) can be efficiently
 Frank Olaf Sem-Jacobsen is with Statsat AS, 0212 Oslo, Norway (e-mail:
Frank.Sem-Jacobsen@statsat.no). combined to automatically detect illegal activities. However,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2023.3322690 when vessels transit at long distance from any coast in
 1558-0016 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1167

the open sea, the maritime surveillance can only rely on we design a model that can process AIS messages in real-time
satellite AIS data. For instance, in the past ten years, the and alert the coastal administration on suspicious ship trajec-
Norwegian Coastal Administration has been using satellites to tories containing possible intentional AIS shutdowns. More
capture AIS messages outside the areas covered by the base precisely, the results presented in this article revolve around
stations. Statsat AS, the company in charge of managing these three distinct contributions:
satellites on behalf of the Norwegian government, drives the 1) We provide a self-supervised deep-learning methodol-
AISSat-{1, 2}1 and NorSat-{1, 2, 3}2 satellites which super- ogy to detect abnormal missing AIS reception in the
vise AIS transmissions. These satellites are inclined at 97◦ open sea. Our methodology is based on unlabelled
and are positioned in Sun-synchronous polar orbit at an orbital world-covering satellite-collected AIS data, which has
height of 600-650 km, such that they shift to cover all latitudes not been annotated by operators;
with each rotation around the earth. 2) Our methodology is designed for live surveillance of
 While these satellites ensure a broad coverage of the earth, vessels. It exploits raw monthly data containing up to
it happens that some AIS messages remain unseen due to 500 million vessel messages corresponding to more than
weather perturbations or reception conflicts. Also, the selected 60,000 unique vessels. Our DL model can be exploited
polar orbit leads to a better coverage of the poles rather than in real-time to ease the decision-making process of the
the equator. Hence, to human eyes, while reconstructing the coastal administration;
trajectory of a single ship, it is common to have missing AIS 3) We demonstrate through experimental results the effecmessages on the trajectory, but for a given ship trajectory, tiveness of our methodology, as well as its robustness
distinguishing missing AIS messages reception due to an in varying scenarios and configurations. In particular,
AIS transponder shutdown from acceptable causes is almost the use of the state-of-the-art transformer deep learning
impossible. In order to distinguish both cases, we refer to model architecture benefits us with greater precision in
abnormal missing AIS message reception for the former case the data analysis.
and as ordinary missing AIS message reception for the latter. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
 Even though the number of messages that can be processed reviews previous work on the usage of Machine Learning in
by the satellites is artificially limited, the volume of collected the maritime surveillance. We introduce our methodology with
AIS messages is still considerable. In a single day, the a general overview in Section III, before detailing how raw
Norwegian satellites can collect more than 4 million AIS mes- data are handled in Section IV. Section V presents our methodsages (e.g., on 15/01/2020, there were 4,862,628 messages). ology in depth as well as the architecture of our deep learning
Due to the high volume, only a restricted proportion of AIS model and its training regime. In Section VI, we evaluate the
messages can actually be manually explored. To the best of our methodology in experiments along three research questions,
knowledge, there exists no dataset annotated by operators that and conclude with a discussion in Section VII.
differentiate intentional AIS shutdown from ordinary missing
AIS message reception. It is therefore not possible to train II. E XISTING M ETHODS IN M ARITIME
models to directly detect these issues. For any alerting system T RAFFIC S URVEILLANCE
to be actionable (i.e. sending out assets to investigate) the
 Intentional shutdown of the AIS transponder to hide illegal
system needs to detect intentional AIS shutdown in near
 fishing or illicit cargo transfer is a common illegal activity in
real-time. Prompt delivery of alerts ensures that the coastal
 maritime domain, and several methods have been proposed to
administration can follow up on the alert while the illegal
 detect intentional AIS shutdown. We review these methods in
activity is performed. The large datasets, seemingly unpre-
 Section II-A. Then, in Section II-B, we present the methods
dictable nature of data gathering, and timeliness requirements,
 processing satellite AIS data using machine learning.
make it very challenging to detect intentional AIS shutdowns
in the open sea and to propose an alerting system that can
work in near real-time. A. AIS Shutdown Detection
 This paper proposes a deep learning-based approach to In [8] and [9], Mazzarella et al. design a method to compute
detect intentional AIS shutdowns in open sea. Our method uses the probability of receiving an AIS message depending on the
self-supervision techniques to cope with the problem related distance to the base station. For that, the signal strength to the
to distinguishing ordinary from abnormal missing AIS mes- base station is used to create a probability map. Also, in [10],
sage reception (which are witnesses of likely intentional AIS Shahir et al. draw a probability distributions for suspected dark
shutdown). Self-supervision means to extract pseudo-labels fishing. In [11], Kontopoulos et al. identify AIS switch-off in
from the unlabelled data set [7]. Our method is generally an near real-time by analysing large streams of AIS messages
unsupervised task, but as pseudo-labels can be derived from received from terrestrial base stations. The method relies on
the dataset itself using self-supervision techniques, it allows the high-quality of the data coming from these sources by
us to eventually train the model in a supervised manner. predicting precisely when AIS messages are expected for a
 By training a multi-layer neural network model with auto- given ship trajectory in a given cell from a coverage network.
labelled data that learn the missing AIS messages’ normality, In [12], Singh and Heymann propose to detect AIS switch-off
 in a labelled dataset extracted from a single base station using
 1 https://eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/a/aissat-1-2 a multi-class artificial neural network, that can additionally
 2 https://eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/n/norsat-1-2 determine if anomalies are due to power outage. The dataset is
1168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

composed of 132 352 messages, corresponding to 133 distinct source of reliable information available in open waters is
vessels. These three solutions have proved to achieve excellent satellite-captured AIS data.
results when using high-quality AIS datasets, but they are In summary, existing analysis methods for detecting AIS
limited to only detecting intentional AIS shutdown of vessels switch-off are mostly based on high-quality data coming from
located in the neighbourhood of base stations. They have base stations, or on probability maps which are relevant only
not been experimented yet when using satellite-based AIS for post-mortem analysis, or else on hidden channels that
datasets, which is the only source of AIS available in the cannot be generalised. In contrast, our work focuses on near
open sea. Besides, by using only ground-based AIS message real-time prediction in the open sea based on satellite data
streams, they cannot detect vessels having their AIS already that are highly irregular and impacted by the position of the
switched off which penetrate into a surveillance zone. There- satellites, the number of vessel in the area, the weather and
fore, it seems complementary to combine these methods with more. In that respect, it is complementary to other methods.
solutions adapted for the open sea able to process satellite data. Also, it is worth noticing that shared labelled datasets for
In this context, AIS missing reception is influenced by the spa- detecting intentional AIS shutdowns do not exist, which makes
tial and temporal coverage of the satellites, as well as potential fair comparison between different methods very difficult.
signal collisions and weather conditions. These elements make
satellite-based datasets very fragmented, with irregular missing
reception from a few minutes to several hours. Moreover, B. Machine Learning Applied to AIS
when considering trajectories located in the neighbourhood The major challenge with AIS messages received by a fleet
of base stations, the signal coverage of satellites is very poor of surveillance satellites is that they contain irregular patterns
as compared to the signal from beacons, which makes any and missing data. Also, AIS data captured by satellites is noisy
comparison or generalisation very difficult. In [13], Ford et al. because there can be errors in the information entered by
propose a Generalised Additive Model (GAM), adapted to the vessel captains, or AIS transponders can be of low quality
open sea, which captures space-time variations in AIS gaps or damaged. Previous work that processes AIS data automatiduring transmissions. The model aims at detecting abnormal cally has focused on detecting anomalies from predicted ship
AIS missing reception and the overall approach shows good trajectories, trajectory reconstruction, collision avoidance and
results for an area located between the Australian and Indone- future traffic evaluation.
sian EEZ border. Interestingly, the approach uses the frequency Among existing techniques, the usage of probabilistic modof transmissions of other vessels to compute the probability of els of ships’ behaviour from historical AIS data has been
(not) receiving a message. It renders the method more accurate proposed. For instance, the exploitation of Gaussian mixwhen considering highly dense traffic zones. However, the ture models (GMMs) [17], grid-based methods [18], Markov
confidence level of the method starts at a very low level and models [19] or hierarchical neural networks [20] have led
increases over time because it is based on a probability map. to significant advances in terms of trajectory reconstruction,
Hence, the solution is well-suited for post-mortem analysis, trajectory prediction and anomaly detection. Other work has
i.e., analysis of the traffic several hours after it actually hap- also focused on enriching vessel information from radar
pened. In [14], Weimerskirch et al. use GPS data provided by and visual tracking [21]. For detecting anomalies in AIS
GPS transponder attached on Albatross birds to track fishing message transmission, reconstructing the trajectory of vessels
vessels. This solution is original and works in real-time, but it just before the loss of the signal is crucial. Arguedas et al.
is limited to specific areas where albatross birds live and follow use graph-based methods to create a promising lightweight
fishing vessels. In [15], d’Afflisio et al. propose a procedure representation of vessel trajectories [22]. Nguyen et al. in [23]
based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck mean-reverting stochastic and [24] use a representation that regularises the frequency of
process to detect anomalous deviations from standard maritime messages by completing a dataset with artificially generated
routes hidden behind AIS Shutdown. This solution cannot be missing messages. Interestingly, this approach deals with noisy
adapted to fishing vessels that have unpredictable trajectories. data and allows datasets to be used for training models for
It also requires to wait for the re-connection to determine the multitasking learning. However, the datasets do not come
abnormality. In [16], Park et al. make the correlation between from satellites but from beacons at sea. As a limitation, such
the vessel lights at night captured with satellite images and the an artificially completed datasets cannot be used to detect
reported AIS messages received from these ships. Using this intentional AIS shutdown because the missing messages have
correlation, the authors discovered a dark fleet fishing illegally been re-introduced for the purpose of regularisation [23], [24].
in North Korean waters, estimated to be worth $440 million. Other approaches include using ship-tracking probability
However, the generalisation of this solution is unfortunately maps, such as those created by Skauen [25], to estimate the
impossible as the vessel lights are usually turned off during probability of receiving (or not receiving) a satellite-based AIS
the day. While the two last presented solutions are original message in a given time frame. However, these maps estimate
and useful for evaluating the negative impact of illegal fishing the probability of re-detecting an already detected ship, which
activities, they cannot easily be generalised and cannot offer implies that one needs to wait a significant amount of time
a robust solution to the problem of automatic intentional AIS before any action is triggered.
shutdown detection. Using hidden information channels for In contrast to these works, we propose to train a
detecting illegal activities is appealing, however, the only self-supervised model for a given vessel, in order to build
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1169

Fig. 1. Overview and data flow of our self-supervised learning method for the detection of abnormal missing AIS reception.

a representation that considers the previous messages and
the gap between them, as explained in Section IV-D. This
allows us to propose a method that reveals suspicious cases
of intentional AIS shutdowns as soon as a vessel’s signal
disappears.

 III. M ETHOD OVERVIEW
 Before giving an in-depth presentation of our selfsupervised method, we introduce a high-level overview of its
different components and their connection, as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2. Auto-labelling of trajectories: Green flags indicate trajectories
 expecting an AIS message in the next time frame τ , while red flags indicate
The diagram highlights three distinct processes, namely, Data trajectories without an AIS message.
Collection, Data Processing and Self-Supervised Training and
Operation, and their workflow. First, during Data Collection, the satellite operator collects and stores AIS data from input format, although in this context without the addition of
geo-marine observation satellites. In the context of this work, self-supervision information that is only necessary for training
the Norwegian Coastal Administration has provided us access purposes. Based on the time frame τ , the logical decision
to the AIS data collected by the Norwegian state operator module then classifies the vessel trajectory as either abnormal,
Statsat AS during 2020, which corresponds to approximately highlighting a risk of intentional AIS shutdown, or as ordinary.
4 billion messages. As part of the Data Processing and Self- In the first case, a specific alert can be escalated to an operator
Supervised Training process, the collected data is first prepared or a downstream system for further investigation, while in the
and processed into a dataset, including the enrichment with second case issues no alert.
self-supervision labelling information. As said above, the
main issue is to distinguish ordinary vs. abnormal missing
 IV. DATA P ROCESSING
AIS reception. For this purpose, we have used the following
artefact for implementing our self-supervised training method A. Automatic Identification System (AIS)
with the collected data. For a given ship in the open sea, According to AIS technical specifications [26], messages
given a window of w successive AIS messages (typically are composed of static and dynamic information. Static fields
25 messages, but other window sizes can be considered) and include, amongst others, international standard vessel idena time frame τ (typically, 10 minutes), one can train a model tifiers, i.e., MMSI,3 IMO ship identification number, vessel
that predicts if an AIS message is expected to be received name and call sign, ship dimensions and vessel type. These
in the next time frame τ . This model will then be useful to static elements, which are entered manually by the vessel
compare its prediction with the actual observation performed captains into the AIS transponder, are automatically transin near real-time (i.e., using the same time frame τ ) regarding mitted on a broadcast channel every 6 minutes. Also, AIS
the reception of the expected AIS message. Fig.2 illustrates transponders send dynamic information every 2 to 10 seconds
this principle by considering a window of w = 3 messages. depending on the vessel’s speed, or every 3 minutes if the
Red-flagged trajectories indicate that no message is expected vessel is at anchor. The dynamic information includes naviwithin τ while green-flagged trajectories indicate the opposite. gation status, e.g., “at anchor” or “fishing”, vessel position in
 During Operation, by using the trained model with the terms of latitude (lat) and longitude (lon), vessel speed over
auto-labelled dataset and a logical decision module that anal- ground, its direction relative to the north pole, its true heading
yses real-time observations streamed from the surveillance relative to the magnetic north pole and the timestamp when
satellites, it becomes possible to classify ordinary versus the message was sent. There are currently 27 different AIS
abnormal missing AIS reception. Every collected vessel trajectory is again preprocessed into the machine learning model 3 Maritime Mobile Service Identity.
1170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I • 1t and TD allow having a better precision on the temporal
 OVERVIEW OF S ATELLITE AIS DATA C OLLECTION dimension than that given by the timestamp t,
 • 1D V and 1D H improve understanding of position over
 small distances,
 • D P allows filtering the relevant samples (more information on this point in Section IV-D).
 Thus, the vector of characteristics corresponding to a message
 takes the following form:
 m = [t, lat, lon, s, 1t, 1DV , 1D H , D P , TD ]
 A trajectory E is a temporal sequence of T successive
message types. Of these message types, we only consider the
 messages from a ship E = [m 1 , m 2 , . . . , m T ]. It corresponds
subset that contains the dynamic information, i.e., message
 to the trajectory of a ship’s motion in a time window. Also,
types 1, 2, 3, 18 and 19. Typical AIS transponders have a
 note that there is no constraint on the maximum values of 1t
range of about 20 to 40 km. The limitation of this range is
 and 1D, between two successive messages within a trajectory.
due to the curvature of the earth and the height at which the
antenna is installed on ships. For vessels too far away from
the coast or other AIS observers, AIS satellites collect and D. Dataset Creation
forward the messages. A total of 500 000 trajectories has been extracted for each
 month, creating 12 datasets, equally balanced between two
B. Data Collection classes: 1. trajectories including a message received within
 One challenge with AIS data collection is that the radio the time frame; 2. trajectories without any message received
access scheme defined in the standard creates only 2200 within the time frame Fig. 3 shows the distribution of the
available time slots every minute for each of the 2 channels and samples on the surface of the globe for January 2020. For the
receivers can be easily overwhelmed by large AIS reception selection of trajectories in the dataset, we set two conditions:
footprints [25]. Due to the growing number of AIS transpon- 1) The AIS vessel trajectory history must consist of at
ders and the expansion of the satellite reception area, message least 50 messages to exclude vessels not sufficiently
collisions can occur and lead to vessel disappearance [27]. represented over the entire year of the dataset. This
 Our satellite-based AIS dataset, provided by the Norwegian corresponds to about a 1-minute history for a moving
Coastal Administration and collected by Statsat, consists of vessel. Indeed, these trajectories are too short for any
4 050 019 441 AIS messages from all over the world, which relevant generalisation by the model;
corresponds to the messages collected for the year 2020 (see 2) The ship’s loss of reception must be at more than
Table I). Technical issues on the satellite during the original 5 kilometres from a port (D P > 5km). This eliminates
data collection can explain the difference in the number of examples of intentional (legal) AIS shutdown that take
messages per month. However, we did not notice any bias in place in ports. It is also relatively easy for the coastal
the data or any effect on our experimental results as a result administration to control vessels without AIS transmisof this difference. sion in ports. To determine the distance to the nearest
 port, we calculate the distance of the arc between two
 points on a sphere with a database of nearly 30 000 ports
C. Feature Extraction
 compiled by the organisation Global Fishing Watch.5
 From each message of the AIS dataset, we select relevant The datasets used for training, validation, and testing of the
characteristics, namely position (lat, lon), the timestamp (t), model are separated by date, e.g., train on the January data
and speed (s). Also, we enrich the characteristics with 1t with 10% of the February data for validation, and then test on
the time difference compared to the preceding message from the rest of the February data. Another alternative is to separate
the same ship, 1DV the difference in meters on the latitude by ships, i.e., train on one group of vessels and test on another,
with the preceding message from the same ship, 1D H the but the temporal separation has the advantage of being closer
difference in meters on the longitude, D P the distance to to the operational use of the model, since the objective is
the port, TD the second of the day (between 0 and 86 399). to make predictions based on past data to predict upcoming
We have chosen to split the relative distance with the previous missing AIS reception. A further alternative would be to split
message between 1D H and 1DV to keep the direction of by geographical regions, but this would either require a strong
movement. regional generalization or result in a highly region-specific
 It is worth noticing that: model, whereas we aim for a globally applicable model.
 • The distance 1D V , 1D H , D P are computed with the Therefore, the model will be trained according to the described
 Haversine formula.4 separation by date.
 4 The distance of the arc on a sphere is not as precise as the Vincenty
 Table II shows the range of duration and distance between
formulas in geodesy since the earth is not a perfect sphere, but its computation two consecutive messages along with the total duration and
has the advantage of being vectorisable, which is necessary in the case where
the dataset contains a very large number of trajectories. 5 https://globalfishingwatch.org/datasets-and-code/anchorages/
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1171

Fig. 3. Distribution of January’s samples over the surface of the globe. Each point shows the location of the most recent message and whether the next
message will be received within 10 minutes.

 TABLE II
 S TATISTICS FOR JAN . 2020 DATASET (500 K T RAJECTORIES ) S HOW A
 W IDE VARIETY OF T RAJECTORY C HARACTERISTICS . (1d = D IST.
 B ETWEEN M ESSAGES , 1t = T IME B ETWEEN
 M ESSAGES , 6d = T RAJECTORY L ENGTH AND
 6t = T RAJECTORY D URATION )

distance trajectories. We observe the dataset to be heterogeneous with strongly varying time spans and distances between
messages as well as drastically different trajectories, explained
both by different vessel types and irregularities in AIS reception and therefore potentially long gaps between messages.
Noticeably, 1% of the messages are sent with a time-interval
of 1s or less, which is abnormal w.r.t. AIS protocol. In fact, our
data is noisy and the noise is mostly due to inappropriate reuse
of MMSI numbers. Skauen et al. estimate than in between
0.5% to 2% of the MMSI numbers are reused [25], [28].

V. T RAJECTORY P REPROCESSING AND S ELF -S UPERVISED
 M ACHINE L EARNING M ODEL
 Fig. 4 shows an overview of the architecture of the deep
learning model. Firstly, the preprocessing step encodes and
normalizes the input trajectory E to simultaneously handle Fig. 4. Model architecture: The relative vessel trajectory is encoded via
 a transformer network and forms together with the most recent position a
long distances between two messages and to maintain suf- representation vector for classification.
ficient precision for those messages having only few seconds
of difference. It also allows us to dissociate the trajectory from
 A. Trajectory Preprocessing
the absolute time and position toward a generic representation.
Secondly, the two output vectors of the preprocessing step are The preprocessing block in the Fig. 4 is essential to
transferred to the deep learning model that is trained to classify our approach. Following the feature extraction describe in
whether a message should be received or not. Section IV-C, the input trajectory E is divided into two vectors,
1172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

VH the history of AIS messages which contains the infor- both long-term and short-term dependencies within the input
mation relating to the previous message and VL the most sequence [36].
recent position. Then VH and VL go through a normalization We specifically use the encoder part of the transformer
layer N . The input is divided to have an encoding that model to extract a general fixed-size representation vector,
considers the possible small distances that can be found that can be used in a generic way for different applications
between two messages while maintaining very high precision in maritime surveillance, here for the detection of abnormal
on the starting position of missing AIS reception. missing AIS reception. More specifically, the model consists
 1) Message History: To represent the message history of two transformer blocks, following on the model of [35],
VH generically, the normalization layer N first removes the to encode a variable-length input sequence VH together with
absolute position in latitude and longitude and the absolute a positional encoding into the first part of the representation
time represented by the timestamp. Instead, the representation vector R. Choosing 64 as the size of the representation
only considers the time and distance differences relative to vector R results from a tradeoff between the model complexity
the previous message. Since the model is supposed to work and an attempt to prevent the classical overfitting risk and has
in relation the most recent received message of a vessel’s been determined through preliminary experiments.
trajectory we can therefore create a relative representation This first part is concatenated with the second input, the
space and work time-independently. In addition, the second of most recent position VL , into the overall fixed-size reprethe day SD is added to strengthen the detection of temporal sentation vector. This vector is then processed by the final,
patterns. A cyclic normalisation NC (Eq. 1) is applied to cyclic task-specific subnetwork. Here, this subnetwork consists of
fields such as the SD , a linear normalisation NL (Eq. 2) is three dense layers of respective size (100, 50, 50) with ReLu
applied to limit values such as speed V. For 1t, 1DV and activation and 10% dropout and a final layer to classify
1D H , a logarithm is applied (Eq. 3). whether a message should be received within the given time
      frame.
 2π(x − min x) 2π(x − min x)
 NC = sin , cos
 max x − min x max x − min x C. Detection of Abnormal Missing AIS Message Reception
 (1) Given a ship trajectory and a time frame τ , the model is
 (x − min x) trained to predict whether an AIS message from the vessel
 NL = (2)
 max x − min x shall be received or not, within τ . Using this model, it becomes
 N (VH ) = [log(1t), log(1DV ), log(1D H ), possible to classify ship trajectories as ordinary or abnormal in
 NC (SD ), NL (V)] (3) near real-time. More precisely, there are four distinct situations
 for a given trajectory:
 N (VP ) = [NL (lat Deg ), NC (lat Min ), NC (lat Sec ),
 1) If the model predicts that no AIS message is expected
 NC (lon Deg ), NC (lon Min ), NC (lon Sec ), . . . ] and no message is actually received during the time
 (4) frame τ , then the trajectory can safely be classified as
 ordinary. The model has correctly learnt that the ship
 2) Most Recent Position: The vector N (VP ) consists of has an ordinary AIS disconnection due to any acceptable
11 values allowing the model to have maximum precision on cause (i.e., reception conflict, loss of satellite coverage,
the position of the vessel at the most recent message received. etc.);
N decomposes latitude and longitude into Degree-Minute- 2) If the model predicts no AIS message and a message
Second and then normalises them cyclically to maintain is actually received within τ , then there is a prediction
continuity (Eq. 4), for example, when a ship passes longitude error in the model. The trajectory can be safely classified
180 at −180. as model error;
 3) If the model predicts that an AIS message shall be
 received within τ and a message is actually received,
B. Model Architecture
 then the trajectory can safely be classified as ordinary;
 Our method to detect the abnormal missing AIS reception 4) If the model predicts that an AIS message is expected
is based on transformer models, a deep learning architecture. within τ and no message is actually received, then the
Transformer models have demonstrated compelling results in trajectory can be classified as abnormal. These latter
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) [29] and the cases are the most interesting for the coastal administrafield of computer vision [30]. The suitability of the transformer tion, whom can then proceed to a detailed analysis of the
architecture for dealing with sequential data makes it a good ship trajectory in order to confirm or denial the abnormal
candidate for the analysis of time series. In the context of AIS, missing AIS reception. In this case, the complete vessel
the message history can be seen as a time series [31], [32]. AIS history is reported.
The transformer architecture is a variant of self-attention During operation, only the missing AIS reception that exceed
networks [33] for processing sequential data, however it does the time frame are analysed. This is corresponding to the
not involve a recurrent network architecture [34]. This is cases 1) and 4) Note that having a prediction model with high
possible due to the multi-head self-attention [35] mechanism, precision is crucial here to avoid the production of too many
that allows it to attend and weight multiple parts of the false negatives or false positives. The detailed examination of
sequence differently in parallel. Thereby, it allows to model a ship trajectory takes time and there is a challenge to report
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1173

only suspicious trajectories which are likely to correspond TABLE III
to actual intentional AIS shutdown. Note also that the time RQ1: C ONFUSION M ATRIX ( IN %), ON 4.5M T RAJECTORIES OF
 V ESSELS D ISAPPEARING M ORE T HAN 10 M INUTES
frame must be exhausted in order to classify ship trajectory.
Besides justifying the terminology “near real-time”, it also
justifies the selection of a value for τ which is compatible
with current practices of the coastal administration. Indeed,
it will be useless to classify ship trajectories as suspicious
after a long time like 24 hours.

 VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION Formally speaking,
 In this section, we evaluate the capabilities and robustness TP +TN
of the proposed model. For that, we examine different con- Accuracy =
 T P + FP + T N + FN
figurations of the trained models, such as their architecture (5)
and the training set size, the selection of the most appropriate TP
time-horizon for improving the detection of missing AIS Positive predictive value (PPV) = (6)
 T P + FP
messages. More precisely, we investigate these three research
 TN
questions: Negative predictive value (NPV) = (7)
 T N + FN
RQ1 Is the method effective enough to detect abnormal AIS
 shutdown? where TP stands for True Positive, TN for True Negative,
RQ2 How stable is the model over time, and is it affected by FP for False Positive and TN for False Negative.
 dataset shift?
RQ3 How robust is the model and its effectiveness to con- B. RQ1: Model Effectiveness
 figuration changes, i.e., changes in training set size, There are no datasets for evaluating our model precisely
 message window size, model architecture, or predicted on the task of detecting voluntary AIS shutdown. Therefore,
 time horizon? we have reversed the question into predicting whether a
 message is received within a time frame or not in order to
A. Experimental Setup train a model in a self-supervised manner.
 Therefore, it is important to note that the model accuracy
 In our experiments, the batch size B is equal to 128, the corresponds to the prediction of message reception within a
message window size W is 25 and the representation vector time frame and not the prediction of voluntary AIS shutdown.
size R is 64 (see Fig. 4). With these hyperparameter values, For this particular task, the combination of the model and
the model M has a total of 470 821 trainable parameters. For the encoder presented in this paper has shown the high
model training, the dataset contains 200 000 trajectories with accuracy between 99.5% and 99.8%. Table III shows the con-
10 minutes time horizon labels. The model is trained over a fusion matrix for prediction results of 4 500 000 trajectories.
maximum of 200 epochs with each 1562 batches with early False negative (F. neg.) means that the model predicted a
stopping once the validation loss converged. All training is per- non-reception of a message, while the message is received;
formed with the configuration described above, unless stated False positive (F. pos.) means that the model predicted a
otherwise. Section VI-D compares the results for the most reception of a message, while the message is not received.
impactful hyperparameters. All our experiments are run on an The 0.04% of detected false negatives can only be caused
NVIDIA DGX-2 with an Intel Xeon Platinum 8168 CPU with by a model error. On the other hand, the 0.2% false positives
2.7 GHz and 24 cores, using one NVIDIA Tesla V100 graphics can either be due to a model error or an anomaly. In our
card.6 One epoch of model training takes approximately 17s. results, 8868 of trajectories are returned as anomalies out
We have evaluated the model stability by running each model of 2 250 000 trajectories that are annotated as missing AIS
prediction five times with different initial random models. messages. However, there is no precise way to evaluate and
As said in Section IV-D, the one-year dataset is separated into filter the proportion of accurate missing AIS receptions among
12 time-windows, one per month. the 8868 of total model predictions for a full year covering
 Evaluation Metrics. Three metrics are used to compare the whole globe. We discuss model errors in Sec.VI-F.
the models: 1) the accuracy (Eq. 5), which measures the
overall capability of the model to predict whether a message
should be received or not; 2) the positive predictive value C. RQ2: Model Stability Over Time & Dataset Shift
(Eq. 6), or precision, focuses on the model capability to predict The second research question addresses the model stability
whether it is normal to not receive a message or not; and 3) the over time and possible effects of dataset shift [37]. A trained
negative predictive value (Eq. 7), which focuses on the error model has potentially the highest accuracy for trajectories
made by the model when it predicts that we should not receive that are close in time to the period covered by the training
a message, but we receive one. data, since it is expected to be most similar to the data
 within the training set, i.e., it is from a similar distribution.
 6 Provided by the eX3 research infrastructure: https://www.ex3.simula.no/ However, over time this distribution might change, e.g., due to
1174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE IV
 RQ2: S TABILITY OF THE M ODEL ( IN %). S MALL S EASONAL E FFECTS T HROUGHOUT THE Y EAR , BUT THE M ODEL I S G ENERALLY S TABLE

seasonal effects. To investigate the general stability of the TABLE V
model over time and a potential negative impact from dataset RQ3: ACCURACY BY DATASET S IZE
shift, we perform two evaluations:
 1) We train the model on one month and evaluate it on the
 next month, e.g., training on January and evaluation on
 February, repeated for all months of the year;
 2) We train the model once on the January dataset and
 evaluate its accuracy on the other months of the year.
 The results are shown in Table IV. We observe a small
dataset shift, as indicated by the slightly lower accuracy of the
fixed model trained on the January data. For each individual
month this difference in accuracy is not more than 0.15%
and in the average over the year not more than 0.08%. The
variation in accuracy is accounted for by seasonal effects. The
largest accuracy differences occur in the summer months, i.e.,
June to September, whereas towards the end of the year the
accuracy gap is closer or even non-existent in December.
 We conclude from this experiment that the model is generally stable and that there is no need for frequent re-training.
Since the encoding of the vessel trajectory works on relative
time and position information, there is no strong dependency Fig. 5. RQ3: Accuracy for different model architectures and message window
or link to the absolute time of the training data, but just sizes.
the vessel traffic patterns, which are subject to seasonal
adjustments. However, it is advisable to consider a training
dataset that spans multiple months or seasons of data to further showed the best accuracy. However, it should be noted that
improve the model stability. the window size is likely to be specific for the surveillance
 application, e.g., for other applications such as detecting
D. RQ3: Model Robustness to Configuration Changes missing AIS reception, a larger window size can be more
 As previously introduced, our model allows to be adjusted beneficial.
through a number of configuration decisions and parameters. 3) Model Architecture: In this experiment, we vary
Those include both parameters that affect the operation in the model architecture and alternatively select a standard
maritime surveillance, i.e., the horizon of time during which feed-forward neural network and a transformer model without
an AIS message is expected, and technical decisions, i.e., AIS message encoding. The feed-forward neural network
the dataset size used for training or the model architecture. consists of 5 layers with 10/20/25/20/10 neurons, selected
To analyse the robustness of the model, we vary each of these by hyperparameter search. Since the input layer needs to be
parameters individually to identify the sensibility of the overall adjusted for each input size, we opt to test it with one input
model to this parameter. message, as the most naive baseline, and 25 input messages,
 1) Dataset Size: As the first parameter, we vary the dataset as selected for our main architecture.
size used for training from 10k to 500k trajectories of each The results are again shown in Fig. 5. While the naive
25 messages. As shown in Table V, the training benefits from baseline is not competitive, it highlights the necessity of
more data, but the effect diminishes after 100 000, while the considering a multi-message window size. For the direct
training time continues to increase approximately linearly. comparison of all three architectures, the feed-forward neural
We therefore select a dataset size for our experiments of network achieves an accuracy of 96.82%, which exceeds
200 000 to balance accuracy and training cost. the 90.86% accuracy of the transformer without the custom
 2) Window Size: The window size controls how much of encoding, whereas the full model achieves 99.65% accuracy.
a vessel’s history the model receives as input. Fig. 5 shows This result underlines the importance of the dedicated message
that some history is relevant to identify vessel behaviour, encoding in combination with the transformer architecture.
but that the effect saturates and a higher window size only 4) Horizon of Time: The horizon of time parameter is
increases model complexity but reduces the accuracy. For our closely linked to the model’s operational use, as it defines the
experiments, we selected a window size of 25 messages, which threshold after which the missing reception of AIS messages is
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1175

 an inherent delay in processing and detecting intentional AIS
 shutdown events.

 F. Discussion
 In this study, we achieved excellent accuracy in predicting whether we should receive an AIS message within a
 specific time frame. The key elements contributing to this
 high accuracy are the combination of transformer model
Fig. 6. RQ3: Comparison of five different time horizons. Total messages with the encoding, and the size of the auto-labelled dataset.
received after each threshold from the whole February data with 138 million However, detecting intentional AIS shutdown with high accumessages and accuracy for the model trained with a subset of 200,000
trajectories. racy remains a challenging task, mainly because labelled
 datasets with ground-truth information do not exist. The
 approach we present in this paper deals with this problem,
deemed interesting or relevant. We evaluate five time horizons: but we still need to take two limitations into account, which
1, 5, 10, 30, and 60 minutes. The model is both trained and are not unique to the detection of intentional AIS shutdown but
tested with these time horizons. common among the setting of limited labelled data in machine
 The results are shown in Fig. 6 with no major difference in learning. First, to cope with the absence of a labelled dataset,
accuracy between the different time horizons. Therefore, it is our model is trained in a self-supervised manner with autothe choice of the operator between a shorter reaction time with labelled data to predict when the next AIS message shall be
a potentially higher number of misclassifications as anomalies received from a given vessel. If there is a divergence between
versus a longer reaction time and lower risk of misclassifica- the prediction and the real-time available information, then
tions. Even if the accuracy is high, the quantity of missing an alert is reported. Even though we predict next message
messages is significant too, and a small prediction error can reception with a very high accuracy, the model does not
represent a large number. If we compare the examples over the provide guarantees on the accuracy to detect intentional AIS
threshold value in our dataset, the number of missing messages shutdown. The availability of a labelled dataset would aid in
with a time horizon of 1 minute exceeds those with a time the training of a model with even higher accuracy, although
horizon of 60 minutes by a factor of 10. After discussions this would incur high cost to create the dataset in the first
with domain experts, we fixed the horizon of time for our place. Second, the effectiveness of our method mirrors the
experiments to 10 minutes. This balances both the number of diversity of the training dataset and the capability of the
potential false alerts and the reaction time, which is still short model to generalise from patterns observed during training.
in the context of satellite-based maritime surveillance. In our context, if an illegal activity is mimicking the most
 standard vessel behaviour perfectly, it will be highly difficult
 to detect. Similarly, if the behaviour is entirely different
E. Near-Real Time Detection from anything seen during training, although this is likely
 to be detected as an anomaly in a AIS processing pipeline.
 Detecting intentional AIS shutdown is highly relevant for
 In order to investigate the possible materialisation of these
maritime surveillance monitoring and any alerting system has
 issues, we analysed 8868 trajectories detected as potential
to react to potential anomalies in (near) real-time. Technically,
 anomalies, such as described in Section VI-B. By grouping
by using the hardware components mentioned in Section VI-A,
 multiple vessels which present the same anomaly, we were
our implementation processes 5 400 000 samples in
 able to detect suspicious patterns. Among these clusters of
409 seconds, i.e., in less than 7 minutes. It corresponds
 anomalous trajectories one of them particularly caught our
to a processing rate of 13 191 predictions per second,
 attention. It corresponds to a cluster of around 50 fishing
a significantly higher rate than the rate of messages collected
 vessels shutting down their AIS transponders repeatedly, next
per second by the four satellites used in our experiment.
 to Argentina’s Exclusive Economic Zone (in between 10 to
These satellites gather approximately 100 to 150 messages
 20 times over the year 2020). Signal loss can last for multiple
per second, with only a subset of these messages being
 days before a vessel reappears again close to the border of the
potential cases of intentional AIS shutdowns.
 zone. From the AIS-message based trajectory, it is observable
 In practice, real-time detection of intentional AIS shutdown
 that these vessels go to anchor in Montevideo, Uruguay, before
is subject to certain limitations. One of these limitations is the
 and after going to the Argentina border where they disappear.
selection of time-horizon. In order to reduce the number of
 The alert triggered by our model was later confirmed in a
false positives, it is necessary to wait for a user-selected time-
 2021 report by Oceana [4].
horizon, which has been optimally evaluated to 10 minutes
in our experiments. Another aspect that affects real-time
detection, independent of our solution, is the method by which VII. C ONCLUSION
the data is collected. The AISSat and NorSat constellations use Intentional AIS shutdowns are performed to hide illethe Svalbard ground station in Norway to collect data on all gal activities in open sea, where vessel traffic systems can
15 of the satellites’ polar orbital passes each day. In the worst- only rely on satellite AIS. In this article, we have precase scenario, the data is collected 96 minutes later, causing sented a method for finding suspicious ship trajectories
1176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2024

containing intentional AIS shutdown in near-real-time using [8] F. Mazzarella, M. Vespe, A. Alessandrini, D. Tarchi, G. Aulicino, and
self-supervised deep learning based on the analysis of satellite A. Vollero, “A novel anomaly detection approach to identify intentional AIS on-off switching,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 78, pp. 110–123,
AIS data only. The model is trained to detect abnormal Jul. 2017.
missing AIS message reception without requiring the provision [9] F. Mazzarella, M. Vespe, D. Tarchi, G. Aulicino, and A. Vollero, “AIS
of a labelled dataset, which would be costly and labor- reception characterisation for AIS on/off anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 19th Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion (FUSION), Jul. 2016, pp. 1867–1873.
intensive. The training process is instead designed to use
 [10] A. Y. Shahir, M. A. Tayebi, U. Glässer, T. Charalampous, Z. Zohrevand,
a self-supervision technique, where the transformer neural and H. Wehn, “Mining vessel trajectories for illegal fishing detection,” in
network is trained with auto-labelled training data, that is Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2019, pp. 1917–1927.
generated from raw AIS data. [11] I. Kontopoulos, K. Chatzikokolakis, D. Zissis, K. Tserpes, and
 G. Spiliopoulos, “Real-time maritime anomaly detection: Detecting
 Our experimental evaluation shows that the method can intentional AIS switch-off,” Int. J. Big Data Intell., vol. 7, no. 2,
predict expected AIS message reception with 99.5% accuracy pp. 85–96, 2020.
on previously unseen test data. Additional experiments further [12] S. Singh and F. Heymann, “Machine learning-assisted anomaly detection
underline the robustness of the method under different con- in maritime navigation using AIS data,” in Proc. IEEE/ION Position,
 Location Navigat. Symp. (PLANS), Apr. 2020, pp. 832–838.
figurations as well as its stability over longer time periods, [13] J. H. Ford et al., “Detecting suspicious activities at sea based on
avoiding the need for continuous re-training. Finally, we were anomalies in automatic identification systems transmissions,” PLoS One,
able to reproduce real-world reports of intentional AIS shut- vol. 13, no. 8, 2018, Art. no. e0201640.
 [14] H. Weimerskirch et al., “Ocean sentinel albatrosses locate illegal vessels
down using our method. and provide the first estimate of the extent of nondeclared fishing,” Proc.
 For future work, we foresee two possible directions to Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 117, no. 6, pp. 3006–3014, Feb. 2020.
reduce model errors. First, we envision incorporating feedback [15] E. d’Afflisio, P. Braca, L. M. Millefiori, and P. Willett, “Detecting
from the coast guard administration on reported abnormal anomalous deviations from standard maritime routes using the Ornstein–
 Uhlenbeck process,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 24,
trajectories to discard false positives and enhance the quality pp. 6474–6487, Dec. 2018.
of auto-labeled training data (i.e., by discarding trajectories [16] J. Park et al., “Illuminating dark fishing fleets in North Korea,” Sci. Adv.,
with ordinary AIS shutdowns which are wrongly reported as vol. 6, no. 30, Jul. 2020, Art. no. eabb1197.
suspicious by the model). Second, our model’s performance [17] B. R. Dalsnes, S. Hexeberg, A. L. Flaten, B. H. Eriksen, and
 E. F. Brekke, “The neighbor course distribution method with Gaussian
could be further improved by adding contextual information mixture models for AIS-based vessel trajectory prediction,” in Proc. 21st
from both micro- and macro-level data sources. Specifically, Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion (FUSION), Jul. 2018, pp. 580–587.
this could involve examining the behavior of nearby ships, [18] B. Ristic, “Detecting anomalies from a multitarget tracking output,”
 IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 798–803,
integrating additional VHF Data Exchange System data, and Jan. 2014.
incorporating optical or infrared satellite imagery for more [19] N. Fridman, D. Amir, Y. Douchan, and N. Agmon, “Satellite detection of
targeted investigations. Moreover, the inclusion of macro-level moving vessels in marine environments,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 33, 2019,
factors like weather conditions, sea currents, and vessel density pp. 9452–9459.
 [20] K.-I. Kim and K. Lee, “Deep learning-based caution area traffic prediccould offer a comprehensive understanding of AIS behavior, tion with automatic identification system sensor data,” Sensors, vol. 18,
thereby improving model robustness. no. 9, p. 3172, Sep. 2018.
 [21] D. D. Bloisi, F. Previtali, A. Pennisi, D. Nardi, and M. Fiorini, “Enhanc-
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT ing automatic maritime surveillance systems with visual information,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 824–833, Apr. 2017.
 Satellite AIS data used for model development and test- [22] V. F. Arguedas, G. Pallotta, and M. Vespe, “Maritime traffic networks:
ing has been made available courteously by its owner, the From historical positioning data to unsupervised maritime traffic monitoring,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 722–732,
Norwegian Coastal Administration (Kystverket). Mar. 2018.
 [23] D. Nguyen, R. Vadaine, G. Hajduch, R. Garello, and R. Fablet, “A multi-
 R EFERENCES task deep learning architecture for maritime surveillance using AIS data
 streams,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Anal. (DSAA).
 [1] M. Riveiro, G. Pallotta, and M. Vespe, “Maritime anomaly detection: A IEEE, Oct. 2018, pp. 331–340.
 review,” WIREs Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 8, no. 5, Sep. 2018, [24] D. Nguyen, R. Vadaine, G. Hajduch, R. Garello, and R. Fablet,
 Art. no. e1266. “GeoTrackNet—A maritime anomaly detector using probabilistic neural
 [2] “Revised guidelines for the onboard operational use of shipborne auto- network representation of AIS tracks and a contrario detection,” IEEE
 matic identification systems (AIS),” IMO, Int. Maritime Org. (IMO), Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 5655–5667, Jun. 2022.
 London, U.K., Tech. Rep. Resolution A.1106(29), 2015.
 [25] A. N. Skauen, “Ship tracking results from state-of-the-art space-based
 [3] L. Malarky and B. Lowell, “Avoiding detection: Global case studies of
 AIS receiver systems for maritime surveillance,” CEAS Space J., vol. 11,
 possible AIS avoidance,” OCEANA, Washington, DC, USA, Tech. Rep.,
 no. 3, pp. 301–316, Sep. 2019.
 Mar. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://oceana.org/publications/
 reports/avoiding-detection-global-case-studies-possible-ais-avoidance [26] Technical Characteristics for an Automatic Identification System Using
 [4] P. Mustain, “Now you see me, now you don’t: Vanishing vessels Time Division Multiple Access in the VHF Maritime Mobile Frequency
 along Argentina’s waters,” OCEANA, Washington, DC, USA, Band, document Recommendation ITU-R M.1371-5, ITU-R Radiocom-
 Tech. Rep., Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://usa.oceana.org/ munication Sector of the International Telecommunication Union, 2014.
 publications/reports/oceana-finds-hundreds-vessels-vanishing-along- [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-M.1371-5-201402-I
 argentinas-waters, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4893397. [27] T. Eriksen, G. Høye, B. Narheim, and B. J. Meland, “Maritime traf-
 [5] D. J. Agnew et al., “Estimating the worldwide extent of illegal fishing,” fic monitoring using a space-based AIS receiver,” Acta Astronautica,
 PLoS ONE, vol. 4, no. 2, Feb. 2009, Art. no. e4570. vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 537–549, May 2006.
 [6] R. M. Desai and G. E. Shambaugh, “Measuring the global impact of [28] A. N. Skauen, “Quantifying the tracking capability of space-based AIS
 destructive and illegal fishing on maritime piracy: A spatial analysis,” systems,” Adv. Space Res., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 527–542, Jan. 2016.
 PLoS ONE, vol. 16, no. 2, Feb. 2021, Art. no. e0246835. [29] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 [7] L. Ericsson, H. Gouk, C. C. Loy, and T. M. Hospedales, “Self-supervised of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 representation learning: Introduction, advances, and challenges,” IEEE Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (NAACL), 2019,
 Signal Process. Mag., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 42–62, May 2022. pp. 4171–4186.
BERNABÉ et al.: DETECTING INTENTIONAL AIS SHUTDOWN IN OPEN SEA MARITIME SURVEILLANCE 1177

[30] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers Bruno Legeard is currently a Professor with the
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020, pp. 1–21. Institut FEMTO-ST, UBFC, and the Scientific Advi-
[31] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck sor and the Co-Founder of Smartesting. He has
 of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Syst. more than 20 years of expertise in model-based
 (NeurIPS), vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11. testing/model-based security testing (MBT/MBST)
[32] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning: and its introduction in the industry. He is the author
 A survey,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A: Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 379, of three books disseminating Model-Based Testing in
 no. 2194, 2021, Art. no. 20200209. the industry and the Practical Model-Based Testing
[33] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by has more than 1200 citations. His current research
 jointly learning to align and translate,” 2016, arXiv:1409.0473. interests include the automation of model-based test
[34] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural case generation using AI techniques. His research
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. results in more than 100 scientific and industrial publications based on MBT
[35] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is All you Need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. and MBST.
 Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[36] J. Cheng, L. Dong, and M. Lapata, “Long short-term memory-networks
 for machine reading,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Dusica Marijan is currently a Senior Research
 Process., 2016, pp. 1–11. Scientist with the Simula Research Laboratory,
[37] J. Quinonero-Candela, M. Sugiyama, A. Schwaighofer, N. D. Lawrence, Oslo, Norway. Prior to the Simula Research
 M. I. Jordan, and T. G. Dietterich, Eds., Dataset Shift in Machine Laboratory, she was a Senior Software Engineer
 Learning (Neural Information Processing Series). Cambridge, MA, with the Consumer Electronics Industry. Her current
 USA: MIT Press, 2008. research interests include software engineering,
 with a focus on improving software quality with
 artificial intelligence techniques.

 Pierre Bernabé is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 degree with the Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo,
 Norway. He is also affiliated with University Frank Olaf Sem-Jacobsen was born in Norway
 Bourgogne Franche Comté (UBFC). His current in 1979. He received the Ph.D. degree in comresearch interests include the application of machine puter science from the University of Oslo, Norway,
 learning techniques to support maritime surveillance with a focus on fault tolerance in high-performance
 by detecting anomalies in AIS communications. interconnection networks (both intra-datacenter and
 on-chip). After a period as a Post-Doctoral Fellow
 with Simula Research Laboratory, he joined Space
 Norway/Statsat as a Systems Engineer. In this position, he has built the Mission Control Centre used
 to control the now five government-owned small
 satellites that gather AIS data around the world 24/7.

 Arnaud Gotlieb is currently the Chief Research Sci- Helge Spieker is currently a Research Scientist
 entist with the Simula Research Laboratory, Norway. with the Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway.
 He has coauthored more than 120 publications His current research interests include the application
 in artificial intelligence and software engineering and validation of machine learning and artificial
 and developed several tools for testing critical intelligence techniques.
 software systems. His current research interests
 include the application of artificial intelligence to the
 validation of software-intensive systems and cyberphysical systems, including industrial robotics and
 autonomous systems.