IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 4287

 DroneSSL: Self-Supervised Multimodal Anomaly
 Detection in Internet of Drone Things
 Junaid Akram , Ali Anaissi , Wajdy Othman, Abdulatif Alabdulatif , Member, IEEE, and Awais Akram

 Abstract—In this study, we introduce a pioneering framework, becoming integrated elements of a broader, interconnected
DroneSSL, that integrates the concept of spatial crowdsourcing ecosystem [3].
with TinyML to enhance anomaly detection in the Internet The advent of the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT) epitoof Drone Things (IoDT). This innovative approach leverages
drones and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) for expansive mizes this technological leap, extending the reach of consumer
data collection in environments that are typically inaccessible electronics into the skies [4]. IoDT networks, encompassing
or hazardous, such as during Australian bushfire incidents. sensor-laden drones, cater to a spectrum of applications,
By employing lightweight machine learning models alongside from environmental surveillance, such as Australian bushadvanced communication technologies, DroneSSL transcends fire monitoring, to defense and healthcare [5], [6], [7], [8],
traditional spatial-temporal data analysis methods. It efficiently
processes multimodal data from diverse Points-of-Interest (PoIs), [9], [10]. However, deploying IoDT systems, especially in
significantly improving the quality and speed of data collection remote or challenging environments, invites a range of disand analysis. The framework’s integration of a temporal feature ruptions and security risks, including signal interference and
extraction module with a Graph Neural Network (GNN) and data breaches [11], [12]. These systems are further strained
its adaptable, scalable GNN architecture tailor DroneSSL for by inherent limitations in resources like energy and bandreal-time operations in resource-constrained IoDT environments.
Achieving an 89.6% F1 score, DroneSSL marks a substan- width [13].
tial 4.9% improvement over existing approaches, highlighting Integrating the concept of spatial crowdsourcing with IoDT
its effectiveness in critical applications such as environmental represents a groundbreaking approach to overcoming these
surveillance and emergency response. This advancement not challenges, particularly in environmental monitoring contexts
only showcases the potential of combining TinyML with spatial such as Australian bushfire management [4], [5]. Spatial
crowdsourcing for IoDT but also sets a new standard for efficient,
scalable anomaly detection, paving the way for future innovations crowdsourcing, when combined with IoDT, leverages drones
in IoT edge devices and environmental monitoring systems. and unmanned ground vehicles (UGVs) for expansive, realtime data collection in areas that are typically hazardous
 Index Terms—Self-supervised learning, autoencoder, GNN,
anomaly detection, drones, data fusion, TinyML. or unreachable by humans. This synergy not only addresses
 the limitations of traditional human-operated spatial crowdsourcing by covering larger areas with greater efficiency but
 also enhances the quality and speed of data collection from
 I. I NTRODUCTION Points-of-Interest (PoIs) through advanced communication
 N THE evolving landscape of consumer electronics, deeply technologies like WiFi/5G [8], [10]. The incorporation of
I intertwined with our daily lives, TinyML emerges as a
pivotal technology reshaping how we interact with smart
 air-ground non-orthogonal multiple access (AG-NOMA) techniques further optimizes data transmission between drones and
devices [1]. From smartphones to wearable technologies, the UGVs, facilitating high-quality data relay and decoding [9].
integration of TinyML is propelling these gadgets beyond their One of the critical aspects of IoDT, enhanced by the
traditional roles, aligning with the Internet of Things (IoT) integration of spatial crowdsourcing, is the development of
paradigm [2]. This progression has ushered in a new era lightweight models for anomaly detection. These models are
where consumer electronics transcend individual functionality, essential for identifying deviations in data flow patterns, which
 could indicate bushfire developments or other environmental
 Manuscript received 17 December 2023; revised 7 February 2024 and 29 anomalies. Current research often overlooks the spatial loca-
February 2024; accepted 4 March 2024. Date of publication 12 March 2024;
date of current version 26 April 2024. (Corresponding authors: Junaid Akram; tion information among drones and the correlation of data
Wajdy Othman.) across various modes, a gap that our approach, DroneSSL,
 Junaid Akram and Ali Anaissi are with the School of Computer Science, aims to fill. DroneSSL, a unique lightweight self-supervised
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2008, Australia (e-mail: jakr7229@
sydney.edu.au; ali.anaissi@sydney.edu.au). learning framework designed for IoDT, incorporates TinyML
 Wajdy Othman is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, principles with spatial-temporal data analysis. This not only
Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China (e-mail: wajdy@ahu.edu.cn). advances anomaly detection but also significantly improves
 Abdulatif Alabdulatif is with the Department of Computer Science,
College of Computer, Qassim University, Buraidah 52571, Saudi Arabia the functionalities of consumer electronics within the IoDT
(e-mail: ab.alabdulatif@qu.edu.sa). domain. By leveraging spatial crowdsourcing, DroneSSL can
 Awais Akram is with the Department of Computer Science, COMSATS process and analyze data from a broader area more efficiently,
University Islamabad, Islamabad 61100, Pakistan (e-mail: awaisakram1212@
gmail.com). enhancing the system’s adaptability and performance in critical
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3376440 applications like bushfire monitoring.
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS IN I O DT

 The following is a summary of this paper’s main to various GNN kernels, suitable for different anomaly
contributions. detection scenarios. By clustering drones and employing
 1) TinyML-Driven Multimodal Data Analysis: Our frame- spatial crowdsourcing for data collection and processing,
 work leverages the strengths of TinyML and spatial we propose a strategy for conducting data flow training
 crowdsourcing to process complex multimodal data and inference on selected anchor drones and UGVs.
 flows in IoDT systems. By employing lightweight This approach ensures minimal hardware strain on
 machine learning models and drones for data collection, IoDT devices and maximizes the efficiency of TinyML
 we ensure efficient processing of data from diverse models, crucial for real-time operations in the spatially
 spatial locations, enhancing spatiotemporal correlation diverse and resource-constrained environments of IoDT
 analysis. This approach surpasses traditional methods by networks.
 integrating the temporal attributes of multimodal multi- The structure of this manuscript is as follows: In Section II,
 drone data and the spatial connections among drones the fundamental concepts and relevant studies in anomaly
 and UGVs, providing a comprehensive overview of detection are presented. We describe our proposed selfenvironmental conditions. supervised learning anomaly detection approach for the
 2) Lightweight Anomaly Detection with Temporal Feature Internet of Drone Things in further depth in Section III. In
 Extraction and GNN: Introducing DroneSSL, a novel Section IV, we do an extensive experimental evaluation of
 anomaly detection system that embodies the fusion of our techniques. The study concludes with a summary and
 spatial crowdsourcing with TinyML. DroneSSL inte- concluding remarks in Section V.
 grates a temporal feature extraction module and a Graph
 Neural Network (GNN) for advanced spatiotemporal
 analysis. Optimized for IoDT devices with limited II. R ELATED W ORK
 computational resources, this system leverages self- In recent years, the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT) has
 supervised learning and autoencoder methodologies, posed significant challenges in anomaly detection, prompting
 allowing for the efficient processing of uplinked data researchers to propose various solutions. For instance, [14]
 from drones and additional sensory data from PoIs utilized Euclidean distances to cluster IoDT data points for
 through UGVs. anomaly detection, but this method did not leverage the
 3) Adaptable and Scalable GNN Architecture: Our frame- spatial correlations between drones. An alternative method
 work addresses the scalability challenge in IoDT by proposed by [15] focuses on anomaly detection in multinintroducing a flexible GNN architecture that can adapt ode data flows using correlation analysis, adeptly managing
AKRAM et al.: DroneSSL: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTIMODAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN IoDT 4289

high-dimensional time series data in IoDT and optimizing not only augments detection efficacy but also minimizes
computational resources. Yet, this approach does not account the requirements for time and computational resources. This
for the multimodal nature of IoDT, where each drone is approach is particularly suited for large-scale IoDT applicacapable of recording data across various modalities. tions, such as Australian bushfire monitoring.
 The escalating scale and intricacy of IoDT, characterized by
varied data sources and dynamic threat landscapes, highlight III. S YSTEM M ODEL
the shortcomings of current anomaly detection techniques. A. Problem Formulation
These include limited generalization, and struggles with high-
 In the domain of the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT),
dimensional, heterogeneous, and imbalanced datasets. Deep
 systems typically monitor extensive areas through a network
learning technologies [23] are being progressively employed
 of densely deployed drones. The data collected by a drone and
to surmount these challenges. Research such as [16] has
 its neighboring drones often show significant correlations due
delved into unsupervised multivariate anomaly detection utito their spatial proximity. For instance, when a drone detects
lizing generative adversarial networks (GAN) coupled with
 a bushfire, it is expected that nearby drones will also register
LSTM to discern temporal patterns in complex data streams.
 changes in their environmental readings, such as a noticeable
Likewise, [17] developed an anomaly detection methodology
 increase in temperature.
combining a variational autoencoder (VAE) with LSTM,
 The data collected by drones are not isolated; they are
and [18] introduced a CNN-based framework augmented with
 multimodal, indicating that changes in one type of data
incremental learning.
 (e.g., temperature increase) are often accompanied by changes
 Using spatial properties of network topologies is essential
 in other types (e.g., increase in CO2 levels and decrease
for robust anomaly detection in the Internet of Things. In
 in humidity). This suggests a direct relationship between
IoDT networks, adjacency and attribute matrices are rich
 temperature and CO2 concentration and an inverse relationship
sources of important characteristics that are well-suited for
 with humidity.
graph neural networks (GNNs). Important GNN types are
 The primary aim of this research is to exploit these
GraphSage [24], graph convolution networks (GCNs) [25], and
 spatiotemporal correlations for effective anomaly detection
graph attention networks (GATs) [26]. They are all widely
 in IoDT environments. We approach the anomaly detection
used for graph representation learning in IoDT, with the goal
 challenge as a regression problem focused on forecasting time
of extracting low-dimensional representations from intricate
 series data. The regression model for a univariate time series
graph structures.
 {Xt }t∈T is defined as follows:
 Graph embedding technologies and unsupervised learning
play a critical role in IoDT anomaly detection. Unsupervised Xt+W = f (Xt , Xt−1 , . . . , Xt+W−1 |θ ) (1)
techniques, reliant solely on normal samples for model Here, f represents a mapping function with parameters θ
training, are bifurcated into reconstruction and predictive that need to be estimated within the model f . By utilizing
modalities. Methods such as [27] employed GCNs for node the time series {Xt }t∈T and considering W as the window
embedding and data reconstruction, while [28] advanced to length of the timestamp, we aim to create a graph neural
GATs. Reference [29] merged structure learning with GNNs network mapping model f . Assuming f as a neural network
for anticipatory anomaly detection, and [30] fused forecast- mapping function (with a single hidden layer for simplicity),
centric models with reconstruction-centric frameworks to forge our original equation transforms to:
an innovative anomaly detection paradigm.  
 Addressing the challenge of overfitting in traditional unsu- D 
 W
 Xt+W = θ0 + θj g θ0j + θij Xt+i−1 (2)
pervised reconstruction methods, self-supervised learning has
 j=1 i=1
emerged as a solution to enhance neural network generalization. In their work, [31] crafted a model predicated on In this equation, D represents the number of nodes in the
a two-phase adversarial training approach. In parallel, [32] hidden layer, g is an activation function, and θ0 , θj , θ0j , and
combined GraphSage approaches with the Deep Graph θij are all trainable parameters. This graph neural network
Infomax (DGI) methodology to improve the performance of model, which extends conventional neural network models,
their model. Other innovative frameworks like [33] explored uses traditional time-series data for training. The historical data
multiscale adversarial training. is aligned with current data to identify θ within f , capturing
 However, these methods typically overlook the IoDT’s essential characteristics of standard time-series data flow.
unique three-dimensional data flow nature, encompassing For anomaly detection testing and evaluation, the function
nodes, modes, and time. To address this, [22] processed f predicts data for the current timestamp. An IoDT system is
multimodal data flows separately, extracting spatial features considered to be in an anomalous state at a given time if the
and using prediction errors for anomaly detection. Despite prediction error exceeds a predefined threshold.
its effectiveness, the method faced challenges in large-scale We define A, a matrix representing spatial relationships
IoDT scenarios due to branch expansion with increasing drone among IoDT nodes, and Xt ∈ RM×N , which consolidates
numbers. readings from multiple modalities across M drone nodes.
 Combining the benefits of self-supervised learning and Given a timestamp window W, Xt , covering W timestamps,
reconstruction-based models, our method combines the tem- along with A, yields:
poral properties of local and global drones. This integration X̃t+W = f (Xt , Xt+1 , . . . , Xt+W−1 ; A|θ ) (3)
4290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 decoder reconstructs this into X  , mirroring the original data’s
 format. The combination of Z and X  then passes through a
 fully connected network and a softmax function to calculate
 the probability of anomalies. The key equations are:

 Z = fe (X; θe ), X  = fd (Z; θd ) (4)
   
 y = Softmax FC Z, X  (5)

 We train our methods using a two-stage process. In order
 to recreate typical IoDT data patterns, the model first learns
Fig. 1. Illustration of IoDT’s multi-drone, multimodal data collection. It
shows drones acquiring various types of data, represented by M, such as
 the data distribution throughout the whole time series. In
temperature and humidity. the second stage, it is further trained with data incorporating
 simulated anomalies, enhancing its capacity to differentiate
 between normal and abnormal patterns at different times.
 The parameters (θ ) are fine-tuned by minimizing the root Further discussion on these training strategies appears in the
mean square error between the predicted matrix X̃t+W and later sections.
the actual observations in matrix Xt+W . A ‘Score’ function
calculates inference scores, indicating the likelihood of anoma- D. Preprocessing Module
lies in the system. A high prediction discrepancy leads to a
 In the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT), where measurement
higher inference score, suggesting potential anomalies. If the
 attributes vary widely, data standardization is essential to
inference score at a specific timestamp exceeds a set threshold
 maintain consistent scales. Uneven measurement scales can
η, it flags an anomaly. The threshold η is typically determined
 skew analysis, either overstating or understating the imporby applying f to a validation dataset.
 tance of certain attributes. To counter this, we adopt Z score
 This research introduces a graph neural network model f and
 normalization for our input tensor, as defined by:
a novel method for determining its parameters θ , considering
   
the topology of the IoDT system. By integrating data from Xij − μ Xij
various nodes, modalities, and time instances, our approach X̃ij =   (6)
 σ Xij
aims to accurately identify anomalies within the IoDT system’s
data flow. Here, the input tensor is denoted by X ∈ RM×N×W and
 the data gathered by sensor i on drone j is indicated by Xij .
B. Data Flow Model The mean and standard deviation of Xij are μ(Xij ) and σ (Xij ),
 In the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT), understanding the respectively. The multimodal data across drones is adjusted
interplay between different drones and data types demands a using this Z score normalization approach to a standard
unique IoDT data flow structure. Consider a network in the distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1,
IoDT spanning a specific area, with N drones equipped with harmonizing the diverse data readings.
M sensors each, for monitoring environmental variables like To address the dynamic nature of IoDT environments,
temperature, humidity, and CO2 levels. These drones use a where drone nodes exhibit mobility and network topology
time synchronization approach for effective data sharing and may evolve, our graph neural network (GNN) model is
collection. designed with adaptability and scalability in mind. GNNs are
 For real-time analysis of both past and current data, the particularly well-suited for dynamic networks due to their
system utilizes a sliding window approach [34]. With the ability to learn and update node representations based on the
present time marked as t and the window size as W, data changing structure of the graph. In the context of IoDT, as
from the drones is collected over the interval {t − W − 1, t − drones move and the network topology changes, the GNN
W, . . . , t − 1}, forming a tensor X ∈ RM×N×W . As new data model dynamically adjusts the node embeddings to reflect
comes in, the window advances, turning the IoDT’s data flow new spatial relationships and connectivity patterns among
into a dynamic temporal network. In this approach, as seen drones. This allows the anomaly detection process to remain
in Figure 1, every drone gathers time series data on a range accurate and reliable even as drones enter or leave the network,
of parameters, including oxygen (O2 ), CO2 and temperature move within the environment, or when the data patterns they
(temp) levels. generate evolve over time.
 Furthermore, the model’s training process can be periodically updated with new data to refine the graph representations
C. Anomaly Detection Model and adapt to long-term changes in the IoDT environment. This
 Figure 2 presents our IoDT anomaly detection approach, continual learning approach ensures that the model remains
centered on a Graph Neural Network (GNN) autoencoder, effective in detecting anomalies in a changing environment.
building on the concepts of [22], [35]. The encoder fe and the Future enhancements will focus on improving the model’s
decoder fd in this autoencoder have the parameters θe and θd , real-time adaptability to sudden changes in network topology
respectively. Using dimension d, the encoder converts IoDT and exploring strategies for incremental learning that minimize
data into a hidden layer representation Z. Subsequently, the computational overhead while maintaining detection accuracy.
AKRAM et al.: DroneSSL: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTIMODAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN IoDT 4291

Fig. 2. Overview of the DroneSSL framework, processing IoDT’s time series data. It involves encoding this data into a hidden layer Z, then decoding
to reconstruct it as X  , and finally, employing a fully connected network using both the reconstructed output and encoder’s hidden layer to assess anomaly
probabilities in the system.

Fig. 3. A module for extracting spatial-temporal features from IoDT data, focusing on a single data type. It extracts temporal and spatial characteristics from
multiple drones’ data, resulting in a feature matrix that encapsulates the characteristics of multiple drones focusing on a single mode.

E. Encoder and Decoder Adhering to [19]’s approach for time series feature extrac-
 The encoder in our IoDT system comprises two primary tion, our module for local temporal features employs a fully
elements: a module for extracting spatiotemporal features from connected neural network. It processes IoDT data Xij (the data
drones based on individual data types, and an adaptive fusion from drone j in mode i), a W-dimensional vector, to distill
module for integrating these features. it into a d/2-dimensional vector. This is achieved through a
 In the IoDT setup, each data type forms a separate layer, series of layers, with K denoting the total number of layers.
with Xi ∈ RN×W representing the data flow for modality The operations at each layer k involve the hidden layer output
i, embodying multinode data streams of that modality. The H k , the initial data vector H 0 , the layer weights ak , biases
first step involves processing data through a module dedicated bk , and the output function g. The process transforms Xij ∈
to deriving spatial and temporal features for each drone, RW into a reduced feature vector Xijl ∈ Rd/2 , as detailed in
specific to a single modality. This results in specialized spa- Equations (7)-(9).
tiotemporal feature representations for each drone, respective H 0 = Xij (7)
to the modality. After processing all modal branches, these  
features are combined using adaptive fusion, facilitating the H k = σ ak H k−1 + bk , k ∈ 1, 2, . . . , K (8)
  
extraction of intermodal correlations. Then, to handle long- Xijl = g H K (9)
term dependencies, a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is utilized,
which serves as the foundation for the encoder’s hidden For global spatial-temporal features, a Graph Neural
layer. The decoder, structured similarly to the encoder, focuses Network (GNN) is employed. It integrates mode i data Xij
on reconstructing the original input from this hidden layer. from drone j with the spatial topology of the IoDT, considering
Detailed explanations of these components are provided in the adjacent drone data to extract common global features. This
following sections. process reduces the data dimensionality to d/2 and is described
 g
 in Equation (10). Here, Xij results from combining adjacent
 1) Spatial-Temporal Feature Extraction Module: As illusdrone data {Xiu , {Hju }} and processing through GNN functions
trated in Figure 3, this module within the IoDT framework
 GNN and fGNN . Our framework is adaptable to various GNN
is bifurcated into two parts: one for local temporal feature
 types, optimizing anomaly detection in IoDT data.
extraction, and another for global spatial-temporal feature   
 g
extraction. Xij = GNN Xij , fGNN Xiu , Hju , u ∈ N(j) (10)
4292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 2) Adaptive Fusion Module: The IoDT framework incorporates an adaptive fusion module to integrate unique and
common features from different modalities of drones. The
procedure initiates by concatenating these distinct and shared
attributes, followed by the application of a modality-specific
fusion weight q to create a comprehensive feature set for each
drone, denoted as X:jc . Equation (11) describes this process,
where the fusion weight for the ith modality is qi ∈ Rd . During
training, these originally random weights are adjusted.
 
 M  
 g
 X:jc = qi Xij Xijl (11)
 i=0
 To better capture temporal features in IoDT data and address
long-term dependencies, the study incorporates dual Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) layers [36]. This leads to the creation
of the encoder’s hidden layer representation, denoted by h. As
discussed in Section IV-B, an autoencoder network is used for
 Fig. 4. DroneSSL’s two-stage training process: initial reconstruction of standata reconstruction and classification. The decoder, mirroring dard input, followed by distinguishing anomalies. The visual representation
the encoder’s architecture, reconstructs the initial input X  from is simplified for clarity, showing data flow for a single modality from one
the hidden layer, as outlined in Equations (12) and (13). drone.
  
 Z = GRU X c , h (12)
 X  = decoder(Z) (13) calculation for the loss function is as follows: l is the total
 number of elements in X, and xi and xi are the elements in X
F. Training and X  respectively.

 1 
 l
 IoDT anomaly detection using deep learning on unlabeled 2
data mainly falls into two categories: unsupervised and self- Lrec = xi − xi (14)
 l
supervised learning techniques. i=0
 Unsupervised Methods: These methods focus on recon- 2) Stage 2: Self-Supervised Learning in DroneSSL: The
structing normal input data or predicting future values, using second phase of DroneSSL training aims to teach the model
the resulting errors for anomaly detection. A key tool here is to identify anomalies in new data. This involves creating
the autoencoder, designed to encode and then decode input negative samples by inserting anomalies into normal data. The
data. Its goal is to learn the data distribution, minimizing primary goal is to distinguish between abnormal and normal
reconstruction errors to create a compact representation in its data. Equation (15) defines the loss function, which aims to
hidden layer. Significant reconstruction errors indicate data reduce classification error. It takes two inputs: the projected
anomalies. probability of having a positive sample (yp ) and the actual
 Self-Supervised Methods: To avoid overfitting, especially label (y.
with limited normal data samples, self-supervised learning is    
used. This technique employs adversarial learning, distinguish- Lce = −y log yp − (1 − y) log 1 − yp (15)
ing between real (positive) and fake (negative) samples, with Figure 4 illustrates DroneSSL’s two-stage training process.
negative samples generated through methods like Generative The training combines elements from (14) and (15) into an
Adversarial Networks (GANs). Self-supervised learning essen- overall training formula, given in (16). The number of training
tially converts an unsupervised task into a supervised one. epochs is indicated by n in this case. In order to evaluate the
 Our IoDT framework employs a dual-phase training strat- present state of the system, the binary classification probability
egy. It combines the reconstruction efficiency of unsupervised is calculated during the inference phase using the classification
methods with the graph representation benefits of self- output branch.
supervised learning. The first phase acquaints the model with
normal data distribution, while the second involves introducing 1 1
 L= Lrec + 1 − Lce (16)
anomalies to generate negative samples. This is crucial for the n n
model to learn to distinguish between artificial anomalies and
regular data. G. Enhancing Scalability: Strategy for Large-Scale IoDT
 1) Stage 1: Reconstruction in DroneSSL Training: The first Scenarios
phase of DroneSSL training is focused on reconstructing In IoDT applications with large datasets, the computational
standard IoDT input data, as shown in (14). In this step, the and storage requirements increase significantly, especially
encoder is used to transform IoDT data X into a hidden layer with the complex layers of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs).
representation Z, and the decoder is used to reconstruct it. This research presents an enhanced DroneSSL technique,
The primary goal is to minimize the reconstruction error. The termed DroneSSL+, that integrates Piecewise Aggregate
AKRAM et al.: DroneSSL: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTIMODAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN IoDT 4293

 strictly necessary parameters, avoiding the capture of irrelevant personal information. Furthermore, the deployment of
 DroneSSL involves stakeholder engagement and transparency
 measures, ensuring that individuals in monitored areas are
 informed about the data collection practices and their rights.
 By prioritizing ethical considerations and privacy protection,
 DroneSSL aims to foster trust and acceptance among the
 public, ensuring its ethical deployment in diverse environments
 while safeguarding individuals’ privacy rights.

 IV. A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION
 To validate the effectiveness of our anomaly detection
Fig. 5. DroneSSL+ optimization strategy in a large-scale IoDT scenario.
 approach for the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT), several
 experiments were conducted. For the experimental setup,
Approximation (PAA) with K-means clustering to overcome we utilized sensor data from the Internet of Drone Things
these issues in large-scale IoDT. (IoDT). The hardware configuration included an AMD Ryzen
 K-means clustering, known for its efficiency and simplicity, 7 3700X CPU running at 3.6 GHz, coupled with an NVIDIA
segments drones into clusters based on their spatial coordinates GTX 1080 Ti GPU. The software framework was based on
C and a user-defined cluster number k, using Euclidean Python, with PyTorch-1.9.0 serving as the primary tool for
distances. PAA, as per [37], is effective for reducing data model implementation and testing of various approaches. Data
dimensionality while retaining key attributes. It compresses a visualization was managed using Python’s matplotlib library.
temporal data sequence Y = {Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Yn } of length n into a For enhanced computational efficiency, GPU acceleration was
shorter sequence Ȳ = {Ȳ1 , Ȳ2 , . . . , Ȳm } of length m, as shown enabled through CUDA version 11.2.
in (17).
 n A. Dataset
 mi
 
 m
 Yi = Yj , m≤n (17) Our model’s validation employed the dataset from the
 n Intel Berkeley Research Lab (IBRL) [38], adapted to an
 j= mn (i−1)+1
 IoDT context. The original IBRL network had 54 sensors
 Figure 5 displays the initial step of DroneSSL+, where measuring temperature, humidity, illumination, and voltage
drones are grouped into k clusters via K-means based on from 28 February to 5 May 2004.
their locations. Each drone is positioned closer to its cluster In our experiments, we used data from 51 drones, capcenter than to others. Afterwards, the temporal data dimension turing three modalities (temperature, humidity, and voltage)
is reduced using PAA. The segmented dataset then under- over 5000 moments between March 4 and March 9. This
goes independent training and inference on separate devices. created a 50 × 3 × 5000 data tensor. The training and test
This division in DroneSSL+ significantly reduces model sets were split 6:4, with 3000 time points for training and
parameters, enabling parallel processing on multiple devices 2000 for testing, covering three modalities across 51 drones.
and improving efficiency. The temporal dimension reduction DroneSSL’s second stage employed self-supervised learning,
converts D data points into fewer points (D1 ), thus lessening including negative sample creation through anomaly injection.
the input data points and preserving essential information,
thereby enhancing system speed.
 B. Anomaly Injection Methods
H. Ethical Considerations and Privacy We tested five anomaly detection methods:
 1) Scale Change: Multiplying IoDT data values by random
 In the deployment of DroneSSL for anomaly detection
 constants within the sliding window.
within the Internet of Drone Things (IoDT), ethical consid-
 2) Negation: Inverting IoDT data values by a factor of −1
erations and privacy concerns take on paramount importance,
 to create mirrored data.
especially given the system’s potential application in sensitive
 3) Sudden Change: Significantly altering IoDT data values,
and diverse environments. The utilization of drones equipped
 as shown in (18).
with various sensors for monitoring purposes raises significant  
privacy issues, as these devices can inadvertently collect up
 Xij (t) = Xij (t) ± Xi − Xidown , t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , τ } (18)
personal data without consent. To mitigate such risks, our
framework incorporates strict data handling and processing 4) Intermodal Anomaly: Introducing anomalies that disrupt
protocols that align with established privacy regulations, such correlations between different modalities.
as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the 5) Internode Anomaly: Injecting anomalies to break corre-
European Union. These protocols ensure that all data collected lations in a single mode among multiple drones.
by drones are anonymized and encrypted, preventing the These experiments aimed to evaluate DroneSSL’s anomaly
identification of individuals from the sensor data. Additionally, detection capabilities in a complex IoDT environment, adapt-
DroneSSL employs mechanisms to limit data collection to ing traditional wireless sensor network methods to IoDT.
4294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

C. Performance Assessment Metrics for DroneSSL
 For evaluating the efficacy of the DroneSSL method
in detecting anomalies within the IoDT framework, we
focus on three primary metrics: the F1 score (F1), recall
(Rec) and precision (Prec), all calculated on the test
dataset.
 Prec (Precision): Precision is the ratio of correctly predicted
abnormal samples to all samples that DroneSSL expected to
be abnormal.
 Rec (Recall): Recall assesses the percentage of correctly
 Fig. 6. Graph depicting the sensitivity test results, where a higher p value
identified abnormal samples by DroneSSL compared to the corresponds to a smaller anomaly deviation from normal data.
actual abnormal samples present in the dataset.
 F1 Score: Precision and recall are seen in balance by
the F1 score, which is a harmonic mean of the two. It’s multiple tests within these parameters to derive the best results,
derived from the confusion matrix elements: True Positives which are detailed in the following sections.
(TP), True Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP), and False
Negatives (FN). TP indicates accurately detected anomalies,
 E. Baseline Method Comparisons for DroneSSL
FP represents incorrect anomaly detections, TN counts correct
identifications of normal instances, and FN refers to anomalies We examined our DroneSSL approach against three deep
that were not detected. The formula for F1 is F1 = 2 × learning-based anomaly detection techniques in order to assess
Prec×Rec its effectiveness in the IoDT environment.
Prec+Rec .
 For testing, the test set is split into two subsets: one 1) CNN-LSTM Model: An 8-layer CNN-LSTM model was
with timestamps for anomaly injection (set-1) and another built using PyTorch, comprising a sequence of Conv2d,
without anomalies (set-2). Every test set undergoes a total of T MaxPool2d, LSTM, and FC layers. This model classifies
anomaly detection iterations. In each iteration, one of the four normal IoDT data as class 0 and data altered by anomalies
anomaly injection methods is applied at a random timestamp in as class 1. Its four-dimensional tensor input, matching the
set-1. Anomaly detection by DroneSSL is considered accurate IoDT data structure, is formatted as [batch, modal_num,
(TP) if it occurs within [t, t + delaystep] after an anomaly is drone_num, window_size]. However, unlike GNNs, CNNs
injected, where t is the timestamp and delaystep is the allowed lack the capability to exploit the inherent topological features
detection delay, set equal to the sliding window length W. of IoDT networks.
Missed detections are marked as FN. 2) Anomaly Detection Using Multivariate Time-Series
 For set-2, DroneSSL correctly identifying a normal point as Data: Zhao et al. [30] introduced a model combining
normal is labeled TN, and wrongly predicting an anomaly is prediction-based and reconstruction-based approaches. This
considered FP. method employs dual Graph Attention Networks (GATs)
 to extract correlation features between modes and temporal
 features over time. After concatenation, these features are
D. Sensitivity Analysis of the Model processed through a GRU, and the network bifurcates for
 To assess our model’s sensitivity to abnormal data, we next-timestamp prediction and input data reconstruction. The
initially trained it using standard parameters and then tested model, initially designed for single-node multimodal data,
its response to anomalies with varying deviations from normal was adapted to our multi-drone scenario. For our dataset,
data. 51 separate Zhao et al. [30] models were developed, one for
 The outcomes of this sensitivity analysis are shown in each drone, with performance metrics representing an average
Figure 6. As previously mentioned in Section III, the deviation of these models’ results.
factor for internode and intermodal anomalies is represented 3) Anomaly Detection Using Multinode Multimodal Timeby the symbol p. An increase in p signifies a smaller deviation Series Data: Zhang et al. [22] extended Zhao et al. [30]’s
from normal data. The graph indicates that as p rises, the approach by including spatial location information of multiple
model’s recall diminishes, suggesting the model is more adept drones. The model uses multiple GAT branches to extract
at distinguishing significant anomalies (lower p values) from features from various modalities and time sequences across
normal data. drones. A GRU is utilized for long-term dependencies, and a
 After establishing the model’s capability to differentiate GAT captures the spatial position of drones. It predicts nextnormal and abnormal data, we fine-tuned its parameters to timestamp values for all modes and drones, with anomalies
optimize performance. The sliding window length W was identified when the prediction error exceeds a certain threshadjusted within the range {10, 15, 20, 25, 30}, the learning old. When anomalous data greatly deviates from the usual data
rate lr was set within the range {0.00001, 0.00005, 0.0001, distribution, this approach works especially well.
0.0005}, the GRU hidden layer size was adjusted with the Table II presents the experimental results comparing the
range {8, 16, 32, 64}, and the anomaly deviation control performance of DroneSSL with other baseline methods in
variable p was set to 40. The anomaly injection duration (te − IoDT anomaly detection. The results include precision (Prec),
ts ) was fixed at 10. DroneSSL and baseline methods underwent recall (Rec), F1 score, and accuracy (Acc) for each method.
AKRAM et al.: DroneSSL: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTIMODAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN IoDT 4295

Fig. 7. Point anomaly test visualization for DroneSSL.

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS IN I O DT Point Anomaly Test: For the second modality from drone
 47, an analysis of raw data over 5000 time points was
 performed, as Fig. 7(a) illustrates. Test data is represented by
 the green curve, while training data is shown by the purple
 curve. Predicted values are displayed on the orange curve,
 with a possible anomaly indicated by a spike. Notably, the
 prediction curve’s multiple spikes to 1 might suggest either
 misjudgments or unrecognized anomalies in the original data.
 The response of DroneSSL to a purposefully created point
 The CNN-LSTM method exhibited lower performance metanomaly at the 500th moment in the test set is seen in Fig. 7(b),
rics, primarily due to its limited ability to exploit the IoDT
 which confirms the model’s capacity to identify significant
network topology compared to GNNs. GNNs enable drones
 deviations from normal ranges by displaying a marked rise
to derive information from all adjacent drones, which proves
 in judgment values. Fig. 7(c) displays the alterations in the
more effective than the CNN’s convolutional layers confined
 hidden layer vector for the same modality and drone around
to the kernel’s range. Zhao et al. [30], focusing on multimodal
 the 511th moment, where an anomaly was introduced. The
data correlations, does not incorporate spatial location features
 green line indicates the vector without anomalies, while
of drones, requiring separate model training for each drone.
 the purple line shows post-anomaly alterations, revealing a
Furthermore, Zhao et al. [30]‘s model sometimes experiences
 distinct difference. Fig. 7(d) presents the reconstruction curves
training difficulties like gradient explosions, affecting its
 with and without an anomaly at the 510th moment. The
performance relative to Zhang et al. [22] and DroneSSL.
 normal input in this case is shown by the purple curve,
 Zhang et al. [22]‘s method, though utilizing GNNs and
 its reconstruction is shown by yellow, and the reconstruc-
GRUs for timestamp-based feature extraction, struggles with
 tion post-anomaly is shown by brown. A notable numerical
long-term dependencies, especially in scenarios with larger
 shift in the reconstruction curve after the anomaly injection
training sets than test sets. This limitation can impact its ability
 demonstrates DroneSSL’s sensitivity to abrupt deviations from
to detect distant correlations, reducing its anomaly detection
 normal data. These visual assessments affirm DroneSSL’s
accuracy.
 efficiency in learning normal data patterns and its adeptness
 In contrast, DroneSSL merges reconstruction-based models
 in spotting and responding to anomalies within the IoDT
with self-supervised learning for effective normal data feature
 framework.
capture and graph representation learning generalization. It
 Contextual Anomaly Test: As seen in Fig. 8(a), we examined
employs GNNs for both global common node information
 5000 minutes of data from drone 45’s first modality in order
extraction and individual drone data analysis. DroneSSL supto further illustrate DroneSSL’s capacity to identify contexports various GNN types, with both GCN and GAT-based
 tual abnormalities. The orange curve highlights anticipated
approaches outperforming others. Specifically, GAT-based
 anomalies, whereas the purple curve shows training data and
DroneSSL achieves the highest overall performance, with
 the green curve indicates test data. DroneSSL’s response to
its F1 score surpassing Zhao et al. [30] by 4.9% and
 contextual anomalies inserted between test set moments 700–
Zhang et al. [22] by 8.7%.
 1000, while adjacent drones exhibit similar declines, is shown
 in Fig. 8(b). A subtle deviation from normal ranges was
F. Interpretability of DroneSSL introduced at the 850th moment, which DroneSSL successfully
 We ran a visual analysis on training and test data to confirm identified as a contextual anomaly. Fig. 8(c) depicts changes in
that DroneSSL can comprehend normal data distribution and the hidden layer vector for drone 45 around the 860th moment,
detect anomalies. This involved looking at the reconstructed with the green line showing the vector without anomaly and
data X  and the hidden layer representation Z for a particular the purple line post-anomaly injection, highlighting a sigdrone. nificant difference. Fig. 8(d) shows the reconstruction curves
4296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 8. Visualization of contextual anomaly detection in DroneSSL, showing data and prediction curves for drone 45.

Fig. 9. Periodic anomaly test visualization for timestamps 150-180, showing DroneSSL’s response to injected anomalies.

Fig. 10. Periodic anomaly test visualization for timestamps 1450-1480, highlighting DroneSSL’s ability to recognize periodic patterns in IoDT data.

before and after injecting the contextual anomaly at the 860th are displayed in Fig. 9(c) and (d), respectively, illustrating
moment. The numerical change in the reconstruction curve, DroneSSL’s capability to identify and respond to the anomaly.
though less drastic than in point anomaly cases, confirms Fig. 10 displays outcomes of injecting the shape into moments
DroneSSL’s sensitivity to subtle deviations from normal pat- 1450-1480. As seen in Fig. 10(b), since the injected shape
terns. resembles the training set waveform and aligns with its
 Periodic Anomaly Test: This test evaluated DroneSSL’s periodicity, DroneSSL does not classify it as an anomaly. This
understanding of periodic normal data patterns. In the test response, along with the earlier results, showcases DroneSSL’s
set data of drone 45, a unique form that resembled those in proficiency in discerning periodic patterns in IoDT data.
the training set was added between moments 150-180 and Fig. 10(c) and (d) depict the hidden layer vector and recon-
1450-1480. The results of the specific shape injection into struction curve changes at timestamp 1483, illustrating slight
moments 150–180 are shown in Fig. 9. This shape introduces deviations but within acceptable ranges, leading DroneSSL
a large anomaly, as shown in Fig. 9(b), which is accurately to not flag this instance as anomalous. These tests highlight
detected by DroneSSL during the lag period. The hidden layer DroneSSL’s capacity to detect anomalies while respecting the
vector and reconstruction curve changes at timestamp 183 inherent periodic nature of normal IoDT data.
AKRAM et al.: DroneSSL: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTIMODAL ANOMALY DETECTION IN IoDT 4297

 TABLE III
 L ARGE -S CALE I MPROVEMENT S TRATEGY W ITH D RONE SSL+ metrics. DroneSSL’s successful application in challenging
 environments not only highlights its potential in critical monitoring tasks but also underscores the transformative impact
 of merging spatial crowdsourcing with advanced computational technologies. Looking ahead, the exploration of further
 optimizations and the expansion of DroneSSL’s application
 scope promise to enrich the IoDT landscape, paving the way
 for groundbreaking developments in IoT edge computing and
 environmental surveillance technologies.
 Future enhancements to DroneSSL could significantly
 enhance its efficacy and extend its applicability across a
G. DroneSSL+ in Large-Scale IoDT Scenarios wider range of Internet of Things (IoT) environments, addressing critical challenges such as computational efficiency and
 In response to the computational and memory demands
 real-time data processing. By integrating edge computing
of expanding Internet of Drone Things (IoDT) networks,
 and federated learning, DroneSSL could offer decentralized
we introduce an advanced version of DroneSSL, termed
 anomaly detection capabilities, reducing latency and band-
DroneSSL+ . This version integrates K-means clustering and
 width usage while ensuring data privacy and security through
Piecewise Aggregate Approximation (PAA) for enhanced effiadvanced encryption techniques. Additionally, expanding its
ciency, as discussed in Section IV-F.
 adaptability to various IoT domains, including industrial
 Two sets of experiments were conducted to assess
 IoT (IIoT) for predictive maintenance and smart cities for
DroneSSL+ ’s time complexity performance. The first set
 urban monitoring, necessitates the development of flexible,
(Experiment 1) involved clustering the IoDT network and
 generalized models that can effortlessly learn from diverse
running the DroneSSL framework on separate devices per
 data types and sources. Incorporating transfer learning could
cluster, reducing model parameters and GPU usage. The
 further streamline DroneSSL’s deployment across different
second set (Experiment 2) utilized PAA to compress the time
 scenarios, minimizing the dependency on extensive labeled
dimension of the dataset while maintaining a constant number
 datasets. Overcoming regulatory and standardization hurdles,
of clusters, performing anomaly detection at specified intervals
 especially in drone airspace management, alongside ensuring
to further cut down on runs and time overhead.
 robust privacy and security measures, will be paramount
 The results, shown in Table III, reveal that increasing the
 for DroneSSL’s broader implementation. Such advancements
number of clusters leads to a slight decline in DroneSSL+ ’s
 promise to solidify DroneSSL’s position as a versatile, efficient
performance but significantly reduces the average testing
 tool for monitoring and surveillance within the ever-evolving
time. Notably, reducing the dataset size to 4/5 through PAA
 IoT landscape, offering promising prospects for future research
improves performance, likely due to PAA’s efficiency in
 and application in this domain.
preserving general data trends while eliminating some irregu-
 Enhancing the validation of DroneSSL’s performance furlarities. However, more substantial reductions, such as to 2/5
 ther, future work could explore a broader array of datasets,
of the original size, result in a marked performance drop, with
 specifically those capturing a wider range of real-world IoDT
the F1 score falling to 70.4% despite a substantial decrease in
 applications, such as urban surveillance, environmental monaverage testing time.
 itoring, and industrial inspections. Integrating datasets with
 Therefore, striking a balance between performance and testvarying characteristics and challenges, such as different scales
ing time efficiency is crucial, depending on the specific IoDT
 of IoDT deployments and diverse anomaly types, would proapplication needs. Selecting an optimal number of clusters
 vide a more robust evaluation of DroneSSL’s adaptability and
and PAA reduction ratio is key to successfully implementing
 efficacy across different scenarios. Additionally, incorporating
DroneSSL+ in large-scale IoDT anomaly detection scenarios.
 a wider range of performance metrics, such as detection
 latency, scalability, and computational efficiency, alongside
 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK precision, recall, and F1 score, would offer a more compre-
 To sum up, this paper has introduced DroneSSL, an inno- hensive assessment of the system’s overall performance. A
vative anomaly detection framework that seamlessly integrates comparative analysis with industry standards and state-of-thespatial crowdsourcing with the Internet of Drone Things art methods, particularly those deployed in real-world IoDT
(IoDT) and TinyML to address the complexities of envi- applications, would further elucidate DroneSSL’s competitive
ronmental monitoring, notably in scenarios like Australian advantages, shedding light on its practical implications and
bushfire management. By utilizing drones and unmanned potential for widespread adoption.
ground vehicles for data collection across inaccessible terrains,
DroneSSL embodies a cutting-edge approach that leverages R EFERENCES
lightweight machine learning models for efficient and effec- [1] J. Akram, Z. Najam, and A. Rafi, “Efficient resource utilization in cloudtive spatiotemporal analysis. This framework’s combination fog environment integrated with smart grids,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Front.
of temporal feature extraction and a scalable Graph Neural Inf. Technol. (FIT), 2018, pp. 188–193.
 [2] M. T. R. Khan, M. M. Saad, M. A. Tariq, J. Akram, and D. Kim,
Network (GNN) architecture optimizes anomaly detection in “SPICE-IT: Smart COVID-19 pandemic controlled eradication over
IoDT, demonstrating a significant improvement in performance NDN-IoT,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 74, pp. 50–64, Oct. 2021.
4298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 [3] A. Tahir, A. Akram, A. Z. Kouzani, H. S. Munawar, J. Akram, and [20] L. Zhao, M. Gao, and Z. Wang, “ST-GSP: Spatial-temporal global
 M. P. Mahmud, “Cloud-and fog-integrated smart grid model for efficient semantic representation learning for urban flow prediction,” in Proc.
 resource utilisation,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 23, p. 7846, 2021. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Min., 2022, pp. 1443–1451.
 [4] J. Akram, M. Umair, R. H. Jhaveri, M. N. Riaz, H. Chi, and S. Malebary, [21] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer:
 “Chained-drones: Blockchain-based privacy-preserving framework for Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” 2021,
 secure and intelligent service provisioning in Internet of Drone Things,” arXiv:2110.02642.
 Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 110, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 108772. [22] Q. Zhang, M. Ye, and X. Deng, “A novel anomaly detection method
 [5] J. Akram, A. Akram, R. H. Jhaveri, M. Alazab, and H. Chi, “BC- for multimodal WSN data flow via a dynamic graph neural network,”
 IoDT: Blockchain-based framework for authentication in Internet of Connect. Sci., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1609–1637, 2022.
 Drone Things,” in Proc. 5th Int. ACM Mobicom Workshop Drone Assist. [23] Z. Rong, L. Weiping, and M. Tong, “Review of deep learning,” Chin.
 Wireless Commun. 5G Beyond, 2022, pp. 115–120. J. Inf. Control, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 385–397, 2018.
 [6] A. Tahir, H. S. Munawar, M. Adil, S. Ali, A. Z. Kouzani, and [24] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 M. P. Mahmud, “Automatic target detection from satellite imagery using learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 machine learning,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1147, 2022. vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
 [7] A. W. A. Hammad, S. T. Waller, and M. Mojtahedi, J. Akram, and [25] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 H. S. Munawar, “Metaheuristics for capacitated vehicle routing for flood convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
 victims evacuation,” in Proc. AIP Conf. Proc., 2023, Art. no. 30010. [26] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
 [8] S. I. Khan, F. Ullah, H. S. Munawar, J. Akram, and B. J. Choi, “Drone- Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
 as-a-service (DaaS) for COVID-19 self-testing kits delivery in smart [27] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
 healthcare setups: A technological perspective,” ICT Exp., vol. 9, no. 4, attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2019, pp. 1–9.
 pp. 748–753, Aug. 2023. [28] Z. You, X. Gan, L. Fu, and Z. Wang, “GATAE: Graph attention-based
 [9] H. S. Munawar, Z. Gharineiat, J. Akram, and S. I. Khan, “A framework anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC Int. Conf.
 for burnt area mapping and evacuation problem using aerial imagery Commun. China (ICCC), 2020, pp. 389–394.
 analysis,” Fire, vol. 5, no. 4, p. 122, 2022. [29] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
[10] H. S. Munawar, F. Ullah, D. Shahzad, A. Heravi, J. Akram, and in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35,
 S. Qayyum, “Civil infrastructure damage and corrosion detection: An 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
 application of machine learning,” Buildings, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 156, 2022. [30] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
[11] J. Akram, A. Javed, S. Khan, A. Akram, H. S. Munawar, and W. Ahmad, attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2020,
 “Swarm intelligence based localization in wireless sensor networks,” in pp. 841–850.
 Proc. 36th Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., 2021, pp. 1906–1914. [31] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[12] H. S. Munawar, A. Z. Kouzani, J. Akram, and M. P. Mahmud, “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 “Using adaptive sensors for optimised target coverage in wireless sensor in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
 networks,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1083, 2022. pp. 3395–3404.
[13] J. Akram, S. Malik, S. Ansari, H. Rizvi, D. Kim, and R. Hasnain„ [32] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 “Intelligent target coverage in wireless sensor networks with adaptive detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learnsensors,” in Proc. IEEE 92nd Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), 2020, ing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
 pp. 1–5. pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
[14] H. Fei and G. Li, “Abnormal data detection algorithm for WSN based on [33] G. Jiayan, L. Ronghua, Z. Yan, and W. Guoren, “Graph neural network
 k-means clustering,” Comput. Eng., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 124–128, 2015. based anomaly detection in dynamic networks,” J. Softw., vol. 31, no. 3,
[15] D. Xiaoou, Y. Shengjian, W. Muxian, W. Hongzhi, G. Hong, and pp. 748–762, 2020.
 Y. Donghua, “Anomaly detection on industrial time series based on [34] M. Datar, A. Gionis, P. Indyk, and R. Motwani, “Maintaining stream
 correlation analysis,” J. Softw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 726–747, 2020. statistics over sliding windows,” SIAM J. Comput., vol. 31, no. 6,
[16] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: pp. 1794–1813, 2002.
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative [35] M. Ye, Q. Zhang, X. Xue, Y. Wang, Q. Jiang, and H. Qiu, “A novel
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, self-supervised learning-based anomalous node detection method based
 pp. 703–716. on an autoencoder for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 18,
[17] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for no. 1, pp. 256–267, Mar. 2024.
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-Based variational autoencoder,” [36] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2019. of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” 2014,
[18] W. Yu and C. Zhao, “Broad convolutional neural network based arXiv:1412.3555.
 industrial process fault diagnosis with incremental learning capability,” [37] E. Keogh, K. Chakrabarti, M. Pazzani, and S. Mehrotra, “Dimensionality
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 5081–5091, Jun. 2020. reduction for fast similarity search in large time series databases,” Knowl.
[19] Y. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Yu, and T. Qin, “Adaptive memory Inf. Syst., vol. 3, pp. 263–286, Aug. 2001.
 networks with self-supervised learning for unsupervised anomaly detec- [38] S. Madden, P. Bodik, W. Hong, C. Guestrin, M. Paskin, and R. Thibaux.
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12068–12080, “Intel lab data.” Intel Berkeley Res. lab. 2004. [Online]. Available: http://
 Dec. 2023. db.csail.mit.edu/labdata/labdata.html