IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 6871

 ECNet: Robust Malicious Network Traffic
 Detection With Multi-View Feature
 and Confidence Mechanism
 Xueying Han , Song Liu, Junrong Liu, Bo Jiang , Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu

 Abstract— Malicious traffic detection in the real world faces the The security of individuals, enterprises, and even nations is all
challenge of dealing with a diverse mix of known, unknown, and under serious threat. Identifying malicious traffic from a vast
variant malicious traffic, requiring methods that are accurate, amount of network traffic, while reducing false positives and
generalizable, and reliable for identifying both known and
emerging threats. However, existing methods are unable to fully negatives, has become a key research area in network security.
meet these requirements. Supervised methods can accurately Network traffic in real-world scenarios is diverse and
detect known malicious traffic, but their performance declines complex. As shown in Figure 1, the detection method will
significantly when encountering unknown attacks. Additionally, encounter known, variant1 and unknown malicious traffic
the misclassification is usually silent, leading to doubts about the when running in a real environment, which requires the
reliability and practicality. Unsupervised methods can deal with
unknown attacks, but their high false positive rate and inability method to be robust and reliable. Firstly, they must be able
to utilize the knowledge of existing attack data constitute obvious to accurately distinguish known normal and malicious traffic
shortcomings. To overcome these limitations, we propose ECNet, while reducing false negatives and false positives. Secondly,
an end-to-end robust malicious network traffic detection method. they need to exhibit a certain degree of generalizability,
Particularly, ECNet incorporates multi-view features, including enabling them to recognize variant and unknown malicious
content and pattern features, and employs a gated-based feature
fusion approach, providing an efficient and robust representation. traffic. Thirdly, the detection process should be credible to
Moreover, ECNet introduces a confidence mechanism and com- ensure its reliable application in the real world. While ensuring
bines category probability and confidence values during training complete accuracy is challenging, the methods should at
and detection; therefore, it can accurately detect both known least inform users when encountering traffic that they cannot
and unknown malicious traffic while ensuring the credibility adequately address.
of results. To validate the performance of ECNet, we conduct
comprehensive experiments on six reorganized datasets and Machine learning and deep learning based malicious traffic
compare ECNet with seven state-of-the-art methods. The results detection methods have been widely developed over the past
demonstrate that ECNet outperforms others, particularly show- few decades. They detect malicious traffic using statistical
ing significant improvements in detecting unknown attacks, with information, sequence information or raw packets through
up to a 14.15% increase in F1 compared to the best-performing supervised or unsupervised approaches. However, they are
method.
 unable to fully fulfill the aforementioned requirements. Current
 Index Terms— Malicious network traffic detection, deep learn- supervised methods [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] can
ing, feature extraction, confidence mechanism, robustness.
 accurately detect known malicious traffic and possess a certain
 I. I NTRODUCTION degree of generalization, but are ineffective in identifying
 unknown attacks. When the distribution of training and test

W ITH the rapid developments of network technology,
 the challenges faced by cybersecurity are becoming increasingly severe. Attack methods have become more
 data differs, their performances decline severely. More critically, as shown in Figure 2, the failures are silent. The model
 is over-confident and does not recognize whether they are
sophisticated and covert, including various advanced malware, capable of processing a given input. The silent misclassifiphishing attacks, and complex cyber espionage activities [1]. cation can leave systems in an unnoticed risk state, making
 Manuscript received 10 January 2024; revised 30 May 2024; accepted 6 July network administrators unable to trust these methods and
2024. Date of publication 10 July 2024; date of current version 18 July hindering their application in the real world. Current unsu-
2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and pervised methods [10], [11], [12], [13] can detect emerging
Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFC2206402; in part by
the Youth Innovation Promotion Association Chinese Academy of Sciences threats by identifying traffic that deviates from past normal
(CAS) under Grant 2021156; in part by the Program of Key Laboratory of behaviors or the majority as malicious traffic. However, the
Network Assessment Technology, CAS; and in part by the Program of Beijing essence of unsupervised methods is detecting anomalies rather
Key Laboratory of Network Security and Protection Technology. The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication than maliciousness specifically. When the difference between
was Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Bo Jiang.) normal and malicious traffic is not obvious, they may produce
 The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, 1 Variant attacks can be considered as unknown attacks to some extent,
China (e-mail: hanxueying@iie.ac.cn; liusong1106@iie.ac.cn; liujunrong@ so in the following, we use the concept of unknown attacks interchangeably
iie.ac.cn; jiangbo@iie.ac.cn; luzhigang@iie.ac.cn; liubaoxu@iie.ac.cn). for convenience and simplicity. In some cases, unknown attacks include both
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3426304 variant attacks and truly unknown attacks.
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 other utilizing a confidence mechanism for model training
 and malicious traffic detection. Firstly, we extract content
 features using PacketCNN and attention mechanisms based on
 randomly selected raw packets, and pattern features through
 a unique coding method that encodes packet length and
 direction sequences, followed by SessionCNN. A gated-based
 feature fusion method is also employed to integrate these
 features flexibly. The comprehensive dimensions of features
 and advanced extraction method ensure the accuracy of ECNet,
Fig. 1. Conceptual diagram of network traffic types during model training while the random packet selection and the applications of
and detection. During training, the model is exposed to normal traffic and CNN and Transformer grant ECNet generalization ability.
several specific types of malicious traffic (Dos-Goldeneye). However, in the
deployment of the model in real-world scenarios, not only known malicious Secondly, we innovatively introduce a confidence mechanism
traffic (DoS-GoldenEye) is encountered, but also variants of these types and integrate it into model training and malicious traffic
(DoS-Hulk) and previously unknown malicious traffic (such as Botnet). These detection. For each session, ECNet not only outputs the
diverse and complex malicious traffic pose challenges for network security.
 probability that it belongs to each category but also provides a
 confidence value, which indicates the reliability of the result.
 In a normally functioning network, the normal traffic does not
 exhibit significant changes over a period of time. Based on
 this, we identify traffic with low confidence as anomalous,
 which enables the detection of unknown malicious traffic. For
 known malicious traffic, it typically has higher confidence and
 can be accurately classified through the maximum category
 probability. Overall, ECNet integrates the advantages of both
Fig. 2. The distribution of maximum class probability (MCP) of a supervised supervised and unsupervised learning. It leverages labeled data
method, GTID [7], on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III for training, facilitating the accurate and confident detection
dataset (right). “Normal - Malicious” indicates that normal traffic is classified
as malicious. The sum of the relative densities of bars of each color equals 1. of known malicious traffic. It employs confidence values
It can be seen a large portion of misclassified normal traffic (green bars) and to evaluate the model’s degree of certainty with samples,
malicious traffic (orange bars) have MCP close to 1, indicating that GTID is thus enabling users to trust the outcomes and to identify
very confident about these results. So, users are unable to perceive potential
misclassifications by observing MCP, that’s to say, the failures are silent. unknown malicious traffic. Besides, ECNet adopts an endto-end approach that offers a new unified paradigm for the
 detection of complex malicious traffic, demonstrating more
a high false positive rate. Besides, most unsupervised methods significant advantages compared to other multi-stage methods.
are based solely on normal or unlabeled traffic, and cannot In conclusion, the main contributions of this paper include:
directly utilize the resources of existing attack data, putting • We propose ECNet, an end-to-end robust malicious netthem at a disadvantage in detecting known and variant attacks. work traffic detection method. It incorporates multi-view
 Furthermore, there are many methods that focus on feature extraction and a confidence mechanism, and can
achieving robust malicious traffic detection from various per- detect both known and unknown malicious traffic.
spectives, yet they still encounter several problems. Extracting • We develop comprehensive features from multi-view to
more robust features [14], [15], [16] that are less susceptible fully represent traffic, including content and pattern feato various changes is a common way to maintain the model’s tures, and design a gated-based method for feature fusion,
good performance in changing environments. Nevertheless, ensuring the accuracy and generalizability of ECNet.
their utility is limited to scenarios where only minor changes • We introduce a confidence mechanism that can assess the
in traffic occur, such as bandwidth fluctuations. When facing certainty of the model’s results, and design a probability
unknown or variant malicious traffic, they still have the branch and a confidence branch for ECNet. By integrating
problems of misclassification and overconfidence as previously these branches, ECNet can achieve accurate and reliable
discussed. Other methods [17], [18] divide the malicious detection of known and unknown malicious traffic.
traffic detection problem into multiple stages, progressively • We conduct comprehensive experiments on six reorgaperforming unknown traffic detection and traffic classifica- nized datasets that can reflect the complexity of malicious
tion to robustly detect complex malicious traffic, including traffic in the real world. The results demonstrate that
both known and unknown types. However, the separation ECNet is superior to others. It improves F1 by 22.41%
of multiple stages may prevent achieving a globally optimal compared to supervised methods and 14.15% to unsupersolution, and errors from the initial stage may propagate to vised methods in detecting unknown malicious traffic.
the subsequent stages.
 To solve these problems, we propose a novel end-to- II. R ELATED W ORK
end method ECNet, which achieves accurate, robust, and
reliable detection of both known and unknown malicious A. Supervised Malicious Network Traffic Detection
traffic. ECNet mainly consists of two parts, one extracting Supervised malicious network traffic detection methods rely
comprehensive multi-view features of network traffic and the on pre-labeled data to train models, learning the features of
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6873

normal and malicious traffic to distinguish between them. attacks. They primarily detect malicious traffic by identifying
Depending on the models used, they can be categorized into patterns that deviate from past normal traffic behaviors or the
machine learning based and deep learning based methods. majority of traffic.
 Machine learning based methods first extract statistical Constructing a model that can perfectly reconstruct normal
features from network traffic, such as duration and packet traffic and considering traffic that cannot be reconstructed
count, and then train machine learning models like SVM and as malicious is a common method. The autoencoder is the
Decision Trees based on these features. Gu et al. [2] used most commonly used model for this purpose. Mirsky et al.
Naive Bayes for feature embedding to obtain high-quality [10] proposed an online plug-and-play method called Kitsune.
features and then constructed a detection model with SVM. It maintained a time window to dynamically extract the
Anderson and McGrew [3] extracted over 300 standard and contextual features of traffic, then trained an ensemble of
enhanced features from sessions, including metadata and byte autoencoders to reconstruct these features, thereby learning
distribution, and used a Random Forest as a detector. These the patterns of normal traffic. Catillo et al. [11] proposed
methods are computationally efficient and easy to implement, CPS-Guard, which used an autoencoder to reconstruct session
but the selection of features depends on expert knowledge, and features. They also designed an outlier-aware algorithm to
they are unable to capture complex malicious traffic patterns. adaptively select thresholds for distinguishing normal and
 Deep learning based methods can solve the problem of malicious traffic.
manual dependency in feature selection and improve detection Traffic that deviates significantly from the majority can be
accuracy. They use CNNs, LSTMs, Transformers, and GNNs considered malicious, and this can be achieved through clusterto automatically learn latent features from sessions, such as ing algorithms or isolation forests. Zhang et al. [13] employed
spatial, temporal and topological features. They mainly use isolation forest to detect isolated malicious traffic. They also
the sequential information of traffic or directly use raw traffic proposed an on-demand evolution isolation forest to enable
as input. the system to detect malicious traffic in real-time and adapt
 Sequential information refers to a series of feature to environmental changes. Fu et al. [12] constructed network
sequences extracted from network traffic, such as packet traffic into a flow interaction graph, and then sequentially
length sequences and packet direction sequences. They retain identified abnormal components and nodes using DBSCAN,
the temporal order information of traffic and can capture ultimately pinpointing the malicious traffic. In this process,
dynamic behavior patterns in network communications. The they analyzed the connectivity, sparsity, and statistical features
packet length sequence is one of the most commonly used of the graph.
features. Liu et al. [6] proposed an end-to-end detection model Unsupervised methods can detect unknown attacks, but their
called FS-Net. It introduced a reconstruction mechanism and performance generally does not reach the level of supervised
employed a GRU-based autoencoder to learn more distinctive methods. Some malicious traffic has minimal differences from
features from the packet length sequence for classification. normal traffic, making it difficult for unsupervised methods to
Hu et al. [19] modeled the packet length sequence and distinguish them, whereas supervised methods can accurately
direction sequence of a session as a graph. Then, they utilized identify them using existing knowledge. Additionally, unsu-
Graph2Vec to learn the representation of the graph. pervised learning methods tend to have a higher false positive
 Both statistical and sequential features involve some infor- rate for normal traffic.
mation loss during the feature extraction process. Raw traffic
provides complete information about network traffic, allowing C. Robust Malicious Network Traffic Detection
for a fine-grained analysis of packets. Yu et al. [5] used Conventional malicious network traffic detection methods
two CNNs to successively learn packet-level and session-level often experience performance degradation when faced with
features of network traffic. They also used few-shot learn- variations in traffic. Consequently, there are some studies that
ing to improve the detection reliability of minor categories. focus on robust malicious network traffic detection.
Zhang et al. [8] encoded each packet into a byte-level traffic Most studies aim to design more robust features that remain
graph, and then utilized GNN to get an overall representation stable even when traffic changes due to environmental factors
vector for each packet. Han et al. [7] extracted packet-level fea- or other conditions. Diallo and Patras [14] used cluster centers
tures through n-gram and proposed a time-aware Transformer as an extension of traffic features to address the challenge
to extract session-level features for classification. Using raw of sensitivity to subtle changes in traffic features. Fu et al.
network traffic can yield good performance, but it requires [16] extracted frequency domain features from the per-packet
more computational and storage resources. feature sequences and then used statistical clustering to detect
 These supervised methods show extremely high perfor- malicious traffic. They claimed that frequency domain features
mance in detecting known malicious traffic. However, their can represent fine-grained information and are not disturbed
performance significantly decreases when facing unknown by the injected noise packets, enabling accurate and robust
attacks, along with issues of silent misclassification. detection. Xie et al. [15] thoroughly analyzed the TCP mechanisms that may affect packet length sequences of flows, and
 proposed a self-supervised learning-based traffic augmentation
B. Unsupervised Malicious Network Traffic Detection mechanism capable of generating effective feature vectors that
 Unsupervised malicious network traffic detection methods robustly represent network traffic in diverse network environdo not rely on pre-labeled data and can detect unknown ments. However, these methods still struggle to effectively
6874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

detect unknown malicious traffic that has not previously been Algorithm 1 Training ECNet
encountered during training. Input: Session S, label y
 Some methods can simultaneously identify both known and Output: Well-trained ECNet
unknown malicious traffic robustly. Yang et al. [17] formu- 1: Initialize the parameters of ECNet
lated the problem as a two-stage minimization problem. They 2: for epoch do
first used Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (CVAE) to 3: /* Content feature extraction */ ▷ IV-B1
classify known malicious traffic by minimizing empirical risk, 4: Randomly select n p packets from S
then utilized Extreme Value Theory to model the distribu- 5: Perform content augmentation on packets ▷ IV-C3
tion of reconstruction errors from the CVAE and identify 6: Extract content feature f c of S from augmented packets
unknown attacks based on abnormal reconstruction errors.
Qiu et al. [18] also followed a similar staged approach. Open- 7: /* Pattern feature extraction */ ▷ IV-B2
Max was first used to detect some unknown malicious traffic, 8: Get length sequence L and direction sequence D of S
then they identified unknown malicious traffic that has been 9: Encode L and D into vsq
misclassified into known categories based on reconstruction 10: Perform pattern augmentation on vsq ▷ IV-C3
loss. This multi-staged approach involves independent train- 11: Extract pattern feature f e of S from augmented vsq
ing for each stage, which compared to end-to-end methods, 12: /* Gated-based feature fusion */ ▷ IV-B3
struggles to achieve a globally optimal solution. When sepa- 13: Fusion f c and f e to get overall representation f s of S
rately carrying out anomaly detection and traffic classification, 14: /* Probability and Confidence generator */ ▷ IV-C1
it encounters issues common to conventional methods, such as 15: Get the probability p and confidence c
the silent misclassification of supervised methods and the high 16: /* Model training */ ▷ IV-C2
false positive rates of unsupervised methods. Moreover, errors 17: Calculate loss L and update the parameters of ECNet
in earlier stages can adversely affect subsequent stages. 18: end for
 19: return Well-trained ECNet
 III. T HREAT M ODEL AND D ESIGN G OAL
 Our objective is to propose a robust malicious network traf- Algorithm 2 Detecting Malicious Traffic With ECNet
fic detection method that can efficiently and accurately detect Input: Session S, Well-trained ECNet
traffic generated by known and emerging attacks. We use Output: prediction r
sessions reassembled from traffic based on five-tuple (source 1: /* Content feature extraction */ ▷ IV-B1
IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol) as 2: Randomly select n p packets from S
inputs, and it contains bidirectional packets. Our approach can 3: Extract content feature f c of S from packets
be deployed at the network edge to analyze traffic between 4: /* Pattern feature extraction */ ▷ IV-B2
devices in the local area network (LAN) and external Internet, 5: Get length sequence L and direction sequence D of S
working in conjunction with firewalls and intrusion detection 6: Encode L and D into vsq
systems. Additionally, our method can also monitor network 7: Extract pattern feature f e of S from vsq
traffic between hosts within a LAN through the mirror ports 8: /* Gated-based feature fusion */ ▷ IV-B3
of switches. 9: Fusion f c and f e to get overall representation f s of S
 The main goals of network attackers include disrupting 10: /* Probability and Confidence generator */ ▷ IV-C1
the availability of devices, stealing or altering sensitive infor- 11: Get the probability p and confidence c
mation, and using compromised devices to conduct other 12: /* Malicious traffic detection */ ▷ IV-C4
malicious activities. To achieve these goals, attackers may 13: Get predicted result r
employ external devices to perform attacks, such as brute 14: return r
force, DDoS, and C&C communications. They can also
leverage devices within the LAN that have already been
compromised to initiate attacks like DoS, network scanning, is used for model training and malicious traffic detection,
and lateral movements against other devices. Our method only and a confidence mechanism is introduced in these processes.
focuses on detecting active attacks that generate network traffic Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 show the processes of training
and does not consider passive attacks that do not generate ECNet and using ECNet to detect malicious traffic, respectraffic, such as privilege escalation [20], passive traffic analy- tively.
sis [21], or local exploitation of vulnerabilities.
 B. Multi-View Session Feature Extraction
 IV. M ETHOD
 To learn comprehensive session features that are repre-
A. Method Overview sentative enough to distinguish normal and malicious traffic,
 The overall structure of ECNet is shown in Figure 3. we extract features from both the content of the session’s
ECNet consists of two parts, namely Multi-view Session Fea- transmissions and the interaction patterns between the comture Extraction and Confidence-based Training and Detection. municating parties. Specifically, we randomly select a small
Firstly, ECNet learns sufficiently representative features from subset of packets from each session to learn content features.
content and pattern perspectives. Then, the extracted feature At the same time, we extract the packet length and direction
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6875

Fig. 3. The overall structure of ECNet. Firstly, ECNet separately extracts content features and pattern features from each session, and then uses a gated-based
feature fusion method to combine these features in the multi-view session feature extraction module. Next, the fused session features are used for model
training and malicious traffic detection. During training, traffic data augmentation is first performed on the sessions in training data. The session features
extracted from the augmented data are the inputs for the probability generator and confidence generator, resulting in p and c. At the same time, hints y also
need to be input into the trainer. During detection, data augmentation is not required. The results are obtained using p and c.

sequences of the session to learn pattern features from them. padded. To learn the latent feature of each packet, we design
We also design a gate-based feature fusion method to appro- a PacketCNN. It consists of three layers of 1d-CNN and
priately fuse these features together. Traffic data augmentation two layers of linear layers. The process is formulated as
is designed to optimize the training process, so it will be Equation (1), and f p′ is the extracted packet feature and FPC (·)
introduced in detail in Section IV-C. denotes the PacketCNN.

 1) Content Feature Extraction: Raw packets carry rich f p′ = FPC ( f p ) (1)
information, including header fields and payload, and can For different types of attacks or normal behaviors, different
better characterize network behaviors. They are useful for packets play distinct roles. For example, in SQL injection
detecting attacks with unusual signatures or attacks that deliver attacks, the data packets during transmission are often abnormalicious payload. Besides, it is highly challenging for attack- mal, whereas in flooding attacks, anomalies typically arise
ers to evade detection by mimicking normal traffic through during the handshake phase. To enable the model to focus
modifying the raw packets while ensuring the quality of the on the most crucial packets, we employ a multi-head attention
attack. Therefore, we choose to learn content features from mechanism to extract content features based on the extracted
raw packets. packet features.
 Although raw packets are useful in detecting malicious The process of the attention mechanism is as show in
traffic, it is noteworthy that different packets in a session Equation (2). The query, key, and value vectors in this paper
often contain much overlapping information. For example, are calculated as Q = f P W Q , K = f P W K and V = f P WV .
TCP traffic can be divided into those generated during the f P = [ f p′ 1 , . . . , f p′ n p ] is a vector consisting of packet features,
connection establishment phase and those generated during and we sort packet features by timestamp to align different
the data transmission phase. sessions. W Q , W K and WV are learnable weights.
 So, it is unnecessary to use all available packets. Employing
all packets can result in increased storage and computational QK T
 Attention(Q, K , V ) = so f tmax( √ )V (2)
overhead, and introduce noise. Besides, since we subsequently dk
extract pattern features from other perspective, we only need The multi-head attention mechanism allows the model to
to obtain the transmitted content information from the raw data focus on information at different levels, enhancing both the
packets. Based on these, we randomly select n p packets from a model’s expressive power and robustness. The process is
session and sort them by timestamps to learn content features. formulated as follows, and headi is the attention value of i th
In this paper, we set n p to 4 as a choice balancing performance Q
 head, Wh , WhK , WhV and Wh are learnable weights, concat (·)
and complexity. We aim to have the randomly selected packets denote the concatenate operation.
include those from both forward and backward connection
establishment and data transmission processes. Setting n p to Multi Att = concat (head0 , . . . , head3 )Wh (3)
4 ideally allows for the inclusion of packets representing these Q
 headi = Attention(QWh i , K WhK i , V WhV i ) (4)
scenarios.
 For each packet, IP and MAC addresses are first removed. Then, the multi-head attention values are averaged to obtain
Then, we convert the hexadecimal packets into decimal format the content feature f c of the session.
and represent each packet as a one-dimensional vector of size np
200, denoted as f p . If the packet length exceeds 200, the 1 X
 fc = Multi Atti (5)
excess is removed, and if it is less than 200, zero vector is np
 i=1
6876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Algorithm 3 Sequence Encoding
Input: L = (l1 , . . . , l N ), D = (d1 , . . . , d N ), m
Output: vsq
 1: Initialize vsq and vtmp as empty vectors
 2: for li ∈ L, di ∈ D do
 3: if di equals to di−1 then
 4: if len(vtmp ) is divisible by m then Fig. 4. An example of sequence encoding (m = 3).
 5: Append m zeros to vtmp
 6: end if
 7: Append li to vtmp one row, a burst with many packets is represented as adjacent
 8: else consecutive rows, and the initiation of each burst aligns in the
 9: Reshape vtmp into a 2D vector of m columns same column.
10: Append vtmp to vsq , and set vtmp as an empty vector After obtaining vsq , we design a SessionCNN based on
 CNN to learn pattern features. The spatial awareness of the
11: Append li to vtmp CNN structure aids in extracting features of traffic displayed
12: end if on the rows and columns of vsq . SessionCNN consists of two
13: end for layers of 2d-CNN and two layers of linear layer. As illustrated
14: Reshape vtmp into a 2D vector and append it to vsq in Equation (6), FSC (·) is SessionCNN, and f e denotes the
15: return vsq pattern feature.

 f e = FSC (vsq ) (6)

 2) Pattern Feature Extraction: For malicious traffic, besides 3) Gated-Based Feature Fusion: The content feature and
anomalies in content, there can also be abnormalities in pattern feature of a session are not mutually independent.
behavioral patterns. For instance, an attack might generate We propose a gated-based feature fusion method to integrate
a large amount of burst traffic or maintain long-term reg- them to get an overall representation of the session. The gating
ular traffic. Besides, due to the shared use of attack tools mechanism provides a flexible, effective, and robust method
and methodologies, similar types of attacks may exhibit for feature fusion.
similar behavior pattern [22]. Therefore, learning the behav- As shown in Equation (7) and (8), we first get two gate
ioral patterns of sessions is vital for detecting malicious vectors gc and ge . The content feature f c and pattern feature f e
traffic. are initially input to a bilinear function to obtain a temporary
 To learn the pattern feature of a session, we first extract vector, and then each element of the vector is scaled to [0, 1]
the length and direction of packets in a session, and combine by a sigmoid function σ . Wcg , Weg , bcg and beg are learnable
them as two sequences, noted as L = (l1 , . . . , l N ) and D = weights and biases. These two gate functions do not share
(d1 , . . . , d N ). li ∈ N is the length of i th packet. di ∈ {1, −1} parameters, thus considering different perspectives.
is the direction of i th packet. Then, we encode these two gc = σ ( f c T Wcg f e + bcg ) (7)
sequences into a two-dimensional vector, noted as vsq . The
process of sequence encoding is depicted in Algorithm 3, ge = σ ( f e Weg f c + beg )
 T
 (8)
and Figure 4 shows an example of sequence encoding. m Then, f c and f e are element-wise multiplied with their
is the number of columns for vsq , and we set m to 3. For respective gate vectors and are concatenated into the final
normal traffic, aside from large file transfers and streaming fused session feature f s .
services, it is rare to encounter many consecutive packets
in the same direction. We use burst to represent a series of f s = concat (gc ⊙ f c , ge ⊙ f e ) (9)
contiguous packets sent in the same direction [23]. Bursts
with a size of less than or equal to 3 accounts for 80% of
all cases, therefore setting m to 3 maximizes the efficiency of C. Confidence-Based Training and Detection
our encoding method and avoids creating too much redundant Existing methods cannot handle unknown malicious traffic
data. well and are prone to false negatives. They also tend to be
 Our encoding method can effectively and robustly repre- overly confident and assign high maximum category probabilsent the communication pattern within a session. Firstly, the ities to their outcomes, leading silent misclassification. These
encoded vector represents the direction well without using uncontrolled failures can damage user’s trust in the method.
signs. Forward and backward directions are relative concepts, We introduce a confidence mechanism to solve these problems.
and directly using the signs can introduce noise when source In this section, we first introduce the probability generaand destination hosts change. Our method is robust in this tor and confidence generator, which are shared components
situation and has better transferability across different envi- for training and detection. We then introduce the details of
ronments. Secondly, our method can capture the sequence, model training and traffic data augmentation method and
frequency, and burst of the content transmitted. Packet length finally describe the confidence-based malicious traffic detecrepresents the content to some extent. Each burst appears in tion method.
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6877

 1) Probability and Confidence Generator: ECNet is different from traditional classifiers. It has two branches: a
probability branch and a confidence branch.
 In the probability branch, the probability generator is the
same as traditional classifiers. The session feature f s is firstly
processed by a fully connected neural network FP G (·), and
then the output is converted into the probabilities p of belong- Fig. 5. An example of traffic data augmentation for a session. The left shows
ing to each category by a softmax function. the augmentation for content, and the right for pattern.

 p = so f tmax(FP G ( f s )) (10) The overall loss L is the sum of prediction loss and
 In the confidence branch, f s is also first processed through confidence loss. λ is the weight of confidence loss, and it
a fully connected neural network FC G (·) to obtain a value, is a hyper-parameter to balance these two losses.
then it is scaled between 0 and 1 using a sigmoid function to L = L p + λLc (15)
obtain the confidence value c.
 In the early stage of training, capturing good initial paramec = σ (FC G ( f s )) (11) ters is crucial as it facilitates faster convergence and improves
 the final performance of the model. If the model is allowed to
 Both FP G and FC G are composed of two linear layers use hints with a low penalty in the early stage, it will hamper
and a dropout layer. The difference is that the last layer of the learning of features used for classification in the probability
FP G has two neurons, representing normal and malicious, branch. Conversely, in the later stage, after the model has
while FC G has only one neuron. We use two independent been exposed to a sufficient number of samples, it should
neural networks to process f s separately instead of using focus more on enhancing the confidence of its predictions.
one network directly. This is because the goals of obtaining Therefore, we set λ to be gradually decreasing, which means
probabilities and confidence values are different. Employing the cost of using hints reduces gradually [25]. The decay
a single neural network necessitates a sufficiently complex process of λ with the training step s is shown in Equation (16).
network structure and parameters to capture all the features λ0 is the initial value of λ, β is used to adjust the decay
and relationships required for both targets. Such complexity speed.
increases the training burden and affects model convergence.
 2) Model Training: Inspired by Devries’s work [24] on λ(s) = λ0 ∗ e−s/β (16)
OOD image classification, we correlate the model’s confidence We also follow Devries [24] to give hints to the 50% of the
with the hints needed in its decision-making process. The inputs to prevent the model from ignoring outliers.
model is allowed to ask for some hints, that is true labels, 3) Traffic Data Augmentation: When over-fitting occurs, the
to assist in decision-making when facing inputs that it is model may accurately predict all inputs with a confidence of
uncertain about or unfamiliar with, but there is a certain 1. It will lead to the failures of the confidence branch when
penalty for using hints. After full training, the model will not facing test data. To address this problem, we specially design
request hints for inputs it is very certain about or has seen a traffic data augmentation method to generate hard samples.
before, where its confidence is high. For unfamiliar inputs, Data augmentation is performed from both content and
it will request real labels as hints, indicating lower confidence. pattern perspectives. For content augmentation, we randomly
 Based on these, the probabilities after using hints are set one of the n p packet features f p used in content feature
calculated as Equation (12), where pi and yi are the predicted extraction to zero vectors. For pattern augmentation, we add
and real probabilities of the session belonging to i th category random perturbations to the encoded sequence vector vsq to
respectively. c is the confidence generated by the confidence modify the communication pattern of the session. Specifically,
generator. The closer c is to 1, the more confident the model we randomly pick half the rows from vsq and randomly add or
is in its prediction results. subtract 1 to one or two values in each row. If the altered value
 becomes negative, it is maintained at 0. Figure 5 illustrates an
 pi′ = c · pi + (1 − c) · yi (12)
 example of content augmentation and pattern augmentation.
 The classification loss L p using modified probabilities is We perform content augmentation on the data comprising
calculated as follows. n c is the number of categories and it a proportion of αc , and pattern augmentation on the data
equals 2. comprising a proportion of α p . Note that a session might
 undergo both content augmentation and pattern augmentation
 nc
 X simultaneously.
 Lp = −yi log( pi′ ) (13)
 4) Malicious Traffic Detection: A well-trained ECNet can
 i=1
 provide low confidence for unknown data while giving high
 To prevent the model from always setting c to 0 for using confidence and accurate class probabilities for inputs it is
real labels to make decisions, we add a confidence loss Lc as certain about. Once we have trained a model, we can use it to
the penalty of using hints. perform malicious traffic detection. In a normally functioning
 network environment, the traffic generated by users’ routine
 Lc = −log(c) (14) activities usually does not change significantly. Traffic that
6878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

differs greatly from past patterns in a network can be generally Facility Project (MCFP). From this project, we gather
considered to be malicious traffic. traffic generated by spyware, miner, ransomware, bot-
 Based on these observations, we can detect malicious traffic ware, and adware, totaling 64 pcap files.
as shown in Equation (17). r is the final predicted category to
 b) Data reorganization: In real-world scenarios, the
which the test data belongs. 0 represents normal and 1 repremalicious traffic may generated by known, variant and
sents malicious. If the confidence c is lower than the threshold
 unknown attacks. We reorganize the two datasets accordingly.
δc , it means that the model has not previously processed
 Table I presents the reorganization details of malicious traffic.
related data, then the traffic is classified as malicious. This
 For the scenario of known attacks, we randomly mix all
approach enables the detection of unknown malicious traffic.
 traffic in each dataset, including normal and malicious traffic,
Conversely, if the confidence is higher than the threshold, the
 and then split them into two parts for the training and testing
class with the higher probability is assigned as the sample’s
 sets. The new datasets reorganized in this manner are named
category, enabling detection of known malicious traffic.
  CICIDS2018-I and EnTra2023-I.
  1, c < δc Variant attacks refer to attacks belonging to the same
 r = arg max p ′ , other wise (17) category, but they have adjustments in strategies, methods,
 i
 or other characteristics. For the CICIDS2018 dataset, we place
 
 i∈{0,1}

 The confidence values for known normal and malicious traf- similar attacks using different tools into the training and testing
fic are close to 1, and they rely on the category probabilities for sets, such as DoS-GoldenEye and DoS-Slowloris. We use the
classification. The confidence values for unknown malicious normal traffic of the first five days as training data and the
traffic are relatively low, and they are directly classified as last three days as test data. For the EnTra2023 dataset, traffic
malicious. At this point, the probabilities are untrustworthy from different pcap files is allocated to the training and testing
and meaningless. sets separately. The normal traffic is also divided into training
 and testing sets based on the sequence of time. The two
 datasets reorganized in this way are named CICIDS2018-II
 V. E VALUATION
 and EnTra2023-II. The normal traffic is divided into training
A. Experiment Overview and testing sets based on the sequence of time. The two
 To thoroughly validate the performance of ECNet, we con- reorganized datasets are CICIDS2018-II and EnTra2023-II.
duct comprehensive experiments. We first introduce the For unknown attacks, we put different types of attacks into
experimental setup, including the datasets, baseline methods, the training and testing sets for the CICIDS2018 dataset. For
and evaluation metrics. Specifically, to reflect the complex the EnTra2023 dataset, the training set only contains traffic
situation of traffic in the real world, we reorganize the datasets. generated by three types of malware, while the testing set
Then, we detail the experimental results, comparing the per- includes traffic from other categories or types of malware.
formance of ECNet and baselines in detecting both known The division of normal traffic follows the same methodology
and unknown malicious traffic, and also comparing their as the variant attack datasets. The reorganized datasets are
complexities. The results indicate that our method outperforms CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III.
other methods, especially in detecting variants and unknown For each dataset, we randomly selected 10% of the data
malicious traffic. Additionally, we perform ablation studies from the training set to serve as the validation set for hyperand sensitivity analysis of parameters on ECNet for a deeper parameter tuning and model selection.
understanding of its workings. c) Statistics of datasets: To ensure the comparability of
 results across the three reorganized datasets and to balance the
B. Experiment Setup ratio of normal and malicious traffic, we sample the datasets,
 and the statistical information is shown in Table II.
 1) Datasets: Randomly splitting data into training and test
sets fails to reflect the diverse traffic in the real world. To verify 2) Baselines: To thoroughly evaluate the performance of
the performance comprehensively, we use two basic datasets ECNet, we establish seven baseline methods for comparison,
and reorganize them for evaluation. including supervised methods (FS-Net [6], CICAutoML [27],
 a) Basic datasets: We use the public dataset GTID [7]) and an unsupervised method (Kitsune [10]), as well
CICIDS2018 [26] and the self-collected dataset EnTra2023 as methods specifically focused on robust malicious traffic
as basic datasets. detection (Rosetta [15], ACID [14], CVAE-EVT [17]).
 • CICIDS2018. The CICIDS2018 dataset is a widely • FS-Net. FS-Net can learn representative features from
 used dataset for malicious network traffic detection. packet length sequences. It utilizes a multi-layer encoder-
 It simulates an enterprise network environment, with decoder structure and reconstruction mechanism to mine
 approximately 500 devices involved. It encompasses a the potential sequential characteristics.
 variety of attacks such as Brute Force, Botnet, DoS, • CICAutoML. We combine CIC features with Automated
 DDoS, and Web Attacks, alongside normal activities. Machine Learning (AutoML) [28] to implement CICAu-
 • EnTra2023. The EnTra2023 dataset is collected by our- toML to represent these ML-based methods as a baseline.
 selves. Its normal traffic comes from a day’s network CIC features are extracted by CICFlowMeter [29] and are
 activity of select hosts within an enterprise network. The a set of widely used statistical features of network traffic,
 malicious traffic is sourced from the Malware Capture including more than 80 features.
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6879

 TABLE I
 R EORGANIZATION D ETAILS OF M ALICIOUS T RAFFIC OF THE CICIDS2018 DATASET AND THE E N T RA 2023 DATASET

 TABLE II TABLE III
 T HE S TATISTICS OF DATASETS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE CICIDS2018-I DATASET (%)

 • GTID. GTID utilizes raw network traffic directly for
 analysis. It uses n-gram frequency to extract packet-level
 features, and uses a time-aware Transformer to extract TABLE IV
 session-level features for malicious traffic detection. P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE E N T RA 2023-I DATASET (%)
 • Kitsune. Kitsune is an unsupervised malicious traffic
 detection method. It uses an ensemble of autoencoders to
 reconstruct the features of normal traffic, and the traffic
 with high reconstruction error is considered malicious.
 • Rosetta. Rosetta is a robust traffic classification method
 in diverse network environments. It leverages TCP-aware
 traffic augmentation mechanisms and self-supervised
 learning to generate robust features based on packet
 length sequences and uses LSTM as the classifier.
 • ACID. ACID uses a supervised adaptive clustering technique to learn cluster centers to expand the features,
 thereby enhancing the robustness against outliers and
 the generalization abilities of the model in the face of features, it employs a fully connected network and a
 evolving traffic landscapes. softmax layer for both training and detection.
 • CVAE-EVT. CVAE-EVT employs conditional autoen- 3) Metric: To offer a comprehensive view of the model’s
 coders and extreme value theory to implement a performance across various aspects of predictive accuracy and
 hierarchical detection method, and performs staged clas- reliability, we choose Accuracy, Precision, Recall and F1 score
 sification of known attacks and detection of unknown as our evaluation metrics.
 attacks.
 We also offer a simplified version of ECNet that does C. Known Malicious Traffic Detection
not utilize confidence, named ECNet-Simple, for comparison. We conduct experiments of known malicious traffic detec-
We introduce it here for ease of reference in the following tion on the CICIDS2018-I dataset and the EnTra2023-I dataset.
sections, although it is not a baseline method in the traditional Table III and Table IV compare the performance of ECNet
sense. and baselines. ECNet achieves an accuracy of 99.97% and an
 • ECNet-Simple. Its feature extraction component is the F1 of 99.98% on both datasets, outperforming other baseline
 same with ECNet. After obtaining the fused session methods, and ECNet-Simple also reaches F1 of 99.71% and
6880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE CICIDS2018-II DATASET AND THE CICIDS2018-III DATASET (%)

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE E N T RA 2023-II DATASET AND THE E N T RA 2023-III DATASET (%)

99.98%. Their performances are comparable to GTID, indi- 1) Overall Performance: Table V and Table VI compare
cating that our content and pattern features are representative the performance of ECNet with baselines. It can be seen
enough. They can achieve similar performance to using all raw that ECNet achieves the best performance across all datasets,
network traffic while avoiding noise. ECNet-Simple’s perfor- especially in the case of detecting unknown malicious traffic,
mance on both datasets surpasses CICAutoML, suggesting our where our method significantly outperforms other methods.
features are superior to the statistical features of sessions. For For the CICIDS2018-II dataset, our method achieves an
kitsune, we use normal traffic to train it, and its performance accuracy of 98.97% and an F1 score of 94.59%, only a slight
is obviously not as good as other supervised methods, and decrease from the performance on the CICIDS2018-I dataset
the precision is lower, indicating that there are many false (with a decrease of 1.01% in accuracy and 5.39% in F1
positives for normal traffic. score). Other supervised methods show a noticeable decline in
 Using confidence in ECNet does not significantly enhance performance, especially in terms of recall. For example, FSperformance compared to ECNet-Simple, as the model Net has a recall of 69.73% and an F1 of 78.71%. The reason
encounters known patterns during testing and assigns high for these low recalls is that a lot of malicious traffic is misclasconfidence values to almost all samples, making the confidence sified as normal traffic, which also shows that these methods
branch of ECNet less influential in decision-making. cannot handle variant malicious traffic well. The recall for
 Kitsune is 91.31%, which is similar to ECNet’s recall, but
D. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection its precision is lower, indicating that a significant amount of
 Detecting unknown malicious traffic is more challenging normal traffic is falsely classified as malicious. Furthermore,
than detecting known traffic, as it requires the model to the performance of robust malicious traffic detection methods
have a certain degree of generalization ability. We conduct that augment features, such as Rosetta and ACID, is unsatisexperiments on CICIDS2018-II, CICIDS2018-III, EnTra2023- factory. Their F1s are 61.93% and 73.17%, similar to those
II, and EnTra2023-III. We refer to variant attacks and truly of ordinary methods. They can only handle minor changes in
unknown attacks as unknown attacks in this section. Variant traffic, such as those caused by environmental variations, and
attacks can be considered unknown to some extent com- their robustness in detecting unknown attacks is insufficient.
pared to known attacks. Besides, this approach allows us CVAE-EVT performs multi-stage detection of unknown and
to analyze how these methods perform when faced with malicious traffic, achieving an accuracy of 96.88%, which is
varying degrees of differences between training and testing superior to other methods. However, our ECNet still surpasses
sets. it by 2.09%, indicating that our confidence-based end-to-end
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6881

approach can achieve a better global solution than the stagewise method.
 For the CICIDS2018-III dataset, due to greater differences
between the training and testing data, the baseline methods
experience more severe performance drops. GTID’s recall is
only 41.65%, with an F1 of 56.08%, which is almost the same
as random guessing. The F1 of CICAutoML is 35.85%, even
worse than random guesses. In contrast, our ECNet maintains
an F1 of 85.78%, a significant 22.41% improvement over the
best supervised baseline method, FS-Net. The unsupervised
method Kitsune is not significantly affected by the novelty
of new attacks since it is trained only on normal traffic,
as evident from its accuracy and recall. Comparatively, ECNet Fig. 6. Heatmap of recall for each category of malicious traffic on the
achieves a recall similar to that of Kitsune, indicating that our CICIDS2018-III dataset.
method is capable of reaching a level comparable to unsupervised methods in detecting unknown attacks. The performance
degradation of these robust malicious traffic detection methods
is also obvious. The F1 of Rosetta and ACID both decrease
by approximately 30%, and CVAE-EVT’s F1 decreases by
22.76%. In contrast, ECNet’s F1 decreases by less than 10%,
further demonstrating ECNet’s superior robustness in handling
unknown traffic compared to other methods.
 For the EnTra2023-II dataset, the performance of these
methods are still satisfactory. This is because the training
and test sets include malicious traffic generated by the same
malware. Our ECNet achieves an accuracy of 99.82% and an
F1 of 99.79%, surpassing other methods. On the EnTra2023-
 Fig. 7. Heatmap of recall for each category of malicious traffic on the
III dataset, most methods still experience the performance EnTra2023-III dataset.
decline observed in the CICIDS2018-III dataset. For example,
FS-Net drops to an accuracy of 88.41% and an F1 of 83.72%.
The performance of Kitsune on this dataset doesn’t change for UDP). CICAutoML’s recalls across all categories are
significantly compared to the performance on Entra2023-II, relatively uniform but all below 50%. This could be due to a
but is still not as good as supervised methods. When there is a well fit on the training set but a lack of generalization ability,
certain degree of correlation between the malicious traffic data leading to an almost random guess in detecting traffic of
in the test set and the training set, Kitsune is unable to leverage all categories. In comparison, ECNet’s recall is much higher,
this information, which limits its performance. Compared to reaching 98.7% for DDOS (LOIC for UDP). Its recall for Web
others, CVAE-EVT and ECNet exhibit minimal performance attack (XSS) is 61.67%, which might be because the traffic
degradation, but ECNet still significantly outperforms CVAE- generated by this attack is somewhat similar to normal traffic.
EVT, with F1s of 99.08% and 95.10% and accuracies of For the EnTra2023-III dataset, ECNet also outperforms
99.25% and 98.12%, respectively. ECNet benefits from the other methods in terms of recall across all categories. The
rich features extracted from both content and pattern perspec- lowest recall is 97.14% in detecting spyware. Other baselines
tives, as well as from its confidence-based end-to-end learning have relatively weaker capabilities in detecting malicious trafand detection model, demonstrating excellent capability in fic generated by adware. The difficulty in detecting adware
detecting unknown malicious traffic. In contrast, CVAE-EVT could be attributed to the significant functional differences
employs statistical features and adopts a multi-stage learning between adware and other types of malware, leading to
strategy, resulting in inferior performance compared to ECNet. greater variations in traffic patterns. Kitsune exhibits the lowest
 2) Detailed Performance: To further investigate the per- recall for adware, possibly due to the similarity between
formance of methods, we calculate the recall for each type adware-generated traffic and normal traffic. In contrast to
of malicious traffic in the CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III supervised methods, our ECNet is not limited by whether the
datasets. The recall indicates how much of each category of same type of malicious traffic appeared in the training set and
malicious traffic is correctly identified as such. Figure 6 and maintains stable performance in detecting unknown malicious
Figure 7 display the corresponding heatmaps. traffic. Compared to unsupervised methods, ECNet can utilize
 For the CICIDS2018-III dataset, most supervised methods the probability branch to classify data that is similar to normal
demonstrate decent detection capabilities for DDOS (LOIC traffic effectively.
for HTTP), likely benefiting from the presence of DoS and 3) Confidence Visualization: To analyze the role of the
Botnet traffic in the training data. However, the recalls for confidence branch in detecting malicious traffic, we visualize
other types of malicious traffic are relatively low. Rosetta, the confidence levels of normal and malicious traffic durfor instance, has a recall of only 2.39% for DDOS (LOIC ing testing. Figure 8 shows the distribution of confidence
6882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VII
 N UMBER OF PARAMETERS AND T IME OVERHEAD

Fig. 8. Confidence distribution of normal and malicious traffic on the
CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).

values on the CICIDS2018-III and EnTra2023-III datasets,
respectively. TABLE VIII
 The confidence of normal traffic is basically close to 1, A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN ECN ET
meaning that the detection of normal traffic mainly relies on ON THE CICIDS2018-I, II, III DATASET (%)
the probability branch. In the CICIDS2018-III dataset, about
50% of the malicious traffic has a confidence level below 0.5.
This suggests the confidence branch significantly contributes
to the excellent performance of ECNet on this dataset. In the
EnTra2023-III dataset, only a small part of the malicious
traffic has low confidence. For malicious traffic with high
confidence levels, ECNet accurately detects them by extracting
representative features combined with the probability branch,
achieving an F1 of 99.08%.
 Combining these observations, we can conclude that both
the probability and confidence branches of our ECNet are
crucial. They complement each other, ensuring that ECNet
maintains robust performance in various scenarios.
 TABLE IX
E. Complexity Analysis A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN ECN ET
 ON THE E N T RA 2023-I, II, III DATASET (%)
 To fully evaluate the trade-off between the model’s performance and complexity, we compare the number of model
parameters and the time required to analyze a session for
ECNet and other methods, as shown in Table VII.
 Rosetta has a significantly more parameters than other
methods because its feature augmentation process requires the
use of pre-trained models. ECNet employs both packet length
sequences and raw packets, yet its parameter count is lower
than that of FSNet, which uses packet length sequences, and
GTID, which uses raw packets. Additionally, ECNet has a
shorter runtime and superior detection performance compared
to these methods, indicating that its model design is both
concise and efficient. Compared to ACID and CVAE-EVT,
ECNet has slightly higher parameter counts and runtime,
mainly due to its processing of features from multiple perspectives. Nonetheless, ECNet’s latency is acceptable and can ‘w/o Fusion’ represents not using gated feature fusion, but
achieve near real-time performance. ECNet leverages easily instead directly concatenating the two types of features.
accessible features, including randomly sampled packets and Both content and pattern features play important roles.
session packet length and direction sequences, along with a In most cases, content features are more crucial than pattern
simple model to reduce overhead. features. When detecting unknown malicious traffic, such as on
 the CICIDS2018-II dataset, using only pattern features results
 in a 6.53% decrease in accuracy and a 20.39% decrease in F1
F. Ablation Experiment for ECNet. Similar trends are observed on the EnTra2023-II
 To quantify the individual contribution of each component dataset. Interestingly, on the CICIDS2018-III dataset, using
in ECNet, we perform ablation experiments, and the results are only content features leads to a more significant performance
shown in Table VIII and Table IX. For convenience, we denote drop, with a decrease of 10.82% in F1. This also shows that
using only content features and pattern features as ‘w/ Content’ relying on a single type of feature is unstable and insufficient
and ‘w/ Pattern’. Feature fusion is not required in these cases. to cope with the variability of network traffic. Instead, the
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6883

Fig. 9. Performance of ECNet with different number of randomly selected Fig. 10. Performance of ECNet with different dimension of encoded sequence
packets on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset vector on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset
(right). (right).

optimal performance is achieved by combining both content
and pattern features.
 Additionally, the use of gated feature fusion also plays a
certain role in enhancing the performance of ECNet. On the
CICIDS2018-III dataset, it results in an increase of 1.57% in
accuracy and an improvement of 4.41% in F1.

G. Sensitivity Analysis
 Fig. 11. Distribution of burst lengths in the CICIDS2018 dataset and the
 To investigate the impact of hyper-parameters on perfor- Entra2023 dataset.
mance, we conduct a thorough sensitivity analysis of the
key parameters in ECNet on the CICIDS2018-III dataset and
EnTra2023-III dataset. The parameters analyzed include the
number of randomly selected packets n p , the dimension of
encoded sequence vector vsq m, the proportion of augmented
samples αc and α p , and the confidence threshold for detecting
malicious traffic δc .
 1) Number of Randomly Selected Packets: ECNet randomly
selects n p packets from each session to extract content fea-
 Fig. 12. Performance of ECNet with different proportion of sessions
tures. Figure 9 illustrates the performance of ECNet as n p performed content augmentation on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and
varies. The model performs poorly with only two packets, the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).
while the performance with six and four packets shows
minimal differences. Typically, four packets are sufficient to
include packets from both the session establishment and data
transmission processes, so increasing to six packets does not
yield substantial benefits. The inferior performance when using
two packets can be attributed to two main factors. Firstly,
two packets contain limited information. Secondly, it may be
affected by the data augmentation process. During content
augmentation, one of the n p packet vectors is randomly set to
 Fig. 13. Performance of ECNet with different proportion of sessions
a zero vector. When using only two packets, half of the content performed pattern feature augmentation on the CICIDS2018-III dataset (left)
features are set to zero, potentially negatively impacting the and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right).
model’s training.
 2) Dimension of Encoded Sequence Vector: ECNet encodes showing that the burst length less than or equal to 3 can cover
packet length and direction sequences into a vector vsq with about 80% of the data, so setting m to 3 is enough.
m columns. Figure 10 shows the impact of m on model 3) Proportion of Augmented Samples: Data augmentation
performance. The results indicate that the choice of m has includes content augmentation on the data comprising a prominimal impact on performance, suggesting that our encoding portion of αc and pattern augmentation on the data comprising
method combined with SessionCNN can effectively capture a proportion of α p during training. To more clearly analyze the
the pattern features of interaction processes. However, the effect of augmenting these two types of features, we avoid augchoice of m affects the size of vsq , which in turn influences menting pattern features when adjusting the sample proportion
the time and space overhead. In vsq , each row stores the for content feature augmentation, and vice versa. Figure 12 and
lengths of consecutive packets in the same direction (burst), Figure 13 respectively show the impact of the value of αc and
while adjacent rows store the lengths of packets in different α p on the performance of ECNet.
directions. If the length of a burst exceeds m, a blank row From Figure 12, we observe that ECNet performs best when
consisting of zeros needs to be filled in; if a burst is shorter 10% of the samples are performed content augmentation, and
than m, it is also padded with zeros to fill up to m. Figure 11 there is a significant improvement compared to the scenario
provides statistics of the burst lengths of the two datasets, without data augmentation (αc = 0). However, as αc continues
6884 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 we use normal data from different time periods for training and
 testing, ECNet exhibits high confidence in data, and the probability branch also accurately classifies the data, indicating that
 our method can resist slight changes well. Furthermore, in the
 future, we can combine ECNet with incremental learning.
 This allows ECNet to continuously learn new normal traffic
 patterns and continue to update and accumulate knowledge.
Fig. 14. Performance of ECNet with different confidence threshold on the
 This is different from attack data information leakage [30].
CICIDS2018-III dataset (left) and the EnTra2023-III dataset (right). New attacks are unpredictable and cannot be obtained in
 advance, while normal traffic can be obtained continuously,
 so incremental learning is a feasible solution. In situations of
to increase, the model’s performance begins to decline. This is drastic network changes, all methods face the challenge of
because content augmentation involves replacing all the values retraining models by capturing a new dataset over a period
of a data packet with zeros, which has a considerable impact. and retraining the model, which is a common practice.
A continual increase in αc leads to an increase in difficult
samples, resulting in unstable gradients during model training
 VII. C ONCLUSION
and hindering the learning of effective features.
 The impact of pattern augmentation on performance is In this paper, we propose a robust malicious traffic detection
not as significant as that of content augmentation. From method with multi-view feature extraction and confidence
Figure 13, it can be observed that ECNet achieves satisfactory mechanism, which can effectively and accurately detect maliperformance when 30% to 50% of the samples are performed cious traffic in the real world. ECNet extracts multi-view
pattern augmentation. During the training process, our ECNet features from sessions, including content features and pattern
performs both content and pattern augmentation on the training features. A gated-based feature fusion method is also used
data to optimize the model’s learning capability. to combine these features. ECNet introduces a confidence
 4) Confidence Threshold: Traffic with a confidence lower mechanism. For each session model, it not only outputs
than δc are considered malicious. Figure 14 shows the variation the probability that it belongs to each category but also
in ECNet’s performance as δc changes. When δc is 0, the outputs a confidence value, indicating the reliability of this
confidence branch does not play a role. At this point, the model result. Combining these two outputs, ECNet can accurately
misclassifies many malicious traffic as normal, particularly detect known and unknown attacks. We conduct comprehenresulting in poor performance on the CICIDS2018-III dataset. sive experiments on six reorganized datasets, and the results
As δc increases, more and more unknown malicious traffic is demonstrate that our ECNet outperforms other state-of-thecorrectly classified. When δc continues to increase from 0.6 to art methods in detecting both known and unknown malicious
0.9, there is a slight decrease in precision, as a small number traffic.
of unfamiliar normal sessions are misclassified as malicious. In the future, we will explore integrating ECNet with
However, this situation is rare and has minimal impact on incremental learning to further enhance its robustness. We will
overall performance. also investigate the adaptive configuration of the confidence
 threshold, making it more automated.
 VI. D ISCUSSION
A. Challenges for Attackers in Evading Detection R EFERENCES
 Attackers may attempt to evade detection by modifying [1] D. Ucci, L. Aniello, and R. Baldoni, “Survey of machine learning
 techniques for malware analysis,” Comput. Secur., vol. 81, pp. 123–147,
packets or altering the speed of traffic to mimic the char- Mar. 2019.
acteristics of normal traffic. ECNet uses a deep learning [2] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using
approach. Attackers must understand normal network traffic SVM with naïve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. Secur., vol. 103,
 Apr. 2021, Art. no. 102158.
over time and know the structure and settings of our model
 [3] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
to evade detection. Furthermore, our method involves the traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
random selection of packets, and the use of packet length and in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
direction sequences. Attackers need to modify both aspects Halifax, NS, Canada, Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
 [4] X. Han et al., “STIDM: A spatial and temporal aware intrusion detection
simultaneously while ensuring the effectiveness of their attack, model,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
which is very difficult. The random selection of packets means Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2020, pp. 370–377.
that the attacker needs to modify all packets. The combination [5] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
of packet length and direction sequences requires attackers to Art. no. 108117.
control not only the packets they send but also those sent by [6] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
the target host. This significantly heightens the challenge for network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Sep. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
attackers aiming to manipulate these features. [7] X. Han, S. Cui, S. Liu, C. Zhang, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Network intrusion
 detection based on n-gram frequency and time-aware transformer,”
B. Usability in Changing Environment Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103171.
 [8] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
 In slightly changing network environments, ECNet shows neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc.
good performance without being affected. In experiments, ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075.
HAN et al.: ECNet: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION 6885

 [9] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based Xueying Han received the B.S. degree from
 network analysis,” in Proc. 25th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Def., Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunica-
 2022, pp. 495–509. tions, Beijing, China, in 2020. She is currently
[10] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Inforensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in mation Engineering, University of Chinese Academy
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. of Sciences, Beijing. Her research interests include
[11] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “CPS-GUARD: Intrusion deep learning and intrusion detection.
 detection for cyber-physical systems and IoT devices using outlieraware deep autoencoders,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, Jun. 2023,
 Art. no. 103210.
[12] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. Song Liu received the M.S. degree from the Institute
[13] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
 vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023. an Engineer with the Institute of Information Engi-
[14] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic neering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. research interests include network attack detection
 Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10. and defense, and big data processing.
[15] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic classification in diverse network environments with TCPaware traffic augmentation,” in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf. China, Jul. 2023, pp. 625–642. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/presentation/xie
 Junrong Liu received the master’s degree from
[16] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 in 2010. She is currently a Senior Engineer with
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
[17] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional Academy of Sciences. Her research interests include
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage network situational awareness and network security
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion visualization.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
 2021.
[18] Z. Qiu, D. Zhou, Y. Zhai, B. Liu, L. He, and J. Cao, “VAEMax: Openset intrusion detection based on OpenMax and variational autoencoder,”
 2024, arXiv:2403.04193.
[19] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early Bo Jiang received the Ph.D. degree from the Chiand accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE nese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He is currently
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023. an Assistant Professor with the Institute of Infor-
[20] D. Suciu, S. McLaughlin, L. Simon, and R. Sion, “Horizontal privi- mation Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
 lege escalation in trusted applications,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. His research interests include network situational
 Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2020, pp. 825–840. awareness, knowledge graphs, and data mining.
[21] S. Siby, M. Juarez, C. Diaz, N. Vallina-Rodriguez, and C. Troncoso,
 “Encrypted DNS–> privacy? A traffic analysis perspective,” 2019,
 arXiv:1906.09682.
[22] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A
 channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025,
 2023. Zhigang Lu received the Ph.D. degree in com-
[23] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi- puter applications from the University of Chinese
 directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur. Academy of Sciences. He is currently a Professor
 Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188. with the Department of Cyber Security, University
[24] T. DeVries and G. W. Taylor, “Learning confidence for out-of- of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has pubdistribution detection in neural networks,” 2018, arXiv:1802.04865. lished more than 30 papers in top network and
[25] Y. Lu, J. Zeng, J. Zhang, S. Wu, and M. Li, “Learning confidence for security journals and conferences, including IEEE
 transformer-based neural machine translation,” 2022, arXiv:2203.11413. T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS
[26] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating AND S ECURITY , Computer Networks, Computers
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characteriza- & Security, and TrustCom. His research interests
 tion,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, include network and system security, with a specific
 pp. 108–116. focus on cyber situation awareness, intrusion detection and prevention, and
[27] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions mobile terminal security.
 in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
 Baoxu Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
[28] (2023). Automl for Image, Text, Time Series, and Tabular Data.
 Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sci-
 Accessed: Dec. 7, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://auto.gluon.
 ences, Beijing, China, in 2002. He is currently a
 ai/stable/index.html
 Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute
[29] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 Sciences, Beijing, and the School of Cyber Secu-
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
 rity, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 pp. 253–262.
 Beijing. His current research interests include net-
[30] E. Quiring et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in com- work attack detection and defense, and network
 puter security,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), security situational awareness.
 2022, pp. 3971–3988.