IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 1631

 Energy-Efficient Self-Supervised Technique to
 Identify Abnormal User Over 5G
 Network for E-Commerce
 Sami Ahmed Haider , Mohammad Zia Ur Rahman , Sachin Gupta , Ataniyazov Jasurbek Hamidovich,
 Arsalan Muhammad Soomar, Bhoomi Gupta , Jagdish Chandra Patni, and Venkata Chunduri

 Abstract—Within the realm of e-commerce networks, it is I. I NTRODUCTION
frequently observed that certain users exhibit behavior patterns
 ITH the continuous spread and development of the
that differ substantially from the normative behaviors exhibited
by the majority of users. The identification of these atypical
individuals and the understanding of their behavioral patterns
 W Internet, many unscrupulous merchants engage in
 fraudulent activities on major e-commerce platforms by
are of significant practical significance in maintaining order manipulating a large number of users to post fake reviews,
on e-commerce platforms. One such method for accomplishing engage in malicious ordering, and other deceptive practices.
this objective entails examining the behavioral tendencies of
atypical users through the abstraction of e-commerce networks These acts result in significant detriment to consumer interests.
as heterogeneous information networks. These networks are To mitigate the adverse effects caused by atypical users,
then transformed into a bipartite graph that establishes associ- the scholarly community has put forth many approaches for
ations between users and devices. The Self-Supervised Aberrant detecting anomalies, which have proven to be efficacious in
Detection Model (SAD) has been proposed within this theoretical
framework as a means to identify and detect users who exhibit
 practice.
aberrant behavior. The SSADM methodology utilizes a self- Literature [1] proposed a density-based local outlier
supervised learning process that utilizes autoencoders to encode detection algorithm that introduces information entropy to
representations of user nodes. The proposed method aims to uncover local outliers in homogeneous information networks.
maximize a combined objective function for backpropagation Literature [2] combined the K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) outwhile utilizing support vector data description to detect abnormalities in the representations of user nodes. In summary, lier detection algorithm with a multi-level random forest model
many tests have been conducted utilizing both authentic network to detect abnormal behavior in homogeneous information
datasets and partially synthetic network datasets to demonstrate networks. A person’s behavior can be influenced by a variety
the efficacy and superiority of the SAD technique, specifically of personal circumstances, such as age, health, illness, pain,
within the domain of an energy-efficient 5G network.
 and the effect of drugs or alcohol. Literature [3] proposed
 Index Terms—Energy efficiency, aberrant detection model, an anomaly detection algorithm based on suffix trees, which
optimization technique, behavioral analysis, social networks. detects anomalies, based on the periodicity of anomalies
 in time series data. Literature [4] used autoencoders and
 Manuscript received 8 November 2023; revised 8 December probabilistic neural networks to achieve anomaly detection
2023 and 7 January 2024; accepted 15 January 2024. Date goals. Most of the current research focuses on homogeneous
of publication 24 January 2024; date of current version
26 April 2024. (Corresponding author: Sami Ahmed Haider.)
 information networks, and many methods are still limited
 Sami Ahmed Haider is with the Glasgow College, University of and not suitable for heterogeneous information networks [5].
Electronics Science and Technology, Chengdu 610056, China (e-mail: Literature [6] proposed a dynamic anomaly detection method
samiahmed.haider@glasgow.ac.uk).
 Mohammad Zia Ur Rahman is with the Department of Electronics and based on tensor representation for heterogeneous networks,
Communication Engineering, Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation, which constructs a tensor index tree for classification samples
Vaddeswaram 522302, India (e-mail: mdzr55@gmail.com). and clustering, making dynamic anomaly point judgments
 Sachin Gupta is with the Department of CSE, Maharaja Agrasen Institute
of Technology, Meerut 250005, India (e-mail: sachin.gupta@mait.ac.in). based on whether clusters transform effectively. In the realm
 Ataniyazov Jasurbek Hamidovich is with the Department of International of literature, a study [7] has presented a method for detecting
Finance and Credit, Tashkent Institute of Finance, Tashkent 1000000, anomalies in heterogeneous information networks. The impor-
Uzbekistan (e-mail: j_ataniyazov@tfi.uz).
 Arsalan Muhammad Soomar is with the Faculty of Electrical and Control tance of different kinds of nodes is ascertained by an attention
Engineering, Gdańsk University of Technology, 80-226 Gdańsk, Poland mechanism. By examining unique aggregation patterns, this
(e-mail: Arsalan.muhammad.soomar@pg.edu.pl).
 Bhoomi Gupta is with the Department of Information Technology,
 makes it possible to identify abnormal users. The differentia-
Maharaja Agrasen Institute of Technology, New Delhi 110086, India (e-mail: tion embeddings from heterogeneous networks are adaptively
bhoomigupta@mait.ac.in). learned in the suggested technique. The literature [8] presents
 Jagdish Chandra Patni is with the Symbiosis Institute of Technology
(Nagpur Campus), Symbiosis International (Deemed University), Nagpur
 a method for detecting outliers in the distribution of com-
440008, India (e-mail: jagdish.patni@sitnagpur.siu.edu.in). munities within diverse information networks. Literature [9]
 Venkata Chunduri is with the Senior Software Developer, Department of proposed a fraud detection model called SAD for e-commerce
Mathematics and Computer Science, Indiana State University, Terre Haute,
IN 47809 USA (e-mail: vchunduri@sycamores.indstate.edu). networks, which uses autoencoders to extract behavioral pat-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3355477 terns of fraudulent accounts in heterogeneous graphs and uses
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise 2. In light of this, we propose the Supervised Anomaly
(DBSCAN) to detect fraud clusters. Unusual users appear as Detection Model (SAD). The suggested method
a result of several fraudulent merchants registering a large improves the efficiency of abnormal user detection by
number of new users and logging in on particular devices automatically optimizing the network in iterative cycles,
to conduct group fraud activities. Because of the Internet’s while preserving the bipartite graph structure and user
continuous expansion, many dishonest merchants utilise well- behavioral features.
known e-commerce platforms. Literature [10] proposed a joint 3. Second, the usefulness and superiority of the proposed
embedding method to capture the structure of heterogeneous method is demonstrated through comparative experigraphs and detect fraud account groups in social networks. ments and analysis of SAD on three real network
End-to-end trainable joint model for e-commerce network false datasets and one semi-synthetic network dataset.
review detection that combines neural random forests and
autoencoders. Literature [11] proposed an end-to-end train-
 II. R ELATED W ORK
able joint model combining autoencoders and neural random
forests to detect fake reviews in e-commerce networks. An A. Behavioral Patterns of Abnormal Users
autoencoder consists of two neural networks: a decoder that In e-commerce platforms, many fraudulent merchants regisextends the latent representation back to its original size and ter numerous new users and log in on specific devices to carry
an encoder that compresses an input, like an image, to a low- out collective fraudulent activities, leading to the emergence
dimensional latent representation. The thousands to millions of of abnormal users. Literature [7] conducted an analysis of user
transaction records that are generated everyday in e-commerce data on e-commerce platforms. Device clustering and activity
platforms are made up of the registration, login, purchase, clustering are the two main Behavioral tendencies of aberreview, and other behaviors of users, devices, products, and rant users. Device Clustering: Unusual users in e-commerce
retailers. A person’s Behavior can be influenced by a variety networks have access to a large number of computer machines
of personal circumstances, such as age, health, illness, pain, for fraudulent purposes, but this Behavior has a hefty price.
and the effect of drugs or alcohol. In light of this, we suggest The majority of anomalous users usually log in on particular
the Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection Model (SAD) as a groupings of devices in order to control expenditures. The
means of identifying anomalous users in e-commerce systems. Supervised Anomaly Identification Model (SAD) preserves
The network maintains consistent detection results while also the bipartite graph structure and user behavioural data while
keeping the relatively complete bipartite graph structure and automatically optimising the network in iterative cycles to
user behavioural aspects in user node representations by increase the effectiveness of anomalous user identification.
automatically supplying supervision information for anomaly Device Clustering: In e-commerce networks, abnormal users
detection. In order to identify fraud clusters using DBSCAN control a significant number of computing devices for fraudand extract fraudulent account behavior patterns from diverse ulent activities, but this behavior comes at a high cost. To
graphs, an integrated embedding technique to identify fraud control costs, most abnormal users typically log in on specific
account clusters in social networks and capture the structure groups of devices. Activity Clustering:
of heterogeneous graphs. In the following sections, this paper In e-commerce networks, abnormal users need to complete
describes the behavioral characteristics of abnormal users in tasks within a short time frame, which leads to a burst of
e-commerce networks and introduces related work, details the collective activity during specific time intervals. In [12], a
construction of SAD, summarizes the algorithm flow of SAD, thorough analysis of the methods for detecting novelty is
validates and compares SAD in experiments, analyzes its time provided. A detailed study of DL-based anomaly detection
complexity, and concludes the paper while looking forward algorithms was recently published in [13]. A review of the
to future work. This study outlines the development of SAD, data mining methods for anomaly detection is covered in [14].
summarizes the algorithm flow of SAD, and describes the Regression, rule learning, and clustering are the approaches
Behavioral features of atypical users in e-commerce networks. that are covered.
It also introduces related work. The SAD technique relies
on the analysis of popularity community distribution patterns B. Autoencoders
among various object kinds and employs non-negative matrix
factorization for outlier detection. The concept of autoencoders was first introduced by
 This article presents the Behavioral traits of abnormal users Literature [15], and subsequent literature [16] provided
in e-commerce networks, reviews relevant literature, goes into detailed explanations. Autoencoders consist of two main parts:
detail on how SAD is constructed, outlines its algorithmic the encoder (E) and the decoder (D), and their structures are
flow, verifies and contrasts SAD in experiments, examines its symmetric, meaning that the number of hidden layers in the
temporal complexity, and ends the paper by looking ahead to encoder is the same as the number of hidden layers in the
future research. The following are the paper’s most significant decoder. The encoding process of the encoder is as follows:
contributions:
 z = σe (W1 x + b1 ) (1)
 1. The research abstracts the e-commerce network as a
 heterogeneous information network and turns it into a The decoding process of the decoder can be described as:
 user-device bipartite graph in order to solve the problem
 of detecting aberrant users in e-commerce platforms. y = σd (W2 z + b2 ) (2)
HAIDER et al.: ENERGY-EFFICIENT SELF-SUPERVISED TECHNIQUE TO IDENTIFY ABNORMAL USER 1633

 The feature representation in the hidden space is denoted by
z, where W1 and b1 are the encoding weights and biases and
W2 and b2 are the decoding weights and biases. The activation
function is denoted by e, commonly used ones include ReLU,
Sigmoid, and Tanh, while σd can be the same as σe [17].
 J(W, b) = (L(x, y)) = y − x22 (3)
 The encoding process maps the input signal to a feature
representation in the hidden space deterministically, while the
decoding process attempts to remap the feature representation
in the hidden space back to the input signal [17 Autoencoders
have advantages such as a simple reconstruction process,
the ability to stack multiple layers, and support from neuroscience [17]. Today, methods based on autoencoders, such as
 Fig. 1. Association relationships between different entities in the e-commerce
image classification [18], [19], anomaly detection [20], [21], network.
and pattern recognition [22], are widely applied in various
research fields and have achieved success. Large amount A indicates that each object v ∈ V belongs to a specific
of data to obtain sufficient training samples, which is very object class, while ϕ(e) ∈ R indicates that each relationship e
labor and resource intensive [23]. An information entropy- ∈ E belongs to a specific relationship class. An information
based density-based technique for local outlier detection in network is referred to as a heterogeneous information network
homogeneous information networks. A multi-level random when the number of node types |A| is greater than 1 or the
forest model combined with the KNN outlier detection tech- number of edge types |R| is greater than 1. Conversely, if |A|
nique is used to identify anomalous activity in homogeneous = 1 and |R| = 1, the information network is classified as a
information networks. homogeneous information network.
 Therefore, unsupervised anomaly detection has received In Section II-A, Literature [7] analyzed the login patwidespread attention, and autoencoder-based anomaly detec- terns of users on different devices in e-commerce platforms.
tion methods are widely used in fields such as e-commerce We concentrate on the relationships that exist between two
fraud detection [24] and social network abnormal user detec- different types of entities: people and gadgets. End-to-end
tion [25] due to their excellent performance. trainable joint model that blends neural random forests and
 autoencoders for e-commerce network false review detection.
 III. A NOMALY U SER D ETECTION M ETHOD FOR When describing different things and their relationships, het-
 E-C OMMERCE N ETWORKS erogeneous information networks are an abstraction of the
 This section introduces an anomaly user detection method underlying real-world systems. The method aims to convert
for e-commerce networks - the Supervised Anomaly Detection the heterogeneous information network into a bipartite graph
Model (SAD). It provides a detailed description of SAD that accurately represents the relationship between individuals
from three aspects: basic definition, model structure, and and devices. This graph is going to be an essential part of
optimization stage. our next research projects. The e-commerce infrastructure is
 modelled as a bipartite graph of consumers and their devices
 after being abstracted as a heterogeneous information network.
A. Basic Definition
 Definition 1 (Bipartite Graph Structure): Given a directed
 In e-commerce platforms, every user leaf records when graph G = (X, Y, E), where X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xm } represents
they log in, browse, make purchases, and provide reviews. a set of m user nodes, Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } represents a set
As shown in Figure 1, these records cover the relationships j=1,2,...,n
 of n device nodes, and E = {eij }i=1,2,...,m represents a set of
between different entities, such as users, devices, products, directed edges from X to Y. If there is an edge from xi to yj ,
and merchants, including the behavioral traces of abnormal then eij = 1; otherwise, eij = 0. Therefore, the bipartite graph
users. The links between various entities, including users, structure can be represented as a matrix S = [s1 , s2 , . . . , sm ]T ,
devices, items, and merchants, as well as the Behavioral where si = [ei1 , ei2 , . . . , ein ].
traces of problematic users, are covered by these records,
as seen in Figure 1. The e-commerce network is abstracted
as a heterogeneous information network in order to more B. Model Structure of S-SAD
intuitively analyze the Behavioral traits of various users inside This section offers a comprehensive explanation of the
the network. model structure of S-SAD, and Figure 2 illustrates the entirety
 According to the first definition provided by the of the SAD framework.
Heterogeneous Information Network [6], Consider a directed Most users typically log in to e-commerce platforms only
graph G = (V, E; τ , ϕ; A, R). In this graph, V represents the on their personal devices, while abnormal users tend to log in
set of nodes, E represents the set of edges, τ is a function on specific groups of devices. Any Behavior that differs from
that maps each object to its object type, ϕ is a function that what is deemed normal is termed abnormal. Psychologists
maps each relationship to its relationship type, and τ (v) ∈ utilize four broad criteria to classify conduct as abnormal:
1634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Furthermore, the Euclidean distance can be transformed into
 behavioral similarity between user node representations using
 the following mapping function:
  
 ij = exp −disij
 sim (10)
 ij ranges from (0, 1). For user nodes xi and xj ,
 where sim
 when their distance is close to 0, sim ij is approximately 1,
 representing that xi and xj have small behavioral differences.
 When their distance is large enough, simij is approximately 0,
 indicating that xi and xj have significant behavioral differences.
 By narrowing the difference between sim ij and simij , you
Fig. 2. The complete framework of the abnormal user detection method can obtain node representations that capture user behavioral
SAD for e-commerce networks.
 characteristics.
statistical rarity, emotional suffering, maladaptive Behavior, Backpropagation is used to optimise the joint objective
and breach of social norms. function in order to offer SAD a self-supervised mechanism,
 Formally, by taking the bipartite graph structure matrix S which allows user node representations to autonomously proas the input to the autoencoder, the encoding process can be vide supervision for anomaly detection. updating the weights
represented as: and biases in the autoencoder network.
 Next, the Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) is
 Z = σ (WS + b) (4) employed for anomaly detection on the user node representations Z.
 Then, the user node representations Z are decoded to
 First, the core c of the hypersphere in the latent space is
reconstruct the bipartite graph structure matrix S, and the
 computed:
formal representation of the decoding process is as follows:
 1
 m
 
 S = σ (WZ + b) (5) c= zi (11)
 m
 i=1
where Z = [z1 , z2 , . . . , zm ]T , and zm represents the user node
representation corresponding to the m-th user node in the latent Then, the Euclidean distances between each user node
space. W and b are the decoding weights and biases, and σ representation and the core are calculated:
is the activation function. Both the encoder and decoder parts
 di =zi −c22 (12)
use the ReLU activation function [7]. The device similarity
between user nodes is defined as: And a set of distances D is formed: D = {d1 , d2 , . . . , dm }.
  
 Ni ∩Nj  To find an appropriate hypersphere radius r, the normal
 sim− dij =   (6) distribution of the set D is discussed using the 3σ criterion.
 Ni ∪Nj 
 The following text defines the 3σ criterion.
 In which, Ni := {yj ∈ Y:eij = 1} represents the set of device 
nodes associated with the user node xi . If x ∼ N μ,σ 2 , then:
 According to activity clustering, it is known that an abnor- P{|x − μ| < σ } = 0. (13)
mal user group will engage in collective activities during a P{|x − μ| < 2σ } = 0.9445 (14)
specific time period of the day. Therefore, the day is divided
into 24 time periods, and the number of times each user logs P{|x − μ| < 3σ } = 0.9977 (15)
in to different devices is counted, denoted as T for each time Based on Equation (15), it is evident that the likelihood of
period. The login behavior of each user is described as ti = a normally distributed variable x falling outside the range (μ
[T0 , T1 , . . . , T23 ]. The activity similarity between user nodes –3σ , μ + 3σ ) is below 0.003, a probability that is commonly
is defined as: regarded as being exceedingly low.
 ti ·tj
 sim− tij =   (7)
 |ti |×tj  C. Optimization Phase
 Combining the two types of similarity, the behavioral The joint objective function of the SAD model comprises
similarity between user nodes in the original space is defined three components. The initial component of the objective
as follows: function pertains to the reconstruction error of the autoencoder,
 which quantifies the disparity between the original input S and
 simij = sim_ dij × sim− tij (8) the reconstructed output Ŝ. Minimizing the reconstruction error
 As user nodes xi and xj are represented in the latent space helps preserve the bipartite graph structure more effectively.
as zi and zj , the behavioral differences between user node The definition of the objective function Lrec is as follows:
representations can be defined using Euclidean distance: 
 m
 Lrec = si −si 22
  (16)
 disij = zi − zj 22 (9) i=1
HAIDER et al.: ENERGY-EFFICIENT SELF-SUPERVISED TECHNIQUE TO IDENTIFY ABNORMAL USER 1635

The second part of the objective function concerns the dif- Algorithm 1 SAD Anomaly Detection Method for
ference between sim ij and simij . Minimizing this objective E-Commerce Networks
function helps obtain user node representations with behavioral Input: Heterogeneous information network data
characteristics. The objective function Lsim is defined as Output: Anomaly detection evaluation metrics results
follows: Convert heterogeneous network data to a user-device bipartite
 graph and construct the bipartite graph structure matrix S using
 m
 Lsim = ij −simij 2
 sim (17) Definition 1.
 2
 i=1,j=1 for i, j = 0 to m
 Calculate behavioral similarity between user nodes using
 In the paper [26], Deep SVDD optimizes the objective Equation (8).
function of SVDD to place the majority of user nodes within end
the minimum hypersphere around the core, while anomalous Use matrix S as input to the autoencoder. Choose the optimizer
user nodes lie outside the hypersphere. To constrain user node as stochastic gradient descent and set the values for epochs,
representations, the third part of the objective function is batch size, and learning rate (EPO, batch size, learning rate).
defined as in [26]: for i = 0 to epoch
 1 Calculate user node representations using Equation (4) and
 m
 Lsvdd = zi −c 22 (18) complete forward propagation. Calculate behavioral similarity
 m
 i=1 between user node representations using Equation (10).
 Finally, to simultaneously preserve the bipartite graph Optimize the joint objective function L using Equation (19)
structure and user behavioral characteristics in user node and complete backward propagation.
representations and constrain them, the joint objective function Calculate the core of the hypersphere latent space using
is defined based on Equations (16) to (18). The definition of Equation (11).
the objective function L is as follows: end
 for i = 0 to m
 L =Lrec +α(Lsim + Lsvdd ) (19) Calculate distances between user node representations and
 the core using Equation (12) to form the set D.
where α is a hyperparameter. Minimizing L helps obtain user
 end
node representations with supervised information.
 Remove di values in D that fall outside the interval using
 principles from Equation (13) to (15). Select the maximum
 IV. SAD A LGORITHM F LOW value in the remaining set as the radius r.
 This section presents the algorithmic flow of SAD, for i = 0 to m
providing theoretical guidance for subsequent experimental if di > r
validation and comparative analysis. The node is considered an anomalous user node.
 else
 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS The node is considered a normal user node.
 To validate the effectiveness and superiority of SAD, sev- end
eral existing baseline methods were selected for comparative end
experiments. The experimental environment utilized an Intel Return the anomaly detection evaluation metrics results.
Core i7-7700 CPU with a clock speed of 3.60GHz, 8GB of end
memory, and a 64-bit Windows 10 operating system.

A. Baseline Methods user genders, login device IDs, purchase timings, and
 more relevant information. In this experiment, a subset
 Firstly, the baseline methods used in the experiments
 of the original dataset was
are introduced, including three classical anomaly detection
 (2) Real Dataset 2: The dataset encompasses user purchase
methods such as Isolation Forest, classic autoencoder-based
 records obtained from a certain e-commerce platform,
anomaly detection methods, and recent anomaly detection
 encompassing various user information such as IP
methods like Deep FD [9] and Fraud NE [10].
 addresses, email addresses, phone numbers, login device
 IDs, and more data.
B. Datasets (3) Real Dataset 3: The information encompasses user pur-
 In this study, experiments were conducted using three chase records obtained from a prominent online retailer,
real e-commerce network datasets obtained from Kaggle and spanning the time frame between October 2019 and
one semi-synthetic e-commerce network dataset. The datasets April 2020.
are shown in Table I, and the subsequent descriptions offer (4) Semi-Synthetic Dataset: This dataset contains user purcomprehensive information regarding each dataset. chase records from a certain e-commerce platform,
 (1) Real Dataset 1: The dataset encompasses user purchase including user IDs, user ages, user genders, login device
 records derived from a certain e-commerce platform. It IDs, and purchase times. It was created by randomly
 comprises various attributes such as user IDs, user ages, sampling from the original data and adding behavioral
1636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I TABLE III
 E-C OMMERCE N ETWORK DATA S ET E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT
 M ETHODS IN R EAL DATA S ET 1

 TABLE II
 B EWILDERMENT M ATRIX

 TABLE IV
 E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT
 M ETHODS IN R EAL DATA S ET 2

 records for some anomalous users, where the number of
 anomalous user’s accounts for 5% of all users.

C. Evaluation Metrics
 Since anomaly detection datasets are typically imbalanced,
evaluating performance can be more complex. Finding data
points or patterns in a dataset that substantially depart from
the norm is known as anomaly detection. Five evaluation beneath the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
metrics are used to assess the performance of various methods. curve. The calculation is performed as follows:
These metrics include Precision (P), Recall (R), F1-score, Area TP
Under the Curve (AUC), and the G-mean. TPR = (23)
 TP + FN
 The evaluation of measurements is conducted by employing FP
a bewilderment matrix, exemplified in Table II. Similarly, FPR = (24)
 FP + TN
“FP” designates the count of false positive samples that
 (5) G-mean is used for imbalanced datasets and is defined
have been inaccurately classified, while “TN” represents the
 as:
quantity of true negative samples that have been correctly √
classified. G mean = R × TNR (25)
 (1) Precision is defined as:
 where TNR (True Negative Rate) represents the propor-
 TP tion of detected negatives among all actual negatives,
 P= (20)
 TP + FP calculated as:
 TN
 (2) Recall is defined as: TNR = (26)
 TN + FP
 TP
 R= (21) D. Experimental Validation and Comparative Analysis
 TP + FN
 The tests were carried out utilizing the TensorFlow frame-
 (3) In general, there exists a trade-off between precision work, wherein the latent space dimension was configured to
 and recall. The F1-measure is computed by using the be 10. The experimental findings are displayed in Tables III
 following formula: to 6, whereby the most favorable outcomes for each statistic
 2×P×R are highlighted in bold.
 F1 = (22) A comparative analysis is performed between SAD and
 P+R
 baseline methods in the four experiments. Table III presents
 (4) The evaluation statistic known as AUC (Area Under the evaluation metric results for different methods on Real
 the Curve) holds significant importance in the context Dataset 1, where SAD performs better in Recall, F1-measure,
 of classification algorithms, since it quantifies the area AUC, and G-mean.
HAIDER et al.: ENERGY-EFFICIENT SELF-SUPERVISED TECHNIQUE TO IDENTIFY ABNORMAL USER 1637

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT O RDINAL VALUE TABLE
 M ETHODS IN R EAL DATA S ET 3

 TABLE VI
 E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT
 M ETHODS IN S EMI -S YNTHETIC DATA S ETS
 by encoding user node representations using autoencoders.
 This indicates that the anomaly detection method with a
 self-supervised learning mechanism exhibits strong detection
 performance and generalization capabilities.
 To comprehensively compare the generalization capabilities
 of all methods, a Friedman test is performed on the F1-
 measure evaluation metric results for different methods across
 different datasets.
 The null hypothesis (H0) and alternative hypothesis (H1)
 for the Friedman test are as follows:
 H0: There is no difference in F1-measure evaluation metric
 results among different methods across different datasets,
 meaning that the performance of different methods is the same.
 H1: There is a difference in F1-measure evaluation metric
 Table IV lists the evaluation metric results for different results among different methods across different datasets,
methods on Real Dataset 2, where SAD outperforms the indicating that the performance of different methods varies.
baseline methods in various metrics. First, the F1-measure evaluation metric results for different
 Table V presents the evaluation metric results for differ- methods across different datasets are ranked, and the average
ent methods on Real Dataset 3. KNN achieves the highest ranks are calculated for each row to obtain the average rank,
Precision in this experiment, while Deep FD performs best in as shown in Table VII.
Recall. SAD outperforms the baseline methods in F1-measure, Assuming the comparison of k methods on N datasets, let ri
AUC, and G-mean, and its performance is second only to Deep represent the average rank of the i-th method. The ri follows
FD in Recall. a normal distribution with a mean of (k+1)/2 and a variance
 Table VI displays the evaluation metric results for different of (k2 − 1)/12. This leads to a χ 2 distribution:
methods on the semi-synthetic dataset. Deep FD performs best
in Precision, with SAD closely following. SAD outperforms 12N 
 k
 k(k + 1)2
 τχ 2 = ri2 − (27)
the baseline methods in other evaluation metrics. Improved k(k + 1) 4
 i=1
feature representations of the data through self-supervised
learning can improve computer vision model performance. Based on Equation (27), the F-distribution can be derived:
Furthermore, the use of an SSL method improves a model’s (N − 1)τχ 2
capacity to learn in the absence of the structure that labelled τF = (28)
 N(k − 1) −τχ 2
data provides.
 Analyzing the experimental results, SAD demonstrates its where τF follows an F-distribution with degrees of freedom
effectiveness and superiority in various evaluation metrics k-1 and (k–1)(N–1) [27]. At a significance level α = 0.05 and
across different datasets. Within this theoretical framework, degrees of freedom of 8, by calculation, τF = 13.94, which is
the Self-Supervised Aberrant Detection Model (SAD) has been greater than the critical value 2.355 [27]. This confirms that
presented to recognize and identify people who display aber- the null hypothesis H0 is not valid, indicating that there is a
rant behavior. Autoencoders are used in the self-supervised difference in the performance of different methods.
learning process of the SSADM methodology to encode Next, a sensitivity analysis of the hyperparameter α is
user node representations. the usage of the Self-Supervised performed. When α takes different values in the range (0,1),
Anomaly Detection Model (SAD) in e-commerce systems to the evaluation metric results of SAD on different datasets are
detect unusual user Behavior. It finishes forward propagation observed to see if they change. The statistical distribution
1638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 to classical anomaly detection methods but similar to other
 baseline methods. With the same time complexity, this method
 shows more outstanding performance on different datasets.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 E-commerce networks involve relationships between different entities and have a structure of a heterogeneous
 information network. By analyzing anomalous user behavior
 patterns, a self-supervised anomaly detection method, SAD,
 is proposed for e-commerce networks. A self-supervised
 anomaly detection technique called SAD is presented for
 e-commerce networks. It operates by examining unusual
 user Behavior patterns. Within this theoretical framework,
 a method for identifying and detecting users who display
 aberrant Behavior has been proposed: the Self-Supervised
 Aberrant Detection Model (SAD). Experimental verification
 and comparative analysis demonstrate that SAD outperforms
Fig. 3. Different evaluation index results of SAD when α changes in data baseline methods in various evaluation metrics, proving the
set 1-3. feasibility and superiority of this method. Despite having great
 TABLE VIII anomaly detection performance, the SAD approach described
 F1G MEASURE E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF SAD W HEN THE in this paper ignores node and edge attribute information in
 ACTIVATION F UNCTION C HANGES IN R EAL DATA S ET 1 heterogeneous information networks. Furthermore, although
 there are other links among various entities in e-commerce
 networks, this research primarily focuses on the relationships
 between users and devices. In the future, we hope to further
 expand research on anomaly user detection by analyzing
 behavior patterns among different entities.

 TABLE IX
 F1-M EASURE E VALUATION I NDEX R ESULTS OF SAD W HEN THE
 R EFERENCES
 ACTIVATION F UNCTION C HANGES IN R EAL DATA S ET 2 [1] M. R. Kondamudi, S. R. Sahoo, L. Chouhan, and N. Yadav, “A comprehensive survey of fake news in social networks: Attributes, features,
 and detection approaches,” J. King Saud Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 35,
 no. 6, Art. no. 101571, doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2023.101571.
 [2] A. Mewada and R. K. Dewang, “Research on false review
 detection Methods: A state-of-the-art review,” J. King Saud
 Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 7530–7546, 2022,
 doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2023.101571.
 [3] A. Abdallah, M. A. Maarof, and A. Zainal, “Fraud detection system:
 A survey,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 68, pp. 90–113, Jun. 2016,
of precision and recall over all three data set are shown in doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2016.04.007.
 [4] Q. Zheng, Y. Xu, H. Liu, B. Shi, J. Wang, and B. Dong, “A survey
Figures 3. of tax risk detection using data mining techniques,” Engineering, early
 Based on the analysis of experimental results, it can be access, Sep. 25, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.eng.2023.07.014.
concluded that as the α value gradually increases, the values [5] T. Limbasiya, K. Z. Teng, S. Chattopadhyay, and J. Zhou, “A systematic
 survey of attack detection and prevention in connected and autonomous
of different evaluation metrics continue to increase. When α vehicles,” Veh. Commun., vol. 37, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 100515,
reaches a certain value, the changes in the values of different doi: 10.1016/j.vehcom.2022.100515.
evaluation metrics stabilizes. [6] M. A. Javed, M. S. Younis, S. Latif, J. Qadir, and A. Baig, “Community
 This paper examines the impact of activation functions in detection in networks: A multidisciplinary review,” J. Netw. Comput.
 Appl., vol. 108, pp. 87–111, Apr. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2018.02.011.
SAD (Self-Attention Distillation) and presents a comparative [7] P. Bindu and P. S. Thilagam, “Mining social networks for anomalies:
analysis of the evaluation metric outcomes of SAD on various Methods and challenges,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 68, pp. 213–229,
datasets, specifically focusing on the F1-G measure. Based Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2016.02.021.
 [8] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detection:
on the data shown in Table VIII, it is apparent that the Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) function demonstrates superior vol. 186, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115742, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2021.115742.
performance in precision, F1-G measure, and G-mean across [9] S. Lee et al. “Towards secure intrusion detection systems
 using deep learning techniques: Comprehensive analysis and
three assessment criteria. Tables IX show that the ReLU review,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 187, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103111,
function excels in various evaluation metrics. doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2021.103111.
 According to the algorithm procedure in Section IV, the [10] A. Cherif, A. Badhib, H. Ammar, S. Alshehri, M. Kalkatawi, and
 A. Imine, “Credit card fraud detection in the era of disruptive technolotime complexity of SAD is O(m) + O( epoch ∗ 2m), which gies: A systematic review,” J. King Saud Univ.-Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 35,
is O(n2 ), making it have a higher time complexity compared no. 1, pp. 145–174, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.jksuci.2022.11.008.
HAIDER et al.: ENERGY-EFFICIENT SELF-SUPERVISED TECHNIQUE TO IDENTIFY ABNORMAL USER 1639

[11] T. Taleb, C. Benzaïd, R. A. Addad, and K. Samdanis, “AI/ML [20] E. Quagliarini, G. Romano, and G. Bernardini, “Investigating pedestrian
 for beyond 5G systems: Concepts, technology enablers & solu- behavioral patterns under different floodwater conditions: A video
 tions,” Comput. Netw., vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110044, analysis on real flood evacuations,” Safety Sci., vol. 161, May 2023,
 doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2023.110044. Art. no. 106083, doi: 10.1016/j.ssci.2023.106083.
[12] M. A. F. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, [21] X. Yi et al., “Gas-theft suspect detection among boiler room users:
 “A review of novelty detection,” Signal Process., vol. 99, pp. 215–249, A data-driven approach,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 12,
 Jun. 2014. pp. 5796–5808, 1 Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3062707.
[13] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: [22] J. Bian, L. Wang, R. Scherer, M. Woźniak, P. Zhang, and W. Wei,
 A survey,” 2019, arXiv: 1901.03407. “Abnormal detection of electricity consumption of user based on
[14] S. Agrawal and J. Agrawal, “Survey on anomaly detection using data particle swarm optimization and long short term memory with the
 mining techniques,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 60, pp. 708–713, 2015, attention mechanism,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 47252–47265, 2021,
 doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.220. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3062675.
[15] H. Fourati, R. Maaloul, L. Chaari, and M. Jmaiel, “Comprehensive [23] Z. Wang, S. Li, X. Zhang, and G. Feng, “Exploring abnormal behavior
 survey on self-organizing cellular network approaches applied to 5G in swarm: Identify user using adversarial examples,” IEEE Trans.
 networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 199, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 108435, Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 250–260, Feb. 2023,
 doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2021.108435. doi: 10.1109/TETCI.2022.3201294.
[16] M. Menchón, E. Talavera, J. Massa, and P. Radeva, “Behavioural [24] A. Naser, A. Lotfi, M. D. Mwanje, and J. Zhong, “Privacy-preserving,
 patterns discovery for lifestyle analysis from egocentric photo- thermal vision with human in the loop fall detection alert system,” IEEE
 streams,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 95, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 101846, Trans. Hum.-Mach. Syst., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 164–175, Feb. 2023,
 doi: 10.1016/j.pmcj.2023.101846. doi: 10.1109/THMS.2022.3203021.
[17] X. Lian et al., “Recognition of typical environmental control behavior [25] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection
 patterns of indoor occupants based on temporal series association model based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
 analysis,” Build. Environ., vol. 234, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 110170, Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021,
 doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2023.110170. doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2021.3120804.
[18] D. Li et al., “Association between behavioral risks and Alzheimer’s [26] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, L. Xue, and Q. Zheng, “A deep multidisease: Elucidated with an integrated analysis of gene expression view framework for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
 patterns and molecular mechanisms,” Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 150, Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2539–2552, Jun. 2022,
 Apr. 2023, Art. no. 105207, doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105207. doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2020.3015098.
[19] J. Wu et al., “Sedentary behavior patterns and the risk of non- [27] U. Islam, A. Al-Atawi, H. S. Alwageed, M. Ahsan, F. A. Awwad, and
 communicable diseases and all-cause mortality: A systematic review and M. R. Abonazel, “Real-time detection schemes for memory DoS (Mmeta-analysis,” Int. J. Nurs. Stud., vol. 146, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 104563, DoS) attacks on cloud computing applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
 doi: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2023.104563. pp. 74641–74656, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3290910.