sensors
Article
Enhanced Network Intrusion Detection System for Internet
of Things Security Using Multimodal Big Data Representation
with Transfer Learning and Game Theory
Farhan Ullah 1,2 , Ali Turab 1 , Shamsher Ullah 3 , Diletta Cacciagrano 2 and Yue Zhao 4, *

 1 School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, China;
 farhankhan.cs@yahoo.com (F.U.); aliturab@nwpu.edu.cn (A.T.)
 2 Division of Computer Science, University of Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy; diletta.cacciagrano@unicam.it
 3 National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University,
 Shenzhen 518060, China; shamsher@szu.edu.cn
 4 School of Computer Science, College of Science, Mathematics and Technology, Wenzhou-Kean University,
 Wenzhou 325015, China
 * Correspondence: yuezhao@kean.edu

 Abstract: Internet of Things (IoT) applications and resources are highly vulnerable to flood attacks,
 including Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. These attacks overwhelm the targeted device
 with numerous network packets, making its resources inaccessible to authorized users. Such attacks
 may comprise attack references, attack types, sub-categories, host information, malicious scripts,
 etc. These details assist security professionals in identifying weaknesses, tailoring defense measures,
 and responding rapidly to possible threats, thereby improving the overall security posture of IoT
 devices. Developing an intelligent Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is highly complex due to its
 numerous network features. This study presents an improved IDS for IoT security that employs
 multimodal big data representation and transfer learning. First, the Packet Capture (PCAP) files
 are crawled to retrieve the necessary attacks and bytes. Second, Spark-based big data optimization
 algorithms handle huge volumes of data. Second, a transfer learning approach such as word2vec
Citation: Ullah, F.; Turab, A.; Ullah, S.; retrieves semantically-based observed features. Third, an algorithm is developed to convert network
Cacciagrano, D.; Zhao, Y. Enhanced bytes into images, and texture features are extracted by configuring an attention-based Residual
Network Intrusion Detection System Network (ResNet). Finally, the trained text and texture features are combined and used as multimodal
for Internet of Things Security Using features to classify various attacks. The proposed method is thoroughly evaluated on three widely
Multimodal Big Data Representation used IoT-based datasets: CIC-IoT 2022, CIC-IoT 2023, and Edge-IIoT. The proposed method achieves
with Transfer Learning and Game excellent classification performance, with an accuracy of 98.2%. In addition, we present a game
Theory. Sensors 2024, 24, 4152.
 theory-based process to validate the proposed approach formally.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134152

Academic Editor: Alessandra Keywords: intrusion detection system; big data; transfer learning; game theory; network
Rizzardi traffic; cybersecurity

Received: 7 May 2024
Revised: 16 June 2024
Accepted: 24 June 2024
Published: 26 June 2024
 1. Introduction
 The adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies and systems is accelerating at an
 unprecedented rate. Modern IoT systems work on a far larger scale than the individual
 level, with interconnected devices dispersed throughout entire cities or countries. IoT
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors. devices can efficiently acquire, send, and process large amounts of data due to increased
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
 connectivity speed and bandwidth [1]. Together with their accumulated data, these IoT
This article is an open access article
 devices present considerable prospects for developing and delivering smart services in
distributed under the terms and
 various sectors, including autonomous vehicles, automatic monitoring, and smart cyberconditions of the Creative Commons
 physical networks [2,3]. However, the obtained IoT data may contain personal information,
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
 emphasizing the importance of privacy protection and stringent data security procedures.
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
 Modern IoT and distributed systems must improve their capacity to effectively identify
4.0/).

Sensors 2024, 24, 4152. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24134152 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 2 of 31

 and thwart network intrusions to resolve the rising issues regarding privacy and security.
 Techniques for Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) based on machine learning or
 deep learning have received much attention in the scientific community [4,5]. Their aim
 is to mitigate misuse or deviations within IoT infrastructures and systems. While NIDS
 has proven effective in detecting malicious network activity, a significant limitation is the
 inability to identify new forms of network intrusions due to the challenges posed by big data
 processing and related imbalances [6]. Furthermore, existing machine learning algorithms
 for intrusion detection struggle with multimodal data, emphasizing the significance of
 further study into hybrid feature engineering. Big data is generated via network traffic,
 system events, and logs. Cybersecurity is improved by using big data analytics and related
 approaches to analyze data flows, investigate events, and regularly detect anomalies, shifts,
 and threats in network traffic, as shown in Figure 1. Remote routers properly collect and
 track the network traffic that IoT devices generate. These routers send such real-time data to
 Spark stream processors for efficient processing. The AMP Lab at UC Berkeley developed
 Spark, a platform for distributed computation [7]. A Spark-based platform can dynamically
 and efficiently manage massive amounts of generated data. Due to the expansion of large
 data structures, networking system speeds, and intruder techniques, intelligent intrusion
 detection remains an essential research challenge. Spark incorporates several integration
 techniques across multiple big data systems, enabling it to quickly handle enormous
 amounts of data [8,9]. Its memory-driven Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD) method is
 designed for ensembles and recurrent computations and permits intermediary data caching
 in storage. As a result, the Spark model provides particular benefits for processing massive
 volumes of data through various optimization approaches, including partitioning, caching,
 API selection, and more.

 Figure 1. Monitoring of IoT-based network traffic flows using Spark stream processor.

 Traditional Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) methods in NIDS have
 prioritized model performance over in-depth network semantic analysis. NIDS evaluates
 data from hosts and network traffic to detect intrusion attempts. Intruders regularly utilize
 malicious scripts to disrupt IoT network functionality. Semantic-based feature engineering
 can be applied to behavioral segmentation to detect potential malicious scripts. This
 strategy entails evaluating network data semantically to generate training features before
 using them for classification. Nonetheless, text-based behaviors such as code obfuscation,
 insertion, and re-ordering present difficulties. In contrast, image-based feature analysis is
 frequently used, capturing a wide range of structural information such as memory, process,
 and header details. This enables visual images to retrieve dynamic or obfuscated data
 of any type [10–12]. However, this strategy may disrupt the overall structure of network
 traffic, making it harder to target specific scripts such as DDoS or authentication protocols.
 It is also entirely dependent on the properties of images, which leaves it open to attacks
 that impair image quality. To address these concerns, it is possible to employ multimodal
 features that combine text and visual features to detect potentially harmful scripts and
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 3 of 31

 risky behaviors such as memory or resource usage. This unique multimodal technique
 accurately identifies a wide range of intrusion threats. This paper introduces an innovative
 approach for detecting IoT-based NIDS involving analyzing and characterizing networkbased multimodal features. A crawler is developed to gather network flows from PCAPs
 for in-depth study. Subsequently, word2vec is used to extract trained vocabulary features.
 The network-based byte stream is then converted into an image. We develop a powerful
 NIDS by integrating text-based and visual features. Our findings show that these two
 features enhance one another, resulting in a higher intrusion detection rate. The proposed
 methodology establishes a strong foundation by incorporating anomaly detection and
 signature-based approaches. Although the current focus is on signature-based detection
 approaches, including word2vec transfer learning to extract features from harmful scripts,
 the system can be readily adapted to detect anomalies. This adaptability provides the
 ability to detect network anomalies. Anomaly detection algorithms can be developed using
 dynamic feature extraction techniques and enhanced streaming data processing capabilities.
 This development can enable the IDS to detect abnormal network activity in real-time,
 thereby improving signature-based detection. Consequently, it can offer a comprehensive
 defense against emergent threats. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
 • We proposed custom datasets crawled from PCAPs in the CIC-IoT 2022 and 2023
 datasets. Numerous attacks are assembled, including camera-based flood, DDoS,
 RTSP brute force, etc. Furthermore, PCAPs are mined for various camera-based
 attacks to analyze abnormal visual surveillance behavior.
 • The optimization approach, implemented within the Spark framework, efficiently
 extracts insights from huge datasets. Comparative analysis of different optimization
 strategies is used to determine how big data behaves and to improve the workings
 of the NIDS. The word2vec transfer learning approach extracts trained features from
 dangerous scripts while minimizing data transmission overhead. This strategy uses
 semantic anchors to focus on specific network attacks involving malicious scripts.
 • We design a method that converts the network bytes to an image to analyze the visual
 features. A malware-to-image conversion algorithm is developed that can transform
 the byte stream into a grayscale image. The texture features are then extracted from
 visuals using an attention-based Residual Network (ResNet)-trained model. The text
 and texture features are then combined for effective IoT-based NIDS.
 • A game theory-based method is designed to validate the performance of the proposed
 method, supporting the use of the Nash equilibrium and mathematical formulations
 to develop a reliable and trustworthy IoT-based IDS system.
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the relevant
 and recent literature; Section 3 describes the proposed approach; Section 4 provides an
 extensive experimental analysis; Section 5 presents the IDS game theory-based study; and
 Section 6 concludes the work.

 2. Related Work
 Numerous research studies have been proposed on IoT security using IDS customized
 to the IoT ecosystem’s characteristics. Stephen et al. [13] designed an approach renowned
 for its mobility, composite structure, and centralized design. This method is intended to
 detect Hello Flood and Sybil attacks on IoT networks that use the Low Power and Lossy
 Networks (RPL) protocol for routing. Their method uses detection measures, including
 the number of packets received and delivered, to verify the intrusion ratio (IR) via the
 IDS agent. Raza et al. [14] designed the SVELTE method, a real-time IDS for the Internet
 of Things. It includes a 6LoWPAN Mapper, an intrusion detection module, and a small
 firewall. The method examines traced data to detect unauthorized network access and has
 been particularly tested for its capacity to identify faked or changed information, sinkholes,
 and selective forwarding threats. Shreenivas et al. [15] made SVELTE better by adding an
 intrusion detection module with an Expected Transmission (ETX) measure to find bad activities happening on the network. They also suggested employing a geographical indicator
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 4 of 31

 to identify hostile nodes engaged in ETX-based network attacks. Combining the EXT and
 rank-based methods revealed a rise in the overall True Positive (TP) rate. Pongle et al. [16]
 proposed an IDS with centralized and distributed architectures, which they constructed
 and tested using simulated scenarios and networks. This technique is specifically designed
 to detect routing attacks such as wormholes. Jun et al. [17] presented an event-processingbased IDS for IoT. For attack detection, this specification-based system employs complicated
 event-processing algorithms. It collects IoT data, extracts events, and matches them to rule
 pattern repositories to detect security instances. While it is more efficient than standard IDS,
 it does place a large demand on the CPU. Summerville et al. [18] designed an IDS for IoT
 by combining a deep packet inspection approach with a bit-pattern strategy. With feature
 selection using overlapping n-grams, network payloads are considered as bit-patterns.
 The bit pattern and n-grams are said to be matched when corresponding bits line up in
 every location. The false positive rate of the system decreased substantially when it was
 evaluated via the execution of four assaults [19]. Ioulianou et al. [20] proposed a hybrid
 lightweight signature-based IDS to counter two DoS attacks: Hello flooding and version
 number alteration. Despite the excellent findings, it is vital to highlight that their system
 was tested in a simulated environment using Cooja.
 Recent research has shown increasing interest in using big data gathered from network
 traffic to find different patterns and classify harmful activity. The proliferation of big
 data has facilitated the advancement of more precise IDS by implementing ML and DL
 methodologies [21,22]. Gupta et al. [23] used Spark streaming to perform real-time network
 analysis. Their research revealed several streaming analytics issues, notably spotting port
 scans, tracking mirrored breaches, and analyzing application efficiency. Using programmed
 switches such as OpenFlow switches allowed for the collection of 95% of query-related
 activity. Mustapha et al. [24] used Apache Spark to compare the efficacy of four popular classification methods for detecting intrusions in network traffic: SVM, NB, DT, and
 RF. The UNSW-NB15 dataset was used to assess detection accuracy and forecast time.
 Samed et al. [5] developed an IDS using a hybrid deep learning (HDL) network with CNN
 and LSTM models. To reduce the influence of data imbalance on system performance, they
 used the Synthetic Minority Oversampling Technique (SMOTE) and Tomek-Links (STL)
 sampling methods. The PySpark application within Apache Spark showed a remarkable
 classification accuracy of 99.17%. A statistical IDS was put forth by Kamran et al. [25]
 to detect fraudulent information attacks and additional forms of intrusion. They investigated the consequences of numerous parameters using simulation and analysis under
 various traffic situations, presenting their modeling findings graphically and quantitatively.
 A cooperative information exchange application layer (IDS) was used to compare and
 evaluate the methodology. The CIDDS-001, CICIDS17, and CICDDoS19 datasets were
 used by Pontes et al. [26] to design an energy-based method for finding intrusion attacks.
 Traffic flows were classified as benign or detrimental according to their energy values. To
 accomplish this, the authors utilized real-world data and executed Mixed Integer Linear
 Programming (MILP). Their method reduced the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) by 35%
 compared to server count and 43% compared to turnaround time.
 Business applications frequently produce large amounts of log data to track operational
 conditions and network utilization metrics. An IDS generally necessitates the examination
 of PCAP files, which contain unstructured network data. The data may contain vital
 characteristics of specific attacks, including names, references, and host details. Semantic
 preprocessing of network data removes noise and extracts relevant information, potentially
 relieving network-based IDS [27]. Seyyar et al. [28] suggested a web IDS solution that
 uses network traffic to categorize URLs as benign or malicious. The technique uses the
 BERT transformer model and CNN to categorize distinct types of attacks during the URL
 analysis phase. Li et al. [29] used the word2vec model and weighted mapping of HTTP
 data to design a low-dimensional feature vector for semantic extraction. The detection
 accuracy, true positive rate, and false positive rate were high on datasets such as HTTP
 CSIC 2010, UNSW-NB15, and Malicious URLs. Min et al. [30] advocated a statistical
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 5 of 31

 and payload-based IDS strategy using word semantics and text-CNN to extract relevant
 attributes from payloads.
 The work described in this paper overcomes several deficiencies in existing intrusion
 detection systems. Such difficulties include scalability issues with huge datasets, which
 create processing delays and limited feature representation based only on text. Other
 limitations include insufficient threat detection due to a lack of connectivity between text
 and image data, difficulty identifying complex assaults in diverse IoT environments, and
 reliance on manual rules, limiting adaptability. The suggested solution addresses these
 issues by combining text and picture data. In addition, transfer learning improves accuracy
 and adaptability in IoT security and optimizes algorithms for greater efficiency. This
 integrated strategy improves the system’s ability to respond quickly to emerging threats
 while capturing a wider range of attack patterns, ultimately increasing overall efficacy.

 3. Proposed Method
 Figure 2 depicts the overall process of extracting multimodal features and detecting
 attacks. We use multimodal features combining text and visual elements to detect malicious
 attacks. Textual features are collected from network traffic using Spark-based optimization
 algorithms and a transfer learning approach. The network bytes are transformed into
 images to extract textural information. An algorithm is created to handle this conversion,
 and texture features are extracted by tuning the attention-based ResNet. The trained text
 and texture features are integrated and used as multimodal features to classify different
 attacks. These novel multimodal features correctly identify a wide range of intrusion threats.

 Figure 2. Proposed framework for enhancing IoT security using multimodal data representation and
 big data.

 3.1. Network Data Preprocessing
 The PCAP includes the communication logs utilized by IoT devices. Each message is
 preserved in an unreadable format. By filtering out essential network-related activities (e.g.,
 HTTP, TCP, DNS), Wireshark is employed to analyze the PCAP file. Such flow activities
 could include various data, including host data, protocol, both the sending and receiving
 IP addresses, and the time. Analyzing these transit events makes distinguishing between
 harmless and malicious network behavior possible, as shown in Algorithm 1. An effective
 IDS is developed by combining this information with a big data platform that employs
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 6 of 31

 transfer learning. Nevertheless, this type of data is perturbed and might not possess
 significant interpretations that could aid in detecting diverse attacks. As a result, all chaotic
 flow events are eliminated from this data. We accomplished this by developing a semantic
 crawler that processes all flow activities and transforms them into substantial trends. The
 subsequent steps provide additional illustrations of the crawling procedure:
 • To avoid redundancy, eliminate repetitive features in sequence within input sets.
 • The dataset excludes brief sequences that lack sufficient data to determine relevant
 network behavior.
 • Sequence length homogeneity is critical for effective IDS, as varying lengths might
 confuse neural network models. To achieve balance, this technique employs a predetermined sequence length, designated as L. Patterns longer than L retain their initial
 L elements, while shorter patterns are equalized using zero-padding. The complete
 architecture is shown in Figure 2.

 Algorithm 1: Texture features
 Input: Network Traffic
 Output: Texture feature
 initialization;
 1 Set T f = { t1 , t2 , . . . , t n };
 ′
 2 Compute E(t f ) = t f ;
 3 for for check condition do:
 ′
 while If E(t f ) = t f do
 ′ ′
 4 Compute t f as a text feature, where t f : HTTP, TCP, UDP, etc.;
 ′
 5 Display t f as an output;
 6 Else;
 7 Display error message;
 8 End for
 9 Go to step 3;
 10 Finish

 3.2. Texture Features Analysis
 Texture attributes analyze intrusions as harmful activities that change to elude static
 and dynamic detection methods. This novel method extracts textural information from
 bytes as images, eliminating the requirement for intrusion fingerprints or reverse engineering, as shown in Algorithm 2. Our approach includes a bytes-to-image conversion
 method that creates grayscale images from network traffic. The packet data are initially
 parsed to extract bytes from PCAPs by retrieving relevant byte streams from network
 packets. These byte sequences are subsequently converted into a string of unsigned 8-bit
 integers in the form of images. The retrieved images are standardized to 128 × 128 pixels
 in size to facilitate effective processing. This method is distinguished by its ability to
 effectively reduce the size of large PCAP files. For example, megabytes of PCAP data can
 be reduced to smaller, more standardized images, as shown in Figure 3. The versatility of
 image-based IDS makes them ideal for capturing a wide range of structural data, including
 storage, processes, headers, etc. By utilizing these visuals, advanced image processing and
 machine learning techniques such as deep learning models can be employed to identify
 patterns and anomalies that conventional methods may have overlooked. This increases
 the effectiveness of the proposed IDS.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 7 of 31

 Algorithm 2: Texture features in bytes
 Input: Network Traffic in bytes
 Output: Texture feature in bytes
 initialization;
 1 Compute B = { B1 , B2 , . . . , Bn }, where B stands for Bytes;
 2 Compute I = { I1 , I2 , . . . , In }, where I stands for Images;
 3 for for check condition do:
 while If I == I do
 4 Decomposed I in SS, where SS is 128X128.;
 5 Apply ResNet(SS);
 for ResNet(SS): do
 while Attention ResNet(SS): do
 for each I in SS: do
 6 Generate texture features;

 7 Get Texture features;

 8 End for
 9 Finish

 Figure 3. A chunk of grayscale images (128 × 128) extracted from network traffic.

 In neural networks, attention frequently refers to strategies that allow the model to
 focus on specific portions of the input sequence or image while making predictions. A
 Residual Network (ResNet) is a deep neural network that uses residual blocks or skip
 connections to address the vanishing gradient issue [31]. Figure 4 shows how we constructed the attention-based ResNet to extract image texture information. This network’s
 attention-aware characteristics are produced via several attention modules. As the depth
 of the layers grows, these attention-aware characteristics evolve gradually throughout
 modules. The extracted images are used as input to the ResNet blocks. The details are
 as follows:
 (a) Hierarchical network composition: Several attention modules are assembled in a
 layered framework to develop residual attention networks. This stacking structure
 is the basic implementation of the mixed attention mechanism, which allows for
 integrating multiple types of attention into distinct modules.
 (b) Attention Residual Learning: A significant performance drop would be the outcome
 of directly stacking the attention modules; to address this, we present a method for
 learning attention residuals that can enhance the performance of a residual attention
 network with several layers.
 Adding self-attention to the ResNet increases its ability to store long-term dependencies, assess global context, and focus on key features. This combination improves data
 transmission, enables feature learning at several sizes, and works across multiple tasks,
 making it an effective solution for various applications.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 8 of 31

 Figure 4. Attention-based ResNet for texture features extraction.

 3.3. Transfer Learning
 We use a pre-trained word2vec model as a transfer learning approach to extract semantic features from large network data. The neural network uses vector features to detect
 various types of attacks. A fixed-size feature vector, denoted as L, is obtained following a
 network traffic analysis. Although one-hot encoding can handle these characteristics, it is
 unsuitable for huge datasets. The model is initially trained on a large corpus of text related
 to network traffic analysis. During training, the model learns to generate dense vector
 representations (word embeddings) for each corpus word, capturing semantic interpretations and additional context. To optimize the model parameters, including neural network
 weights, gradient descent minimizes a loss function that compares expected and actual
 outputs. This iterative optimization reduces the gap between anticipated and observed
 outcomes, improving the model’s performance with each iteration. Then, transfer learning
 is used to apply previously acquired information to detect cyberattacks in IoT network
 traffic. Word2vec transfer learning gradually improves pre-trained word embeddings by
 leveraging IoT network traffic data. This continual fine-tuning refines the embeddings, improving their ability to capture the contextual relevance of network traffic features. In this
 way, vector semantics are improved by establishing geometric connections between them.
 Word2vec trains and extracts features using dynamic fine-tuning. This produces numerous
 vectors with comparable meanings for each feature, allowing for multiple interpretations of
 the same feature. The model can better categorize and mitigate threats in various network
 scenarios by exploiting the semantic understanding of data acquired by the original model
 through transfer learning.
 The Spark platform task and the word2vec transfer learning algorithm make it
 easier to obtain trained features from network traffic, as shown in Algorithm 3 [32].
 The org.apache.spark.ml.feature class in Spark is responsible for implementing dynamic
 word2vec. This class uses distributed computation capabilities to simplify vector generation from large text corpora and accelerate word2vec training. Converting the data into
 the Data Frame format before beginning the training process with the word2vec Spark
 class is essential. Subsequently, the fit function must be invoked. After training, we use the
 Discover Synonyms method to find phrases similar to a particular word. Processing speeds
 for Spark and Gensim may differ due to their respective algorithms and implementation
 techniques. Word2vec, which uses distributed processing capabilities, can outperform
 Gensim when dealing with large datasets. When working with small datasets, Spark may
 perform slower than Gensim due to data translation to the Data Frame format and the
 execution of multiple I/O operations.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 9 of 31

 Algorithm 3: Trained crawling texture features
 Input: {θt , θi }, where θt is for text feature and θi for texture feature
 ′
 Output: θ f IoT-based IDS classification
 1 Apply σµ as σµ (θt ) = ρt where σ for spark yarn client, µ for derive process and ρ
 for DAGScheldular;
 while σµ as σµ (θt ) = ρt : do
 2 Generate ρ as a DAGScheldular;
 3 Apply σµ (ρt ) = (YARNcs ), where CS stands for cluster scheduler;
 4 Compute Rm ← SYN (YARNcs ), where Rm stands for resource manager;
 while if θt == Ec : do
 for Check YARN: do
 5 Compute Nm = C, where Nm for node manager and C for container;
 6 Else
 7 Go to Step 2;

 8 Compute O p ← N IDS − VSB, O p for optimization process;
 9 Apply O p (Word2Vec) = Train f eature ; for Apply CNN-LSTM: do
 ′ ′
 while E(θt ) == t f && E(θi ) == i f : do
 ′
 10 Compute t f as a texture feature;
 ′
 11 Compute i f as an image feature;
 ′ ′ ′
 12 Combine θ f ← (t f + i f );
 ′
 13 Display θ f as classification of IoT-based IDS;
 14 Else;
 15 Display error message;
 16 Go to step 5;
 17 Finish;

 3.4. Big Data Analysis
 We investigated several optimization methods to analyze in-depth analysis for computation speed when dealing with large datasets, including partitioning, caching, serialization,
 data storage, and API selection [33].
 (a) Partitioning:The number of partitions is an important parameter that significantly
 impacts how efficiently Spark analyzes data. When the partition count is limited,
 computational resource utilization on individual nodes may be insufficient. On
 the other hand, too many partitions may increase network transmission and node
 scheduling costs, limiting processing efficiency. The unique processing and storage
 capacities of each node in a distributed computing system make it advantageous to
 synchronize the number of Spark partitions with the number of nodes. We aimed to
 select a partition count equal to the number of nodes that allows for the most efficient
 use of resources on each node. This alignment enhances data processing efficiency by
 reducing irrelevant network traffic and node scheduling overhead.
 (b) Caching: Spark is configured to cache data in memory, although disk storage is
 also an option. The cache can be set to employ disk storage to achieve the desired
 results. Spark might theoretically achieve faster processing times by caching data
 in memory, which has faster read-write and response times than disks. Besides
 improving overall data processing performance, this strategy lowers data access costs
 by reducing the frequency of disk read-write operations. However, disc caching
 has the advantage of a longer data retention period and greater storage capacity.
 On the other hand, its response time and read-write speed are quite slow, limiting
 data processing efficacy. Disk caching is often more appropriate in circumstances
 requiring significant data storage capacity without overwhelmingly emphasizing
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 10 of 31

 frequent access and computation. It is critical to note that storing data in memory can
 result in insufficient memory or out-of-memory (OOM) issues when memory space is
 limited or the dataset is very large. In such instances, using disk caching or studying
 other optimization methods to improve data processing throughput becomes crucial.
 (c) Serialization: Spark utilizes the Kryo and Java serialization mechanisms. Despite
 the widespread use of Java serialization, the default application of this strategy is
 inefficient, leading to large amounts of serialized data, expensive disk storage, and
 network transmission expenses. In contrast, Kryo serialization provides an efficient
 binary alternative. In addition to reducing the quantity of data, it speeds up the
 serialization and deserialization procedures and lowers disk storage and network
 transmission costs. As a result, Kryo serialization is suggested in scenarios requiring
 high performance.
 (d) Data storage: Spark supports various formats, including CSV, JSON, XML, PARQUET,
 ORC, AVRO, and others. Choosing parquet files with fast compression can improve
 Spark jobs, resulting in better performance. Parquet files internal to Spark contain
 metadata, including schemas, data types, and additional pertinent information. As a
 result, implementing parquet files can significantly accelerate processing and improve
 the overall efficacy of information management.
 (e) API selection: The three types of Spark APIs are DataFrame, DataSet, and RDD. RDD
 is used in reduced-level processes, which have a restricted number of optimization
 strategies. DataFrame is generally the best option, as it employs the catalyst optimizer,
 which produces a query plan that enhances performance. DataFrame also has minimal
 trash collection overhead. DataSets offers high-type safety during serialization by
 integrating the encoder and using Tungsten as a binary serializer. The amount of
 data and the techniques employed influence how rapidly RDD, DataFrame, and
 DataSet in Spark process information. DataFrame and DataSet frequently beat RDD
 by employing Spark SQL’s optimizer and code generator. In addition to binary
 serialization and deserialization, they provide columnar storage. Furthermore, both
 DataFrame and DataSet enable rigorous typing, which allows for the examination and
 avoidance of type problems during compilation. DataSet requires more code and type
 declarations than DataFrame but has faster processing as it employs the Tungsten
 engine, a high-performance in-memory management and serialization engine. As a
 result, the right API must be chosen based on specific parameters, such as data types
 and processing needs.
 The complexity of high-dimensional network traffic data makes it difficult to use big
 data for intelligent IDS effectively. Selecting useful characteristics while lowering dimensionality remains a challenge. Spark’s DataFrame, memory caching, Kryo serialization,
 PARQUET file storage, and adjustable partition numbers based on node count dramatically
 improve processing performance and data efficiency, especially with huge datasets. Several
 important features of the IDS make proactive threat identification and response possible
 in real-time. Utilizing optimization strategies within the Spark framework is one of these
 methods for efficiently processing streaming data. Furthermore, the word2vec transfer
 learning approach enables real-time adaptive feature extraction from harmful scripts. The
 system can rapidly identify potential risks by analyzing irregular visual surveillance behavior by scanning PCAPs for camera-based assaults. The IDS is ensured to be adaptable and
 resilient in dynamic environments by utilizing a formal validation method based on game
 theory. This method provides an exhaustive framework for assessing the effectiveness of
 proactive strategies.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 11 of 31

 3.5. Deep Learning: CNN-LSTM
 The proposed method leverages a CNN-LSTM [34] framework to detect intrusions in
 network systems immediately using the benefits of both models. Within CNN networks,
 max-pooling layers extract features for the next fully connected layer. On the other hand,
 the suggested CNN-LSTM model bypasses the fully connected layer in favor of the LSTM
 layer for processing deep features. The LSTM network detects long short-term correlations,
 whereas the CNN network is good at representing and perceiving network feature vectors.
 Figure 5 depicts the two steps of the defined CNN-LSTM model. The first phase involves
 implementing convolution, dropout, and max-pooling layers, whereas LSTM and dropout
 layers are utilized in the second phase. Convolution layers encode the network feature set
 and LSTM layers decode it. Data are flattened before being transmitted to a completely
 connected layer to optimize the performance of the IDS. LSTMs depend on the fundamental
 elements comprising the cell state and its gates. The cell state acts as a data connection
 route, transporting relevant features across the sequence-aligning system. The memory
 module of the LSTM is essential; it consists of one storage unit and three interaction gates
 (input, forget, and output). When data are communicated using the sigmoid activation
 function, values close to 0 indicate forgetting, and values close to 1 indicate retention. The
 input gate decides what information to keep at a time “t”, the forget gate controls data flow
 at a time “t minus 1”, and the output gate manages parameter settings and oversees hidden
 state actions. The sigmoid and tanh functions are used to integrate the past and present
 input and calculate the hidden state, which predicts the hidden state information that will
 be revealed later. Equations (1)–(6) describe how the model works.

 it = σ (Vixt + Wi h(t−1) + bi ) (1)
 f t = σ (Vf xt + W f h(t−1) + b f ) (2)
 cˆt = tanh(Vc Xt + Wc h(t−1) + bc ) (3)
 ct = ( f t ACt + Wc h(t−1) + it Acˆt ) (4)
 ot = σ(Vo xt + Wo h(t−1) + bo ) (5)
 ht = ot Atanh(ct ). (6)
 The symbol xt represents the input at time “t”, the symbols x∗ and w∗ represent the
 weight matrices, the symbols b and h represent the bias and hidden states, respectively,
 the symbols σ and tanh represent the activation functions, and the letters it , f t , ot , and ct ,
 represent the input gate, forget gate, output gate, and memory cell, respectively.

 Figure 5. Deep CNN-LSTM architecture for IoT-based IDS.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 12 of 31

 Scalability is critical to our system’s response to the increasing hazard of flood attacks on IoT applications. By integrating multimodal big data representation with transfer
 learning, our system can dynamically adapt to various attacks. Spark-based optimization
 ensures that huge datasets are processed smoothly. We use transfer learning to extract
 semantically rich features, improving adaptation to evolving threats. Furthermore, we employ innovative approaches such as transforming network data into images and applying
 ResNet to extract texture properties. This combination makes it possible to classify attacks
 accurately. To demonstrate scalability, we extensively tested several typical IoT datasets,
 such as the CIC-IoT 2022 and 2023 datasets. In addition, by including validation based
 on game theory, we ensure that our system is resilient and scalable, making it capable of
 efficiently handling future issues.

 4. Experimental Results
 4.1. Datasets
 We used three standard datasets to investigate the efficiency of the proposed method,
 namely, CIC-IoT 2022 [35], CIC-IoT 2023 [36], and Edge-IIoTset [37]. Canadian Institute
 for Cybersecurity datasets were used in these experiments. IoT devices were set up and
 used to examine network traffic behavior. The CIC-IoT 2022 dataset is generated using Wireshark and dumpcap in six distinct types of experiments. Dumpcap is used for
 semi-automated tests, whereas Wireshark is utilized for hands-on testing. The tests are
 divided into six categories: power, idle states, interactions, scenarios, active states, and
 attacks. For this investigation, we collected network flows associated with eleven different types of flood attacks, including Amcrest, Arlo Basestation Camera, ArloQ Camera,
 Borun Camera, DLink Camera, HeimVision Camera, Home Eye Camera, Luohe Camera,
 Nest Camera, Netatmo Camera, and SimCam, during device activation and interaction.
 The CIC-IoT 2023 dataset operates in real-time and serves as a benchmark and dataset
 specifically selected for evaluating extensive attacks in the IoT domain. Its main goal is
 to introduce a unique and comprehensive dataset on IoT threats for use in developing
 security analytics applications in real IoT operations. To this end, it implements 33 attacks on 105 IoT devices. The attacks are classified into seven types: DDoS, DoS, Recon,
 Web-based, Brute Force, Spoofing, and Mirai. We organized ten unique DDoS attacks
 to conduct the experiment: SYN_Flood, TCP_Flood, SynonymousIP_Flood, UDP_Flood,
 ICMP_Flood, PSHACK_Flood, RSTFINFlood, HTTP_Flood, ACK_Fragmentation, and
 ICMP_Fragmentation. Finally, the Edge-IIoTset dataset contains data from more than
 ten IoT devices, including inexpensive digital temperature and humidity sensors. It includes 14 DoS/DDoS, information gathering, man-in-the-middle, injection, and malware
 attacks on IoT and IIoT communication protocols. The dataset comprises alarms, system
 resources, logs, and network traffic, with 61 significantly related characteristics out of 1176
 total features.

 4.2. Performance Measures
 To comprehensively analyze the proposed approach, we used a set of five distinct
 assessment metrics: precision, recall, f1-score, accuracy, and the confusion matrix. True
 Positives (TPs) and True Negatives (TNs) are accurately classified based on how much of
 each type of network traffic is normal and abnormal. In contrast, a substantial fraction of
 regular and aberrant network traffic is incorrectly labeled as False Positive (FPs) and False
 Negative (FNs). The overall classification efficacy was assessed by calculating the accuracy,
 which is determined by dividing the number of correctly classified instances by the total
 number of instances. The evaluation matrices are shown in Equations (7)–(10).

 FP
 Recall = (7)
 (FP + TN)

 TP
 Precision = (8)
 (TP + FP)
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 13 of 31

 (2 * TP)
 F1-score = (9)
 (2TP + FP + FN)
 (TP + TN)
 Accuracy = (10)
 (TP + TN + FP + FN)

 4.3. Results Analysis
 Figure 6 shows the epoch curves for training and testing data obtained from the
 CIC-IoT 2022 dataset. To compare the performance of the proposed method, we used
 three prominent deep learning models: CNN-LSTM, CNN-RNN, and CNN-GRU. The
 blue color represents training data, whereas the red color represents testing data for model
 accuracy. Similarly, yellow represents the training data, whereas green represents the
 testing data for model loss. Using CNN-LSTM, the model accuracy curves comprising
 training and testing show behavior between 10% and 99%. Both curves behave similarly,
 with minor variations at different epochs. For instance, there is an abrupt decrease in
 the testing curve of up to 85% on the 22nd epoch and 83% on the 24th epoch. When
 compared to the accuracy curves, the loss curves react differently. For instance, the training
 and loss values are initially large, but drop steadily after a few epochs, finally yielding a
 minimum loss of approximately 3%. The training and testing curves for the CNN-RNN
 model accuracy range between 22% and 95%. Similarly, for both the training and testing
 curves the minimum model loss is around 10%. The model accuracy and testing curves for
 the CNN-GRU model range from 19% to 90%. Both curves exhibit significant variability,
 particularly for the testing data. The model loss is roughly 17% for both the training and
 testing curves. The CNN-LSTM model performs better, whereas the CNN-GRU model
 performs worse. Figure 7 shows the accuracy and loss curves of the model using the
 CIC-IoT 2023 dataset. The model accuracy curves for the CNN-LSTM model, including
 training and testing, range from 19% to 96%, while the minimum loss is around 4%. The
 CNN-RNN model accuracy curves range from 21% to 96%, with a minimum loss of around
 8%. Similarly, for the CNN-GRU model, the accuracy curves range from 5% to 95%, with
 the testing curve beginning at 82%. Thus, the CNN-LSTM performs better on the CIC-IoT
 2023 dataset.
 The CNN-LSTM model’s performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset are shown
 in Table 1. The precision, recall, and f1-score metrics were used to examine the camerabased flood attacks. The Amcrest has a 98% f1-score, 100% recall, and 95% precision,
 respectively. Comparably, the Arlo Basestation Camera offers 100% f1-score, 99% recall,
 and 100% precision. For precision, recall, and f1-score, ArloQ, DLink, Hiem Vision, and
 SimCam all have 100% performance. Overall, the values range from 95% to 100% for all
 types of flood attacks. The performance metrics for the CNN-RNN model on the CIC-IoT
 2022 dataset are shown in Table 2. The performance of this method is marginally less than
 that of CNN-LSTM. For instance, all sorts of flood attacks have values of 58% to 100%
 according to the performance metrics. The Luohe Camera shows the lowest performance,
 with 58% precision, 100% recall, and 74% f1-score. The CNN-GRU model’s performance
 metrics for the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset are shown in Table 3. In comparison to the CNN-LSTM
 and CNN-GRU models, it offers the lowest performance metrics. The Luohe Camera has
 the lowest performance, with 55% precision, 98% recall, and 71% f1-score.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 14 of 31

 Figure 6. Accuracy and loss dynamic curves on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 15 of 31

 Figure 7. Accuracy and loss dynamic curves on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 16 of 31

 Table 1. CNN-LSTM performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset.

 Flood Attacks Precision Recall F1-Score
 Amcrest 0.95 1.00 0.98
 Arlo Basestation Camera 1.00 0.99 1.00
 ArloQ Camera 1.00 1.00 1.00
 Borun Camera 1.00 0.96 0.98
 DLink Camera 1.00 1.00 1.00
 HeimVision Camera 1.00 1.00 1.00
 Home Eye Camera 1.00 0.99 0.99
 Luohe Camera 1.00 1.00 1.00
 Nest Camera 1.00 0.98 0.99
 Netatmo Camera 0.97 1.00 0.98
 SimCam 1.00 1.00 1.00

 Table 2. CNN-RNN performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset.

 Flood Attacks Precision Recall F1-Score
 Amcrest 0.88 0.75 0.81
 Arlo Basestation Camera 1.00 0.99 1.00
 ArloQ Camera 1.00 0.91 0.95
 Borun Camera 0.94 0.81 0.87
 DLink Camera 1.00 0.86 0.93
 HeimVision Camera 0.88 0.70 0.78
 Home Eye Camera 1.00 0.95 0.98
 Luohe Camera 0.58 1.00 0.74
 Nest Camera 0.95 1.00 0.98
 Netatmo Camera 0.95 0.94 0.94
 SimCam 0.98 1.00 0.99

 Table 3. CNN-GRU performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset.

 Flood Attacks Precision Recall F1-Score
 Amcrest 0.88 0.75 0.81
 Arlo Basestation Camera 1.00 0.99 1.00
 ArloQ Camera 1.00 0.91 0.95
 Borun Camera 0.94 0.81 0.87
 DLink Camera 1.00 0.86 0.93
 HeimVision Camera 0.88 0.70 0.78
 Home Eye Camera 1.00 0.95 0.98
 Luohe Camera 0.55 0.98 0.71
 Nest Camera 0.95 1.00 0.98
 Netatmo Camera 0.95 0.94 0.94
 SimCam 0.98 1.00 0.99
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 17 of 31

 Table 4 displays the performance metrics obtained with the CNN-LSTM model on
 the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset. A total of ten DDoS attacks were examined. SYN_Flood has a
 precision of 75%, a recall of 97%, and an f1-score of 85%. Similarly, TCP_Flood has 100%
 performance across all three performance metrics. SynonymousIP_Flood has the lowest
 precision (96%), recall (69%), and f1-score (80%). Overall, the performance metrics range
 from 69% to 100%. Table 5 shows the performance metrics obtained by the CNN-RNN
 model on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset. SynonymousIP_Flood has the worst performance, with
 a precision of 96%, recall of 64%, and f1-score of 77%. SYN_Flood comes second with a
 precision of 73%, recall of 98%, and f1-score of 83%. Overall, the CNN-RNN model delivers
 performance metrics ranging from 64% to 100% for all forms of DDoS attacks. Table 6
 compares the performance of the CNN-LSTM, CNN-RNN, and CNN-GRU models for
 average values of the performance indicators. This study was based on both two datasets.
 The two datasets demonstrate that the CNN-LSTM model delivers the best performance
 for detecting various intrusions. For instance, on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset, the CNN-
 LSTM model has an average precision of 98.1%, recall of 98.4%, f1-score of 97.9%, and
 classification accuracy of 98.2%. The CNN-LSTM model achieves a 96.4% classification
 accuracy, 97% precision, 96.1% recall, and 96.1% f1-score on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset. These
 results demonstrate that the CNN-LSTM model has the highest performance, whereas
 the CNN-GRU model has the lowest and the performance of the CNN-RNN model lies
 in the middle. Table 6 shows the classification performance of the CNN-LSTM model on
 the Edge-IIoT dataset, which includes 14 different IoT attacks. XSS, Ransomware, and OS
 Fingerprinting have the highest classification, while MITM has the lowest. Considering
 the variety of attacks in this dataset, the overall classification performance is impressive at
 96.1% for 14 classes. Table 7 shows the performance comparison for the three datasets.

 Table 4. CNN-LSTM performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset.

 DDoS Attacks Precision Recall F1-Score
 SYN_Flood 0.75 0.97 0.85
 TCP_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 SynonymousIP_Flood 0.96 0.69 0.80
 UDP_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 ICMP_Flood 1.00 0.99 1.00
 PSHACK_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 RSTFINFlood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 HTTP_Flood 0.98 0.98 0.98
 ACK_Fragmentation 0.99 0.99 0.99
 ICMP_Fragmentation 0.99 0.99 0.99

 The confusion matrices for the three deep learning models using both datasets are
 shown in Figure 8. These matrices examine the correct and incorrect classifications at
 the class level. This evaluation can comprehensively evaluate how well our suggested
 approach worked for the specified class. The diagonal values represent the correct classification, while the off-diagonal values represent the incorrect classification. The CIC-IoT 2022
 dataset contains eleven types of attacks, whereas the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset contains ten.
 The CNN-LSTM model performs well on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset; most classes have 100%
 classification, such as Amcrest, ArloQ Camera, DLink Camera, etc. However, a few classes
 exhibit slight misclassifications; for example, the Arlo Basestation Camera has 1% incorrect
 classification, while the Borun Camera has 4%. Amcrest has the lowest performance when
 using the CNN-RNN model, with 73% correctly classified and 27% incorrectly classified.
 Using the CNN-GRU model, the lowest performance for the HeimVision Camera is 70%
 correct classification and 30% error. The CNN-LSTM model delivers the best classification
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 18 of 31

 results for all sorts of attacks on the CIC-IoT 2022 dataset. However, CNN-LSTM delivers
 the lowest classification on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset for SynonymousIP_Flood, with 69%
 correct and 31% incorrect, while the majority have 100% or more than 97% correct classification. The CNN-RNN model’s classification is the next best, while the CNN-GRU model’s
 classification is the worst.

 Table 5. CNN-RNN performance metrics on the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset.

 DDoS Attacks Precision Recall F1-Score
 SYN_Flood 0.73 0.98 0.83
 TCP_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 SynonymousIP_Flood 0.96 0.64 0.77
 UDP_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 ICMP_Flood 1.00 0.99 1.00
 PSHACK_Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 RSTFINFlood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 HTTP_Flood 0.99 0.98 0.98
 ACK_Fragmentation 0.99 0.99 0.99
 ICMP_Fragmentation 0.98 0.99 0.99

 Table 6. CNN-LSTM performance metrics on the Edge-IIoTse dataset.

 Class Precision Recall F1-Score
 Backdoor 0.89 0.95 0.93
 DDoS HTTP Flood 0.95 0.95 0.96
 DDoS ICMP Flood 0.97 0.99 0.96
 DDoS TCP SYN Flood 0.94 0.95 0.94
 DDoS UDP Flood 1.00 1.00 1.00
 MITM (ARP spoofing + DNS) 0.85 0.94 0.9
 OS Fingerprinting 0.99 1.00 0.98
 Password 0.97 0.81 0.87
 Port Scanning 1.00 0.96 0.96
 Ransomware 0.97 1.00 0.98
 SQL injection 1.00 0.96 0.98
 Uploading 0.99 0.98 0.97
 Vulnerability scanner 1.00 0.98 0.98
 XSS 0.98 1.00 0.97
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 19 of 31

 Table 7. Comparison of performance metrics on all three datasets.

 Dataset Method Precision Recall F1-Score Accuracy
 CIC-IoT dataset 2022 CNN-LSTM 0.981 0.984 0.979 0.982
 CNN-RNN 0.958 0.953 0.951 0.954
 CNN-GRU 0.921 0.906 0.897 0.902
 CIC-IoT dataset 2023 CNN-LSTM 0.970 0.961 0.961 0.964
 CNN-RNN 0.958 0.963 0.958 0.961
 Edge-IIoT dataset CNN-LSTM 0.965 0.963 0.956 0.962
 CNN-RNN 0.943 0.942 0.936 0.940

 Figure 8. Confusion matrices for the CIC-IoT 2022 and CIC-IoT 2023 datasets.

 5. Game-Theoretical Perspective on IDS for IoT
 Game theory and the development of IDS for the IoT have emerged as a significant
 study area in recent years. This context has offered insight into cutting-edge approaches for
 addressing the complex security issues linked to IoT systems. Game-theoretical analysis
 can help to evaluate and improve NIDS security solutions [38]. While the primary purpose
 of a NIDS is to detect malicious behavior by monitoring traffic streams, signatures, and
 anomalies, adding game theory can provide significant strategic insight. This technique
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 20 of 31

 contributes to a better understanding of how attackers interact with and respond to security mechanisms [39,40]. This methodology helps to identify optimal processes, analyze
 equilibrium conditions, and allocate resources more efficiently. Analyzing dynamic and
 sequential games allows defenders to anticipate attackers’ plans while designing adaptable
 and cost-effective responses. Incorporating game theory into NIDS increases risk detection,
 resulting in more innovative and reliable security solutions. Furthermore, researchers have
 used the theoretical framework of the Nash equilibrium [41] to identify optimal techniques
 for distributing resources in intrusion detection [42,43]. In addition, evolutionary game
 theory has been used to analyze the concurrent development of methods employed by
 attackers and defenders in IoT systems [44,45]. These significant findings emphasize the
 significance of game theory as a vital tool in advancing IoT-based IDS. Such studies provide
 new perspectives on security analysis, strategy optimization, and decision-making in a
 constantly changing field of cyber threats [46,47].

 5.1. Modeling Game Theory-Based IDS for IoT Security
 Figure 9 presents a complex framework of game theory interactions and recurrent
 decision-making patterns. It illustrates how players’ strategic choices and actions lead
 to outcomes that are meticulously assessed to identify the Nash equilibrium (NE) and
 influence future strategic decisions. The suggested IDS game for the IoT approaches NE
 when both the attacker and the defender cannot boost their payoffs by changing their
 techniques. At the same time, the other side’s strategy remains unchanged. This balancing
 demonstrates the resilience and effectiveness of various intrusion detection methods against
 different attack strategies.

 Figure 9. A representation of the cyclic effect of players, strategies, actions, and payoffs on the Nash
 equilibrium.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 21 of 31

 The components of the proposed game-theoretic IDS for IoT security model can be
 defined as follows:
 1. In the context of IoT security, the set of players, denoted as P = {P1 , P2 , · · · , Pm }
 (m ≥ 2) in this game-theoretic model, consists of defenders and attackers. In IoT
 systems, defenders aim to prevent unauthorized access and protect system stability.
 At the same time, attackers, driven by objectives such as data pilferage or service
 disruption, persistently threaten these networks.
 2. The concept of ‘activity’ is essential in the game-theoretical analysis of IDS, as it
 encompasses the strategic decisions made by players, whether attackers or defenders,
 to optimize their profits. The game’s rules lie in the players’ ability to decide between
 interacting or dodging binary options. Attackers need to decide whether or not to
 initiate attacks; at the same time, defenders must choose whether to execute their
 strategy or adopt a passive approach. This strategic duality defines the game’s
 interactive essence. Within a formal setting, we shall label P to indicate a player with a
 collection of non-trivial feasible options. The set A is defined as A = {A1 , A2 , . . . , Am },
 where every component Pn represents a distinct action that the player can execute.
 The intrinsic depth of a set A contributes to the game’s strategic complexity by offering
 player P a multitude of possibilities to achieve the most advantageous outcome.
 3. In an academic context, a collection of strategies in game theory is represented as
 S = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }. These methods include a sequence of planned actions formulated by subjects while considering previous outcomes and their rewards. The efficacy
 of the attacker’s strategy relies on evading detection while transmitting malicious data
 packets. On the other hand, the defender’s strategy focuses on identifying unusual
 changes in entropy and efficiently coordinating defensive actions while minimizing
 energy consumption.
 4. The payoffs are decided according to each participant’s chosen strategies. The collection of payoffs consisting of m payoffs for matching strategies can be denoted as
 Y = {Y1 , Y2 , . . . , Ym }. The payoffs are determined by considering the advantages of a
 successful defense or attack, the cost associated with deploying defensive methods,
 and the costs borne by attackers. The provided evaluation approach clearly outlines
 the effectiveness of each defensive strategy against each attack strategy, indicating
 how well each defense can neutralize a certain sort of attack.
 5. Upon analyzing the methods used by attackers and defenders and the resulting
 benefits, it is crucial to understand how these benefits interact with the strategic
 structure of the game. Such interactions can be defined by the concept of the Nash
 Equilibrium (NE) [41]. The NE is important in game theory, as it represents a scenario
 in a non-cooperative game where no player can improve their result by independently
 altering their strategy given that the other players’ strategies remain unchanged. The
 mathematical representation of the NE is as follows:
 • Consider a game with m ≥ 2 players, denoted as P, each possessing a distinct
 set of tactics, say, SP . Let sr denote the strategy selected by player Pr and let s−r
 indicate the strategies chosen by the remaining players. The utility function for
 player Pr is represented as UP (sr , s−r ).
 A Nash Equilibrium is defined as a strategy profile s1∗ , s2∗ , . . . , s∗m in which the
 
 •
 condition stated below is satisfied for every player Pr :

 Ur (sr∗ , s∗−r ) ≥ Ur (sr , s∗−r ), ∀sr ∈ SP . (11)

 5.2. An Analytical Approach for Finding the NE
 Here, to provide a mathematical perspective on the proposed IDS game-theoretical
 model, we consider the following three strategies of defenders and attackers (see Figure 10).
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 22 of 31

 Figure 10. A representation of the proposed strategies of the defender and attacker.

 The representation of the strategy space for both the defender (SD ) and attacker (S A )
 can be identified by the rows and columns in a 3 × 3 matrix M, as follows.
       
 q11 q12 q13 SD1 , S A1  SD1 , S A2  SD1 , S A3 
 M =  q21 q22 q23  =  SD2 , S A1  SD2 , S A2  SD2 , S A3  
 q31 q32 q33 SD3 , S A1 SD3 , S A2 SD3 , S A3

 In the above matrix M, the element q11 denotes the rate-based detection of a DDoS attack by
 an IDS against volumetric DDoS attacks executed by the attacker. This particular situation
 entails the utilization of volumetric DDoS attacks by the attacker, which is already known to
 the defender. Simultaneously, the defense employs rate-based DDoS monitoring to identify
 and detect attacks efficiently. The calculation of the IDS reward depends on the equilibrium
 between energy use and the benefits obtained from efficient monitoring, as defined in the
 following equation:
 U11 ( D ) = GSD (t) − ERb (t). (12)
 The attacker experiences a loss of the resources utilized due to the attack’s lack of success.
 Equation (13) provides the calculation for the attacker’s payout:

 U11 ( A) = − RCA (t). (13)

 Each approach in this framework is complemented by matching payoffs, demonstrating the
 balance between the costs and advantages of the chosen defensive and offensive strategies.
 The comprehensive nomenclature of the parameters used in this framework is shown in
 Table 8 below.

 Table 8. Nomenclature of the parameters used in the proposed game-theoretical model.

 Description Symbol
 Energy consumed by Rate-based DDoS IDS ERb
 Energy consumed by Anomaly-based IDS E Ab
 Energy consumed by Heuristic Network Behavior IDS EHNB
 Gain for successfully detecting GSD
 Value of the assets under attack VAA
 Resource consumption by attacker RCA
 Gain for successfully attacking GSA
 Waiting time cost for attacker WCA
 Detection rate of IDS for Rate-based DDoS α
 Detection rate of IDS for Anomaly-based β
 Detection rate of Heuristic Network Behavior γ
 False Positive rate of Defender µ
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 23 of 31

 The utility matrices (MD ) and (M A ) in our cybersecurity game model represent the
 strategic interaction between the defender and attacker. Positive values GSD and GSA
 represent the advantages obtained from successful defense and attack, respectively; on
 the other hand, the costs ERb , E Ab , EHNB , RCA , and WCA have a negative impact on utility,
 indicating a balance between possible benefits and their associated costs. To calculate the
 game matrix, we can use the provided strategies and payoffs in the following manner:
 • Matrix for the defender’s payoff (MD )
    
 d11 d12 d13 GSD (t) − ERb (t) − ERb (t) − ERb (t) − VAA (t)
 MD =  d21 d22 d23  =  GSD (t) − E Ab (t) − E Ab (t) GSD (t) − E Ab (t) 
 d31 d32 d33 − EHNB (t) − VAA (t) − EHNB (t) GSD (t) − EHNB (t)

 • Matrix for the attacker’s payoff (M A )
    
 a11 a12 a13 − RCA (t) −WCA (t) GSA (t) − RCA (t)
 M A =  a21 a22 a23  =  − RCA (t) −WCA (t) − RCA (t) 
 a31 a32 a33 GSA (t) − RCA (t) −WCA (t) − RCA (t)

 We have used the scribing approach [47] to identify the NE in analyzing the proposed
 game-theoretic framework. For this, it is necessary to contrast the optimal function of
 matrix M A with the equivalent element in matrix MD , then identify a solution based on the
 pure strategies. The attacker’s maximal profits are represented by a13 and a31 ; on the other
 hand, the highest possible profits for the defense are denoted as d11 , d21 , d23 , and d33 . From
 the above model, we can draw two important conclusions.

 Theorem 1. There is no NE in pure strategies for the suggested game-theoretic model, which is
 represented by the utility matrices MD and M A .

 Proof. This conclusion can be derived from the observation that the attacker’s optimum
 choices (a13 and a31 in matrix M A ) do not correspond to any of the defender’s optimal
 choices (d11 , d21 , d23 , and d33 in matrix MD ). Given that an NE necessitates that each
 player’s strategy be the optimum response to the other player’s approach, the absence of
 concurrence between the attacker’s and defender’s optimal strategies suggests that a pure
 strategy for the NE does not exist in this scenario.

 Theorem 2. The attacker should consistently initiate the attack to optimize the potential gains
 within the suggested game-theoretic framework.

 Proof. Within the framework of the proposed model, the utility matrices M A and MD
 are used to assess the attacker’s strategies by considering their prospective benefits and
 expenses. The utility matrix M A reveals that actions such as a13 and a31 provide the
 most benefits for the attacker, as they correspond to situations where the attacker decides
 to initiate an attack. The benefits of these gains are compared with the disadvantages
 of waiting or using other techniques that do not include attacking, which tend to be
 comparatively less advantageous. Given that the attacker’s main goal is to optimize their
 gains, it is preferable for them to use techniques that result in the maximum level of
 utility. Hence, based on the configuration of the utility matrix M A and the comparative
 assessments of the advantages and disadvantages linked to each strategy, it is apparent that
 engaging in an attack results in the highest benefit for the attacker. Consequently, it can be
 deduced that the attacker will consistently select an attack to optimize their utility.

 Table 9 shows the results of the above analysis.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 24 of 31

 Table 9. Modified utility matrix for the defender and attacker.

 Rate-Based DDoS Heuristic Network
 Defender (SD ) Anomaly-Based IDS
 IDS Behavior IDS
 GSD (t) − ERb (t), GSD (t) − E Ab (t), − EHNB (t) − VAA (t),
 Volumetric DDoS
 − RCA (t) − RCA (t) GSA (t) − RCA (t)
 − ERb (t) − VAA (t), GSD (t) − E Ab (t), GSD (t) − EHNB (t),
 RTSP Brute-Force
 GSA (t) − RCA (t) − RCA (t) − RCA (t)

 As the detection rates of the IDS for Rate-based DDoS, Anomaly-based, and Heuristic
 Network Behavior attacks are α, β, and γ, respectively, from Table 9 we have the following
 payoff matrices for the defender and attacker:
 h i
 αGSD (t)− ERb (t)−(1−α)VAA (t) βGSD (t)− E Ab (t)−(1− β)VAA (t) − EHNB (t)−VAA (t)
 M̃D = − E (t)−V (t) βG (t)− E (t)−(1− β)V (t) γG (t)− E (t)−(1−γ)V (t)
 Rb AA SD Ab AA SD HNB AA

 and
  
 (1 − α) GSA (t) − RCA (t) (1 − β) GSA (t) − RCA (t) GSA (t) − RCA (t)
 M̃ A = .
 GSA (t) − RCA (t) (1 − β) GSA (t) − RCA (t) (1 − γ) GSA (t) − RCA (t)

 To estimate the relevant payoffs for both the defender and the attacker in each of the
 following scenarios (see Table 10), we use the modified 2 × 3 matrices, denoted as M̃D
 and M̃ A .

 Table 10. Different scenarios and relevant defender’s strategies.

 Cases Defender’s Strategies
 Case 1 Rate-Based DDOS or Anomaly-Based
 Case 2 Rate-Based DDOS or Heuristic Network Behavior
 Case 3 Anomaly-Based or Heuristic Network Behavior

 Below, we discuss several cases.

 Case 1: In the above context, the defender uses the rate-based DDoS and anomaly-based
 methods with the corresponding probabilities η1 and (1 − η1 ). Similarly, the probabilities associated with the attacker initiating a volumetric DDoS attack and an RTSP
 brute-force attack are represented by the corresponding variables ϑ1 and (1 − ϑ1 ).
 Considering the relevant probabilities, the following equations represent the cumulative advantages for the defender (U( D )) and attacker (U( A)):

 U( D ) = η1 ϑ1 U11 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )ϑ1 U12 ( D ) + η1 (1 − ϑ1 )U21 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ1 )U22 ( D )

 and

 U( A) = η1 ϑ1 U11 ( A) + (1 − η1 )ϑ1 U12 ( A) + η1 (1 − ϑ1 )U21 ( A) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ1 )U22 ( A).

 The following equations represent the partial derivatives of the payoffs for the defender
 (U(D)) and attacker (U( A)) with respect to probabilities η1 and ϑ1 , respectively:

 ∂U( D )
 = ϑ1 [(α − β) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + ( β − α)VAA (t)]
 ∂η1
 +(1 − ϑ1 )[( βGSD (t) − E Ab (t) + βVAA (t) − ERb (t) − VAA (t))]

 and
 ∂U( A)
 = −η1 αGSA (t) − (1 − η1 ) βGSA (t).
 ∂ϑ1
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 25 of 31

 By solving the above equations, we obtain

 −[ βGSD (t) − E Ab (t) + βVAA (t) − ERb (t) − VAA (t)]
 ϑ1 = , (14)
 [(α − 2β) GSD (t) + 2( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (1 − 2β + α)VAA (t)]
 [(α − β) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (α − β)VAA (t)]
 (1 − ϑ1 ) = , (15)
 [(α − 2β) GSD (t) + 2( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (1 − 2β + α)VAA (t)]
 β
 η1 = , (16)
 α−β
 α − 2β
 ( 1 − η1 ) = . (17)
 α−β

 Case 2: In this case, the probabilities η2 and (1 − η2 ), represent the defender’s utilization
 of rate-based DDoS and heuristic network behavior techniques, respectively. Additionally, the variables ϑ2 and (1 − ϑ2 ) reflect the likelihood of the attacker attempting
 an RTSP brute-force assault or a volumetric DDoS attack, respectively. The following
 equations show the resulting benefits for the attacker (U( A)) and defender (U( D )):

 U( D ) = η2 ϑ1 U11 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )ϑ2 U12 ( D ) + η1 (1 − ϑ2 )U21 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ2 )U22 ( D )

 and

 U( A) = η2 ϑ1 U11 ( A) + (1 − η1 )ϑ2 U12 ( A) + η1 (1 − ϑ2 )U21 ( A) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ2 )U22 ( A).

 ∂U( D ) ∂U( A )
 By solving these equations with ∂η2 = 0 and ∂ϑ2 , we obtain

 −γGSD (t) + EHNB (t) − ERb (t)
 ϑ2 = , (18)
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + γGSD (t)
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + 2γGSD (t) − EHNB (t) + ERb (t)
 (1 − ϑ2 ) = , (19)
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + γGSD (t)
 γ
 η2 = , (20)
 α+γ
 α
 ( 1 − η2 ) = . (21)
 α+γ

 Case 3: The defender uses anomaly-based and heuristic network behavior approaches,
 respectively indicated by the probabilities η3 and (1 − η3 ). In addition, the variables
 ϑ3 and (1 − ϑ3 ) represent the possibility of the attacker initiating a volumetric DDoS
 attack or an RTSP brute-force assault, respectively. The benefits to the attacker (U( A))
 and defender (U( D )) are shown in the following equations:

 U( D ) = η2 ϑ1 U11 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )ϑ2 U12 ( D ) + η1 (1 − ϑ2 )U21 ( D ) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ2 )U22 ( D )

 and

 U( A) = η2 ϑ1 U11 ( A) + (1 − η1 )ϑ2 U12 ( A) + η1 (1 − ϑ2 )U21 ( A) + (1 − η1 )(1 − ϑ2 )U22 ( A).

 ∂U( D ) ∂U( A )
 Equations ∂η3 = 0 and ∂ϑ3 can be solved to obtain

 γGSD (t) − EHNB (t) − γVAA (t)
 ϑ3 = , (22)
 ( β − γ) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − EHNB (t)) + (γ − β)VAA (t)
 βGSD (t) − γGSD (t) + E Ab (t) − EHNB (t) + γVAA (t) − βVAA (t)
 (1 − ϑ3 ) = , (23)
 ( β − γ) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − EHNB (t)) + (γ − β)VAA (t)
 1−γ
 η3 = , (24)
 β − 2γ + 1
 β−γ
 ( 1 − η3 ) = . (25)
 β − 2γ + 1
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 26 of 31

 Supposing that the odds for each event are identical, it can be inferred that both the
 attacker and the defender will obtain the maximum advantages. Based on Cases 1–3, we
 arrive at the following NE solution for the defender (SD ) and attacker (S A ):

 SD = [ϑ1 , (1 − ϑ1 ), ϑ2 , (1 − ϑ2 ), ϑ3 , (1 − ϑ3 )]
 −[ βGSD (t) − E Ab (t) + βVAA (t) − ERb (t) − VAA (t)]
 
 = ,
 [(α − 2β) GSD (t) + 2( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (1 − 2β + α)VAA (t)]
 [(α − β) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (α − β)VAA (t)]
 ,
 [(α − 2β) GSD (t) + 2( E Ab (t) − ERb (t)) + (1 − 2β + α)VAA (t)]
 −γGSD (t) + EHNB (t) − ERb (t)
 ,
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + γGSD (t)
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + 2γGSD (t) − EHNB (t) + ERb (t)
 ,
 αGSD (t) + αVAA (t) + γGSD (t)
 γGSD (t) − EHNB (t) − γVAA (t)
 ,
 ( β − γ) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − EHNB (t)) + (γ − β)VAA (t)
 βGSD (t) − γGSD (t) + E Ab (t) − EHNB (t) + γVAA (t) − βVAA (t)
 
 (26)
 ( β − γ) GSD (t) + ( E Ab (t) − EHNB (t)) + (γ − β)VAA (t)

 and

 SA = [η1 , (1 − η1 ), η2 , (1 − η2 ), η3 , (1 − η3 )]
 α − 2β 1−γ β−γ
  
 β γ α
 = , , , , , . (27)
 α − β α − β α + γ α + γ β − 2γ + 1 β − 2γ + 1

 Our game-theoretic approach focuses on three specific strategies for the attacker and
 defender. Using this approach, we can depict a more complex model which allows us to
 find the optimal strategy and Nash equilibrium (NE) within the given framework. These
 methods can be employed to illustrate the complex relationships between the defender and
 attacker in the proposed Network Intrusion Detection System (IDS) for Internet of Things
 (IoT) security.
 As IoT systems become more complicated and ubiquitous, formal validation methodologies are increasingly important. Formal methodologies employ mathematical models
 to systematically design, construct, and validate systems to guarantee that they possess
 the desired characteristics and function efficiently in various environments [48,49]. Despite
 the dynamic and varied nature of the IoT environment, formal techniques can provide a
 high level of assurance against safety vulnerabilities and malfunctions. Developers can
 reduce the probability of significant defects in deployable systems by identifying and
 fixing potential problems early in the design phase. Model checking, theorem proving,
 and formal specification languages are among the methods for accomplishing this. It is
 also possible to improve interactions between interconnected IoT devices by combining
 game theory with formal techniques. Game theory provides a framework for modeling
 strategic interactions in IoT environments with competing resources and potentially hostile
 behaviors. As decisions made by one device impact the results of others, this integration
 improves the potential of developing resilient and robust IoT systems by ensuring cooperative behavior across devices and anticipating and mitigating conflicts. Consequently,
 integrating formal methodologies and game theory into the validation process can enhance
 IoT systems’ robustness, security, and trustworthiness.
 The computational complexity of each algorithm is shown in Table 11. The costly
 terms of the proposed scheme are defined in Algorithms 1, 2, and 3.
 Table 12 shows detailed comparisons with existing approaches. Verma et al. [50]
 examined how machine learning and random search categorization might improve IoT
 security against DoS attacks. They examined classifiers in depth to improve anomalybased intrusion detection systems (IDS), assessed their efficacy using key metrics and
 validation procedures, and compared them on the CIDDS-001, UNSW-NB15, and NSL-
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 27 of 31

 KDD datasets. Qiu et al. [51] employed black-box access to generate a novel adversarial
 assault on a DL-based NIDS in the IoT. They used model extraction with fewer data points
 and a saliency map to duplicate the model to identify the most influential packet features.
 Almiani et al. [52] developed a fully automated IDS to improve cloud computing security
 and avoid cyberattacks. A multi-layered recurrent neural network model is used in cloud
 computing environments near end users and IoT devices. Anthi et al. [53] proposed a
 three-layer IDS to identify IoT network intrusions. Their system classifies and profiles IoT
 device behavior detects malicious packets and identifies attack types. Granjal et al. [54]
 used anomaly-based intrusion detection to detect DoS and 6LoWPAN/CoAP assaults.
 According to their experiments, this method provides an effective defense against these
 threats. Yang et al. [55] presented a lightweight detection technique for FL-based IoT
 intrusion detection against poisoning attacks. Their scoring method filters out unusual
 central server actors and their models from the global aggregate based on the size of
 the dataset and the local model loss. Suge et al. [56] introduced an IDS that uses deep
 learning and machine intelligence to combat security assaults in IoT networks. It compares
 attack detection with LSTM and KNN algorithms regarding detection time, kappa statistics,
 geometric mean, and sensitivity. The efficacy of the IDS was examined using Bot-IoT
 datasets. Saeed et al. [57] presented a sophisticated security framework utilizing random
 neural networks (RNNs) for intrusion detection and prevention. Using an instrumented
 source code analysis technique, this method looks for out-of-bound memory accesses
 during compilation. Each memory allocation generates its own set of tags and each memory
 visit adds instructions to verify the tags. Our approach uses the multimodal features with
 transfer learning, providing excellent classification results.

 Table 11. Complexity analysis.

 Cost Terms Algorithm 1 Algorithm 2 Algorithm 3
 Ini |n| 2| n | −
 E, Co |n| 2| n | 2| n |
 D, f − 2|n| + 3| ResNet| 5| f |
 ρ, σ, µ − − | ρ t | + 3| E |
 Total cost 2| n | 6|n| + 3| ResNet| 2| n | + 5| f | + | ρ t | + 3| E |
 Ini stands for Initialization, E for encryption, Co for computeness, D for decomposition, f for functions, ResNet
 for residual network functions, ρ for DAGScheldular, µ for derive process, and σ for Spark yarn client.

 Table 12. Performance comparisons with existing methods.

 Work Method Accuracy
 Verma et al. [47] Random Search with ML 0.967
 Qiu et al. [48] Adversarial DNN 0.943
 Almiani et al. [49] Deep RNN 0.924
 Anthi et al. [50] Supervised ML 0.98
 Granjal et al. [51] SVM with Kernels 0.933
 Yang et al. [52] Federated Learning 0.971
 Suge et al. [56] LSTM 0.973
 Saeed et al. [57] Random Neural Networks 0.972
 Our Method Multimodal with Transfer Learning 0.982
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 28 of 31

 6. Conclusions
 IoT applications and resources are vulnerable to flood attacks, especially DDoS attacks.
 Under such attacks, the resources of the targeted device become inaccessible to authorized
 users due to the enormous influx of network packets. Because of the complexity of the
 system and the number of features involved, developing an intelligent IDS is extremely
 difficult. Moreover, choosing adequate features that capture the distinguishing aspects of
 attacks while minimizing dimensionality remains a challenge [58,59]. This paper provides
 an enhanced IDS for IoT security by combining multimodal large data representation and
 transfer learning. Initially, PCAPs are evaluated to extract relevant attack types and bytes.
 Following this, Spark-based techniques for optimizing big data are implemented to manage
 massive amounts of data. The transfer learning process is then used to generate semantically
 enriched trained features. Finally, combining multimodal features, including training and
 texture features, improves the classification of various cyberattacks. The CIC-IoT 2022
 and CIC-IoT 2023 datasets, two well-known IoT-based datasets, were used to examine
 the proposed method thoroughly. In addition, a game theory-based methodology was
 utilized in the validation phase to validate the proposed method’s efficacy formally. Three
 standard deep learning models, CNN-LSTM, CNN-RNN, and CNN-GRU, were designed
 for the experiments. The results show that the proposed method using a CNN-LSTM model
 provides the highest classification results. For instance, the proposed CNN-LSTM model
 obtained 98.1% precision, 98.4% recall, 97.9% f1-score, and 98.2% accuracy on the CIC-IoT
 2022 dataset. On the CIC-IoT 2023 dataset, our CNN-LSTM model obtained 97% precision,
 96.1% recall, 96.1% f1-score, and 96.4% accuracy.
 Nonetheless, the following limitations and challenges must be addressed before deploying the proposed system in a real setting:
 • Adversarial Robustness: Addressing adversarial threats is critical for IDS reliability
 and efficacy in adversarial circumstances. Detecting and mitigating network traffic
 data modifications can help to defend the system against sophisticated attackers.
 • Privacy-preserving Techniques: An IDS with privacy-preserving methods can reduce
 concerns about collecting and analyzing sensitive network traffic data. It is possible
 to protect user privacy and detect threats efficiently using homomorphic encryption,
 secure multiparty computation, and differential privacy.
 • Cross-Domain Generalization: The system’s applicability and efficacy can be expanded
 across IoT domains and surroundings. The IDS can be trained on various datasets to
 adapt to deployment scenarios, including IoT applications, topologies, and protocols.
 • Energy Efficiency: Improving the system’s energy efficiency is vital, especially in
 IoT environments where resources are typically constrained. Energy-efficient techniques for data processing, feature extraction, and model inference can minimize IDS
 computing and energy requirements while maintaining performance.
 • Robustness Against Evolving Threats: DDoS attacks and other cyber threats evolve as
 attackers adopt new techniques and strategies. Advanced techniques can be used to
 detect and address emerging threats that are not included in training datasets.

 7. Future Directions
 The following prospective research directions could improve the proposed system’s
 performance in various ways:
 • Using Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) and advanced transfer learning techniques with big data technology is an exciting direction. This integration uses smart
 feature engineering and interpretable models. The resulting strategy promotes confidence and intelligence in big data solutions by focusing on transparency, interpretability, and usability. Future research could look into novel strategies for improving the
 explainability of complex models while retaining the scalability and effectiveness of
 big data analytics.
 • Research strategies could be formulated for feature extraction algorithms that dynamically adapt to evolving network conditions and attack patterns. Reinforcement
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 29 of 31

 learning techniques that can optimize feature extraction in real time to enhance detection accuracy should be investigated.
 • The integration of IDS with edge computing frameworks to enhance distributed
 intrusion detection and response capabilities could allow for evaluating network-edge
 lightweight feature extraction and model inference to reduce latency and bandwidth.
 • Strategies can be designed for detecting and mitigating zero-day threats that exploit
 previously undiscovered vulnerabilities. Analyzing behavior-based analysis and
 anomaly detection techniques can help to detect novel attack behaviors without the
 need to depend on previously identified signatures.
 • Profiling IoT devices and analyzing their behavior can reveal security threats. Such
 methods can aid in constructing detailed device profiles and detecting deviations from
 usual behavior.

 Author Contributions: F.U. proposed the study, simulated it, and wrote the manuscript. A.T.
 contributed to formal validation and writing. S.U. wrote the algorithms. D.C. and Y.Z. reviewed and
 analyzed the proposed research. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
 manuscript.
 Funding: This research received no external funding
 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
 Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
 Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in
 the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity CIC-IoT 2022 and CIC-IoT 2023 datasets at https://www.unb.
 ca/cic/datasets/iotdataset-2022.htmlandhttps://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iotdataset-2023.html, respectively. (accessed on 30 October 2023).
 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1. Ray, P.P. A survey on Internet of Things architectures. J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf. Sci. 2018, 30, 291–319.
2. Minovski, D.; Åhlund, C.; Mitra, K. Modeling quality of IoT experience in autonomous vehicles. IEEE Internet Things J.
 2020, 7, 3833–3849. [CrossRef]
3. Tao, F.; Cheng, J.; Qi, Q. IIHub: An industrial Internet-of-Things hub toward smart manufacturing based on cyber-physical
 system. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2017, 14, 5, 2271–2280. [CrossRef]
4. Zhou, X.; Liang, W.; Li, W.; Yan, K.; Shimizu, S.; Kevin, I.; Wang, K. Hierarchical adversarial attacks against graph-neural-networkbased IoT network intrusion detection system. IEEE Internet Things J. 2021, 9, 9310–9319. [CrossRef]
5. Al, S.; Dener, M. STL-HDL: A new hybrid network intrusion detection system for imbalanced dataset on big data environment.
 Comput. Secur. 2021, 110, 102435. [CrossRef]
6. Ullah, F.; Srivastava, G.; Ullah, S.; Yoshigoe, K.; Zhao, Y. NIDS-VSB: Network Intrusion Detection System for VANET using
 Spark-Based Big Data Optimization and Transfer Learning. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 2023, 70, 1798–1809. [CrossRef]
7. Ramkumar, M.P.; Reddy, P.V.B.; Thirukrishna, J.T.; Vidyadhari, C. Intrusion detection in big data using hybrid feature fusion and
 optimization enabled deep learning based on spark architecture. Comput. Secur. 2022, 116, 102668.
8. Limkar, S.V.; Jha, R.K. A novel method for parallel indexing of real time geospatial big data generated by IoT devices. Future
 Gener. Comput. Syst. 2019, 97, 433–452. [CrossRef]
9. Alsirhani, A.; Sampalli, S.; Bodorik, P. DDoS attack detection system: Utilizing classification algorithms with Apache Spark. In
 Proceedings of the 9th IFIP International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), Paris, France, 26–28
 February 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2018; pp. 1–7.
10. Moustafa, N.; Turnbull, B.; Choo, K.-K.R. An ensemble intrusion detection technique based on proposed statistical flow features
 for protecting network traffic of Internet of Things. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018, 6, 4815–4830. [CrossRef]
11. Ring, M.; Wunderlich, S.; Scheuring, D.; Landes, D.; Hotho, A. A survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets. Comput.
 Secur. 2019, 86, 147–167. [CrossRef]
12. Yu, L.; Dong, J.; Chen, L.; Li, M.; Xu, B.; Li, Z.; Qiao, L.; Liu, L.; Zhao, B.; Zhang, C. PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional
 neural network for network intrusion detection. Comput. Netw. 2021, 194, 108117. [CrossRef]
13. Stephen; R.; Arockiam, L. Intrusion detection system to detect sinkhole attack on RPL protocol in Internet of Things. Int. J. Electr.
 Electron. Comput. Sci. 2017, 4, 16–20.
14. Raza, S.; Wallgren, L.; Voigt, T. SVELTE: Real-time intrusion detection in the Internet of Things. Ad Hoc Networks
 2013, 11, 2661 –2674. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 30 of 31

15. Shreenivas, D.; Raza, S.; Voigt, T. Intrusion Detection in the RPL-connected 6LoWPAN Networks. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
 International Workshop on IoT Privacy, Trust, and Security, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 2 April 2017; pp. 31–38.
16. Pongle, P.; Chavan, G. Real Time Intrusion and Wormhole Attack Detection in Internet of Things. Int. J. Comput. Appl.
 2015, 121, 1–9. [CrossRef]
17. Jun, C.; Chi, C. Design of Complex Event-Processing IDS in Internet of Things. 2014 Sixth International Conference on Measuring
 Technology and Mechatronics Automation (ICMTMA). In Proceedings of the 2014 6th International Conference on Measuring
 Technology and Mechatronics Automation, Zhangjiajie, China, 10–11 January 2014; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2014; pp. 226–229.
18. Summerville, D.H.; Zach, K.M.; Chen, Y. Ultra-lightweight deep packet anomaly detection for Internet of Things devices. In
 Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 34th International Performance Computing and Communications Conference, Nanjing, China,
 14–16 December 2015; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2015; pp. 1–8.
19. Santos, L.; Rabadao, C.; Goncalves, R. Intrusion detection systems in Internet of Things: A literature review. In Proceedings of the
 13th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), Caceres, Spain, 13–16 June 2018; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
 USA, 2018; pp. 1–7.
20. Ioulianou, P.; Vasilakis, V.; Moscholios, I.; Logothetis, M. A signature-based intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things.
 In Proceedings of the Information and Communication Technology Forum, Bandung, Indonesia, 3–5 May 2018.
21. Ahmad, Z.; Khan, A.S.; Shiang, C.W.; Abdullah, J.; Ahmad, F. Network intrusion detection system: A systematic study of machine
 learning and deep learning approaches. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol. 2021, 32, e4150. [CrossRef]
22. Vinayakumar, R.; Alazab, M.; Soman, K.P.; Poornachandran, P.; Al-Nemrat, A.; Venkatraman, S. Deep learning approach for
 intelligent intrusion detection system. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 41525–41550. [CrossRef]
23. Gupta, A.; Birkner, R.; Canini, M.; Feamster, N.; Mac-Stoker, C.; Willinger, W. Network monitoring as a streaming analytics
 problem. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, Atlanta, GA, USA, 9–10 November 2016;
 pp. 106–112.
24. Belouch, M.; El Hadaj, S.; Idhammad, M. Performance evaluation of intrusion detection based on machine learning using Apache
 Spark. Proc. Comput. Sci. 2018, 127, 1–6. [CrossRef]
25. Jia, Y.; Zhong, F.; Alrawais, A.; Gong, B.; Cheng, X. FlowGuard: An Intelligent Edge Defense Mechanism Against IoT DDoS
 Attacks. IEEE Internet Things J. 2020, 7, 9552–9562. [CrossRef]
26. Tripathi, R.; Vignesh, S.; Tamarapalli, V.; Medhi, D. Cost Efficient Design of Fault Tolerant Geo-Distributed Data Centers. IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. 2017, 14, 289–301. [CrossRef]
27. Ullah, F.; Ullah, S.; Srivastava, G.; Lin, J.C.-W. IDS-INT: Intrusion detection system using transformer-based transfer learning for
 imbalanced network traffic. Digit. Commun. Netw. 2024, 10, 190–204. [CrossRef]
28. Seyyar, Y.E.; Yavuz, A.G.; Ünver, H.M. Detection of web attacks using the BERT model. In Proceedings of the 30th Signal
 Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU), Safranbolu, Turkey, 15–18 May 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA,
 2022; pp. 1–4.
29. Li, J.; Zhang, H.; Wei, Z. The Weighted Word2vec Paragraph Vectors for Anomaly Detection Over HTTP Traffic. IEEE Access
 2020, 8, 141787–141798. [CrossRef]
30. Min, E.; Long, J.; Liu, Q.; Cui, J.; Chen, W. TR-IDS: Anomaly-based intrusion detection through text-convolutional neural network
 and random forest. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2018, 2018, 4943509. [CrossRef]
31. Wang, F.; Jiang, M.; Qian, C.; Yang, S.; Li, C.; Zhang, H.; Wang, X.; Tang, X. Residual Attention Network for Image Classification. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA,
 21–26 July 2017; pp. 3156–3164.
32. Salloum, S.; Dautov, R.; Chen, X.; Peng, P.X.; Huang, J.Z. Big data analytics on Apache Spark. Int. J. Data Sci. Anal.
 2016, 1, 145–164. [CrossRef]
33. Mazumdar, S.; Seybold, D.; Kritikos, K.; Verginadis, Y. A survey on data storage and placement methodologies for cloud-big data
 ecosystem. J. Big Data 2019, 6, 1–37. [CrossRef]
34. Sun, H.; Chen, M.; Weng, J.; Liu, Z.; Geng, G. Anomaly Detection for In-Vehicle Network Using CNN-LSTM With Attention
 Mechanism. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2021, 70, 10880–10893. [CrossRef]
35. Dadkhah, S.; Mahdikhani, H.; Danso, P.K.; Zohourian, A.; Truong, K.A.; Ghorbani, A.A. Towards the development of a realistic
 multidimensional IoT profiling dataset. In Proceedings of the 2022 19th Annual International Conference on Privacy, Security &
 Trust (PST), New Brunswick, Canada, 22–24 August 2022; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2022; pp. 1–11.
36. Neto, E.C.P.; Dadkhah, S.; Ferreira, R.; Zohourian, A.; Lu, R.; Ghorbani, A.A. CICIoT2023: A real-time dataset and benchmark for
 large-scale attacks in IoT environment. Sensors 2023, 23, 5941. [CrossRef]
37. Ferrag, M.A.; Friha, O.; Hamouda, D.; Maglaras, L.; Janicke, H. Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security
 dataset of IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 40281–40306. [CrossRef]
38. Tavafoghi, H.; Ouyang, Y.; Teneketzis, D.; Wellman, M.P. Game theoretic approaches to cyber security: Challenges, results, and
 open problems. In Adversarial and Uncertain Reasoning for Adaptive Cyber Defense: Control-and Game-Theoretic Approaches to Cyber
 Security; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 29–53.
39. Agah, A.; Das, S.; Basu, K. A non-cooperative game approach for intrusion detection in sensor networks. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE 60th Vehicular Technology Conference, 2004. VTC2004-Fall. 2004, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 26–29 September 2004; IEEE:
 Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2004; Volume 4, pp. 2902–2906.
Sensors 2024, 24, 4152 31 of 31

40. Alpcan, T.; Basar, T. A game theoretic approach to decision and analysis in network intrusion detection. In Proceedings of the
 42nd IEEE International Conference on Decision and Control (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37475), Maui, HI, USA, 9–12 December 2003;
 IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2003; Volume 3, pp. 2595–2600.
41. Nash, J.F., Jr. Equilibrium points in n-person games. In Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, USA,
 24–26 April 1950; National Acad Sciences: Washington, DC, USA, 1950; Volume 36, pp. 48–49.
42. Liu, B.; Xu, H.; Zhou, X. Stackelberg Dynamic Game-Based Resource Allocation in Threat Defense for Internet of Things. Sensors
 2018, 18, 4074. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Xia, Z.; Tan, J.; Gu, K.; Jia, W. Detection resource allocation scheme for two-layer cooperative IDSs in smart grids. J. Parallel Distrib.
 Comput. 2021, 147, 236–247. [CrossRef]
44. Boudko, S.; Aursand, P.; Abie, H. Evolutionary Game for Confidentiality in IoT-Enabled Smart Grids. Information 2020, 11, 582.
 [CrossRef]
45. Arisdakessian, S.; Wahab, O.A.; Mourad, A.; Otrok, H.; Guizani, M. A survey on IoT intrusion detection: Federated learning,
 game theory, social psychology, and explainable AI as future directions. IEEE Internet Things J. 2022, 10, 4059–4092. [CrossRef]
46. Estiri, M.; Khademzadeh, A. A game-theoretical model for intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of the
 CCECE 2010, Calgary, AB, Canada, 2–5 May 2010; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2010; pp. 1–5.
47. Han, L.; Zhou, M.; Jia, W.; Dalil, Z.; Xu, X. Intrusion detection model of wireless sensor networks based on game theory and an
 autoregressive model. Inf. Sci. 2019, 476, 491–504. [CrossRef]
48. Krichen, M. A Survey on Formal Verification and Validation Techniques for Internet of Things. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 8122. [CrossRef]
49. Hofer-Schmitz, K.; Stojanović, B. Towards formal verification of IoT protocols: A Review. Comput. Netw. 2020, 174, 107233.
 [CrossRef]
50. Verma, A.; Ranga, V. Machine Learning Based Intrusion Detection Systems for IoT Applications. Wirel. Pers. Commun.
 2020, 111, 2287–2310. [CrossRef]
51. Qiu, H.; Dong, T.; Zhang, T.; Lu, J.; Memmi, G.; Qiu, M. Adversarial Attacks Against Network Intrusion Detection in IoT Systems.
 IEEE Internet Things J. 2020, 8, 10327–10335. [CrossRef]
52. Almiani, M.; AbuGhazleh, A.; Al-Rahayfeh, A.; Atiewi, S.; Razaque, A. Deep recurrent neural network for IoT intrusion detection
 system. Simul. Model. Pract. Theory 2020, 101, 102031. [CrossRef]
53. Anthi, E.; Williams, L.; Słowińska, M.; Theodorakopoulos, G.; Burnap, P. A supervised intrusion detection system for smart home
 IoT devices. IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 9042–9053. [CrossRef]
54. Granjal, J.; Silva, J.M.; Lourenço, N. Intrusion Detection and Prevention in CoAP Wireless Sensor Networks Using Anomaly
 Detection. Sensors 2018, 18, 2445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Yang, R.; He, H.; Wang, Y.; Qu, Y.; Zhang, W. Dependable federated learning for IoT intrusion detection against poisoning attacks.
 Comput. Secur. 2023, 132, 103381. [CrossRef]
56. Sugi, S.S.S.; Ratna, S.R. Investigation of machine learning techniques in intrusion detection system for IoT network. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Sustainable Systems (ICISS), Thoothukudi, India, 3–5 December 2020;
 pp. 1164–1167.
57. Saeed, A.; Ahmadinia, A.; Javed, A.; Larijani, H. Intelligent Intrusion Detection in Low-Power IoTs. ACM Trans. Internet Technol.
 2016, 16, 1–25. [CrossRef]
58. Ullah, F.; Alsirhani, A.; Alshahrani, M.M.; Alomari, A.; Naeem, H.; Shah, S.A. Explainable Malware Detection System Using
 Transformers-Based Transfer Learning and Multi-Model Visual Representation. Sensors 2022, 22, 6766. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Ullah, F.; Ullah, S.; Naeem, M.R.; Mostarda, L.; Rho, S.; Cheng, X. Cyber-Threat Detection System Using a Hybrid Approach of
 Transfer Learning and Multi-Model Image Representation. Sensors 2022, 22, 5883. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.