IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 7017

 Enhanced Pseudo-Label Generation With
 Self-Supervised Training for Weakly-
 Supervised Semantic Segmentation
 Zhen Qin , Member, IEEE, Yujie Chen, Guosong Zhu, Erqiang Zhou , Yingjie Zhou , Member, IEEE,
 Yicong Zhou , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ce Zhu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Due to the high cost of pixel-level labels required Index Terms— Semantic segmentation, weakly-supervised
for fully-supervised semantic segmentation, weakly-supervised learning, attention transfer mechanism, class attention/activation
segmentation has emerged as a more viable option recently. Exist- maps.
ing weakly-supervised methods tried to generate pseudo-labels
without pixel-level labels for semantic segmentation, but a I. I NTRODUCTION
common problem is that the generated pseudo-labels contain
insufficient semantic information, resulting in poor accuracy.
To address this challenge, a novel method is proposed, which
generates class activation/attention maps (CAMs) containing
 S EMANTIC segmentation aims to predict object class
 labels and pixel-specific object masks, which can locate
 different types of objects that exist in various images. It has
sufficient semantic information as pseudo-labels for the semantic
segmentation training without pixel-level labels. In this method, become one of the most important, complex and challenging
the attention-transfer module is designed to preserve salient fields in computer vision research. With the advancement
regions on CAMs while avoiding the suppression of inconspic- of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), numerous fullyuous regions of the targets, which results in the generation supervised semantic segmentation models have been proposed
of pseudo-labels with sufficient semantic information. A pixel in recent years, which makes the segmentation accuracy be
relevance focused-unfocused module has also been developed for
better integrating contextual information, with both attention greatly improved. Due to the data-hungry nature of deep
mechanisms employed to extract focused relevant pixels and CNN, segmentation requires a large number of training images
multi-scale atrous convolution employed to expand receptive field with ground truth labels, which are typically manually annofor establishing distant pixel connections. The proposed method tated. This is particularly true for segmentation tasks, as they
has been experimentally demonstrated to achieve competitive necessitate time-consuming and costly pixel-level labeling for
performance in weakly-supervised segmentation, and even outperforms many saliency-joined methods. effective training. This leads to constraints on the availability
 of annotated data for existing models.
 Manuscript received 28 June 2023; revised 2 December 2023; accepted Weakly supervised learning is an approach to address
6 February 2024. Date of publication 9 February 2024; date of current these limitations, which employs supervision in the form of
version 12 August 2024. This work was supported in part by the National image-level labels that are less precise but more economical
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62072074, Grant 62076054,
Grant 62027827, Grant 62002047, Grant 62171302, and Grant 62020106011; than semantic segmentation masks [1]. In recent years, various
in part by the Sichuan Science and Technology Support Plan under forms of image-level labels have been investigated for the pur-
Grant 2022YFQ0045, Grant 2022YFS0220, Grant 2021YFG0131, Grant pose of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation, including
2023YFS0020, Grant 2023YFS0197, and Grant 2023YFG0148; in part by the
CCF-Baidu Open Fund under Grant 202312; in part by the 111 Project under image-level labels, point labels, scribbles and bounding boxes.
Grant B21044; in part by the Sichuan Science and Technology Program under These works aim to achieve fully supervised segmentation
Grant 2023NSFSC1965; and in part by the Medico-Engineering Cooperation while only employing weakly semantic segmentation with
Funds from University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
under Grant ZYGX2021YGLH212 and Grant ZYGX2022YGRH012. This image-level classification labels, which could be obtained at a
article was recommended by Associate Editor L. Chiariglione. (Corresponding low annotation cost. To achieve this goal, high-quality pseudoauthor: Yingjie Zhou.) labels are generated by neural networks as a substitute for
 Zhen Qin, Yujie Chen, Guosong Zhu, and Erqiang Zhou are with
the Network and Data Security Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, manual labels in our work. Then the generated pseudo-labels
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, are employed to train the semantic segmentation network.
China (e-mail: qinzhen@uestc.edu.cn; 202021090126@std.uestc.edu.cn; Most of weakly-supervised segmentation methods attempt
202111090804@std.uestc.edu.cn; zhoueq@uestc.edu.cn).
 Yingjie Zhou is with the College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, to extract semantic information from image-level labels [2].
Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail: yjzhou@scu.edu.cn). The mainstream of them rely on class attention/activation maps
 Yicong Zhou is with the Department of Computer and Information Science, (CAMs) [3], as the representation of locating targets. CAMs
University of Macau, Macau, China (e-mail: yicongzhou@um.edu.mo).
 Ce Zhu is with the School of Information and Communication Engineering, are usually generated based on the classification network,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, where the classifier focuses on salient regions of recognizable
China (e-mail: eczhu@uestc.edu.cn). objects and aims to effectively classify them into different
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3364764. categories. Riding on the success of these advanced methods,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3364764 our approach also tries to generate CAMs as pseudo-labels
 1051-8215 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

for the training of semantic segmentation. The boundaries and while preventing the excessive loss of details. Unlike previous
details of targets in existing weakly-supervised segmentation atrous convolutions, the improved 4-layer multi-scale atrous
methods are usually not accurate enough, which limits the convolution employed in the framework has different dilation
performance of the trained semantic segmentation network. factors for each layer, allowing for better extraction of global
Although the leveraging of CAMs significantly improves the information. Context association is also employed to build
performance of weakly-supervised segmentation, there is still connections between pixels, facilitating a better understanding
a large gap with the fully-supervised segmentation method of features.
which uses accurate pixel-level labels. Our method overcomes the limitations that existing CAMs
 To further improve the performance of weakly-supervised only focuses on salient object regions, while generating
segmentation, a novel method is proposed by generating the pseudo-labels which represents complete semantic informa-
CAMs as pseudo-labels for the training of semantic seg- tion with accurate boundaries of targets. The generated
mentation, which could activate the regions of recognizable pseudo-labels can be used in training more accurate semantargets with accurate boundaries. The recognizable targets cor- tic segmentation models, further narrowing the gap between
respond to image-level classification labels, and corresponding semantic segmentation in weakly-supervised manner with
pixels can provide higher activation scores for the classifi- image-level labels and fully-supervised manner with pixelcation network compared with those for background pixels. level labels. The contributions are summarized as follows:
The pixels with respect to recognizable targets, suppressing the • The novel framework employing an effective selfbackground pixels, could be regarded as pseudo-labels. The supervised training strategy is proposed to generate
modules, i.e., the attention transfer module and the pixel pseudo-labels for semantic segmentation. The framework
relevance focused-unfocused module, are designed to improve learns accurate localization of important object features
the quality of pseudo-label generation in our method. and complete semantic information while preserving
 Inspired by contrastive learning, we propose the attention the original semantics, which is capable of generating
transfer module to generate better CAMs, which effectively high-quality class attention maps as pseudo-labels.
extracts and activates hidden pixels of targets, transferring • An effective pixel relevance focused-unfocused module
salience attention to overall target attention in a self-supervised is designed in the framework, which adopts channel
manner. We first apply image augmentation techniques to and spatial attention mechanisms to focus on important
adjust the contrast and brightness of the original image before features, alone with the improved 4-layer multi-scale and
inputting it into the classification network. Then we merge context association to expand the receptive field. This
the output CAMs with the original image CAM to transfer module significantly improves the capacity of framework
classifier attention. The reason why we adjust only the contrast in deeply extracting semantic information, while avoiding
and brightness is that this strategy can optimize the quality excessive loss of details.
of generated CAMs in certain aspects without changing the • The proposed method has been experimentally
semantic content of the images. Enhancing contrast and bright- demonstrated to achieve competitive performance
ness makes the important features of objects in the generated in weakly-supervised segmentation on the PASCAL
CAMs more salient, leading to accurate localization of the VOC 2012 dataset [4], and even outperforms many
target. Decreasing contrast and brightness enriches the seman- saliency-joined methods.
tic of targets in the generated CAMs, making the semantic
information more comprehensive. By merging enhanced and II. R ELATED W ORK
weakened CAMs, the network can be trained to simultaneously This section reviews semantic segmentation models closely
learn more accurate target localization and more complete related to our method. We first introduce the existing
semantic information. Finally, we define a similarity loss weakly supervised approaches for the task, and then discuss
function to optimize the classification network, making the self-supervised learning works. Finally, we discuss the advanfinal used CAM closer to ground truth. The proposed attention tage and drawbacks of traditional atrous convolution.
transfer module enables the classifier to not only attend to
salient object regions, but also capture suppressed activation
regions which belongs to targets. A. Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
 Furthermore, to enhance the framework’s capacity of Unlike fully-supervised semantic segmentation, which
extracting features while avoiding the loss of details caused requires pixel-wise labels for images, weakly-supervised
by convolution operations, an effective pixel relevance semantic segmentation methods employ low-cost labeling,
focused-unfocused module has also been designed to generate such as bounding boxes, scribbles, and image-level classifihigher-quality CAMs. For the pixel relevance focused com- cation labels. Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation has
ponent in this module, channel attention and spatial attention been significantly boosted by employing CAMs to generate
mechanisms are employed to extract pixel relationships and pseudo labels [5]. Considering that the bounding boxes genacquire finer pixel-wise information. In this way, the frame- erated by classification network contain abundant semantic
work is capable of accurately focusing on important features and objective information [6], most existing weakly-supervised
and achieving accurate locating of objects. For the unfocused semantic segmentation methods refine the CAMs generated by
component of pixel relevance, an improved 4-layer multi-scale the image classifier to approximate the segmentation mask.
atrous convolution is employed to expand the receptive field, Proposed by Ahn et al. [7], AffinityNet trains an additional
QIN et al.: ENHANCED PSEUDO-LABEL GENERATION WITH SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING 7019

network to learn similarities between the pixels, which often detection and part segmentation. Proposed by Liu et al. [20],
generates a transition mix and multiplies with CAM to adjust a novel method for self-supervised time series anomaly detecits activation coverage. Also proposed by Ahn et al. [8], IRNet tion and clustering is designed. Proposed by Zhou et al. [21],
generates a transition matrix from the boundary activation map a novel strategy is adopted to transform the input data into
and extends the method to achieve weakly supervised instance meaningful representations, hidden representation, reconstrucsegmentation and weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. tion residual vector, and reconstruction error that could be used
Hao et al. [9] proposed a novel network that establishes for anomaly detection in self-supervised manner.
context correlation through CAMs to achieve efficient video Overall, self-supervised methods come in various forms, but
segmentation. Chen et al. [10] proposed an effective method their common objective is to generate labels from existing
of reactivating the converged CAM with binary cross-entropy images without relying on manual annotations, serving to
loss by using softmax cross-entropy loss, improving the economize the cost of manual labeling. In our work, to train
quality of CAMs generation while reducing computational our Attention Transfer Module for generating higher-quality
overhead. Proposed by Wang et al. [11], SEAM aims to CAMs without manual labeling, we adjust the contrast and
refine CAMs using a pixel correlation module that captures brightness of the original images to generate corresponding
context appearance information for each pixel and alters CAMs as supervision. Specifically, CAMs generated after
the original CAMs by using learned affinity attention maps. enhancing contrast and brightness exhibit more accurate local-
Proposed by Sun et al. [12], SSA directly utilizes semantic ization of key features, while those generated after decreasing
structural information to expand CAM during the inference contrast and brightness contain more comprehensive semanstage, resulting in high-quality CAMs without incurring any tic information. By combining these two types of CAMs,
additional training cost. Proposed by Li et al. [13], a novel we obtain high-quality CAMs as ground truth, which are used
and interesting context-based tandem network is designed for to supervise the training of the CAMs generation network in
semantic segmentation by effectively exploring the channel the Attention Transfer Module.
context and the spatial context, which significantly improves
the segmentation performance. Proposed by Sun et al. [14], C. Atrous Convolution In Weakly-Supervised Methods
a novel strategy that decompose the backbone parameters into Many weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods
three matrices, and one of these matrices is fine-tuned by prefer using atrous convolution in stead of ordinary conadjusting its singular values while keeping the other two frozen volution in the classification network as the backbone in
during training, addressing over-fitting in weakly supervised order to capture richer semantic information and achieve
semantic segmentation. better performance. The fully convolutional approach has been
 In general, current weakly supervised semantic segmenta- proved to be effective for semantic segmentation, but frequent
tion methods still rely on generating CAMs as pseudo-labels max-pooling and striding may lead to a severe reduction in
to train semantic segmentation networks. The improvements the spatial resolution of the obtained feature maps. Proposed
are mostly centered around enhancing the quality of generated by Noh et al. [22], deconvolution has been used to restore
CAMs. However, previous methods often struggle to optimize the spatial resolution, but the holes convolution should be
the accuracy of focusing on key features while enriching the advocated because the receptive field of atrous convolution
completeness of semantic information. To address this issue, is larger. When the amount of parameters is certain, ordinary
we integrate adjusted CAMs to possess both comprehensive convolution [23] can only extract features of small blocks,
semantic information and accurate important feature localiza- while hole convolution can increase the hole rate to make
tion simultaneously. more overlapping sampling areas on the input feature map for
 each sampling, so as to obtain denser characteristic response.
 However, atrous convolution also has some drawbacks, such
B. Self-Supervised Learning
 as the inability to extract some key local information and poor
 Instead of using massive annotated labels to train network, performance in object segmentation for small targets. Thereself-supervised learning approaches aim at designing pretext fore, we have improved the traditional atrous convolution,
tasks to generate labels without additional manual annotations, as illustrated in III-C. Unlike traditional atrous convolution
which is applied in relative position prediction, spatial transfor- that use fixed dilation rates, our approach employs a 4-layer
mation prediction, image inpainting [15], image colorization multi-scale atrous convolution with varying dilation factors
and seismic image analysis [16]. Proposed by Qian et al. [17], in the convolutional layers. Moreover, the dilation rates are
FR-Net is designed to separate and remove footprint noise progressively increased with the network depth. This allows
from the image in self-supervised manner, which can be our network to significantly expand the receptive field of
regarded as an important application of self-supervised learn- the convolutional kernels, enabling a better understanding
ing. To some extent, the generative adversarial network can of global information without adding extra parameters or
also be regarded as a self-supervised learning approach that computational load. As a result, this enhances the performance
the authenticity labels for discriminator do not need to be and generalization capabilities of the network.
annotated manually [18]. Labels generated by pretext tasks In summary, atrous convolution is widely employed in
provide self-supervision for the network to learn a more robust weakly supervised methods. Many weakly supervised methods
representation [19]. The feature learned by self-supervision build upon traditional dilated convolutions to further reduce
can replace the feature pretrained on some tasks, such as computational cost or increase receptive fields. In our work,
7020 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 1. The overall structure of the proposed method. In this figure, the shared network refers to a network with the same structure as the focused-unfocused
module, taking adjusted image as input. In the structure, the backbone is a classification network used to generate CAMs after training. In focused-unfocused
module, the focused part is used to help backbone focus on important salient regions, while the unfocused part is used to expand the receptive field of
backbone. The attention transfer module adopts data augmentation operation and fuses enhanced and decreased CAMs to obtain the merged CAMs with richer
semantics, which are used to retrain the backbone for generating CAMs with more complete semantics as pseudo-labels. The generated CAMs are used to
train semantic segmentation networks.

a 4-layer multi-scale atrous convolution is employed, which inconspicuous semantic information. This assists the Attention
significantly expands the receptive field of the convolutional Transfer module in generating CAMs with precise feature
kernel without increasing parameters or computational load. information, addressing the issues of important features being
This allows for better extracting of global information, lead- overlooked and incomplete semantic information of target that
ing to improved network performance and generalization exist in previous CAMs generation methods.
capabilities.
 In our work, we ameliorate the issues of inaccurate fea- A. Preliminary
ture localization and incomplete semantic information in the The conventional CAM of a single image highlights the
generation of CAMs from previous related work by design- most representative areas of each class. Therefore, when
ing a self-supervised training attention transfer module. This generating the CAM of the same class for image patches, the
module, in conjunction with the focused-unfocused module model focuses on finding the key features of the class based
that focuses on context and key features, aids in the improved on partial observation of the object.
extraction of features. For a class c, the CAM is a feature map indicating the
 discriminative regions of the image which helps the classifier
 III. M ETHODOLOGY to make the decision that whether the target object belong
 to class c. As an activation map, the confidence of CAM at
 This section introduces the proposed method in details. location (x, y) is calculated as follows:
Firstly, we present the preliminary of our work. Then we X
introduce the proposed attention transfer module. The designed Mc (x, y) = wkc f k (x, y) (1)
focused-unfocused module is integrated into the network to k
further improve the consistency of prediction. Finally, the loss where f k (x, y) denotes the activation of a channel k in the
design of our network is discussed. The overall structure of last convolutional layer at location (x, y), and wc denotes the
our method is shown in Fig. 1. weights from f k (x, y) via global average pooling by SoftMax
 Channel and spatial attention mechanisms are employed to function. In the classification task, a higher value of CAM
focus on important features in the Focused-Unfocused module, indicates a greater contribution for classification.
which also incorporates multi-scale atrous convolution and However, it is easy to find that the properties of classificacontext association to expand the receptive field for providing tion and segmentation function are different. The classification
QIN et al.: ENHANCED PSEUDO-LABEL GENERATION WITH SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING 7021

Fig. 2. The structure of the proposed attention transfer module elaborated in III-B and the designed loss functions illustrated in III-D. In this figure, image
has been enhanced with contrast and brightness, and enhanced CAM is the CAM generated from the enhanced image. Decreased image has been decreased
with contrast and brightness, and decreased CAM is the CAM generated from the decreased image. Merged CAM combines the strengths of both enhanced
and decreased CAMs for supervising the generation of CAMs.

task focuses on the salient area of the object, so the CAMs
generated by the single classification network will activate
the most recognizable area of the object and suppress other
areas of the target. This does not meet the goals of the segmentation task. Semantic segmentation focuses on the target
as a whole, not just salient regions. Therefore, the attention
transfer module is designed to activate other inhibited areas
of the target, combining with the focused-unfocused module
to extract refined features and expand the receptive field,
to obtain optimized CAMs with more semantic information
that can be used as pseudo-labels for the training of semantic
segmentation.

 Fig. 3. The visualization of CAMs adjustment. The left column is the CAMs
B. Attention Transfer Module generated from original images, the middle column is generated from images
 with decrease of contrast and brightness, and the right column is generated
 To allow the CAMs preserving target salient regions while from images with enhancement of contrast and brightness.
avoiding suppressing semantic segmentation focus regions, the
attention transfer module is proposed, which adopts image the figure, the enhancement makes the distinction between
augmentation strategy to provide richer semantic information the instance area more obvious, which enables the network
for semantic segmentation task in self-supervised manner. The to learn the information of the target area and boundary more
structure of the proposed attention transfer module is shown clearly. Decrease significantly reduces the recognition degree
in Fig. 2. of significant regions, which also reduces the dependence on
 Since we only used image-level labels, the information significant regions, activating the suppressed regions.
obtained from labels is insufficient to support the semantic Based on the aforementioned analysis, the CAM with
segmentation task. To solve this, the image augmentation enhancement has higher activation scores in the most recognizprocessing is adopted, including two operations: enhancing able regions and boundaries of the target, while the CAM with
image contrast and brightness, and decreasing image contrast decrease partly activates other regions which are important for
and brightness. For a single pixel (x, y) in the image, the semantic segmentation. The combination of these two CAMs
adjustment of new pixel value g ′ (x, y) is formulated as outputs the semantic information needed for the semantic
follows: segmentation task. For a point x in the merged CAM, the
 g ′ (x, y) = αg(x, y) + β (2) confidence calculation of x belonging to category C can be
 divided into four cases:
where g(x, y) denotes the original pixel value. α is used to The first case is when point x of both enhanced CAM Me (x)
control the intensity of contrast between pixels, and β is used and decreased CAM Md (x) belongs to category C, the confito adjust the brightness of the picture. The visualization of dence that corresponding point x of the merged CAM belongs
CAMs adjustment is shown in Fig. 3. As is evident from to category C is calculated as P = max(Pe (x), Pd (x)). where
7022 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 4. The structure of the proposed focused-unfocused module. In this module, D in 3×3 Conv denotes dilation factor, and B N denotes batch normalization.
The focused part adopts channel and spatial attention mechanisms to focus on important features, and the unfocused part adopts multi-scale atrous convolution
and context association to expand the receptive field for providing inconspicuous semantic information.

Pe (x) and Pd (x) denote the confidence of x belonging to C. Focused-Unfocused Module
this category in the adjusted CAM. The second case is when In general, the results of semantic segmentation are posipoint x of Me (x) or Md (x) belongs to category C, while tively related to the information provided by labels. However,
the maximum values of Pe (x) or Pd (x) is greater than 0.5, without pixel-level labeling, image-level classification labeling
P = max(Pe (x), Pd (x)). The third case is when point x of can provide very limited useful information. Therefore, the
Me (x) or Md (x) belongs to category C, but the values of focused-unfocused module is designed to further explore the
both Pe (x) and Pd (x) are smaller than 0.5, P = 0. The semantic information of pixels, as shown in Fig. 4.
fourth case is when point x of neither Me (x) nor Md (x) The channel attention mechanism [24] and spatial attenbelongs to category C, P = 0. In this way, the merged CAMs tion mechanism [25] are introduced in the network to focus
can be obtained to supervise the final generated CAMs as on important feature information. Meanwhile, a multi-scale
pseudo-labels for the training of semantic segmentation in atrous convolution layer [26] is also introduced to expand the
weakly-supervised manner. receptive field of the remaining regions, i.e., expanding the
 In the absence of pixel-level labels as semantic segmentation receptive field of remaining regions to alleviate the influence
supervision, the processed CAMs are adopted as supervision of insufficient semantic information from its image-level label.
to narrow the supervision gap between self-supervision and However, traditional atrous convolution has defects, such as
fully-supervision, obtaining more semantic information. the lack of partial local information and difficulties in estab-
 In the previous operation, we can obtain the CAM Me lishing the association of remote features, which is limited
generated from image with enhancement, the CAM Md gen- in the segmentation of small targets. Therefore, following the
erated from image with decrease, the CAM Mo generated hybrid dilated convolution [27], a 4-layer multi-scale atrous
from original and the CAM M co combined of Me and Md .
 convolution with dilation factors of 0, 1, 2, 3 is designed. Each
In feature space, Me and Md should be similar to and tend layer is designed with an atrous convolutional followed by
to be consistent with M co , because only the contrast and
 an activation function, which activates important regions and
brightness of the image are adjusted, with the information suppress irrelevant regions.
contained in image unchanged. Therefore, a similarity loss To further explore the semantic information for segmen-
L s is proposed to better extract the semantic features of tation from images without pixel-level labels, we design
images. Furthermore, background similarity between Mo and a context association submodule, for exploring the context
co is also used for self-supervised learning. We activate
M relation of pixels in a deep level with semantic information
the background regions of Mo and M co with background
 expanding. The cosine distance is also adopted to measure
activation scores reassigned. For the foreground, activation pixel context similarity. The detailed design is presented as
scores of the most recognizable pixel are maintained, and follows. First, the feature map after the designed 4-layer multithe scores of remaining points are set to 0. It is supposed scale atrous convolution is reshaped, with dimension reduced
that the background regions and target regions in Mo and from H × W ×C to H W ×C ′ . The reshaped feature map F0 is
co are the same. Based on the above design, a background
M transposed to get F0T , with size of C ′ × H W . Then the cosine
similarity loss L bs is also proposed, with L s illustrated in distance between pixels of F0 and F0T is calculated, with
subsection III-D. activation and normalization operations to suppress irrelevant
QIN et al.: ENHANCED PSEUDO-LABEL GENERATION WITH SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING 7023

regions, for obtaining the context relation weight map Mc , generated from original image and the CAM M co combined of
with size of H W × H W . The calculation of cosine distance Me and Md , as illustrated in subsection III-B, we segment the
between pixel Vm and pixel Vn is shown in formulation 3, background for Mo and M co to get the background activation
where 8 denotes the reshaping process. Finally, input features map, Mb and Mb , respectively. L1 loss is also used as the
 c
are multiplied with Mc to get the weighted feature map, with background similarity loss, formulated as follows:
size of H W × C, followed by reshaped to H × W × C as final
feature map. L bs = ∥Mb − M
 cb ∥1 (6)

 8(Vm )T 8(Vn ) By jointly considering classification loss, similarity loss and
 θ (Vm , Vn ) = (3) background similarity loss, the overall loss L for optimizing
 |8(Vm )| × |8(Vn )|
 the architecture weight is formulated as follows:
 By introducing channel attention mechanism, spatial attention mechanism, 4-layer multi-scale atrous convolution and L = L cls + λs L s + λbs L bs (7)
context association submodule, we explore more semantic where λs and λbs denote the hyper-parameters to balance
information from images without pixel-level labels, optimizing overall loss. L cls is used for roughly locating target regions.
the generated CAMs as illustrated in subsection III-B, for bet- L s is used for providing additional supervision and narrowing
ter serving as pseudo-labels to guide the training of semantic the gap with fully-supervision. L bs is used for combining
segmentation task. background regions with salient regions to obtain the ignored
 information of original CAM Mo .
D. Loss Functions
 1) Classification Loss: Since the provided labels are IV. E XPERIMENTS
image-level for classification, we select the classification net- In this section, we evaluate the performance of the prowork ResNet50-FPN [28] as the backbone in our framework. posed method for semantic segmentation. We first briefly
Accordingly, the cross entropy loss is adopted to train the introduce the dataset used in experiments, and illustrate
classification network, and both the original images and the the implementation details including parameter settings and
adjusted images are input as training data. The classification data preprocessing. We then evaluate the performance of
loss is formulated as follows: the proposed method and compare with other state-of-the-art
 1X methods. Finally, we present ablation studies to demonstrate
 L cls = − [y ln a + (1 − y) ln(1 − a)] (4) the contribution of different components in our method.
 n x
where n denotes the number of samples, and x denotes the
 A. Datasets
prediction vector dimension. y denotes the real value after
one-hot coding corresponding to the label on x dimension, Our experiments were conducted on the PASCAL
with the value of 1 as truth or 0 as false, and a denotes the VOC 2012 dataset [4], which contains the images and labels
prediction label, with the range of 0 to 1. needed for the classification task, detection task, segmentation
 2) Similarity Loss: It is a common truth that adjusting the task, behavior recognition and human layout detection task.
image contrast and brightness does not change the semantic This dataset consists of 21 categories, including 20 foreground
information of the image. Therefore, when projected into pixel categories and 1 background pixel category, where
feature space, the CAM Mo generated from original image, images are divided by authority, with 1,464 used for training,
the CAM Me generated from image with enhancement and 1,449 for verification and 1,456 for testing.
the CAM Md from image with decrease should be consistent. Furthermore, following the general experimental strategy of
We use L1 loss to train the network, making the network semantic segmentation, we extract additional labels from SBD
extract obvious features in the image, as well as improving the dataset [47] and extend the original training set from SBD
robustness of network in contrast and brightness, as formulated dataset. According to statistics, 11,355 images in the SDB data
as follows: set are actually included in the VOC 2012 dataset, but only
 ∥Mo − Md ∥1 + ∥Mo − Me ∥1 1,462 images in the VOC 2012 dataset can be used to train
 Ls = (5) the semantic segmentation task. After introducing the data of
 2
 SDB dataset, 10,582 images with image-level labels were used
 3) Background Similarity Loss: CAMs are generated by for training and 1,449 images for validation in total.
classification network and iteratively optimized by classification loss of foreground target. However, since the training is
based on image-level labels, it is inevitable that the semantic B. Implementation Details
information of many pixels will be ignored, which are learned In the image augmentation process as illustrated in
as background pixels and set as zero vector. In this way, subsection III-B, we set α = 1.5 and β = 300 for the
the gradient cannot be generated to learn feature represen- formulation 2 to enhance the image contrast and brightness,
tation through back propagation, leading that a great deal and we set α = 0.8 and β = 150 to decrease the image
of information provided by background pixels is ignored. contrast and brightness.
Therefore, we design the background similarity loss to explore Our framework was trained with 10,582 images with
the semantic information of background. For the CAM Mo image-level classification labels from the designed training-set.
7024 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

In this process, the poly strategy is adopted, for dynamically TABLE I
adjusting the learning rate, which is formulated as follows: Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF W EAKLY-S UPERVISED S EMANTIC
 S EGMENTATION M ETHODS ON PASCAL VOC 2012 DATASET,
 epoch W HERE M I O U I S A DOPTED AS THE E VALUATION M ETRIC
 lr = lr0 × (1 − )m (8)
 max_epoch
where lr0 denotes the initial learning rate, set as 0.1, and
m is the momentum, set as 0.9. epoch denotes to the current
number of iterations, and max_epoch denotes the number of
iterations required to complete the training. In this way, the
update of the last iteration is taken into account to accelerate
the learning and reduce the oscillation phenomenon in the
process of model convergence.
 To evaluate the effect of the proposed weakly-supervised
learning method, we use the pseudo-labels generated by our
method to train a fully-supervised semantic segmentation
network, where the DeepLab v2-ResNet50 [23] is adopted
as the semantic segmentation network to evaluate the quality of generated pseudo-labels. The semantic segmentation
accuracy with respect to the model pretrained with generated
pseudo-labels can be used to evaluate the performance of our
method. In the training of semantic segmentation network,
10,582 images from the designed training-set were also used
for training, but the labels were replaced with generated
pseudo-labels. The hyper-parameters λs and λbs in the overall
loss are set to 0.5 each, in order to balance the overall loss.
 segmentation results of our method and compared state-of-the-
C. Benchmarks art weakly-supervised methods are also provided, to further
 illustrate that our method has achieved excellent performance,
 Following the commonly used semantic segmentation eval- as shown in Fig. 5.
uation scheme [48], the main evaluation metric is Mean
Intersection over Union (mIoU), with the tests performed on
20 categories and background of the PASCAL VOC 2012 D. Ablation Studies
dataset. We compared multiple state-of-the-art methods for In this subsection, we performed ablation studies on the two
semantic segmentation in weakly-supervised manner, which core modules of our method, i.e., attention transfer module
is performed on PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, as illustrated and focused-unfocused module to evaluate the contribution of
in Table I. them in our method.
 In the Table I, saliency denotes the additional supervi- 1) Effect of the Attention Transfer Module: As illustrated
sion of significance regions joined in the weakly-supervised in subsection III-B, we adjust the contrast and brightness
training, which theoretically results in a better performance of the image, obtaining CAM Me generated from image
than methods without saliency. However, our method not only with enhancement and CAM Md generated from image with
outperformed the compared methods without saliency, but also decrease. To evaluate the contribution of introducing adjusted
achieved the competitive performance compared with those of CAMs to the training of our framework for generating final
saliency-joined methods. CAMs as pseudo-labels, we introduce Me separately, Md
 To demonstrate that our methods achieves competitive separately, and both Me and Md to the base model to compare
performance for objects with different shapes and sizes, the quality of pseudo labels generated under different condiwe also performed the quantitative comparison with other tions, respectively. The quality of generated pseudo-labels is
weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods on 20 cat- evaluated by comparing with semantic segmentation ground
egories and background category, where the test images are truth labels, as illustrated in Table III.
from the validation set of Pascal VOC 2012 dataset, as illus- The evaluation in Table III shows the contribution of introtrated in Table II. ducing Me and Md , which obviously improve the quality of
 As shown in Table II, the performance of our method pseudo-labels. Note that, the base model of this ablation study
is superior to those of other compared weakly-supervised was based on the introduction of complete focused-unfocused
semantic segmentation methods on accuracy in many cate- module, and only used Mo to generate pseudo-labels. Furthergories of semantic segmentation, where these categories have more, the visualization of loss convergence curves is provided
different shapes and sizes. Due to differences in the size, in Fig. 6. Obviously, after introducing Me and Md , the loss
shape, texture, feature patterns, and surrounding environments convergence curve in network training is smoother and the
of different object categories, the significant difference exists amplitude of oscillation is reduced, indicating that the training
in the segmentation accuracy of these categories. The semantic process is more stable.
QIN et al.: ENHANCED PSEUDO-LABEL GENERATION WITH SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING 7025

Fig. 5. The visualization of the semantic segmentation performance of our method. Some state-of-the-art weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods
in recent years were compared with our method, and experiments were implemented on PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, with four typical categories selected to
show the effect.

 TABLE II
Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF W EAKLY-S UPERVISED S EMANTIC S EGMENTATION M ETHODS ON 21 C ATEGORIES F ROM PASCAL VOC 2012 DATASET

 TABLE III
A BLATION S TUDY OF THE ATTENTION T RANSFER M ODULE C OMPONENTS

 TABLE IV
A BLATION S TUDY OF THE F OCUSED - UN F OCUSED M ODULE C OMPONENTS

 Fig. 6. The visualization of loss convergence curves in ablation study for
 In addition, we also performed an ablation study to evaluate attention transfer module. The horizontal axis denotes steps and the vertical
the effect of hyper-parameters λs and λbs on the quality axis denotes loss.
of CAMs generation. The quality of generated CAMs as
pseudo-labels is evaluated by comparing with semantic seg- on the comparison, we found that setting hyper-parameters
mentation ground truth labels, as illustrated in Table V. Based λs and λbs to 0.5 each resulted in the highest quality of
7026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE H YPER -PARAMETERS λs
 AND λbs FOR P SEUDO -L ABELS Q UALITY

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE D IFFERENT ATTENTION
 M ECHANISMS FOR P SEUDO -L ABELS Q UALITY

 Fig. 8. The visualization of loss convergence curves in ablation study for
 attention mechanisms. The horizontal axis denotes steps and the vertical axis
 denotes loss.

 see the channel attention and spatial attention both improve the
 quality of generated pseudo-labels, with the loss convergence
 curves shown in Fig. 8. Note that, the base model of this
 ablation study only used Mo generated from original images,
 without the introducing of multi-scale atrous convolution and
 context association submodule.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 To improve the performance of weakly-supervised segmentation, a novel method is proposed, which generates
 class activation/attention maps (CAMs) containing sufficient
 semantic information as pseudo-labels for the semantic segmentation training without pixel-level labels. In this method,
 the attention-transfer module is designed to guide the CAMs
 focus on both salient and inconspicuous regions of the
Fig. 7. The visualization of loss convergence curves in ablation study
for multi-scale atrous convolution and context association submodule. The
 targets, with sufficient semantic information extracted for
horizontal axis denotes steps and the vertical axis denotes loss. pseudo-labels. A pixel relevance focused-unfocused module
 has also been developed for better integrating contextual
generated CAMs. Therefore, we used this configuration in our information, with both attention mechanisms employed to
training. extract focused relevant pixels and multi-scale atrous con-
 2) Effect of the Focused-unFocused Module: The focused- volution employed to expand receptive field for establishing
unfocused module contains three components, i.e., attention distant pixel connections. The proposed method has been
mechanisms, multi-scale atrous convolution and context asso- experimentally demonstrated to achieve competitive perforciation submodule, where attention mechanisms consist of mance in weakly-supervised segmentation on PASCAL VOC
channel attention and spatial attention. We first performed an 2012 dataset, and even outperforms many saliency-joined
ablation study on multi-scale atrous convolution and context methods. This method that employs neural networks to generassociation submodule to illustrate their contributions to the ate pseudo-labels, offers an alternative solution for obtaining
framework, as shown in Table IV, followed by a separate annotations in the field of semantic segmentation, leading to
ablation study on the two attention mechanisms to illustrate the substantial savings in human labor costs. It also suggests a
contribution of each adopted attention, as shown in Table VI. potential way for future developments in the AIGC field,
 As shown in Table IV, the multi-scale atrous convolution expanding AIGC technology to a broader range of tasks
and context association submodule obviously improve the through the generation of auxiliary information.
quality of generated pseudo-labels, with the loss convergence
 R EFERENCES
curves shown in Fig. 7. Note that, the base model of this
ablation study only used Mo generated from original images. [1] S.-J. Zhang, J.-H. Pan, J. Gao, and W.-S. Zheng, “Semi-supervised action
 quality assessment with self-supervised segment feature recovery,” IEEE
 The ablation study on the introducing of different attention Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 6017–6028,
mechanisms is illustrated in Table VI. From the results, we can Sep. 2022.
QIN et al.: ENHANCED PSEUDO-LABEL GENERATION WITH SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING 7027

 [2] Z. Li, H. Tang, Z. Peng, G.-J. Qi, and J. Tang, “Knowledge-guided [25] X. Zhu, D. Cheng, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and J. Dai, “An empirical study
 semantic transfer network for few-shot image recognition,” IEEE Trans. of spatial attention mechanisms in deep networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3240195. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2019, pp. 6688–6697.
 [3] B. Zhou, A. Khosla, A. Lapedriza, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba, “Learning [26] F. Yu and V. Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated
 deep features for discriminative localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. convolutions,” 2015, arXiv:1511.07122.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 2921–2929. [27] P. Wang et al., “Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation,”
 [4] M. Everingham, S. M. A. Eslami, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2018,
 J. Winn, and A. Zisserman, “The PASCAL visual object classes chal- pp. 1451–1460.
 lenge: A retrospective,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 98–136, [28] T. Y. Lin, P. Dollàr, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
 Jan. 2015. “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 [5] L. Ru, H. Zheng, Y. Zhan, and B. Du, “Token contrast for weakly- Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 2117–2125.
 supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. [29] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 3093–3102. image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 [6] C. Song, W. Ouyang, and Z. Zhang, “Weakly supervised semantic (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 segmentation via box-driven masking and filling rate shifting,” IEEE [30] Z. Huang, X. Wang, J. Wang, W. Liu, and J. Wang, “Weakly-supervised
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 15996–16012, semantic segmentation network with deep seeded region growing,”
 Dec. 2023. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
 [7] J. Ahn and S. Kwak, “Learning pixel-level semantic affinity with pp. 7014–7023.
 image-level supervision for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” [31] Q. Hou, P. Jiang, Y. Wei, and M.-M. Cheng, “Self-erasing network
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, for integral object attention,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 pp. 4981–4990. Syst., vol. 31, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
 [8] J. Ahn, S. Cho, and S. Kwak, “Weakly supervised learning of instance N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds. Curran Associates, 2018.
 segmentation with inter-pixel relations,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 2209–2218. 2018/file/c042f4db68f23406c6cecf84a7ebb0fe-Paper.pdf
 [9] Y. Hao et al., “Attention in attention: Modeling context correlation for [32] W. Shimoda and K. Yanai, “Self-supervised difference detection for
 efficient video classification,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., weakly-supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 7120–7132, Oct. 2022. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 5208–5217.
[10] Z. Chen, T. Wang, X. Wu, X.-S. Hua, H. Zhang, and Q. Sun, “Class re- [33] J. Fan, Z. Zhang, T. Tan, C. Song, and J. Xiao, “CIAN: Cross-image
 activation maps for weakly-supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. affinity net for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. AAAI
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, 2020, pp. 10762–10769.
 pp. 969–978. [34] T. Zhang, G. Lin, W. Liu, J. Cai, and A. C. Kot, “Splitting vs. merging:
[11] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Kan, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Self-supervised Mining object regions with discrepancy and intersection loss for weakly
 equivariant attention mechanism for weakly supervised semantic seg- supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 mentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (ECCV). Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 663–679.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 12275–12284. [35] G. Sun, W. Wang, J. Dai, and L. Van Gool, “Mining crossimage semantics for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in
[12] Y. Sun and Z. Li, “SSA: Semantic structure aware inference for weakly
 Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020,
 pixel-wise dense predictions without cost,” 2021, arXiv:2111.03392.
 pp. 347–365.
[13] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “CTNet: Context-based tandem
 [36] L. Chen, W. Wu, C. Fu, X. Han, and Y. Zhang, “Weakly supervised
 network for semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
 semantic segmentation with boundary exploration,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 Intell., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 9904–9917, Dec. 2022.
 Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 347–362.
[14] Y. Sun et al., “Singular value fine-tuning: Few-shot segmentation [37] Y.-T. Chang, Q. Wang, W.-C. Hung, R. Piramuthu, Y.-H. Tsai,
 requires few-parameters fine-tuning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. and M.-H. Yang, “Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation via sub-
 Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 37484–37496. category exploration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[15] S. Xu, D. Liu, and Z. Xiong, “E2I: Generative inpainting from edge Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 8991–9000.
 to image,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 4, [38] X. Wang, S. Liu, H. Ma, and M.-H. Yang, “Weakly-supervised semantic
 pp. 1308–1322, Apr. 2020. segmentation by iterative affinity learning,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 128,
[16] F. Qian, Y. He, Y. Yue, Y. Zhou, B. Wu, and G. Hu, “Improved no. 6, pp. 1736–1749, Jan. 2020.
 low-rank tensor approximation for seismic random plus footprint noise [39] N. Araslanov and S. Roth, “Single-stage semantic segmentation from
 suppression,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, pp. 1–19, 2023, image labels,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3243831. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4253–4262.
[17] F. Qian et al., “Unsupervised seismic footprint removal with physical [40] J. Fan, Z. Zhang, C. Song, and T. Tan, “Learning integral objects with
 prior augmented deep autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., intra-class discriminator for weakly-supervised semantic segmentation,”
 vol. 61, pp. 1–20, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3277973. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
[18] S. Li, Z. Yu, M. Xiang, and D. Mandic, “Reciprocal GAN through Jun. 2020, pp. 4283–4292.
 characteristic functions (RCF-GAN),” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. [41] D. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Tang, X.-S. Hua, and Q. Sun, “Causal inter-
 Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2246–2263, Feb. 2023. vention for weakly-supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. NIPS,
[19] S. Li, Z. Yu, M. Xiang, and D. Mandic, “Reciprocal adversarial learning 2020, pp. 655–666.
 via characteristic functions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., [42] P.-T. Jiang, L.-H. Han, Q. Hou, M.-M. Cheng, and Y. Wei, “Online
 vol. 33, 2020, pp. 217–228. attention accumulation for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,”
[20] Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, K. Yang, and X. Wang, “Unsupervised deep learning IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 7062–7077,
 for IoT time series,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 16, pp. 14285- Oct. 2022.
 14306, 2023, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3243391. [43] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
[21] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
 encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” [44] Y. Su, R. Sun, G. Lin, and Q. Wu, “Context decoupling augmentation
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465, for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Jun. 2022. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 6984–6994.
[22] H. Noh, S. Hong, and B. Han, “Learning deconvolution network for [45] L. Ru, Y. Zhan, B. Yu, and B. Du, “Learning affinity from attention: Endsemantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), to-end weakly-supervised semantic segmentation with transformers,”
 Dec. 2015, pp. 1520–1528. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
[23] L. C. Chen, G. Papandreou, and I. Kokkinos, “DeepLab: Semantic image Jun. 2022, pp. 16846–16855.
 segmentation with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully [46] E. Xie et al., “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic
 connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, segmentation with transformers,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Sys.
 pp. 834–848, Jun. 2017. (NIPS), vol. 34, Dec. 2021, pp. 12077–12090.
[24] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in [47] B. Hariharan, P. Arbeláez, L. Bourdev, S. Maji, and J. Malik, “Semantic
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, contours from inverse detectors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 pp. 7132–7141. Nov. 2011, pp. 991–998.
7028 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

[48] V. Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla, “SegNet: A deep Yingjie Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmentation,” degree from the School of Communication and
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2481–2495, Information Engineering, University of Electronic
 Dec. 2017. Science and Technology of China (UESTC), China,
[49] P. O. Pinheiro and R. Collobert, “From image-level to pixel-level in 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor with
 labeling with convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. the College of Computer Science, Sichuan Univer-
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 1713–1721. sity (SCU), China. He was a Visiting Scholar with
[50] A. Kolesnikov and C. H. Lampert, “Seed, expand and constrain: the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia
 Three principles for weakly-supervised image segmentation,” in Proc. University, New York. His current research interests
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, include behavioral data analysis, machine learnpp. 695–711. ing, network management, and resource allocation.
[51] Y. Wei, J. Feng, X. Liang, M.-M. Cheng, Y. Zhao, and S. Yan, He received the Best Paper Awards at IEEE HPCC and IEEE MMSP in
 “Object region mining with adversarial erasing: A simple classification 2022. He has served as the Program Vice-Chair for IEEE HPCC; the Local
 to semantic segmentation approach,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Arrangement Chair for IEEE BMSB; and a TPC Member for many major
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1568–1576. IEEE conferences, such as GLOBLECOM, ICC, ITSC, MSN, and VTC.

 Zhen Qin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the University of Electronic Science
 and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2012. He is Yicong Zhou (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 currently a Professor with the School of Informa- B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Hunan
 tion and Software Engineering, UESTC. He was a University, Changsha, China, and the M.S. and Ph.D.
 Visiting Scholar with the Department of Electrical degrees in electrical engineering from Tufts Univer-
 Engineering and Computer Science, Northwestern sity, Medford, MA, USA.
 University. His research interests include data fusion He is a Professor with the Department of Comanalysis, mobile social networks, wireless sensor puter and Information Science, University of Macau,
 networks, and image processing. Macau, China. His research interests include image
 processing, computer vision, machine learning, and
 multimedia security.
 Dr. Zhou is a fellow of the Society of Photo-
 Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE). He was recognized as one of the
 highly cited researchers in 2020, 2021, and 2023. He serves as an Associate
 Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 Yujie Chen received the bachelor’s degree from the ON N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS , and IEEE T RANSAC -
 University of Electronic Science and Technology of TIONS ON G EOSCIENCE AND R EMOTE S ENSING .
 China (UESTC) in 2020, where she is currently
 pursuing the master’s degree with the School of
 Information and Software Engineering. Her research
 interests include semantic segmentation and instance
 segmentation.

 Ce Zhu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
 electronic and information engineering from Sichuan
 University, Chengdu, China, in 1989, and the M.Eng.
 and Ph.D. degrees in electronic and information
 engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing,
 China, in 1992 and 1994, respectively.
 Guosong Zhu received the B.S. degree (Hons.) in He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with The Chisoftware engineering from the University of Elec- nese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 1995;
 tronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) the City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong;
 in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. and The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC,
 degree with the School of Information and Soft- Australia, from 1996 to 1998. He was with Nanyang
 ware Engineering. He has served as a principal Technological University, Singapore, from 1998 to 2012, for 14 years, where
 investigator in major national research instru- he was a Research Fellow, a Program Manager, an Assistant Professor, and
 ment development projects. His research interests then promoted to an Associate Professor in 2005. Since 2012, he has been
 include image processing and multidimensional with the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
 reconstruction. as a Professor. His research interests include video coding and communications, video analysis and processing, 3D video, and visual perception and
 applications.
 Dr. Zhu was a co-recipient of multiple paper awards at international
 conferences, including most recently the Best Demo Award in IEEE MMSP
 2022 and the Best Paper Runner-Up Award in IEEE ICME 2020. He has
 served on the editorial boards for a few journals, including an Associate
 Erqiang Zhou received the Ph.D. degree from
 Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING, IEEE T RANS -
 the Dublin Institute of Technology (currently Tech-
 ACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY , IEEE
 nological University Dublin) in 2011. He is an
 T RANSACTIONS ON B ROADCASTING, and IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING L ET-
 Associate Professor with the School of Information
 TERS ; an Editor for IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS ;
 and Software Engineering, University of Electronic
 and an Area Editor for Signal Processing: Image Communication. He has
 Science and Technology of China (UESTC), where
 also served as a Guest Editor for a few special issues in international
 he joined in 2012. His research interests are mainly
 journals, including a Guest Editor for IEEE J OURNAL OF S ELECTED T OP -
 in the fields of password security, compiler optimiza-
 ICS IN S IGNAL P ROCESSING . He was an APSIPA Distinguished Lecturer,
 tion, and intelligent systems in education.
 from 2021 to 2022, and an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer of Circuits and
 Systems Society, from 2019 to 2020.