786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 Explosive Cyber Security Threats During
 COVID-19 Pandemic and a Novel Tree-Based
 Broad Learning System to Overcome
 Ying Gao , Hongyue Miao , Jixiang Chen, Binjie Song , Xiping Hu, and Wei Wang

 Abstract— The rapid spread of the COVID-19 has not only sensing, ultra-reliable and low-latency communications, and
affected personal health and economy, but also revolutionized intelligent manufacturing technology, the Internet of Vehicles
people’s lifestyles. As more people turn to work and socialize (IoV), which refers to a vast interactive network composed
online, the development of unmanned technologies based on the
Internet of Vehicles (IoV), such as unmanned delivery, unmanned of information such as vehicle position, speed, and routes, has
vehicles, unmanned transportation, etc., will become an inevitable grown rapidly in recent years, especially during the COVID-19
trend. However, all kinds of intelligent terminals for unmanned pandemic. The great breakthrough in unmanned technologies
equipment require a large amount of data interaction with has not only attracted the attention of industry and academia,
devices such as cloud servers, mobile terminals, and roadside but also brought potential network security risks, because all
terminals, which poses cyber security risks. Furthermore, the
outbreak of COVID-19 has prompted people to put forward intelligent terminals of unmanned equipment need to interact
higher demands for the security of network communications. with cloud servers, mobile terminals, roadside terminals, and
Unfortunately, the current intrusion detection methods based on other devices for large amounts of data interaction [1]–[4].
machine learning still have weaknesses such as low accuracy and Taking the VANET as an example, a distributed denial of
low efficiency when faced with unbalanced data distribution. service (DDoS) attack may occur during vehicle-to-vehicle
To solve the above problems, we propose a novel Tree-based
BLS (TBLS) intrusion detection method according to the idea (V2V) and vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication [5].
of ensemble learning and decision tree (CART and J48). The Once the intrusion is successful, it may cause communication
performance of TBLS was tested on the NSL-KDD dataset and congestion, or even send malicious instructions to mislead the
the UNSW-NB15 dataset respectively, which contain a variety of vehicle’s actions, and even lead to serious traffic accidents.
malicious traffic types for attacks on the IoV. The results show Monitored by the Ministry of Industry and Information Techthat our proposed method can achieve higher accuracy rate and
lower false alarm rate, compared with the existing 16 solutions. nology (MIIT) of China, there were more than one million
 malicious attacks appeared on the VANET platforms in the
 Index Terms— Intrusion detection, broad learning system first half of 2021, which is an increase of more than 80%
(BLS), decision trees, ensemble learning.
 over the same period in 2020. With the spread of COVID-19,
 people have put forward higher requirements for the security
 I. I NTRODUCTION and stability of the IoV [6].
 Nowadays, experts have done lots of research work [7]–[10]
S INCE 2020, the number of COVID-19 cases has been
 increasing and spreading rapidly to the world. It has not
only affected personal health and economy, but also comto improve the safety and reliability of IoV, adopting mainly
 machine learning-based methods, such as artificial neural netpletely changed people’s ways of life. More people choose to works (ANN) [11], convolutional neural networks (CNN) [12],
work and socialize online to protect themselves from the virus. decision trees (DT) [13], random forests (RF) [14], support
Thanks to huge advances in artificial intelligence, mobile vector machines (SVM), Naive Bayes (NB) [15] and so on.
 However, the current intrusion detection methods expose the
 Manuscript received 25 November 2021; revised 3 February 2022; accepted following challenges [16]:
14 March 2022. Date of publication 28 March 2022; date of current ver- 1) Anomalous traffic is relatively difficult to obtain, which
sion 17 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the Key-Area
Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province under Grant results in more normal data in the training set and fewer anom-
2019B010137001 and Grant 2020B010166001 and in part by the Natural alous data. The imbalance of the dataset leads to insufficient
Science Foundation of Guangdong Province under Grant 2018A030313351. training of the detection method, and the detection results often
The Associate Editor for this article was L. Wan. (Corresponding author:
Binjie Song.) tend to classify the abnormal traffic as normal.
 Ying Gao, Hongyue Miao, Jixiang Chen, and Binjie Song are with the 2) There are differences between the same types of traffic,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University and similarities between the different types of traffic, which
of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: gaoying@scut.
edu.cn; csmiaohy1997@mail.scut.edu.cn; cs_cjx_cdh@mail.scut.edu.cn; makes it difficult to detect anomalies.
sbj332644514@163.com). 3) It is not known in advance which features contribute
 Xiping Hu and Wei Wang are with the School of Intelligent Systems greatly to anomaly detection.
Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China (e-mail:
huxiping@mail.sysu.edu.cn; wangw328@mail.sysu.edu.cn). 4) VANET has high real-time performance and a large
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2022.3160182 amount of data, which requires high efficiency in detection.
 1558-0016 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME 787

At present, the anomaly detection method based on deep is the misuse-based anomaly detection method. This method
learning needs to be layer-by-layer in training. This results creates a library of exception rules, which stores known types
in large time overhead and low efficiency. of attack behaviors. During detection, if the network traffic
 To improve the accuracy of intrusion detection, the existing matches a rule in library B, the traffic is identified as abnormal.
methods usually take two approaches [7]. One is to obtain Thus, this method cannot detect unknown abnormal traffic.
better feature representation in order to enlarge the difference The other category is the anomaly-based detection method,
between data distributions and the other is to enhance the which only learns the pattern of normal network traffic. During
recognition ability of the classifier. detection, if the network traffic cannot be identified by the
 Although these approaches have achieved good intrusion model, the traffic will be regarded as abnormal. Although this
detection results, in fact, most of them are still misuse-based method can identify new types of abnormal traffic, the false
method rather than advanced. With the continuous increase of alarm rate is high because it will treat new normal traffic and
data volume, the demands for data processing efficiency will traffic never seen before as an exception.
also become higher. Thus, complex methods such as ensemble With the development of big data technology [22]–[25] and
learning [17]–[19] were adopted to improve the performance artificial intelligence (AI) [26]–[28], the self-learning model
of the classifier. However, the added time and space overhead based on massive data is widely used in the field of NIDS.
of these methods will limit their deployment on NIDS. Nowadays, machine learning has been widely used in intrusion
 Considering the existing problems comprehensively, this detection and can be divided into three categories.
paper firstly proposes an intrusion detection method based on The first category is supervised anomaly detection method.
BLS. As far as we know, this is the first time that BLS [20] is In the training process, a training set and labels representing
applied to intrusion detection. We also propose a novel method categories are required. Shone et al. [29] combined the deep
named Tree-based BLS (TBLS) to detect network intrusion in and shallow learning for intrusion detection. This approach
IoV systems. The implementation process is as follows. First, adopted a deep neural network for feature extraction with
multiple decision tree classifiers are used to fit the features of random forest for classification. The result showed that it
the dataset. Second, based on the idea of ensemble learning, was more efficient and effective than the deep brief netwe use BLS to integrate the features fitted by each basic work (DBN). Yin et al. [30] used recurrent neural networks
tree classifier, and finally get the distribution features of the to build IDS that suitable for binary and multiclass clasraw traffic. In the intrusion detection stage, BLS performs sification. The experimental results showed that its performultiple non-linear transformations on the input nodes to mance is superior to that of traditional ML classification
obtain feature nodes. Then the input nodes and feature nodes methods.
are concatenated for the next step and the final classification The second is unsupervised anomaly detection method.
result is obtained through the pseudo-inverse operation. It requires only a training set and no labels. The classification
 The contributions of this paper include the following is achieved by means such as clustering. Cao et al. [31]
aspects: proposed a novel method to help the AE achieve shallow
 1) To our best knowledge, this is the first time that BLS has representation of abnormal traffic, and proposed two modbeen adopted in network intrusion detection. This paper real- els which are Shrink Auto-encoder (SAE), and Dirac Delta
izes the preliminary exploration of BLS in intrusion detection Variational Auto-encoder (DVAE). They adopted seven oneand shows how to set various parameters in order to maximize classifiers to detect abnormal traffic. Experiments showed that
its effectiveness. We also have provided references for the SAE and DVAE can achieve higher accuracy when compared
latter research work. with the other three shallow representation methods. Ahmed
 2) We have improved the BLS intrusion detection method and Mahmood [32] presented a clustering-based collective
and proposed the TBLS method, which uses trees to improve anomaly detection approach to detect denial of service (DoS)
the input nodes of the original BLS and further improve the attacks in the traffic. Their approach was proved to be more
generalization ability of the BLS. efficient than other traditional cluster methods.
 3) The experimental results show that the proposed method The third is the semi-supervised anomaly detection method.
can adapt to intrusion detection better. Compared with other This method combines the above two methods and adopts
proposed intrusion detection method, TBLS can obtain higher a few labels to train the model. Semi-supervised learning
accuracy and a lower false alarm rate, and it shows higher methods can be further subdivided into transductive learning
intrusion detection efficiency in the test phase. and inductive learning. An online sequential and network
 The structure of the following paper is as follows: Section II Entropy estimation based semi-supervised ML approach was
mainly introduces the related work of the paper. Section III proposed for DDoS detection in [33]. The supervised part was
is the key part, which mainly describes the BLS and TBLS designed to reduce the false alarm rate of the unsupervised
algorithms in detail. Section IV includes the analysis of the part. A semi-supervised learning method called FSSL-EL was
experimental content and results. The summary and future also proposed to detect abnormal network traffic in [34]. After
work are in Section V. training the supervised part, the author adopted the fuzzinessbased method to mine the hidden structure of unlabeled
 II. R ELATED W ORK data and combined them via a neural network. However, the
 As we know, network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) prediction performance of the above methods still needs to be
can be divided into two categories [21]. The first category improved.
788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Structure of TBLS.

 III. T HE I MPLEMENTATION P ROCESS After encoding, we use min-max standardization to scale all
 the feature values within the interval [0, 1], the new value is
 A novel Tree-based Broad Learning System (TBLS) for calculated by:
intrusion detection is presented in this section, which can give
 j
a more accurate classification with less time consumption. j xi − M I N j
 xi = (1)
The main structure of broad learning is also artificial neural M AX j − M I N j
network. However, unlike the deep learning system which j
mainly learns hidden features by increasing the number of where x i is the attribute value, M I N is the minimum of the
layers in its neural network, a broad learning system adds j -th column while M AX is the maximum.
neurons to each layer to extend features in order to realize Meanwhile, Y = {y1 , y2 , . . . , yn } denotes the label of X,
thorough analysis and recognition of complex and multivariate and the range of y j is determined according to the classidata. Moreover, in order to further improve the fitting degree fication categories. For instance, we set yi ∈ {0, 1} if there
of traffic data and the processing performance of unbalanced are only two types of records: normal and abnormal. If there
data, we have involved several weighted DT classifiers in our are five types to be identified, we will set yi ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.
structure. We also implement the one-hot encoding method on Y as well,
 In the following subsections, data preprocessing, k-means it will facilitate the training process of the whole model.
based data sampling, broad learning system and the novel tree- In addition, the redundancy and correlation between features
based BLS method for NIDS will be introduced respectively in Traffic data may slow down the training process and reduce
in detail. For better understanding our method, the flowchart detection efficiency. Hence, we use the Principal Component
of the proposed approach is described in Fig.1. Analysis (PCA) algorithm to reduce the dimensions of the
 dataset for better feature selection and improving the speed
 of training process. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a
A. Data Preprocessing kind of unsupervised learning feature extraction method which
 maps high-dimensional data to a low-dimensional space by
 In this paper, we set X = {x 1 , x 2 , . . . , x n } ∈ R m×n to denote
 linear projection. Useful information will be kept after the
the training traffic with features, where n expresses the amount
 change. In this paper, we adopt PCA to discard the redundant
of traffic in the training dataset, and m represents the number
 j components and extract the important features.
of dimensional features. x i represents the j -th feature in x i .
 Due to the existence of non-numerical features in X which
may cause a negative effect on the learning process, we adopt B. K-Means Based Data Sampling
the one-hot encoding method to transform symbolic features A universal characteristic of the network traffic dataset is
into numerical data. For example, if a column in X has three that the original data is unbalanced. The number of normal
distinct values { f 1 , f2 , f3 }, and then they will be mapped to data is always much larger than that of abnormal data. Thus,
three binary vectors [1, 0, 0], [0, 1, 0], [0, 0, 1] respectively, once a classifier is trained on an imbalanced dataset, it will
which are regarded as their new values. tend to bias towards those frequent records. To avoid this,
GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME 789

Algorithm 1 K-Means Based Sampling Approach alternative approach to deep learning. In order to save the
 Input: The labeled examples S = {X, Y }, the number time consumption caused by multi-layer neural network, there
 of categories C, the number of clusters k, and sampling are only two layers in a BLS. The first layer contains input
 threshold n over nodes together with feature nodes which are mapped by input
 Output: The labeled examples Snew after sampling nodes. And the second layer is the output layer, which has the
 1: initialize Snew = {} same number of nodes as the number of categories. A BLS can
 2: for i = 1 : C expand the model by adding feature nodes to the first layer,
 3: select all examples and in this way extract more useful and non-linear information.
  that labeled i from S, and mark
 them as S i = Xi, Y i Besides, the BLS does not require backpropagation to find
  
 4: if  S i  ≤ n over  
 the optimal weights because it only has two layers. Instead,
 5: randomly select n over −  S i  records from Pseudoinverse and ridge regression learning algorithms are
 S i as S dup , add perturbation to X dup in S dup adopted to calculate the optimal weights.
 6: Snew = Snew ∪ S dup ∪ S i Assume the input data is X, the feature nodes group is
 7: end F (X) = F1 (X) , F2 (X) , . . . , Fq (X) , the number of the
  if
 8: if  S i  > n over  
 feature nodes is q, the i -th feature node is calculated via the
 9: calculate sample rate r = n over /  S i  following formula:
 10: fit a k-means model with k and X i  Fi (X) = δ (wi X + bi ) (2)
 11: get the clustered examples set S1i , . . . ,Ski
 12: for j = 1 : k    where wi (i = 1, 2, . . . , q) indicates weight and bi (i =
  
 13: randomly select S ij  ∗ r records to form Sˆij 1, 2, . . . , q) indicates bias, which are both randomly generated. δ(·) represents the activation function. In this paper,
 14: S
 new =S
 new ∪ Sˆi
 j we adopt tanh function as the activation function. The formula
 15: end for is as follows:
 16: end if
 17: end for e x − e−x
 δ (x) = (3)
 18: return Snew e x + e−x
 After calculating the feature nodes from the input, the first
 layer A(X) of the BLS can be expressed as:
we adopt a k-means based sampling method to get a balanced
training set from an imbalanced one. A (X) = [X|F(X)] = [X, F1 (X)]
 
 First, we define n over as the sampling threshold, k as the = X, F 1 (X) , · · · , Fq (X) (4)
number of clusters for a k-means clustering algorithm, Snew
as the sampled dataset. Second, we divide the training set Finally, calculate the weight matrix W which satisfies the
S into C subsets S i (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , C}) based on the label. equation A (X) W = Y . Because there are only two layers
For a subset S i , if the number in BLS, the optimal weight can be calculated by a simple
  records is less than n over ,
  of
we randomly select n over −  S i  records from S i , then add inversion method. The formula is as follows:
noise to those duplicates and put both the duplicates and W = A (X)−1 Y (5)
the original subset into Snew . For a subset whose quantity is
more than n over , we first cluster the subset into k clusters and However, the inverse matrix of A(x) may not exist, and
calculate the sample rate r by a function which is defined in we cannot get (A(X))−1 directly. Therefore, a pseudo-inverse
Algorithm 1, then randomly select records from each cluster at operation is adopted to substitute the matrix inverse operation,
this sample rate and add them into Snew . Finally, we get a new expressed as A(X)W ≈ Y . The pseudo-inverse of a matrix M
dataset Snew , which is a balanced one with around C ∗ n over can be calculated by the following formula:
records. The details of the sampling approach are presented in
Algorithm 1. M + = li m (M T M + λI )−1 M T (6)
 λ→0
 After data sampling, if n over is set appropriately, the new
training set can well represent the raw dataset and is suitable the pseudo-inverse of A(X) and the optimal weight matrix W
for training a fairer classifier. are calculated as follows:

 A(X)+ = li m (A(X)T A(X) + λI )−1 A(X)T (7)
 λ→0
C. Broad Learning System (BLS)
 W = A (X)+ Y (8)
 Deep learning-based method includes many hidden layers.
It can further grasp the correlation between features and the It is obviously that it takes much less time to get the
target labels by continuously increasing the depth of the struc- weight matrix compared with deep learning approaches which
ture. However, the huge number of parameters to be optimized require complex backpropagation processes. Thus, the BLS
in a deep learning structure usually takes a lot of time and shows better real-time performance in dealing with the massive
machine resources. To resolve these issues, the Broad Learning dataset of VANET and at the same time effectively avoids the
System was first introduced in [20], aiming to provide an transmission error between layers in backpropagation.
790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

D. Tree-Based BLS Method for NIDS Algorithm 2 Tree-Based BLS
 Since all the feature nodes are generated from the input X, Input: The labeled training dataset S = {X, Y }, the number
the quality of the input data plays a vital role in the perfor- of the basic classifiers p, the number of the feature nodes q
mance of BLS. While the raw data of traffic is not able to and the bootstrap sample rate r
fully present the relationship between feature X and labels Y , Output: Tree-based BLS model χ
we reconstruct the input nodes of BLS with the help of 1: χ = {}
ensemble learning, and put forward a novel network intrusion 2: for i = 1 : p
detection method named Tree-based BLS (TBLS). The TBLS 3: Generate bootstrap Bi by sampling S with sample
uses the extended feature nodes of broad learning algorithm rate r
to integrate the learning results of each weighted decision 4: Train a tree classifier Ii on Bi , χ = χ ∪ {I i }
tree classifier and adaptively calculate the input weight of 5: end for 
each classifier so that it can achieve better predictions than 6: I (X) = I1 (X) , . . . ,I p (X)
a single classifier. 7: for i = 1 : q
 Assume the input of BLS is I (X) , for an original BLS, 8: randomly initialize weight wi and bias bi
I (X) = [X]. Instead of using raw training data X as input, 9: χ = χ ∪ {wi , bi }
we define I (X) = [I1 (X) ,I2 (X) , . . . ,I p (X)], where Ii is a 10: Calculate Fi (X) use Eq. (9)
decision tree classifier, p denotes the number of the trees, and 11: end for 
Ii (·) is the i -th tree’s decision function, i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , p}. The 12: F (X) = F1 (X) , . . . ,Fq (X)
dimension of I (X) is p × C, where C denotes the number of 13: A (X) = [I (X)|F(X)]
classes. 14: Calculate the optimal weight W use Eq. (11)
 First, for the training dataset S = {X, Y }, we adopt a 15: χ = χ ∪ W
bootstrap sampling strategy to get some samples from S as 16: return χ
Bi to train the i -th basic classifier Ii . The sample rate r is set
to 0.4 based on sufficient experimental results in this paper. TABLE I
After p classifiers have been generated, input X to each basic C ONFUSION M ATRIX
classifier to get the  predictions, and assemble them to form
the input I (X) = I1 (X) , I2 (X) , . . . , I p (X) of BLS.
 Second, according to the training approach of BLS
described in the previous section, the i -th feature node is
mapped via the following formula:
 Fi (X) = δ wi I (X)T + bi (9)
 proposed model. The representations of these three metrics are
thus, the first layer can be present as: given as follows:
 
 A (X) = [I (X)|F(X)] = I (X) , F1 (X) , · · · ,Fq (X) (10) TP +TN
 AC = (12)
 T P + T N + FP + FN
where q denotes the number of the feature nodes.
 TP
 Finally, the weight matrix W which satisfies the equation DR = (13)
A (X) W = Y is calculated by the following formula: T P + FN
 FP
 FAR = (14)
 W = A (X)+ Y (11) FP + T N
 +
where A (X) is the pseudo-inverse matrix of A (X). where true positive (TP) refers to the number of attack records
 In the testing phase, for a record x, after data preprocessing, correctly identified as an attack, true negative (TN) denotes the
the input is mapped to I (x) = [I1 (x) , I2 (x) , . . . , I p (x)] in number of normal records that are correctly identified as northe first step. Then, use all the wi and bi which have been mal, false positive (FP) denotes the number of normal records
fitted during the training process to build the i -th feature node incorrectly identified as an attack, and false negative (FN)
and F (x). After that, I (x) and F (x) are used for generating refers to the number of attack records incorrectly identified
A (X) via Eq. (10). Finally, the output of x is ŷ = A (X) W . as normal. The definition of a confusion matrix is shown in
Since there are C nodes in the output layer, ŷ contains C Table I. The accuracy describes the ability of a detection model
values, and the label corresponding to the maximum value of to make correct prediction while the detection rate indicates
ŷ is considered as the prediction class. the probability that attacks can be identified correctly. The
 To make it easier to understand, the details of the TBLS false alarm rate indicates the rate that the normal records
algorithm are demonstrated in Algorithm 2. are predicted as attacks. Researchers try their best to build
 a detection model with high accuracy and low FAR.
 IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
A. Evaluation Measures B. Experiment Dataset and Settings
 In our work, accuracy (AC), detection rate (DR), and false KDD Cup 99 dataset has been widely used as a benchmark
alarm rate (FAR) are used to evaluate the performance of the dataset for evaluating the performance of IDS for many years.
GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME 791

 TABLE II
 T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF C LASSES IN NSL-KDD D ATASET

 TABLE III
 T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF C LASSES IN UNSW-NB15 D ATASET

However, it was observed that the training data contains a TABLE IV
lot of redundant records. This redundancy causes the learning T HE PARAMETERS IN D ATA P REPROCESSING
algorithms to be biased towards the frequent records and leads
to poor classification results of harmful records. Thus, this
paper is tested on the other two common datasets, NSL-KDD
[35] and UNSW-NB15 [40], respectively.
 NSL-KDD dataset is an improved version of the KDD
Cup 99 dataset, and it was built by eliminating the redundant
records from the training and test data in KDD Cup 99 dataset.
Hence, the NSL-KDD dataset contains a reasonable number
of records, which make it more suitable for the training and
evaluating of any learning algorithm. Nowadays, although abnormal behaviors of traffic data. Compared with NSLthere are some other newer datasets available for evaluation, KDD, the UNSW-NB15 dataset has more novel types of
NSL-KDD dataset is still considered as one of the most attacks and features. It has nine aggressive behaviors in total:
authoritative benchmark datasets in this filed. Therefore, we Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoor, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconutilize the NSL-KDD dataset in our work as mentioned before. naissance, Shellcode, and Worms. The raw data of UNSW-
The NSL-KDD dataset covers two training sets ‘KDDTrain’ NB15 includes 47 features, and can be divided into two subsets
and ‘KDDTrain_20percent’, ‘KDDTest+’ and ‘KDDTest-21’ ‘UNSW-NB15_training-set.csv’ and ‘UNSW-NB15_testingas the testing sets. Each record consists of 41 features in set.csv’. And in these subsets, the number of features has been
numerical or symbolic type, and one class label for indicating reduced to 42. Table III shows more information about the
whether the record is normal or a particular kind of attack. distribution of classes in UNSW-NB15 dataset.
There are five typical network events involved in the dataset, The experiments are performed on a personal computer,
i.e., normal, probe, Denial-of-Service (DoS), user to root and the configurations are listed as follows: The Windows
(U2R) and remote to local (R2L). We provide Table II below 10 professional system, Intel Core i7-8700 CPU @ 3.20 GHz,
to show the distribution of classes in NSL-KDD dataset. and 16 GB RAM, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2070S GPU.
 The ‘KDDTrain_20percent’ dataset contains 20% records
in the ‘KDDTrain’, which can still represent the distribution
well. Specifically, we use the ‘KDDTrain_20percent’ dataset C. Experimental Results
as our training dataset for improving training efficiency while In order to make our experimental testing process easier
guaranteeing a good performance. Besides, ‘KDDTest+’ and to understand, all the specific parameters of the experiments
‘KDDTest-21’ are used for testing. under the NSL-KDD dataset and UNSW-NB15 dataset are
 The UNSW-NB15 dataset is collected and established by written in the following Table IV and Table V.
the Australian Centre for Cyber Security (ACCS) from IXIA 1) The Impact of the PCA Method: To maximize the per-
PerfectStorm. The dataset contains multifarious normal and formance of the proposed model, we designed an experiment
792 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE V
 T HE PARAMETERS OF TBLS

 Fig. 3. Relationship between sample size n over and detection accuracy.

Fig. 2. Relationship between PCA dimensionality d and detection accuracy.

to find out the optimal parameter for PCA. The results of
NSL-KDD and UNSW-NB15 are shown in Fig.2. For the
NSL-KDD dataset, when the dimensionality is set to 20, the Fig. 4. Relationship between number of decision trees p and detection
proposed model reaches its best performance in terms of accuracy.
accuracy on Test+ and Test-21 datasets. When the dimension
is lower than 20, the processed data is not able to describe
the raw data fully, and the performance is unsatisfactory 3000 as the sample size of the NSL-KDD dataset and the
predictably. Meanwhile, when the dimension is higher than 20, UNSW-NB15 dataset respectively.
the processed data may generate irrelevant data that adversely 2) The Impact of the Bootstrapping Method: In this part,
affect the detection performance and consume more computing we test the effects of two parameters in the bootstrapping
resources. When the dimension is set to 121, it means the PCA process which are the number of decision trees p and the
is not applied, and we have observed that the accuracy drops sample rate r , to study the efficiency of the ensemble learning
sharply. For the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the model peeks when method. Relative results are shown in Fig.4. When p is set to
the dimensionality is set to 30. Neither higher than 30 nor 100, the TBLS method performs the best. As p declines from
lower than 30 can give better performance. The result shows 100, there is a significant decrease in accuracy, which indicates
that it is necessary to apply PCA to reduce the dimension of that the model is underfitting and cannot learn the training
the data before the training process. Thus, we choose to use data comprehensively. Therefore, we choose p = 100 as the
the 20-dimension and the 30-dimension data respectively for optimal number of decision trees.
our proposed model in the following experiments. Furthermore, it is shown in Fig.5 about the performance
 Besides, we also made tests about the threshold n over of the of the TBLS algorithm when different sample rates are used.
k-means based sampling method to explore the relationship Through the outcomes, when r is set to 0.4, the model gets
between n over and detection accuracy. Fig.3 shows the whole the best accuracy in all three datasets. If the r is set below
results of the above two datasets. When n over is too small, the 0.4, the accuracy of the model will be poor due to lack of
lack of data samples results in underfitting, which makes the sampled data. However, the performance of the model will
model unable to achieve a satisfactory training effect. Mean- still decline when r is set over 0.4, since TBLS cannot fully
while, when n over is too large, the algorithm is more inclined learn the distribution of the dataset based on a mass of data.
to classify traffic into normal class and ignore other aggressive As a result, we choose r = 0.4 as the sample rate of our
behaviors. Therefore, it is proved that proper sampling can approach.
reduce the impact of data imbalance to a certain extent, make 3) The Impact of the Feature Nodes: In order to verify the
the algorithm pay more attention to those attack classes, and effect of increasing feature nodes in broad learning system on
then improve the performance of data prediction and detection the overall performance of model, we change the number of
of attack behaviors. As a result, we decided to choose 400 and feature nodes q to see which is the most appropriate one. The
GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME 793

Fig. 5. Relationship between sample rate r and detection accuracy. Fig. 7. Classification results of different basic classifier.

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARED W ITH THE C URRENT D ETECTION M ETHODS

Fig. 6. Relationship between number of feature nodes q and detection
accuracy.

results are shown in Fig.6, illustrating that the detection ability
to traffic data is constantly improving with the increase of the
feature nodes. However, limited by the personal computer’s
performance in the experiment, we can only set q to 80 as the
optimal number of feature nodes.
 4) The Impact of the Basic Classifier: To explore the
influence of different basic classifiers on the detection accuracy
of our TBLS model, we tried three decision tree classifiers J48,
CART and C4.5 respectively as the basic classifiers. Besides,
an original BLS based on GNB classifiers was built to act
as the baseline for comparison. For each model, grid search
and cross-validation techniques are used to search for the best
parameters. After training, we apply the models to the testing
set for multiple classifications.
 The results are described in Fig.7. The detecting accuracy of methods. Among them, ‘Experiment-1’ in [38] and
BLS(GNB) in ‘KDDTest-21’ and ‘UNSW-NB15_testing-set’ ‘Experiment-2’ in [39] are methods based on semi-supervised
drops to almost 50% without the help of the decision trees, and learning. In addition, we also used the original BLS framework
the integrated model gets the highest accuracy score when J48 and the tree-based deep learning system (TDLS) to conduct
serves as the base classifier. In a word, the TBLS has proved to ablation experiments. The results are shown in Table VI.
be more efficient than the original BLS for intrusion detection The accuracy of TBLS is 84.49% on ‘KDDTest+’, 70.92%
with a stronger non-linear representation produced by the basic on ‘KDDTest-21’, and 72.84% on ‘UNSW-NB15_testing-set’
decision tree classifiers. Moreover, after weighted processing, (which is not listed). When compared with the most popular
the decision tree classifiers can improve the performance of semi-supervised learning algorithms, our approach can still
the whole model more effectively. stay ahead. Although the accuracy of TBLS is relatively weak
 5) Comparison With Other Existing Methods: In this on ‘KDDTest+’, it has obvious advantage in FAR, which is
section, we compare the proposed method with 16 existing regarded more important in the field of intrusion detection.
794 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 The great improvement of our TBLS over the original BLS [7] L. Tawalbeh, F. Muheidat, M. Tawalbeh, M. Quwaider, and G. Salhave emphasized the importance of using tree structure as the damli, “Predicting and preventing cyber attacks during COVID-19 time
 using data analysis and proposed secure IoT layered model,” in Proc.
basic classifier. Furthermore, in order to verify the superiority 4th Int. Conf. Multimedia Comput., Netw. Appl. (MCNA), Oct. 2020,
of BLS in NIDS, we replace the broad learning structure in pp. 113–118.
Fig.1 with a 3-layer neural network to connect each decision [8] M. Said Elsayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, and A. D. Jurcut, “Dealing with
 COVID-19 network traffic spikes [cybercrime and forensics],” IEEE
tree classifier. Momentum-based gradient descent algorithm Security Privacy, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 90–94, Jan. 2021.
was used to train the new model called TDLS. Experimental [9] W. Choi, K. Joo, H. J. Jo, M. C. Park, and D. H. Lee, “VoltageIDS:
results show that the TBLS not only learns faster, but also has Low-level communication characteristics for automotive intrusion detection system,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 8,
better detection performance than TDLS in NIDS scenarios. pp. 2114–2129, Aug. 2018.
 In sum, the proposed TBLS is superior to other methods [10] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection
regardless of AC or FAR. Results have already proved that our system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight
proposed method can be well adapted to intrusion detection. bag servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3,
 pp. 1164–1181, May 2021, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2019.2914035.
 [11] A.-H. Muna, N. Moustafa, and E. Sitnikova, “Identification of malicious
 V. C ONCLUSION activities in industrial Internet of Things based on deep learning models,”
 J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 41, pp. 1–11, Aug. 2018.
 In this paper, a novel Tree-based broad learning system [12] K. Wu, Z. Chen, and W. Li, “A novel intrusion detection model for
(TBLS) method is proposed for intrusion detection task in a massive network using convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Access,
VANET during COVID-19 pandemic. The presented TBLS vol. 6, pp. 50850–50859, 2018.
 [13] Y. Won, M.-J. Choi, B. Park, and J. W.-K. Hong, “An approach for
approach achieves 84.49%, 70.92%, and 72.84% accuracy failure recognition in IP-based industrial control networks and systems,”
respectively on ‘KDDTest+’, ‘KDDTest-21’, and ‘UNSW- Int. J. Netw. Manage., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 477–493, Mar. 2012.
NB15’ datasets through a large series of experiments, which [14] Y. Chang, W. Li, and Z. Yang, “Network intrusion detection based on
 random forest and support vector machine,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
stand out from the other state-of-the-art methods. Comput. Sci. Eng. (CSE) IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Ubiquitous Comput.
 Overall, the main contributions of our method can be (EUC), Guangdong, China, Jul. 2017, pp. 635–638.
summarized as follows. Firstly, it is the first time that BLS [15] J. M. Beaver, R. C. Borges-Hink, and M. A. Buckner, “An evaluation
has been applied to intrusion detection domain as far as of machine learning methods to detect malicious SCADA communications,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl., Miami, FL, USA,
we know, aiming to reduce training time consumption and Dec. 2013, pp. 54–59.
provide a faster way to remodel without retraining. Secondly, [16] J. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Meng, Y.-P. Tan, and J. Yuan, “Boosting positive
multiple decision trees are trained to reconstruct the input of and unlabeled learning for anomaly detection with multi-features,” IEEE
 Trans. Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1332–1344, May 2019.
a BLS so that the integrated TBLS model can perform better [17] A. H. Mirza, “Computer network intrusion detection using various clason multi-class classification. Finally, several approaches like sifiers and ensemble learning,” in Proc. 26th Signal Process. Commun.
PCA method and k-means based sampling method have been Appl. Conf. (SIU), Izmir, Turkey, May 2018, pp. 1–4.
 [18] B. Morris, “Explainable anomaly and intrusion detection intelligence
adopted to discard the redundant part of data for extracting for platform information technology using dimensionality reduction and
important features and address the issue of data imbalance, ensemble learning,” in Proc. IEEE AUTOTESTCON, National Harbor,
which ensures the quality of data and thus raises the ceiling MD, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 1–5.
of performance. [19] A. S. Varal and S. K. Wagh, “Misuse and anomaly intrusion detection
 system using ensemble learning model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Recent
 In the future research, we are going to try more machine Innov. Electr., Electron. Commun. Eng. (ICRIEECE), Bhubaneswar,
learning structures like the Generative Adversarial Networks India, Jul. 2018, pp. 1722–1727.
in order to improve the generalization ability of our model [20] C. L. P. Chen and Z. L. Liu, “Broad learning system: An effective
 and efficient incremental learning system without the need for deep
and realize the real-time detection of new attacks. Our goal is architecture,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 1,
to build an all-around intrusion detection system. By the way, pp. 10–24, Jan. 2018.
we will test our approach on more public benchmarks. [21] T. F. Lunt, “A survey of intrusion detection techniques,” Comput. Secur.,
 vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 405–418, Jun. 1993.
 [22] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, Y. Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Big data analytics in
 R EFERENCES intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
 Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 383–398, Jan. 2019.
 [1] H. F. Al-Turkistani and H. Ali, “Enhancing users’ wireless network cyber
 [23] G. Bello-Orgaz, J. J. Jung, and D. Camacho, “Social big data: Recent
 security and privacy concerns during COVID-19,” in Proc. 1st Int. Conf.
 achievements and new challenges,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 28, pp. 45–59,
 Artif. Intell. Data Anal. (CAIDA), Apr. 2021, pp. 284–285.
 Mar. 2016.
 [2] A. A. Shammari, R. R. Maiti, and B. Hammer, “Organizational security
 policy and management during COVID-19,” in Proc. SoutheastCon, [24] U. Aftab and G. F. Siddiqui, “Big data augmentation with data ware-
 Mar. 2021, pp. 1–4. house: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Seattle, WA, USA,
 [3] J. Ahmed and Q. Tushar, “COVID-19 pandemic: A new era of cyber Dec. 2018, pp. 2785–2794.
 security threat and holistic approach to overcome,” in Proc. IEEE Asia– [25] G. Chareyron, J. Da-Rugna, and T. Raimbault, “Big data: A new
 Pacific Conf. Comput. Sci. Data Eng. (CSDE), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–5. challenge for tourism,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, Washington,
 [4] A. Rahman, M. S. Hossain, N. A. Alrajeh, and F. Alsolami, “Adversarial DC, USA, Oct. 2014, pp. 5–7.
 examples—Security threats to COVID-19 deep learning systems in med- [26] B. S. Sager, S. Niranjan, N. Kashyap, and D. N. Sachin, “Providing
 ical IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 9603–9610, cyber security using artificial intelligence—A survey,” in Proc. 3rd Int.
 Jun. 2021. Conf. Comput. Methodol. Commun. (ICCMC), Erode, India, Mar. 2019,
 [5] A. M. Alrehan and F. A. Alhaidari, “Machine learning techniques pp. 717–720.
 to detect DDoS attacks on VANET system: A survey,” in Proc. 2nd [27] B. Zhang, T. Zhang, and Z. Yu, “DDoS detection and prevention based
 Int. Conf. Comput. Appl. Inf. Secur. (ICCAIS), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on artificial intelligence techniques,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Conf.
 May 2019, pp. 1–6. Comput. Commun. (ICCC), Chengdu, China, Dec. 2017, pp. 1276–1280.
 [6] N. Mathew and V. Uma, “VANET security—Analysis and survey,” [28] M. Lin and Y. Zhao, “Artificial intelligence-empowered resource manin Proc. Int. Conf. Control, Power, Commun. Comput. Technol. agement for future wireless communications: A survey,” China Com-
 (ICCPCCT), Kannur, India, Mar. 2018, pp. 100–106. mun., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 58–77, Mar. 2020.
GAO et al.: EXPLOSIVE CYBER SECURITY THREATS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND NOVEL TBLS TO OVERCOME 795

[29] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “A deep learning approach Jixiang Chen is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
 to network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. in computer science and technology with the School
 Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Feb. 2018. of Computer Science and Engineering, South China
[30] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for University of Technology, China. His research interintrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, ests include deep learning, big data, and network
 vol. 5, pp. 21954–21961, 2017. anomaly behavior recognition.
[31] V. L. Cao, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Learning neural representations for network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49,
 no. 8, pp. 3074–3087, Aug. 2019.
[32] M. Ahmed and A. N. Mahmood, “Novel approach for network traffic
 pattern analysis using clustering-based collective anomaly detection,”
 Ann. Data Sci., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 111–130, 2015.
[33] M. Idhammad, K. Afdel, and M. Belouch, “Semi-supervised machine
 learning approach for DDoS detection,” Appl. Intell., vol. 48, no. 10,
 pp. 3193–3208, 2018.
[34] Y. Gao, Y. Liu, Y. Jin, J. Chen, and H. Wu, “A novel semi-supervised
 learning approach for network intrusion detection on cloud-based robotic
 system,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50927–50938, 2018.
[35] T. M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed Binjie Song received the M.S. degree from the South
 analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. China University of Technology, China, in 2020. His
 Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., Ottawa, ON, Canada, Jul. 2009, pp. 1–6. main research interests include machine learning,
[36] B. Ingre and A. Yadav, “Performance analysis of NSL-KDD dataset deep learning, evolutionary computation, cyberspace
 using ANN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Signal Process. Commun. Eng. Syst., security, network anomaly behavior recognition, and
 Andhra Pradesh, India, Jan. 2015, pp. 92–96. the Internet of Things.
[37] T. A. Tang, L. Mhamdi, D. McLernon, S. A. R. Zaidi, and M. Ghogho,
 “Deep learning approach for network intrusion detection in software
 defined networking,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw. Mobile Commun.
 (WINCOM), Fez, Morocco, Oct. 2016, pp. 258–263.
[38] M. Yousefi-Azar, V. Varadharajan, L. Hamey, and U. Tupakula,
 “Autoencoder-based feature learning for cyber security applications,” in
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Anchorage, AK, USA,
 May 2017, pp. 3854–3861.
[39] R. A. R. Ashfaq, X.-Z. Wang, J. Z. Huang, H. Abbas, and Y.-L. He,
 “Fuzziness based semi-supervised learning approach for intrusion detection system,” Inf. Sci., vol. 378, pp. 484–497, Feb. 2017.
[40] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for Xiping Hu received the Ph.D. degree from The Uninetwork intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in versity of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
 Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Canberra, ACT, Australia, He is currently a Professor with the School of Intel-
 Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6. ligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
 China. He has more than 120 papers published and
 presented in prestigious conferences and journals.
 Ying Gao received the bachelor’s and master’s His research areas consist of mobile cyber physical
 degrees from the Central South University, China, systems, crowd sensing, and affective computing.
 and the Ph.D. degree from the South China University of Technology, China, in 1997, 2000, and
 2006, respectively. She is currently a Professor with
 the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
 South China University of Technology. She has
 published more than 70 papers in international journals and conferences. Her current research interests
 include service-oriented computing technology, software architecture, and network security.

 Hongyue Miao was born in Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, Wei Wang received the Ph.D. degree in software
 China, in 1997. He received the B.S. degree in elec- engineering from the Dalian University of Technoltronic science and technology from the South China ogy in 2018. He is currently an Associate Professor
 University of Technology in 2019, where he is cur- with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering,
 rently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer science Sun Yat-sen University, China. Before this, he had
 and technology. His research interests include deep been the UM Macao Research Fellow at the Univerlearning, adversarial attacks, and network intrusion sity of Macau, Macau. He has authored/coauthored
 detection. over 60 scientific papers in international journals and
 conferences. His research interests include computational social science, data mining, the Internet of
 Things, and artificial intelligence.