420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 Extensible Machine Learning for Encrypted
 Network Traffic Application Labeling via
 Uncertainty Quantification
 Steven Jorgensen , John Holodnak , Jensen Dempsey , Karla de Souza , Ananditha Raghunath,
 Vernon Rivet , Noah DeMoes, Andrés Alejos, and Allan Wollaber

 Abstract—With the increasing prevalence of encrypted network model is unsure about a given prediction. By integrating data,
traffic, cybersecurity analysts have been turning to machine learn- feature generation, and confidence-aware ML, we have laid a founing (ML) techniques to elucidate the traffic on their networks. How- dation that will allow future researchers to create robust analytics
ever, ML models can become stale as new traffic emerges that is out- for this challenging domain at the intersection of cyber security and
side of the distribution of the training set. In order to reliably adapt ML.
in this dynamic environment, ML models must additionally provide contextualized uncertainty quantification to their predictions, Index Terms—Cybersecurity, discrete wavelet transform,
which has received little attention in the cybersecurity domain. Un- encrypted traffic, machine learning (ML), network traffic
certainty quantification is necessary both to signal when the model classification, uncertainty quantification, virtual private networks
is uncertain about which class to choose in its label assignment and (VPNs).
when the traffic is not likely to belong to any pretrained classes. We
present a new public dataset of network traffic that includes labeled I. INTRODUCTION
virtual-private-network-encrypted network traffic generated by
ten applications and corresponding to five application categories. HE proportion and popularity of encrypted network traffic
We also present an ML framework that is designed to rapidly
train with modest data requirements and provide both calibrated
predictive probabilities and an interpretable “out-of-distribution”
 T has quickly risen over the past several years, with over 95%
 of traffic across Google and 97 of the top 100 websites defaulting
(OOD) score to flag novel traffic samples. We describe calibrating to encryption [1]. This is a boon for online privacy; however,
OOD scores using p-values of the relative Mahalanobis distance. there is a corresponding increase in encryption for malware
We demonstrate that our framework achieves an F1-score of 0.98 delivery [2], [3]. Beyond that, MITRE ATT&CK enumerates
on our dataset and that it can extend to an enterprise network several techniques in which encryption has been used to obfusby testing the model: 1) on data from similar applications; 2) on
dissimilar application traffic from an existing category; and 3) on
 cate command and control or to masquerade one application as
application traffic from a new category. The model correctly flags another. Although signature-based techniques, such as website
uncertain traffic and, upon retraining, accurately incorporates the fingerprinting [4], [5] and Palo Alto’s App-ID, can flag particnew data. ular packet sequences that indicate a known website request or
 Impact Statement—Labeling application-generated virtual pri- protocol handshake, the general problem of inferring an applivate network (VPN)-encrypted network traffic is challenging given
limited public datasets, the difficulty of signal extraction using only
 cation when signatures and heuristics fail remains a challenging
packet size and timing information, and the need to account for problem. In particular, virtual private network (VPN) providers
uncertainty in the machine learning (ML) pipeline to screen out have also lowered the barriers for users not only to encrypt
predictions for novel applications or low-confidence predictions. the ports, protocols, and IP addresses of their connections, but
We provide a new public labeled packet capture dataset with also to obfuscate the IP address of the VPN server itself [6]
VPN-encrypted network traffic for researchers to train their own
models, filling a needed gap for this problem domain. We propose
 and/or pad all packets to be the same size before encryption [7],
data features and a neural network architecture that accurately which can defeat signature detection capabilities. In light of
trains with modest data requirements and provides predictions these difficulties, network security analysts have begun turning
alongside confidence scores that allow analysts to know when a to machine learning (ML) approaches that leverage latent signals
 in the packet timings, sizes, and their encrypted payloads in order
 Manuscript received 14 June 2022; revised 15 September 2022 and 24 to predict the applications that generated the encrypted traffic.
October 2022; accepted 15 January 2023. Date of publication 14 February Until recently, the existing work in ML for encrypted traffic
2023; date of current version 8 January 2024. This work was supported by
U.S. Cyber Command under Air Force Contract FA8702-15-D-0001. This paper classification has focused primarily on feature construction and
was recommended for publication by Associate Editor Supratik Mukhopadhyay model development to optimize raw performance metrics such
upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Steven as overall accuracy. For example, traditional ML models (like
Jorgensen.)
 The authors are with the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA naïve Bayes and decision trees) have been applied to simple
02421 USA (e-mail: steven.jorgensen@ll.mit.edu; john.holodnak@ll.mit. statistical features [8], [9], and neural networks based on one- or
edu; jensen.dempsey@ll.mit.edu; karla.deSouza@ll.mit.edu; ananditha. two-dimensional convolutions have been applied to sequences of
raghunath@ll.mit.edu; vernon.rivet@ll.mit.edu; noah.demoes@ll.mit.edu;
andres.alejos@ll.mit.edu; allan.wollaber@ll.mit.edu). raw byte values, interarrival times, and wavelet coefficients [10],
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TAI.2023.3244168 [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. Many of these techniques yield
 © 2023 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 421

very good performance on publicly available data, the most with an 80/20 train/test split, our model has a micro F1-score
popular being the ISCXVPN2016 dataset for studying VPN en- of 0.98. Furthermore, we investigate our model’s performance
cryption [9]. Much more recently, end-to-end and transformer- when training with only small fractions of the dataset, achieving
based architectures have begun showing impressive perfor- (for instance) 95% accuracy on Voice over Internet Protocol
mance [17], [18], [19], [20] on a variety of Internet of Things (VoIP) traffic in a five-class problem using just under 14 min
(IoT) and mobile traffic datasets outside of a VPN setting [21], of data capture. On the UTMobileNetTraffic2021 dataset, our
[22], [23]. model has 80% accuracy, comparable to Heng et al.’s [22] best
 In this article, we build upon some previously developed results.
features (interarrival statistics and wavelet signal processing) We stress-test the model by attempting to transfer its learning
with an eye toward enabling rapid learning with limited data. In from the testbed to an enterprise network over several cateaddition, we focus on developing an ML model with accurate gories. We found that in some instances (a streaming and VoIP
uncertainty quantification that is able to 1) produce accurate application), the model cleanly transfers onto another network
probabilistic predictions for the classes on which the model with high accuracy and low uncertainty, and in others (two
is trained and 2) detect examples dissimilar to application file transfer applications), the model successfully reports low
categories that the model was trained to predict. While there in-distribution confidence and can be quickly retrained to inhas been some limited mention of uncertainty quantification in corporate the new applications for identification in the known
cybersecurity applications of ML in general [24], [25], [26], category.
[27], [28], the problem has not received the same attention To test our model’s ability to identify OOD examples, we perin cybersecurity as it has in other domains, such as computer form inference on PCAP containing an unseen traffic category
vision and health care. We consider this unfortunate and believe (Zoom) from an enterprise network and demonstrate that the
that in a dynamic environment such as a computer network, it model reliably assigns the new category a high OOD score, with
is critically important to quantify model uncertainty. A recent over 77% predicted as significantly OOD. Upon retraining with
review highlighted the need to reduce errors (false positives) about 2 h of labeled examples of Zoom, which takes under 5 min,
when moving from a closed training set to real-world data for the fraction of significantly OOD test examples drops to 26%.
encrypted network traffic analysis [29], and Nascita et al.’s [28] Finally, we test our model’s robustness by investigating the
emphasis on trustworthiness and explainability in deep learning case where all packets are padded to have identical sizes, as ocin traffic classification is a step in the right direction. curs in the Noise Protocol or in certain implementations of traffic
 In our work, we develop a classifier for encrypted network flow confidentiality [7], [32]. We see that the model (which
traffic based on prototypical networks, which leverage distances utilizes both packet timing and size information) is still able
to class prototypes (means) in a learned embedding space to to obtain very good performance (micro F1-score of 0.97) indicompute class probabilities and, thus, predictions [30]. We use cating that packet size information is not necessary for accurate
the recently developed relative Mahalanobis distance between classification. In addition, this observation calls into question
test examples and class prototypes to detect out-of-distribution the degree of privacy offered by such obfuscation strategies.
(OOD) examples [31]. Our model uses as input a mixture of To summarize, the primary contributions of this article are as
simple features derived from flow statistics as well as wavelet follows:
transform coefficients to produce class predictions for segments 1) a new public dataset of application-labeled, VPNof bidirectional network flows (although more advanced trans- encrypted, and non-VPN-encrypted network traffic;
former architectures such as in [19] should also be compatible 2) an ML architecture for encrypted traffic designed to
with a prototypical network layer). To enable regular predic- quickly train with limited labeled data and provide caltions in VPN settings in which 1) the embedded five-tuples for ibrated uncertainty-contextualized predictions for two
connections are encrypted and 2) the beginnings and endings tasks: a) predictive uncertainty, when the model is indeciof connections are obfuscated, we split all network flows into sive about which known label a sample belongs to; and b)
discretely sampled time segments and make one prediction for model uncertainty, when the model encounters OOD data
each time segment in each flow. potentially from an unknown label, enabling the model to
 We apply our model to a new dataset (which we have made be systematically extended to new data;
publicly available) of encrypted network traffic collected on a 3) a demonstration of sufficiently high accuracy and F1-score
testbed from ten applications that cover five broad, but not com- for application data that are grouped into discrete time
prehensive categories of traffic. This dataset supplements those windows, instead of by collecting statistics or data for an
already available in the literature, which either cover only very entire connection or relying upon fingerprints or signaspecific types of network traffic such as the UC Davis dataset of tures, enabling sequential application predictions under a
QUIC traffic [14] or the Orange dataset of HTTPS traffic [16] VPN.
or contain artifacts such as unencrypted packets that could The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
affect the validity of models trained on them.1 When trained presents related work. Section III discusses our PCAP dataset.
 Section IV presents data and learning techniques. Section V
 1 See Section II-E for specific examples of artifacts we identified in the often- presents computational experiments. Section VI gives discusused ISCXVPN2016 dataset, introduced in [9], which we hope to supplement. sion. Finally, Section VII concludes this article.
422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 II. RELATED WORK the first to use wavelet-based features for traffic classification
 and show that support vector machines trained with wavelet
 In this section, we describe the existing work in the literature related to traffic classification in general, encrypted traffic features outperform those trained with flow-statistic-based features. Later, Liang et al. [10] used convolutional neural networks
classification, and website fingerprinting. Owing to our focus
 trained on wavelet-based features for traffic classification. We
on uncertainty in encrypted traffic classification, we briefly
review relevant work on uncertainty in deep learning from the build on this approach by dividing the connections into chunks of
 time rather than classifying the aggregate connection all at once
ML community. Finally, we discuss existing encrypted traffic
 and combining flow-statistic-based features and wavelet features
datasets and our motivation for collecting our own.
 in each time window. Roy et al. [57] also use a time-based
 approach via a neural ordinary differential equation on packet
A. Early Traffic Classification interarrival times, and they also avoid payload inspection, which
 In the early days of the Internet, censors used port-based is similar in spirit to our approach. Shapira and Shavitt [58] use a
traffic classification to restrict Internet content [33]. Port-based clever time/size technique to generate images (“FlowPic”) from
classification models could classify network traffic using the application traffic, which then enables standard image classifiport numbers encoded in the packet headers because the Inter- cation techniques. Recently, end-to-end and transformer-based
net Assigned Numbers Authority maps services to unique port architectures have bypassed the need for feature generation,
numbers [34]. In response, clever Internet users and application shifting the burden into the neural network, which typically
developers adapted to port-based censorship by dynamically leverages on the order of a million parameters and achieve
changing port numbers, hiding behind port numbers already as- state-of-the-art accuracies [17], [18], [19], [20]. In our work,
signed to well-known, trusted applications, or using unregistered we achieve high accuracy using fewer than 30 000 parameters,
port numbers [35], [36], [37]. Deep packet inspection (DPI) then which enables rapid training (minutes).
emerged as a technique that inspects the payloads of packets
and classifies them accordingly [33], [37], [38], [39], [40]. DPI C. Website Fingerprinting
is often used to check for malicious code, obtain situational Website fingerprinting is a process of recognizing specific
awareness on a network, and eavesdrop on connections. For web traffic (e.g., to particular websites) based on unique patterns
example, the operators of the Great Firewall of China have used in the traffic [59]. This approach leverages the fact that websites
DPI to inform active probing to identify and censor Tor [33]. tend to have unique packet sequence patterns (handshakes) that
However, with the rise of easy-to-use encryption schemes, such allow for identification. Traffic features can include informaas HTTPS and VPNs, DPI has lost its effectiveness. Although tion such as unique packet lengths, sequence lengths, packet
possible, traffic decryption is not a viable countermeasure, ordering, and packet interarrival timings [60]. These features
because decryption not only compromises user privacy but is are then fed to ML algorithms that classify traffic based on the
also computationally expensive and difficult to implement [41]. observed patterns. However, the identifying handshake must be
VPNs in particular can effectively obscure payloads, ports, and learned beforehand and observed in a traffic sample to enable
IP addresses, through encryption, leaving only packet timing detection. Website fingerprinting techniques also tend to be
and size information as potential signal sources. sensitive to changes in network patterns such as packet padding
 and fluctuations in packet round trip time, and it is challenging
B. Encrypted Traffic Classification to know when the models must be updated [61].
 We envision our approach would work in tandem with web-
 To overcome the limitations of port- and payload-based classite fingerprinting and signature-based approaches, allowing for
sification models, researchers have focused on traffic classificacontextual uncertainty-quantified predictions to be made before
tion models that use features from observable encrypted traffic
 or after a handshake has been identified. An example of this is the
metadata [29], [41].
 case where, within some packet capture, website fingerprinting
 Some examples of features constructed from observable metaidentifies a handshake to a malicious website. Our approach
data include features based on simple statistics derived from
 could then also be applied to the connection to determine if any
flows [9], [36], [37], [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48],
 file transfer or new command and control channels occurred after
[49], [50] and wavelet-based features [10], [51]. While trafthe signature was detected.
fic classification methods that use flow-statistic-based features
yield respectable results for isolated application classification in
contained environments, it is uncertain whether they are robust D. Uncertainty in Deep Learning
enough to be utilized in real-world settings. Flow-statistic-based Quantifying the uncertainty of model predictions is an active
features can vary widely between network topologies and are area of research in the ML community. Considerable research
not able to characterize the highly variable and bursty nature of has been focused on improving the ability of classification mod-
Internet traffic [52], [53], [54], [55]. On the other hand, wavelet- els to output calibrated probabilistic predictions and to detect
based features can capture the inherent nonlinearities of Internet OOD examples at test time.
traffic, such as jumps and edges, by providing representations of To be clear, a model’s predictive probabilities are calibrated
the observable metadata from the bidirectional connection that if their confidence (highest predicted probability) matches their
are localized in both time and frequency [56]. Shi et al. [51] are accuracy. In other words, a model should correctly label 90%
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 423

 TABLE I
 DISTANCE-BASED APPROACHES TO OOD DETECTION

of the examples that it categorizes with 90% confidence. Guo include basing OOD detection on the distance to a fixed point in
et al. [69] showed that while shallow neural networks tend to be feature space, representing the embedding of random noise [66]
reasonably well calibrated, deep neural networks are not. Vari- and computing the cosine similarity between the embedding
ous procedures for improving calibration have been proposed, and the last layer weight vectors [68]. Finally, to avoid making
including temperature calibration [69], deep ensembles [70], distributional assumptions, Sun et al. [67] compute the distance
and Bayesian model averaging [71]. In the context of traffic to the kth nearest neighbor.
classification, Nascita et al. [28] evaluate the calibration of Our approach is also based on the distance of test examples
several classifiers in terms of expected calibration error (ECE) to the training data. It is most similar to that in [63], but instead
(binwise average difference between confidence and accuracy) makes use of the relative Mahalanobis distance from [31]. We
and classwise ECE, and their emphasis on trustworthiness and summarize the distance-based approaches, as they are most
explainability makes their article nearest in spirit to this work, similar to ours, in Table I.
although it does address OOD detection.
 We now briefly review some of the major approaches to OOD
detection in the ML literature. The degree to which examples E. Publicly Available VPN-Encrypted Traffic Datasets
are OOD is usually quantified using either the distribution of The development of reproducible research in VPN-encrypted
predicted probabilities for examples or some notion of distance traffic classification is hindered by the shortage of publicly
to the distribution of training data. A detailed review of OOD available VPN-encrypted traffic data. In 2016, the Canadian
detection approaches is given in [72]. Institute for Cybersecurity published the ISCXVPN2016 dataset
 For example, the magnitude of the largest predicted prob- of VPN and non-VPN traffic from 20 applications and seven
ability was used in [73] as a score, encoding the assumption traffic categories [9]. As the first publicly available dataset of
that if a data example is OOD, no class will be assigned a VPN traffic, the ISCXVPN2016 dataset has been used by many
high probability. Other work [74] improved this approach by researchers to train and test ML models. Other datasets with
applying input preprocessing and softmax temperature scaling encrypted traffic have since been released as well, such as the UC
to improve separation between the largest predicted probabilities Davis dataset of QUIC traffic [14], the Orange dataset of HTTPS
of in-distribution and OOD examples. In another approach, traffic [16], as well as multiple IoT and mobile datasets [21],
Malinin and Gales [75] model the output probabilities as a dis- [22], [23], although none of these distinguishes between VPN
tribution and place a Dirichlet prior over them. During training, and non-VPN encrypted data.
they attempt to enforce the assumption that uncertain examples Despite its widespread use, we found that the ISCXVPN2016
produce a flat distribution of predictive probabilities by training dataset contains discrepancies in the VPN captures that comon OOD examples. This idea is improved in [76], which removes promise the integrity of encrypted network traffic classificathe necessity for using OOD examples in training. tion methods evaluated on it (these are in addition to Aceto
 On the other hand, Lee et al. [62] fit class-conditional Gaus- et al.’s [20] observation that 65% of the biflows are due to
sian distributions in the embedding space of a model with soft- BlueStacks and should be filtered out). Upon closer inspection
max output probabilities and compute Mahalanobis distances to of the PCAP files from the VPN captures, we find packets
the Gaussian distributions at test time. A very similar approach with unencrypted payloads. For example, the payload of the
is taken in [63], but in the context of meta-learning and proto- 17th packet in the PCAP file for the ICQ Chat VPN capture in
typical networks. In this case, the authors use the distance to the vpn_icq_chart1b.pcap contains body HTML text saying
closest class prototype as an OOD score. Maciejewski et al. [64] “how are you today,” which can be easily viewed in Wireexamine the effect of covariance types and the dimension of the Shark. We also find PCAP files for VPN-labeled captures to
embedding space on OOD detection performance. To encourage contain multiple connections, although we expect the PCAP
separation between classes, Ming et al. [65] attempt to minimize files for a VPN session to contain a single connection bethe angular distance between a class prototype and examples of tween the VPN client and the VPN server. As an example,
that class and maximize the angular distance different class pro- the vast majority of packets in the vpn_netflix_A.pcap
totypes. They then use the Mahalanobis distance to the closest file are over port 80 to a Netflix IP address, the majorclass to uncover OOD examples. Other interesting approaches ity of packets in vpn_hangouts_audio1.pcap resolve
424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 TABLE II TABLE III
 APPLICATIONS AND TRAFFIC CATEGORIES USED TO GENERATE THE DATASET TOTAL PACKET SIZES, CONNECTIONS, AND TIME PER TRAFFIC CATEGORY IN
 THE DATASET, AS WELL AS THE PERCENTAGE OF EACH CATEGORY THAT IS
 VPN ENCRYPTED

to a Google IP address, and the majority of packets in
vpn_facebook_audio2.pcap resolve to a Facebook IP
address (with a minority fraction also going to Google). These
findings imply that either the network was tapped before the
packets went through the VPN client or the packets were not
encrypted.
 Unencrypted packet payloads will unfairly strengthen traffic
classification methods that leverage packet payloads, such as
DPI or the deep packet approach in [15]. In addition, the presence
of multiple connections per VPN capture will unfairly strengthen
methods that leverage connection information aggregated at the Fig. 1. Diagram of the virtual subnetworks used to capture network traffic.
flow level. The yellow stars denote where the data captures occur. The non-VPN traffic is
 In light of these concerns, we recommend that researchers captured between the client and the client VPN, while the VPN traffic is captured
 between the client VPN and the VPN server.
seeking to utilize the ISCXVPN2016 dataset ensure that their
traffic classification methods do not presume that VPN-labeled
packet payloads are VPN-encrypted. In addition, if their meth- A. Dataset Characteristics
ods for analyzing VPN-encrypted traffic rely on connection information aggregated at the flow level, we recommend that they Our dataset consists of 36.1 GB, 33 711 connections, and
postprocess the packet headers to ensure that all packets appear approximately 272 h of packet capture from five traffic cateunder the same five-tuples, as they would inside a VPN connec- gories, as listed in Table III. Although the File Transfer cattion. Alternatively, one could also replay the VPN-labeled files egory constitutes 90% of the total size of the dataset, it only
through a VPN. contributes to roughly 40% and 5% of the total connections
 Finally, there is also a challenge with respect to consistent and time, respectively. In contrast, the Command & Control
assignment of the traffic categories to the collected PCAP files. category only makes up about 2% of the dataset in size while
As an example, the file skype_video1a.pcap could rea- comprising 40% of the connections and almost 47% of the total
sonably be categorized as VoIP or Web Browsing, but probably time. The Streaming category contributes approximately 7%,
would have fit better with other video-teleconferencing (VTC) 5%, and 2% of the total size, connections, and time, respectively.
PCAPs in its own VTC category. The Chat category contributes less than 1% of the total size,
 In response to the limitations of the ISCXVPN2016 dataset, 4% of the total connections, and 45% of the total time. The
we introduce a supplemental labeled dataset of VPN and non- smallest traffic category, VoIP, makes up around 1% of the
VPN network traffic for public use and to test our extensible ML total size and time and less than 2% of the total connections.
framework. Although each protocol is encrypted by default, we also report the percentage of each category that is VPN-encrypted,
 which varies from 41% to 65% by size. In addition to the
 III. ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC DATASET complete dataset in PCAP form, researchers can also download
 In this section, we describe the characteristics of our dataset2 a pandas dataframe in HDF5 format that contains the connecand outline the process used to produce the dataset. Our dataset tion (biflow) five tuples, packet time stamps, directions, and
is a collection of 36.1 GB of labeled network traffic that contains corresponding label (filename containing application and VPN
both VPN-encrypted and unencrypted flows from the five traffic status).
categories shown in Table II, which is inspired by the categories
in [9] with a few omissions (e.g., P2P and Web Browsing) and B. Network Setup
a new category (Command & Control). See Table VI in the
 To produce the dataset, we begin by creating virtual subnet-
Appendix for the file mappings used to assign class labels.
 works for each traffic category, as shown in Fig. 1. Each subnetwork contains a client, a client DNS server, a VPN client, and a
 VPN server. The Skype subnetwork contains an additional client
 2 The dataset is available for download at: https://www.ll.mit.edu/r-d/datasets/ to allow for bidirectional chat. The video streaming and web
vpnnonvpn-network-application-traffic-dataset-vnat browsing subnetworks are connected to the Internet to enable
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 425

access to Firefox, Chrome, YouTube, Netflix, and Vimeo. As TABLE IV
 FLOW STATISTIC FEATURES CALCULATED OVER EACH TIME WINDOW
shown in Fig. 1, VPN traffic is captured between the VPN client
and the VPN server. Separately, non-VPN traffic is captured
between the VPN client and the application layer.

C. Data Generation
 Once the network setup is complete, we generate the dataset
for each traffic category individually to ensure data purity. All
traffic is captured using tcpdump and stored in the PCAP format.
Filename-to-category mappings are provided in Table VI in the
Appendix.
 The Streaming category includes Vimeo, Netflix, and
YouTube traffic generated by team members watching videos
 TABLE V
on each platform. The VoIP category is composed of VoIP WAVELET-BASED FEATURES CALCULATED OVER EACH TIME WINDOW
audio generated by team members having conversations with
one another using Zoiper. The Chat category consists of Skype
Chat traffic generated with bots that replay actual chats from
publicly available logs from Gitter.im chat rooms [77].
 The Command & Control category includes SSH and RDP
traffic. RDP traffic is generated by team members actively
performing tasks, such as editing Word documents, over an
RDP connection. To emulate SSH traffic, we created a script to
randomly sample 2–20 commands with replacement from a predetermined list of 17 commands. For each command, it samples a
random wait time between 1 and 60 seconds. Once it is finished
executing each command and wait time, it waits 60 seconds B. Feature Construction
before repeating the entire process from the beginning. For each 40.96-second interval, we compute aggregate statis-
 The File Transfer category contains SFTP, RSYNC, and SCP tics (such as total, average, maximum, etc.) for flow features such
traffic. To emulate users performing file transfers, we created as interarrival times and time spent as active or idle. We compute
scripts that randomly choose a file out of a list of 15 files of statistics both for the flow’s forward and backward direction.
sizes ranging from 1 kB to 1 GB. Then, they randomly decide We note here that in our current implementation, “forward”
whether to send the chosen file to or from a remote server. After and “backward” are arbitrary; the first observed packet in the
executing the file transfer, the scripts wait 60 seconds before connection is designated as “forward” for the remainder of the
selecting a new file. connection. The full set of aggregate statistics features are listed
 in Table IV and are very similar to those in [9].
 IV. METHODS We also generate wavelet-based features from the 40.96-
 In this section, we discuss the features that we used as model second intervals using the discrete wavelet transform, as done
input, the specifics of our model architecture, and how we define by Shi et al. [51]. We select the Haar basis as the mother
OOD scores. wavelet because it produces the maximum-energy-to-Shannonentropy ratio. Before calculating the wavelet-based features,
 we extract the detail coefficients from frequency bands 0–12
A. Data Preprocessing of the wavelet-transformed connection sizes in the forward and
 We group packets into connections based on the five tuples backward directions using the PyWavelets Python package [78].
consisting of the source IP address, destination IP address, Then, we use the detail coefficients of each band to calculate the
source port, destination port, and protocol using the dpkt3 Python wavelet-based features from the connection sizes in the forward
module. We split the connections into 40.96-second intervals4 and backward directions. The wavelet-based features include the
and discard any intervals containing fewer than 20 packets. For relative wavelet energy, Shannon entropy, and absolute means
each 40.96-second interval, we obtain the packet time stamps, and standard deviations of the detail coefficients, as shown
payload sizes, and directions discretized into 0.01-second bins. in Table V. The absolute means and standard deviations of
After this preprocessing, the data collection contains 1675 Com- the detail coefficients are log-transformed to induce symmetry
mand & Control examples, 10 498 Chat, 851 File Transfer, 1827 because the original distributions of these features are heavily
Streaming, and 243 VoIP examples. right-skewed. See the Appendix for details on how to calculate
 the wavelet-based features.
 In total, this data pipeline collapses the (up to) gigabytes of
 3 https://github.com/kbandla/dpkt network traffic that could flow across 40.96 seconds into two
 4 A discussion of our selection of 40.96-second intervals and 0.01-second bins vectors of length 4096 that are then reduced to 129 features
is provided in the Appendix. per time window. Some of these features are also correlated
426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

and could be winnowed (data not shown) to further sparsen the
 Algorithm 1: Train.
signal.
 Require: Xtrain , ytrain , Nepisodes , Nquery , Strain , fθ
 for 1 ≤ b ≤ Nepisodes do
C. Classification Model
 Sample support {xks }Ss=1 train
 for each class k and query
 Nquery
 Prototypical networks are neural networks that compute examples {xi }i=1 from Xtrain
class probabilities using the distances to a set of the so-called Compute embeddings fθ (xi ) and fθ (xks )
prototypical examples [30], rather than by applying a softmax 1
 Strain k
 Compute prototypes ck = Strain i=s fθ (xs ).
activation function to the output layer. The neural network that Calculate class probabilities as in (1) where each dk is
forms the base of the prototypical network is usually referred to the Euclidean distance
as an embedding function. We denote the embedding function Compute the gradient of the loss over the query
as fθ : RD → RE , where D is the dimension of the feature examples; update parameters θ
space, E is the dimension of the embedding space, and θ are end for
weights to be learned. We assume access to a set X = {xi } Ensure: fθ
of examples with corresponding labels yi ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}. We
will use the notation Xtrain , Xcal , and Xtest to refer to partitions of
the dataset. The prototype for each class k, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, which
 where Σ† denotes the pseudoinverse of Σ. Using the pseudoinwe denote as ck , is simply the mean of the embedding of a few
 verse rather than the matrix inverse handles the case in which
(S) examples of the class (known as the support examples), that
  the covariance matrix is singular. For a dataset consisting of K
is, ck = S1 Ss=1 fθ (xks ). Here, the superscript k indicates the classes, the relative Mahalanobis distance to class k is defined to
examples come from class k. be the Mahalanobis distance to class k minus the Mahalanobis
 For a given observation, the class probabilities are calculated distance to the overall data distribution [31]. That is
by applying the softmax activation function to the distances bek
tween the class prototypes and the embedding of the observation. Mrel (x; μk , μ0 , Σ, Σ0 ) = M (x; μk , Σ) − M (x; μ0 , Σ0 ) (3)
Specifically, the probability of class k for input example xi is
 where μk is the mean of class k, μ0 is the mean of the dataset as
 exp(−dk (fθ (xi ), ck )) a whole, Σ is the covariance matrix of each class k, and Σ0 is the
 P (yi = k|xi ) =  (1) To be clear, μk =
 k exp(−dk (fθ (xi ), ck ))
 covariance
 S matrix of the datasetas a whole.
 1 k 1 K S k
 K s=1 f θ (x s ) and μ 0 = KS k=1 s=1 f θ (xs ), while
where each dk is a distance function on the embedding space.
 K S
 In our application, we use an embedding model with four 1     k    T
fully connected hidden layers each containing 64 neurons with Σ= fθ xs − μk fθ xks − μk (4)
 KS s=1
 k=1
rectified linear unit activations. We perform 25% dropout on the
weights connecting the second and third and the third and fourth and
layers. K S
 1     k    T
 We learn our model’s parameters using the episodic training Σ0 = fθ xs − μ0 fθ xks − μ0 . (5)
paradigm [30]. In episodic training, for each of Nepisode episodes, KS s=1
 k=1
we sample Nquery query examples and Strain support examples.
The prototypes are computed from the support examples, and Ren et al. [31] argue that subtracting out M (x; μ0 , Σ0 ) rewe compute the cross-entropy loss over the query examples. We moves the outlier score contribution along dimensions that are
summarize our training procedure in Algorithm 1. not discriminative between in-distribution and OOD examples.
 Throughout this article, we set Nepisode to 20 000, Nquery to This is especially important for scenarios in which a large
512, and Strain to 5. As in [30], the choice of squared Euclidean number of dimensions are not discriminative.
distance during training roughly corresponds to spherical Gaus- After training is complete, we use a support set of maximum
sian densities in RE ; this motivates our use of the Mahalanobis size Scal = 100 sampled from the training data (or all the training
distance for OOD scoring. data if there are fewer than 100 examples) to fit the means and full
 covariance matrices used in the relative Mahalanobis distance.
 While the relative Mahalanobis distance allows us to rank the
D. OOD Scores
 examples in the test set according to how outlying they are, it
 We now describe how we obtain OOD uncertainty measures does not immediately suggest a threshold. To convert the raw
from the prototypical network. Our OOD score is based on distance into an interpretable score, we fit a univariate kernel
the Mahalanobis distance. The Mahalanobis distance is used to density estimate (KDE) to the relative Mahalanobis distances
measure the distance between a point and a distribution. Given (for each class) computed on a set of held-out in distribution
a point x and a distribution with mean μ and covariance matrix examples Xcal . The density estimate will be used at test time to
Σ, the Mahalanobis distance between x and the distribution define an outlier score between 0 and 1 by integrating under the
is density to determine the proportion of calibration examples that
  are more outlying than the test point. We refer to this process as
 M (x; μ, Σ) = (x − μ)T Σ† (x − μ) (2) calibration and summarize our procedure in Algorithm 2.
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 427

 Algorithm 2: Calibrate.
 Require: Xtrain , ytrain , Xcal , ycal , Scal , fθ
 Sample support {xks }Ss=1 cal
 from the training data for each
 class k
 Compute μk , for each class k, μ0 , Σ, and Σ0 as defined
 in Section IV-D with S = Scal
 for 1 ≤ k ≤ K do 
 Compute Σk = S1cal Ss=1 cal
 (fθ (xks ) − μk )(fθ (xks )
 T
 −μk ) (used only in testing phase)
 Compute relative Mahalanobis distance for calibration
 k
 examples Mrel (fθ (xki ))
 Fit Gaussian kernel density estimate Gk to the set of
 k Fig. 2. Micro F1-score of the model against the fraction of data used to train
 relative Mahalanobis distances Mrel (fθ (xki )) the model. We plot the average F1-score over ten trials. The error bars indicate
 end for one standard deviation.
 Ensure: Gk , μk , μ0 , Σ, Σ0 , Σk

 Algorithm 3: Test.
 Require: Gk , μk , μ0 , Σ, Σ0 , Σk xtest , fθ
 Compute predicted class k ∗ as in (1) where
 dk = M (x; μk , diag(Σk ))
 k∗
 Compute r = Mrel  ∞test ))
 (fθ (x
 Compute p-value p = r Gk∗ (r )dr
 Ensure: 1 − p

 At test time, to compute a p-value for the null hypothesis that
a test sample is in-distribution, we calculate the area under the Fig. 3. ECE of the model against the fraction of data used to train the model.
 We plot the average F1-score over ten trials. The error bars indicate one standard
density corresponding to the predicted class for distances larger deviation.
than the relative Mahalanobis distance of the test point. To maintain the convention that large scores indicate OOD examples, we
take one minus the p-value as our OOD score. We summarize ECE are shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Clearly, the model’s perforthis procedure in Algorithm 3. The computational overhead of mance improves as we increase the fraction of data provided,
the OOD approach is small. Computing the covariance matrices both for F1-score and ECE. It is interesting to note that we
on the calibration data takes O(E 2 ), where E is the dimension achieve quite good performance with only a limited number of
of the embedding space. Computing the relative Mahalanobis training examples. To call out a specific example, using 10%5
distances is also O(E 2 ). Finally, computing each p-value from of the training data corresponds to 118 examples of Command
the KDE involves |Xcal | evaluations of the normal cumulative & Control, 945 examples of Chat, 66 examples of File Transfer,
distribution function. 143 examples of Streaming, and just 19 examples of VoIP. Even
 with only this very small training set, we are able to obtain
 a micro F1-score of nearly 0.96. In addition, the calibration
 V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS error using 10% of the data for training is about 0.04, which
 In order to validate our framework, we perform a series of indicates that the model’s confidence is fairly consistent with
increasingly challenging tests for our ML framework. its accuracy. Marginal gains in calibration (lower ECE values)
 can be achieved via neural network ensembles as in [25] (data
 not shown); we speculate that the relatively shallow network,
A. Model Performance on the Dataset
 dropout, and prototypical network architecture helped to enable
 First, we train the model on the provided dataset using an the low ECE values. Fig. 4 depicts the average confusion matrix
increasing stratified fraction of the dataset and compute the F1- for each of the ten training runs using an 80/20 train/test split,
scores (harmonic average of precision and recall) on a held-out indicating that the model performs well in every category, the
test set (20% of the data). We also compute the model’s ECE worst confusion being 3% of File Transfer examples being
as a way to measure the quality of its probabilistic forecasts. incorrectly predicted as VoIP.
The ECE measures the discrepancy between a model’s predicted
probability and the observed accuracy of those predictions. For 5 Technically, only 8% of the data is used for training, as 20% of the 10% is
more details, see [69]. For each training dataset size considered, reserved internally by our implementation for generating the p-value distribuwe repeat the experiment ten times. The results for F1-score and tions.
428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 Fig. 5. Model uncertainties for SMB from an enterprise network before (using
 a pretrained model from our dataset) and after retraining (adding 91 labeled
 examples).

Fig. 4. Average confusion matrix for ten runs using a randomized 80/20 0.95 on average.6 Thus, even though the YouTube traffic was
train/test split (FT indicates File Transfer). collected on a different network than the one that the training
 data came from, the model was still able to recognize its class
 (Streaming). This is an encouraging result, although we do not
B. Model Performance on UTMobileNet2021 rely on this transferability holding true for all applications in the
 training set, as will be demonstrated next.
 In order to evaluate our approach on a greater variety of To answer the second question, we collected data from three
labels, we evaluated our model on the UTMobileNet2021 applications that do not appear in the training data (Avaya,
encrypted traffic dataset, which contains data from 17 unique Samba (SMB), and the Code42 automated file backup program).
traffic applications. Using the above settings, we found that our In our labeling schema, we consider Avaya to be a VoIP applicaapproach retained 80% accuracy across all applications using tion and SMB and Code42 to be File Transfer. We collected 123
an 80/20 train/test split, which is on par with their best reported examples of Avaya, 141 examples of SMB, and 202 examples of
results [22]. We also tested the effect of adding multiple labels to Code42. As before, we trained on 80% of our training dataset (for
nonoverlapping applications from our own dataset, and we found ten trials) and tested on the new applications. Avaya was easily
that for 5, 10, 15, and 20 application labels, our approach had recognized by the model as VoIP traffic, correctly labeling all
overall accuracies of 93%, 87%, 80%, and 80%, respectively, 123 examples in each trial, although the model was less certain
indicating that our per-application performance degrades a bit about them, assigning about half of them OOD scores above
but remains competitive. For more details, see Table VII in the 0.95. SMB and Code42, however, were not initially recognized
Appendix. as File Transfer. Encouragingly, the model tended to give these
 examples a high OOD score. Specifically, across the ten trials, an
 average of 78% of the SMB traffic received an OOD score above
C. Model Performance in a New Environment 0.95, and an average of about 63% of the file backup program
 Having established the “usual” ML metrics, we then turn to a received an OOD score above 0.95.
more challenging problem of validation outside of the training To see whether the model could learn to classify SMB and
dataset. To do these experiments, we used WireShark to capture Code42 as File Transfer, given a few training examples, we
network traffic on a live enterprise network and then tested investigate retraining the model. For the case of SMB, we add 91
our model on this new traffic. We consider three increasingly examples to our training set and test on the remaining 50. After
challenging scenarios. First, can the model recognize traffic retraining, the model is able to correctly classify an average of
from an existing application in an existing category? Second, can 92% of the test samples. In addition, the OOD scores are much
the model recognize new applications in an existing category? lower. After retraining, only an average of 10% of examples had
Finally, can the model detect data that is OOD (comes from a OOD scores above 0.95 (left side of Fig. 5). Fig. 5 also pronew category)? vides the predictive confidences before and after retraining with
 To answer the first question, we collected 40 additional in- examples of SMB, which refers to the probability associated
stances of YouTube (an application in the Streaming category). with the class prediction (the highest probability class among
We trained the model on 80% of our training dataset and then known classes). The distributions exhibit high confidences both
tested on the YouTube data. We repeated the experiment ten before and after retraining. This indicates that it is important
times. The results were quite good. For the YouTube traffic, the
model predicted the correct class 40 out of 40 times in nine 6 We have selected OOD scores above 0.95 as a threshold of interest, as it
of the trials and 39 out of 40 times in the other trial, only corresponds to a p-value of 0.05 or lower for rejecting the null hypothesis that
predicting one of the examples to have an OOD score above the test samples are in-distribution.
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 429

Fig. 6. Model uncertainties for Code42 from an enterprise network before
(using a pretrained model from our dataset) and after retraining (adding 42
labeled examples).
 Fig. 8. Empirical cumulative distribution function of OOD scores on a held-out
 set of 116 Zoom examples (OOD data) and a held-out set of in-distribution
 data. OOD scores are produced using the squared Mahalanobis distance and
 χ2 distribution as well as the relative Mahalanobis distance and a KDE fit on
 calibration examples.

 indicating that these errors can easily be screened out due to their
 model uncertainty. It perhaps indicates that Zoom traffic behaves
 differently depending upon its mode of usage (screen sharing,
 video, or audio-only); it may be possible to cluster self-similar
 OOD examples in the embedding space to assist analysts with
 new labeling.

Fig. 7. Distribution of Zoom OOD scores on a held-out validation set of 128 D. Model Performance on Padded Packets
examples (sum of ten runs) using the pretrained model from our dataset (“Before
Training”) and after retraining with 195 labeled examples (“After Training”). In order to address any concerns about the model’s resilience
 to encryption protocols that pad packets to be of uniform size, we
 repeated the initial testing on the collected dataset but masked the
to not rely solely on the predictive confidences for uncertainty
 sizes of all packets to be 1500 bytes before feature generation.
quantification, as they are essentially meaningless when applied
 Upon retraining ten times with 80/20 train/test splits, the model
to OOD test examples.
 retained an average F1-score of 0.971 ± 0.008 on the dataset.
 In the case of Code42, we add 42 examples to our training set
 This is a marginal drop from the raw unpadded data at 0.982 ±
and test on the remaining 160. The model now correctly classifies
 0.004. These results indicate that our model is not much affected
an average of 98% of the test samples. As with SMB, the OOD
 by the effective removal of packet size information. In addition,
scores are now much lower as well, with only an average of
 this result presents initial evidence that packet padding alone
5% with scores above 0.95. In Fig. 6, we show OOD score and
 may not offer substantial privacy benefits, at least at the level of
predictive confidence before and after training with examples of
 granularity of traffic categories.
Code42.
 To answer the final question, we collected 323 examples of
Zoom, which is a new application of a new category one could E. Baseline OOD Performance
label as VTC. Since VTC is a new class, we expect that the Finally, we compare our OOD approach to a baseline apmodel will give high OOD scores to the Zoom examples. This proach. In our baseline, rather than fitting a KDE on a calibraended up being the case, as an average of 78% of examples tion set to compute an outlier score, we note that the squared
had an OOD score above 0.95. We then retrained our model Mahalanobis distance follows a χ2 distribution with 64 (the
with 195 Zoom examples added to the training set (with the dimension of our embedding space) degrees of freedom. We
new VTC label). After retraining, the fraction of OOD scores use this distribution to compute p-values for new observations.
above 0.95 is reduced to 26%. Fig. 7 depicts the distribution of As before, our OOD score is simply one minus the p-value. This
OOD scores before and after training on a held-out validation assumes, of course, that the embeddings are actually normally
set of 128 Zoom examples; the post-training results are more distributed according to the model in Section IV. In Fig. 8, we
uniform, as expected. Across ten trials, the model correctly evaluate our model on a held-out test set of in distribution data
labeled an average of 73% of the validation examples as Zoom, as well as 116 examples of Zoom traffic (which is OOD).
generally confusing the errors as VoIP. We note that this accuracy We first examine the in-distribution data. Notice that the
is lower than the previous examples; however, about 97% of the OOD scores based on the squared Mahalanobis distance and χ2
incorrectly labeled examples still have OOD scores above 0.95, distribution tend to be either close to 0 or close to 1. This stands
430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

 We finally comment that although our dataset does not comprehensively capture the diversity of Internet applications, it was
 enough to “generate intuition” for a generic ML framework
 to predict time-windowed encrypted application traffic on a
 different network, and we have demonstrated the importance of
 treating uncertainty as a first-class feature to enable a systematic
 extension of the dataset onto other networks or application
 categories of interest.
Fig. 9. Study in the sensitivity of the overall ML accuracy with respect to
different choices of window length T and three time-bin sizes Δt, 0.1, 0.01, and VII. CONCLUSION
0.001 second. Note the semilog x-scale.
 In this article, we presented a labeled dataset of VPNencrypted and unencrypted network traffic to facilitate ML appliin contrast to the scores produced by the relative Mahalanobis cations seeking to leverage packet size and timing information
distance and the KDE, which are roughly uniform. Thus, if we to predict the traffic’s most likely application categories. We
set the OOD detection threshold to α, then we expect to filter out discussed potential issues and possible workarounds for a pop-
(1 − α)% of the in-distribution data, when using the approach ular alternative dataset, which motivated the organization of our
proposed in this article. dataset. We showed an ML framework leveraging wavelet-based
 For OOD data, both the approaches tend to assign highs and statistical features on discrete sampled time windows in a
scores, for the most part. The squared-Mahalanobis-distance- prototypical network architecture that achieved high F1-scores
based score again tends to be either very close to 1 or very close (0.98) on the labeled dataset. Furthermore, we showed that
to 0, while the relative-Mahalanobis-based score varies more the architecture could be trained on a small random fraction
smoothly. of the dataset, achieving an accuracy of 0.96 on VOIP using
 fewer than 14 min of data. In addition, we demonstrated low
 VI. DISCUSSION calibration errors for predictive confidence (3%). We also tested
 the model on application traffic (YouTube and a new VoIP
 The results of the previous section appear very encouragapplication) from an enterprise network and found it extended
ing, particularly since: 1) the framework performs effectively,
 accurately.
achieving high accuracy without requiring rigorous feature opti-
 We used a technique for constructing an OOD score based on
mizations and on only timing and size information; 2) the dataset
 p-values of the relative Mahalanobis distance on in-distribution
and model extended in part to another network for YouTube and
 data to reliably indicate model degradation in a series of in-
VoIP; and 3) the model “degraded gracefully” when confronted
 creasingly challenging experiments. In all the cases, the model
with novel application data and was quick to retrain on limited
 retrained quickly with relatively few examples to learn to incordata. We envision this framework to be used in a tool that
 porate the new applications into a known category or assign them
would allow network analysts to systematically build insight
 to a new one. We additionally demonstrated that the framework
for applications of interest in conjunction with other analysis
 retains very high performance (F1-score of 0.97) even when all
techniques (malware signatures, website fingerprinting, etc.) to
 packet sizes are uniform, such as occurs in encryption protocols
supplement where they fail.
 that ensure all packets are padded to the same size before
 Shorter window lengths could hypothetically provide more
 encryption.
label opportunities over the entire observation period, but arbi-
 Future work should incorporate the identification of concurtrarily short window lengths would reduce accuracy (additional
 rent applications inside a VPN (multilabel predictions), as our
analysis is provided in Fig. 9). Longer window lengths within a
 approach currently only predicts one class per time interval.
VPN would also be more likely to merge multiple application
 Another interesting avenue of research would be to look for
types into the same sample, and our approach only predicts one
 structure in OOD examples, perhaps via clustering, and suggest
application per time window. We also note that this framework
 possible new classes to the user. Finally, future work should
does not leverage continuity between time windows as of yet,
 consider adversarial methods that attack the framework, such as
and certain connections can tend to be shorter (loading a web
 flooding connections with dummy packets, re-encoding traffic
page) or longer (streaming movies).
 through other protocols, or adversarial ML techniques that target
 Our approach can also be attacked and degraded by maboth the accuracy and the uncertainty scores.
nipulating the traffic, e.g., by adding “cover packets” to flood
connections or mask timings, re-encoding traffic through another protocol [79] or by leveraging adversarial ML [80], [81]. APPENDIX
However, our approach still retains an advantage in that it forces FILENAME-TO-CATEGORY MAPPINGS
an adversary to work harder to obfuscate the nature of their We use the mappings shown in Table VI to assign class labels
connections. We also note that our approach could be used to to each PCAP file. If any of the words in the “File Keyword”
“red-team” censorship evasion development by incorporating column occurs in the column name, then we assign the label in
uncertainty in addition to the standard accuracy metrics. the left column.
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 431

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 FILENAME-TO-CATEGORY LABELING SCHEME UTMOBILENET2021 MULTIPLE CLASSES’ STUDY

 WAVELET-BASED FEATURES
 This section provides details on how to calculate the waveletbased features extracted from the wavelet-transformed connection sizes in the forward and backward directions for frequency
bands 0–12. The wavelet-based features include the relative
wavelet energy, Shannon entropy, and absolute means and standard deviations of the detail coefficients.
 The continuous wavelet transform coefficients are defined as where Ek is the energy of frequency band k
 
 T
 1 t−b Ek = |dn,k |2 , for n = 1, 2, . . . , N (8)
 d(a, b) =  x(t)ψ dt (6) n
 |a| 0 a
 and Etotal is the total energy of the signal after wavelet decomwhere x(t) is the time-dependent signal over the observation position
period [0, T ] (for instance, bytes transferred in a flow during a 
sample interval), ψ( t−b a ) is the wavelet function, a is the scale Etotal = Ek , for k = 0, 1, . . . , K . (9)
factor, and b is the translation factor. This article employs the dis- k
crete wavelet transformation, which restricts a and b to discrete
values that balance temporal and frequency resolution while Wavelet Shannon Entropy
reducing computational burden. We employ the shift-invariant For each frequency band k, the wavelet Shannon entropy Sk
(stationary) wavelet transformation to ensure that the resulting is given by
features are insensitive to signal translations, otherwise known 
as the “algorithm a-trous” [82], [83]. Sk = − pn log(pn ), for n = 1, 2, . . . , N (10)
 The time-dependent signal, x(t), required for the wavelet n
transform is represented by a discrete vector over an observation where pn is the fraction of energy of the nth detail coefficient
period from [0, T ] that is discretized into N smaller time bins
of width Δt. Within each Δt time interval, all of the packet d2n,k
 pn = . (11)
statistics are aggregated. For instance, let tj and yj be the packet Ek
time stamp and size for packet j in a series of J flow-aggregated
packets with t0 = 0, respectively. Then, a vector version of x(t), Detail Coefficient Statistics
appropriate for the wavelet transform, is defined by xn (t), where For each frequency band k, the absolute mean of the detail
T = N Δt, n ∈ [0, N − 1], and coefficients μk is given by
 J
  1, nΔt ≤ tj < (n + 1)Δt 1 
xn (t) = yj χj (t) ; χj (t) = . μk = |dn,k |, for n = 1, 2, . . . , N (12)
 N n
 j=0
 0, else
 and the standard deviation of the detail coefficients σn is given
We enforce that the length of the vector xn be an integer power of by
2 (N = 2K for some K) by judiciously selecting Δt and T or by
reflecting the signal in our pipeline. Applying (6) for fixed values 1 
of a ∈ 2k and b ∈ xn gives a rectangular coefficient matrix of σk = (μk − dn,k )2 , for n = 1, 2, . . . , N . (13)
 N n
the form dn,k , where n ∈ [0, N − 1] indexes the coefficients in
time and k ∈ [0, K] indexes the coefficients in frequency band. Fig. 9 depicts the results of a range of experiments using three
 time bins (Δt of 1, 10, and 100 ms) and variable time windows,
 Relative Wavelet Energy T . The general trend is that the longer the sample window, T ,
 the more accurate the model. However, this has the tradeoff that
 For each frequency band k, the relative wavelet energy ρk is longer windows require longer vectors, particularly for small
given by time bins (note that we capped the number of wavelet bands
 Ek at 13 to limit feature-computation requirements). The second-
 ρk = , for k = 0, 1, . . . , K (7) to-rightmost blue datapoint represents (Δt, T )=(0.01, 40.96),
 Etotal
432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 5, NO. 1, JANUARY 2024

the selected value for the analysis in this article, as this neared [14] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
the maximum accuracy and used an acceptable vector length for just a few labels: A semisupervised approach using sampled packets,”
 in Proc. 19th Ind. Conf. Adv. Data Mining—Appl. Theor. Aspects, 2019,
computing the wavelet features. pp. 28–42.
 [15] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
 “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
 UTMOBILEDATANET2021 STUDY using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
 Table VII provides the random classes used to study the effects 2020.
 [16] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an
of adding additional classes on the accuracy of our model. We increasingly encrypted web,” in Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS/Int. Conf. Meas.
note that we did not attempt to optimize which applications Model. Comput. Syst., 2021, pp. 23–24.
were chosen for the few-application study, and that the applica- [17] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
tions selected are random subsample of the UTMobileNet2021 Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
dataset [22], with the exception of the 20-class case, which uses [18] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap, “MIMETIC: Mobile
three classes from our dataset (zoiper5, rdp, and ssh). We also encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 165, 2019, Art. no. 106944.
note that Heng et al.’s paper [22] appears to indicate that there [19] Y. Wang, X. Yun, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and X. Liu, “A multi-scale feature
are only 16 classes in this dataset, but this excludes their Skype attention approach to network traffic classification and its model expladata, which accounts for the “extra” label. nation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 875–889,
 Jun. 2022.
 [20] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescap, “DISTILLER: En-
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT crypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,” J.
 Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183/184, 2021, Art. no. 102985.
 Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations [21] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescap, “MIRAGE:
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in Proc. 4th Int.
 Conf. Comput., Commun. Secur., 2019, pp. 1–8.
necessarily reflect the views of U.S. Cyber Command. [22] Y. Heng, V. Chandrasekhar, and J. G. Andrews, “UTMobileNetTraf-
 Distribution Statement: Approved for public release. Distri- fic2021: A labeled public network traffic dataset,” IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 3,
bution is unlimited. no. 3, pp. 156–160, Sep. 2021.
 [23] F. Zaki, A. Gani, H. Tahaei, S. Furnell, and N. B. Anuar, “Grano-GT: A
 granular ground truth collection tool for encrypted browser-based internet
 REFERENCES traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 184, 2021, Art. no. 107617.
 [24] K. Highnam, K. Arulkumaran, Z. Hanif, and N. R. Jennings, “BETH
 [1] HTTPS Encryption on the Web, Nov. 2021. Accessed: Nov. dataset: Real cybersecurity data for anomaly detection research,” in Proc.
 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/ Workshop Uncertainty Robustness Deep Learn., 2021, p. 8.
 https/overview?hl=en [25] K. E. Brown, F. A. Bhuiyan, and D. A. Talbert, “Uncertainty quantification
 [2] E. Ahlm, J. D’Hoinne, L. Orans, and A. Hils, “Predicts 2017: Net- in multimodal ensembles of deep learners,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Flairs Conf.,
 work and gateway security,” Gartner Res., Stamford, CT, USA, Tech. 2020, pp. 422–427.
 Rep., 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/ [26] D. Engel et al., “UQ methods for HPDA and cybersecurity models, data,
 3542117/predicts-2017-network-and-gateway-security and use cases,” Pacific Northwest Nat. Lab., Richland, WA, USA, Tech.
 [3] C. Warfield and J. Hall, “WatchGuard threat lab reports 91.5% Rep. PNNL-24901, 2015.
 of malware arrived over encrypted connections in Q2 2021,” [27] M. C. Darling and D. J. Stracuzzi, “Toward uncertainty quantification
 Sep. 2021. Accessed: Nov. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www. for supervised classification,” Sandia Nat. Lab., Albuquerque, NM, USA,
 watchguard.com/wgrd-news/press-releases/watchguard-threat-lab- Tech. Rep. SAND2018-0032, 2018.
 reports-915-malware-arrived-over-encrypted [28] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescap,
 [4] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. Van Goethem, and W. Joosen, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and improving
 “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. Netw. multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Man-
 Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1–15. age., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
 [5] N. P. Hoang, A. A. Niaki, P. Gill, and M. Polychronakis, “Domain name [29] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network trafencryption is not enough: Privacy leakage via IP-based website finger- fic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM Comput.
 printing,” 2021, arXiv:2102.08332. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, 2021.
 [6] Obfuscated servers, Nov. 2021. Accessed: Nov. 15, 2021. [Online]. Avail- [30] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
 able: https://nordvpn.com/features/obfuscated-servers/ learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 4077–
 [7] T. Perrin, “The noise protocol framework,” Jul. 2018. Accessed: Nov. 4087.
 15, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.noiseprotocol.org/noise.html [31] J. Ren, S. Fort, J. Liu, A. Guha Roy, S. Padhy, and B. Lakshminarayanan,
 [8] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Machine learning based “A simple fix to Mahalanobis distance for improving near-OOD detection,”
 encrypted traffic classification: Identifying SSH and Skype,” in Proc. IEEE in Proc. Uncertainty Deep Learn. Workshop/Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021,
 Symp. Comput. Intell. Secur. Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–8. pp. 1–8.
 [9] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Char- [32] S. Kent, “IP encapsulating security payload (ESP),” Internet Requests
 acterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features,” in Comments, RFC Editor, Tech. Rep. 4303, 2005. [Online]. Available:
 Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414. https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4303
[10] Y. Liang, Y. Xie, X. Fei, X. Tan, and H. Ma, “Content recognition of [33] M. C. Tschantz, S. Afroz, and V. Paxson, “SoK: Towards grounding
 network traffic using wavelet transform and CNN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. censorship circumvention in empiricism,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Mach. Learn. Cyber Secur., 2019, pp. 224–238. Privacy, 2016, pp. 914–933.
[11] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, and A. Taherkordi, “Deep learning for network [34] N. A. Khater and R. E. Overill, “Network traffic classification techniques
 traffic monitoring and analysis (NTMA): A survey,” Comput. Commun., and challenges,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Digit. Inf. Manage., 2015,
 vol. 170, pp. 19–41, 2021. pp. 43–48.
[12] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted [35] A. C. Callado et al., “A survey on internet traffic identification,” IEEE
 traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 37–52, 3rd Quarter 2009.
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat., 2017, pp. 43–48. [36] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service
[13] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classi- mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic
 fication using convolutional neural network for representation learning,” classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2004,
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717. pp. 135–148.
JORGENSEN et al.: EXTENSIBLE MACHINE LEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC APPLICATION LABELING 433

[37] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate identification of [61] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical
 network applications,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Passive Act. Netw Meas., evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 2005, pp. 41–54. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2014, pp. 263–274.
[38] L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano, “nDPI: Open-source [62] K. Lee, K. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Shin, “A simple unified framework for
 high-speed deep packet inspection,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile detecting out-of-distribution samples and adversarial attacks,” in Proc.
 Comput. Conf., 2014, pp. 617–622. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, vol. 31, pp. 7167–7177.
[39] S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and D. Wang, “Accurate, scalable in-network [63] K.-C. Wang, P. Vicol, E. Triantafillou, C.-C. Liu, and R. Zemel, “Out-ofidentification of P2P traffic using application signatures,” in Proc. 13th distribution detection in few-shot classification,” 2020. [Online]. Avail-
 Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2004, pp. 512–521. able: https://openreview.net/forum?id=BygNAa4YPH
[40] T. Choi et al., “Content-aware internet application traffic measurement and [64] H. Maciejewski, T. Walkowiak, and K. Szyc, “Out-of-distribution detecanalysis,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., 2004, pp. 511– tion in high-dimensional data using mahalanobis distance—Critical anal-
 524. ysis,” in Computational Science, D. Groen, C. de Mulatier, M. Paszynski,
[41] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Identifying encrypted malware traffic with V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, J. J. Dongarra, and P. M.A. Sloot, Eds. Cham,
 contextual flow data,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur., 2016, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 262–275.
 pp. 35–46. [65] Y. Ming, Y. Sun, O. Dia, and Y. Li, “CIDER: Exploiting hyperspherical
[42] A. McGregor, M. Hall, P. Lorier, and J. Brunskill, “Flow clustering using embeddings for out-of-distribution detection,” 2022, arXiv:2203.04450.
 machine learning techniques,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Passive Act. Netw. [66] H. Huang, Z. Li, L. Wang, S. Chen, B. Dong, and X. Zhou, “Feature
 Meas., 2004, pp. 205–214. space singularity for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. Workshop
[43] S. Zander, T. Nguyen, and G. Armitage, “Automated traffic classification Artif. Intell. Saf., 2021, pp. 1–9.
 and application identification using machine learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. [67] Y. Sun, Y. Ming, X. Zhu, and Y. Li, “Out-of-distribution detection with
 Local Comput. Netw. 30th Anniversary, 2005, pp. 250–257. deep nearest neighbors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 20827–
[44] W. Li, M. Canini, A. W. Moore, and R. Bolla, “Efficient application iden- 20840.
 tification and the temporal and spatial stability of classification schema,” [68] E. Techapanurak, M. Suganuma, and T. Okatani, “Hyperparameter-free
 Comput. Netw., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 790–809, 2009. out-of-distribution detection using cosine similarity,” in Proc. Asian Conf.
[45] R. Yuan, Z. Li, X. Guan, and L. Xu, “An SVM-based machine learning Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 53–69.
 method for accurate internet traffic classification,” Inf. Syst. Front., vol. 12, [69] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration of modern
 no. 2, pp. 149–156, 2010. neural networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 1321–
[46] M. Soysal and E. G. Schmidt, “Machine learning algorithms for accurate 1330.
 flow-based network traffic classification: Evaluation and comparison,” [70] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
 Perform. Eval., vol. 67, no. 6, pp. 451–467, 2010. predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[47] H. Zhang, G. Lu, M. T. Qassrawi, Y. Zhang, and X. Yu, “Feature selection Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6405–6416.
 for optimizing traffic classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 35, no. 12, [71] A. G. Wilson and P. Izmailov, “Bayesian deep learning and a probabilistic
 pp. 1457–1471, 2012. perspective of generalization,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
[48] A. Fahad, Z. Tari, I. Khalil, A. Almalawi, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An optimal Syst., 2020, pp. 4697–4708.
 and stable feature selection approach for traffic classification based on [72] J. Yang, K. Zhou, Y. Li, and Z. Liu, “Generalized out-of-distribution
 multi-criterion fusion,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 36, pp. 156–169, detection: A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2110.11334.
 2014. [73] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, “A baseline for detecting misclassified and
[49] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz, and M. E. Karsligil, out-of-distribution examples in neural networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf.
 “Application identification via network traffic classification,” in Proc. Int. Learn. Represent., 2017, pp. 1–12.
 Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun., 2017, pp. 843–848. [74] S. Liang, Y. Li, and R. Srikant, “Enhancing the reliability of out-of-
[50] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, distribution image detection in neural networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Learn. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–15.
 Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. [75] A. Malinin and M. Gales, “Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior
[51] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and W. Wu, “Efficient and robust feature networks,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
 extraction and selection for traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 119, pp. 7047–7058.
 pp. 1–16, 2017. [76] T. Tsiligkaridis, “Information aware max-norm Dirichlet networks for
[52] A. C. Gilbert, W. Willinger, and A. Feldmann, “Scaling analysis of predictive uncertainty estimation,” Neural Netw., vol. 135, pp. 105–114,
 conservative cascades, with applications to network traffic,” IEEE Trans. 2021.
 Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 971–991, Apr. 1999. [77] freeCodeCamp.org, “freeCodeCamp/gitter-history,” 2016. [Online].
[53] S. Molnár et al., “Source characterization in broadband networks,” Tech. Available: https://github.com/freeCodeCamp/gitter-history
 Univ. Budapest, Budapest, Hungary, Interim Report COST-257, 1999. [78] G. R. Lee, R. Gommers, F. Waselewski, K. Wohlfahrt, and A. O’Leary,
[54] R. H. Riedi, M. S. Crouse, V. J. Ribeiro, and R. G. Baraniuk, “A multifractal “PyWavelets: A python package for wavelet analysis,” J. Open Source
 wavelet model with application to network traffic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Softw., vol. 4, no. 36, 2019, Art. no. 1237.
 Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 992–1018, Apr. 1999. [79] P. K. Sharma, D. Gosain, and S. Chakravarty, “Camoufler: Accessing the
[55] R. H. Riedi and W. Willinger, “Toward an improved understanding of net- censored web by utilizing instant messaging channels,” in Proc. ACM Asia
 work traffic dynamics,” in Self-Similar Network Traffic and Performance Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 147–161.
 Evaluation. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2000, pp. 507–530. [80] M. Nasr, A. Bahramali, and A. Houmansadr, “Defeating DNN-based
[56] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical traffic analysis systems in real-time with blind adversarial perturbations,”
 Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York, NY, USA: in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 2705–2722.
 Springer, 2009. [81] K. Bock, G. Hughey, X. Qiang, and D. Levin, “Geneva: Evolving censor-
[57] S. Roy, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “Fast and lean encrypted Internet traffic ship evasion strategies,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
 classification,” Comput. Commun., vol. 186, pp. 166–173, 2022. Secur., 2019, pp. 2199–2214.
[58] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for encrypted [82] M. Holschneider, R. Kronland-Martinet, J. Morlet, and P. Tchamitchian,
 traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. “A real-time algorithm for signal analysis with the help of the wavelet
 Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. transform,” in Wavelets. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1990, pp. 286–
[59] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-efficient 297.
 website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc. Privacy [83] D. Percival and A. Waldern, Wavelet Methods for Time Series Analysis.
 Enhancing Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, 2019. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000.
[60] M. S. Rahman, P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, K. G. Gangadhara, and M. Wright,
 “Tik-tok: The utility of packet timing in website fingerprinting attacks,”
 in Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technol. Symp., 2020, pp. 5–24.