1610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Federated Deep Learning for Intrusion Detection in
 Consumer-Centric Internet of Things
 Segun I. Popoola , Member, IEEE, Agbotiname Lucky Imoize , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Mohammad Hammoudeh , Senior Member, IEEE, Bamidele Adebisi , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Olamide Jogunola , Member, IEEE, and Abiodun M. Aibinu

 Abstract—Consumer-centric Internet of Things (CIoT) will recognition within the industrial sector, owing to its extensive
play a pivotal role in the fifth industrial revolution (Industry 5.0) advantages. This is still an open and evolving concept with
but it exhibits vulnerabilities that can render it susceptible to no generally acceptable definition or standard yet. However,
various cyberattacks. Recent studies have explored the potential
of Federated Learning (FL) for privacy-preserving intrusion according to the European Commission report [1], “Industry
detection in IoT. However, the development of the FL models 5.0 recognizes the power of industry to achieve societal
relied on unrealistic and irrelevant network traffic data, while goals beyond jobs and growth to become a resilient provider
also exhibiting limitations in terms of covered attack types and of prosperity, by making production respect the boundaries
classification scenarios. In this paper, we develop Federated of our planet and placing the well-being of the industry
Deep Learning (FDL) models using three recent and highly
relevant datasets, covering a wide range of attack types as worker at the center of the production process.” The vision of
well as binary and multi-class classification scenarios. Our Industry 5.0 revolves around sustainability, human-centricity,
findings demonstrate that the FDL models not only achieve high and resiliency, embodying a forward-thinking approach to
classification performance, comparable to traditional Centralized industrial development [2].
Deep Learning (CDL) models, in terms of accuracy (99.60 ± Consumer-centric Internet of Things (CIoT) will play a
0.46%), precision (92.50 ± 8.40%), recall (95.42 ± 6.24%), and
F1 score (93.51 ± 7.76%) but also exhibit superior computa- pivotal role in the fifth industrial revolution (Industry 5.0) but it
tional efficiency compared to their CDL counterparts. The FDL exhibits vulnerabilities that can render it susceptible to various
approach reduces the training time by 30.52 − 75.87%. These cyberattacks. Moreover, the unlawful exploitation of critical
classification performance and computational efficiency were user information within the CIoT poses significant risks to
achieved through multiple rounds of distributed local training in trust, security, and can potentially lead to the collapse of the
FDL. Therefore, the proposed FDL framework presents a robust
security solution for designing and deploying a resilient CIoT. system. Consequently, CIoT must be resilient to cyberattacks
 to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data
 Index Terms—Federated learning, intrusion detection, cyber and infrastructure.
security, deep learning, Industrial Internet of Things.
 Artificial Intelligence (AI) can simulate human intelligence,
 and this is crucial in building resilient CIoT. In particular,
 Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL) models
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 can be developed to automatically detect cyber-attacks in
 HE FIFTH industrial revolution, commonly referred to
T as Industry 5.0, has garnered significant attention and
 IIoT systems. In Centralized ML (CML) and Centralized DL
 (CDL), distributed data from multiple sources are transmitted
 to a central location, such as a cloud server, for storage,
 Manuscript received 29 May 2023; revised 23 August 2023, 9 October
2023, and 8 November 2023; accepted 21 December 2023. Date of publication processing, and model training. However, these centralized
25 December 2023; date of current version 26 April 2024. This work approaches face critical privacy concerns, high communication
was supported in part by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research overhead, and computational complexity [3].
Council under Grant EP/X039021/1, and in part by the European Research
Executive Agency (REA) under Project 101086387 (REMARKABLE). Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized and privacy-
(Corresponding author: Segun I. Popoola.) preserving approach for ML and DL [4]. It offers lower
 Segun I. Popoola and Olamide Jogunola are with the Department of communication overhead and computational complexity com-
Computing and Mathematics, Manchester Metropolitan University, M1 5GD
Manchester, U.K. (e-mail: segunpopoola@ieee.org). pared to the conventional centralized approach. Distributed
 Agbotiname Lucky Imoize is with the Department of Electrical and network traffic data may contain private and sensitive
Electronics Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Lagos, Lagos information about users and this poses a high risk of privacy
100213, Nigeria, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Information Technology, Institute of Digital Communication, Ruhr University, leakage in CDL [5]. Furthermore, the current strict data
44801 Bochum, Germany. privacy protection laws, such as the European Union’s General
 Mohammad Hammoudeh is with the Department of Information and Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)1 and the Consumer
Computer Science, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran
31261, Saudi Arabia. Privacy Bill of Rights in the United States of America,
 Bamidele Adebisi is with the Department of Engineering, Manchester necessitates the adoption of a privacy-preserving DL approach.
Metropolitan University, M1 5GD Manchester, U.K.
 Abiodun M. Aibinu is with the Department of Mechatronics, Federal
University of Technology, Minna 920101, Nigeria.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3347170 1 https://gdpr.eu/

 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1611

 TABLE I
 In this paper, we propose FDL approach for network DATASETS U SED FOR FL M ODELS IN R ELATED W ORK
intrusion detection in CIoT to address the limitations of CDL
method. Our objective is to develop FDL models for collaborative and privacy-preserving network intrusion detection
in CIoT while ensuring high classification performance and
computational efficiency. Although there are some related
works in the literature, previous studies used outdated and
irrelevant data sets to develop FL models. Furthermore, the
coverage of attack types and classification scenarios was
limited in those studies. Later in Section II, we will go into
a comprehensive review of the relevant literature. The main
contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.
 1) We propose an FDL method that utilizes a Deep Neural
 Network (DNN) model architecture for local training at
 the network edge. This method is designed for privacypreserving, network-based intrusion detection in CIoT.
 2) We train and evaluate multiple FDL models using application of this dataset is limited to fault and attack
 three most relevant and recent datasets (i.e., X-IIoTID, detection in power systems.
 Edge-IIoTset, and WUSTL-IoT-2021) to assess the clas- The Secure Water Treatment (SWaT), Water Distribution
 sification performance and computational efficiency of (WADI), Gas Pipeline, and Water Storage Tank datasets
 the proposed method. The evaluation metrics include are popularly used for attack detection in specific industrial
 accuracy, recall, precision, F1 score, training time, and process within the context of Industrial Control System (ICS).
 testing time. These datasets depend highly on features related to sensor
 3) We conduct a comprehensive investigation to validate measurements, actuators’ statuses, and specific parameters of
 the effectiveness of the FDL models in both binary and industrial packets, which limited their use for diverse industrial
 multiclass classification scenarios. We then compare the systems.
 classification performance and computational efficiency Furthermore, the NSL-KDD, UNSW-NB15, CIC-IDSof the FDL models with traditional CDL models. 2017, CIC-IDS-2018, CIC-DDoS2019, and LITNET-2020 are
 The remaining parts of the paper are organized as fol- mostly relevant to intrusion detection in traditional computer
lows: Section II provides a review of the related work. networks. These datasets provide the network traffic char-
Section III presents the security threats and data distribution acteristics of attacks against traditional IT services but they
in CIoT datasets. Section IV discusses the centralized and do not contain realistic CIoT systems’ activities, connection
federated deep learning processes for intrusion detection in protocols and services, diverse communication patterns, and
CIoT. Section IV analyzes and discusses the results of our CIoT-specific attack behaviours. For instance, the data samples
experiments. Finally, in Section V, we summarize our findings in the NSL-KDD dataset were collected more than 20 years
and provide directions for future research. ago. The testbed did not include any CIoT device because the
 dataset was created before the widespread adoption of CIoT.
 In fact, the samples in the NSL-KDD dataset were simulated
 II. R EVIEW OF R ELATED W ORK to represent a typical United States Air Force’s local area
 In the literature, researchers used different datasets to network.
develop and evaluate the effectiveness of FL models for The benign traffic samples in the CIC-DDoS2019 were genintrusion detection in IoT systems. The list of these datasets erated by four traditional Personal Computers (PCs) using the
is presented in Table I. However, these datasets are not Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), HTTP Secure (HTTPS),
suitable for efficient network-based intrusion detection in CIoT File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Secure Socket Shell (SSH), and
systems [6], [7]. For instance, the Bitcoin Transactions and email communication protocols. An effective dataset should
Ethereum Classic (ETC) BigQuery datasets contain benign cover a wide range of attacks that could be launched against
and malicious cryptocurrency transaction information, which IIoT systems. However, some of the datasets have limited
are largely irrelevant to intrusion detection in CIoT. These attack types. For example, the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset contains
datasets are more suitable for anomaly and fraud detection in only Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks.
a blockchain network. In recent research, the development of datasets such as the
 The Power System dataset contains normal operation activ- X-IIoTID [7], Edge-IIoTset [6], and WUSTL-2021-IIoT [21]
ities, natural events (short-circuit fault and line maintenance), datasets has been specifically tailored for intrusion detection
and attack events (remote tripping command injection, relay within the CIoT context. These datasets were created with
setting change, and data injection). The features in the an emphasis on multi-platform connectivity protocols and
dataset are electrical parameters collected from phasor mea- incorporate devices from a range of vendors. They exhibit
surement units within an electricity grid network. However, both connectivity and device agnosticism. This means that they
the requirements and the operational patterns of CIoT are maintain compatibility with CIoT systems regardless of the
different compared to power systems. Therefore, the relevant specific connectivity protocols, platforms, configurations, or
1612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 R EVIEW OF R ELATED W ORK [36], [37] focused on the Edge-IIoTset dataset only. Among
 them, Ferrag et al. [6] explored all classification scenarios
 in the dataset, Aouedi and Piamrat [35] considered only two
 scenarios, i.e., 6-class and 15-class, and Houda et al. [14],
 Friha et al. [34], Hamouda et al. [36], and Rashid et al. [37]
 explored binary, 6-class, and 15-class scenarios, respectively.
 To address these gaps in the literature, we propose to
 develop and evaluate CDL and FDL models using all three
 datasets and cover all classification scenarios in each dataset.
 To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first to use the
 WUSTL-IIoT-2021 dataset for FL-based intrusion detection
 in CIoT. The proposed study is expected to contribute to the
 development of more accurate and efficient intrusion detection
 systems for CIoT.

 III. C ENTRALIZED AND F EDERATED D EEP L EARNING
 A. Deep Neural Network
 A DNN architecture is used to learn the hierarchical
 features, complex patterns, and non-linear relationships in the
 network traffic data, X ∈ RM×Din , where M is the total number
 of samples and Din is the number of input features. The
 feedforward neural network is made up of an input layer,
the particular hardware and software deployed. This charac- three hidden layers, and an output layer. The first hidden layer
teristic aptly mirrors the heterogeneity of network traffic and transforms a batch of the input data, Xbatch ∈ RN×Din and
system activities generated by various CIoT devices, connec- produces:
  
tivity protocols, and communication patterns, thus ensuring Z1 = σ1 Xbatch · W1 + B1 , (1)
the interoperability of CIoT systems. These datasets encapsulate the behaviours associated with novel CIoT connectivity where N = M/Nbatch , N is the number of samples in a batch,
protocols, the activities of contemporary IIoT devices, and a Nbatch is the number of batches in the entire dataset, Z1 ∈
diverse array of attack types and scenarios. They comprise of RN×H1 is the output of the first hidden layer, W1 ∈ RDin ×H1 is
multi-view features, including network traffic, host resources, the weight, H1 is the number of hidden neurons, B1 ∈ RN×H1
logs, and alerts. is the bias, and (·) is a matrix dot multiplication. σ1 is a ReLU
 The taxonomy of related work that has utilized X-IIoTID, activation function defined as:
Edge-IIoTset, and WUSTL-IIoT-2021 datasets for intrusion f (a) = max(0, a). (2)
detection in IIoT is presented in Table II. In previous work [7],
[25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], researchers have proposed The second hidden layer transforms Z1 and produces:
different ML and DL frameworks for intrusion detection in  
 Z2 = σ1 Z1 · W2 + B2 , (3)
IIoT based on the CL approach. However, none of these studies
explored the FL approach. Furthermore, none of the authors where Z2 ∈ RN×H2 is the output of the second hidden layer,
evaluated their CL models using all three datasets. W2 ∈ RH1 ×H2 is the weight, H2 is the number of hidden
 Al-Hawawreh et al. [7] explored all classification scenarios neurons, and B2 ∈ RN×H2 is the bias.
in the X-IIoTID dataset, but they did not cover the other The third hidden layer transforms Z2 and produces:
two datasets. On the other hand, authors in [25], [26], [27],  
[28], [29], [30] focused on the WUSTL-IIoT-2021 dataset Z3 = σ1 Z2 · W3 + B3 , (4)
only. However, some of them explored only binary clas- where Z3 ∈ RN×H3 is the output of the third hidden layer,
sification [25], [26], [27], [29], while others focused on W3 ∈ RH2 ×H3 is the weight, H3 is the number of hidden
5-class classification [28], [30]. Thus, no study has covered neurons, and B3 ∈ RN×H3 is the bias.
all classification scenarios in all three datasets. Similarly, the Finally, the output layer transforms Z4 and produces:
authors in [6], [14], [31], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37]  
explored the FL approach for intrusion detection in IIoT, but Ypred = σ2 Z3 · Wout + Bout , (5)
none of them developed and evaluated their FL models using
 where Ypred ∈ RN×Dout is the final output which represents the
all three datasets.
 predicted class probabilities, Wout ∈ RH3 ×Dout is the weight,
 In addition, Makkar et al. [32], Hamouda et al. [36],
 Dout is the number of output neurons, and Bout ∈ RN×Dout is
and Houda et al. [14] did not consider the CL approach.
 the bias. σ2 is a softmax activation function defined as:
Therefore, the performance and computation efficiency of
their FL models could not be compared with those of cor- ezj
 σ2 (z)j = D , (6)
 out zk
responding CL models. Some studies [6], [14], [34], [35], k=1 e
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1613

where j = {1, . . . , Dout }, e is the base of natural logarithm, zj Algorithm 1: Model Aggregation for FDL
is the jth element of the input vector z, and σ2 (z)j represents 1: Initialize K = 10
the jth component of the output of the softmax function applied 2: Initialize R = 10
to z. 3: Initialize server model parameters W (0)
 4: for r = 1 to R do
B. Centralized Deep Learning 5: for k = 1 to K do
 In CDL, all the participating CIoT nodes are expected to 6: Set the client model parameters
 (r)
send their private network traffic data to a cloud server for 7: Wk = W (r)
aggregation and global model training. In this case, the DNN 8: Train the client model on its local data Dk
model is trained centrally with all the data in the training sets 9: Wk(r+1) = Wk(r) − η∇φk (Wk(r) , Dk )
of each of the three datasets. The predicted probabilities of 10: end for
the DNN model, Ypred , is compared with the one-hot encoded 11: Aggregate the local models’ parameters
 (r+1)
labels, Ytrue . The categorical cross-entropy loss function (φ) 12: W (r+1) = K1 K W
 k=1 k
is used to measure the differences between Ypred and Ytrue as 13: end for
follows:
   
 N
  
 L = φ Ypred , Ytrue = − Ytrue (i) log Ypred (i) (7) CIoT edge nodes have updated their respective local DNN
 n=1 models, they send their parameters to the cloud server. Then,
To reduce the training losses, the weights and biases of the server aggregates the local model updates to improve the
the DNN model are adjusted over E epochs using the classification performance of the FDL model. The updated
Adam [40] and RMSprop optimizers (), as recommended FDL model parameters, W r+1 , are calculated as the average
in [6], [7], [21]. The learning rate (η) was set to 0.001 to of the parameters of all the local DNN models:
ensure model convergence.
 1  (r+1)
 K
 W (r+1) = Wk (9)
 K
C. Federated Deep Learning k=1

 The FDL is modeled as a collaborative learning process The averaging method ensures that each IIoT edge node’s
which involves a cloud server and K distributed edge nodes model contributes equally to the global model, regardless of
in an CIoT network. Due to the resource-constraints in some the size or distribution of its private data.
CIoT devices, the local training is performed at the edge
nodes close to the devices based on the concept of edge D. Experiments
computing. The integration of edge computing with federated We conducted several experiments to train and test the
learning in the CIoT domain offers a powerful solution to proposed CDL and FDL models for network intrusion detecthe challenges of privacy, network efficiency, latency, and tion in CIoT environment using the X-IIoTID, Edge-IIoTset,
resource limitations. It empowers edge devices to contribute and WUSTL-IIoT-2021 datasets. The experimental setup for
meaningfully to model training while staying within their the development of the models involves both computer hardoperational constraints. Thus, a global DNN model (also ware and software, as presented in Table III.
known as FDL model) and K local DNN models are created The computation involves the use of Central Processing
using the same hyperparameters. Similarly, the weights of the Unit (CPU), Random Access Memory (RAM), and Graphical
local DNN models are set to be the same as those of the FDL Processing Unit (GPU). A special software framework, known
model. The local DNN models are trained with their respective as Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA),2 was used
private training data for a single epoch. At the end of the to gain direct access to the GPU’s virtual instruction set
training, the weights of the local DNN models are sent to the and parallel computational elements. The computer program
cloud server for aggregation using the FedAvg algorithm [4]. was written using the Python programming language. Scikit-
 The model aggregation process for FDL is described in learn,3 Pandas,4 and Numpy5 libraries were used for data
Algorithm 1. Each CIoT edge node, k ∈ {1, . . . , K}, sets its preprocessing, while TensorFlow and Keras frameworks were
local DNN model to the initial weights of the global DNN used for the development of the CDL and FDL models.
model, W (r=0) . The CIoT edge node then trains its local DNN 1) Data Pre-Processing: The effectiveness of CDL and
model on its private data, Dk ∈ {D1 , . . . , DK }. The updated FDL models can be influenced by a range of factors. These
local model parameters, Wkr+1 , are computed as: factors encompass the quality of the training data, the rel-
   evance of network traffic features, the dataset’s size and
 Wk(r+1) = Wk(r) − η∇φk Wk(r) , Dk , (8)
 representativeness, and the complexity of the classification
where, φk is the categorical loss function for the local DNN problem at hand. These considerations guided the selection of
model on CIoT edge node k’s private data, η is the rate at 2 https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-toolkit
which the learning moves towards a minimum of the loss 3 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/
function, and ∇(·) is the gradient of the categorical loss 4 https://pandas.pydata.org/
function with respect to the model parameters. After all the 5 https://numpy.org/
1614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE III TABLE VI
 H ARDWARE AND S OFTWARE S PECIFICATIONS C ENTRALIZED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR WUSTL-II OT-2021 DATASET

 samples are grouped into two primary scenarios: binary and
 5-class, as presented in Table VI.
 In preparation for the model development phase, the three
 TABLE IV datasets were transformed to ensure they were in suitable
 C ENTRALIZED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR X-II OTID DATASET for effective learning. This process of data preprocessing
 encompassed several key steps, including data cleaning, feature scaling, and data partitioning. In the data cleaning stage,
 efforts were made to remove duplicate samples, redundant
 features, and instances with missing values. To enhance model
 convergence, the features of the datasets were normalized
 using the min-max normalization method.
 From the X-IIoTID dataset, we removed six features: date,
 timestamp, source IP, destination IP, source port, and destination port. This action decreased the feature count from 65 to
 59. Fifteen features, including time, source host, destination
 host, sender IP address, target IP address, file data, full
 request URI, transmit timestamp, request URI query, TCP
 options, TCP payload, TCP source port, TCP destination port,
 UDP port, and message, were removed from the Edge-IIoTset
 dataset, reducing the feature count from 61 to 46.
 TABLE V For the WUSTL-IIoT-2021 dataset, we eliminated six fea-
 C ENTRALIZED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR E DGE -II OT SET DATASET tures: start time, last time, source address, destination address,
 source IP identifier, and destination IP identifier, thereby
 reducing the feature count from 47 to 41. The datasets’
 categorical features and labels were converted into numerical
 data through the application of one-hot encoding. The Edge-
 IIoTset dataset contained seven categorical features that were
 transformed into 49 numerical inputs, increasing the overall
 feature count from 46 to 95.
 Subsequently, each dataset was divided into a training set
 comprising 70% of the data and a testing set comprising the
 remaining 30%. This division aimed to facilitate thorough
 model training and robust testing to evaluate the models’
 performance.
 2) Centralized and Federated Deep Learning: The classification performance of the CDL models depends on the
the most pertinent datasets, namely X-IIoTID, Edge-IIoTset, choice of the hyperparameters and regularization techniques.
and WUSTL-IIoT-2021, while also highlighting the necessity Therefore, we employed the settings that were used in the
of data preprocessing. previous related studies [6], [7], [41] because they yielded
 X-IIoTID dataset comprises 65 network traffic features good classification performance. The hyperparameters of the
and 820,834 network traffic samples. These samples can be DNN model are presented in Table VII. The regularization
classified into three distinct scenarios: binary, 10-class, and technique helped mitigate overfitting and improved generaliza-
19-class, as presented in Table IV. tion by adding a penalty term to the loss function. The careful
 Edge-IIoTset dataset encompasses 61 network traffic fea- selection of hyperparameters led to optimal performance and
tures and 1,909,671 network traffic samples. These samples better convergence during training. These combined efforts
are categorized into three distinct scenarios: binary, 6-class, contributed to enhancing the overall effectiveness of the FDL
and 15-class, as presented in Table V. model in capturing complex patterns within the data.
 WUSTL-IIoT-2021 dataset comprises 1,194,464 network For the FDL, each of the training sets for the X-IIoTID,
traffic samples characterized by 47 distinct features. These Edge-IIoTset, and WUSTL-IIoT-2021 datasets was divided
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1615

 TABLE VII
 H YPERPARAMETERS FOR CDL AND FDL M ODELS A. Centralized Deep Learning
 1) X-IIoTID: Table XI presents the classification
 performance of the CDL model on the X-IIoTID dataset. The
 model correctly identified 99.55% of benign and 98.48% of
 malicious samples in the binary scenario, signifying efficient
 detection with very few false alarms. In the 10-class scenario,
 the model correctly classified over 97% of samples in six
 categories but misclassified 14.15% of C&C, 5.66% of
 crypto ransomware, 15.64% of exploitation, and 5.78% of
 reconnaissance samples due to class imbalance in the training
 set. In the 19-class scenario, the CDL model accurately
 classified over 92% of samples for most classes. However, the
 false negative rates were 21.7% for C&C, 12.92% for CoAP
 scanning, 40.91% for fuzzing, 23.81% for MITM, 15.82% for
 shell, and 39.44% for TCP relay attacks, attributed to class
among K(= 10) CIoT edge nodes as shown in Tables VIII-X, imbalance in the training set.
respectively. The entire process was repeated for R(= 10) The model effectively detects many types of attacks,
communication rounds. This approach ensures that the FDL yet exhibits higher false negative rates for C&C, CoAP
model is trained on all the CIoT edge nodes’ private data scan, fuzzing, MITM, shell, and TCP relay attacks. These
without needing to send them to the cloud server. results show that while the CDL model is generally
 effective in network intrusion detection, its classification
E. Performance Evaluation performance varies across different types of attacks. The
 higher false negative rates for specific attack categories will
 In recent related studies [6], [32], [33], [34], [35], [36],
 potentially make CIoT systems more vulnerable to these
[37], [38], the classification performance of the CL and FL
 types of intrusions. Therefore, there is a need to genermodels were evaluated based on accuracy, recall, precision,
 ate and include more samples of these attack classes in
and F1 score. There are other performance metrics, such
 the training set. Alternatively, data-level techniques (e.g.,
as Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. However,
 oversampling, undersampling, hybrid) and algorithmic soluthese four metrics (accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score)
 tions (e.g., cost-sensitive learning, re-weighting, threshold
are popularly used and they have proved to be sufficient and
 moving) may be explored to improve the training set
reliable in assessing the classification performance of ML, DL,
 balance.
and FL models in different application scenarios. So, for the
 2) Edge-IIoTset: Table XII presents the classification
sake of consistency and ease of result comparison, we decided
 performance of the CDL models trained and tested on the
to evaluate the classification performance of the CDL and FDL
 Edge-IIoTset dataset. In the binary scenario, the CDL model
models in this study using the same metrics.
 correctly classified all the benign and malicious samples,
 TP + TN demonstrating its ability to distinguish between benign and
 Accuracy = , (10)
 TP + TN + FP + FN malicious network traffic without any errors.
 TP In the 6-class scenario, the CDL model correctly identified
 Recall = , (11)
 TP + FN over 98% of samples in each of three classes, namely benign,
 TP DoS/DDoS, and MITM. However, due to class imbalance in
 Precision = , (12)
 TP + FP the training set, the model misclassified 24.6% of information
 2 × Precision × Recall gathering samples, 11.66% of injection samples, and 51.09%
 F1 score = , (13) of malware samples. Thus, the model effectively detects
 Precision + Recall
 benign traffic and DoS/DDoS and MITM attacks, but struggles
where True Positive (TP) is the number of malicious samples
 with identifying information gathering, injection, and malware
in the testing set that were correctly classified. True Negative
 attacks.
(TN) is the number of benign samples that were correctly
 In the 15-class scenario, the CDL model correctly classified
classified. False Positive (FP) is the number of benign samples
 over 93% of the samples across benign, backdoor, DDoS, and
that were misclassified as malicious. False Negative (FN) is
 MITM classes. Yet, the model misclassified 15.58% to 66.71%
the number of malicious samples that were misclassified as
 of samples in the fingerprinting, password, port scanning,
benign. Also, the computation efficiency of the models are
 ransomware, SQL injection, uploading, vulnerability scanning,
evaluated based on training time and testing time.
 and XSS classes, primarily due to the class imbalance in the
 training set. Consequently, while the model excels at detecting
 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION benign traffic, backdoor, DDoS, and MITM attacks, it has a
 In this section, we analyze and discuss the classification higher false negative rate when identifying attacks within the
performance and the computational efficiency of the CDL aforementioned classes.
and FDL models in both binary and multi-class classification 3) WUSTL-IIoT-2021: Table XIII presents the accuracy,
scenarios for each of the three datasets in this study. recall, precision, and F1 score of the CDL models trained
1616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE VIII
 F EDERATED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR X-II OTID DATASET

 TABLE IX
 F EDERATED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR E DGE -II OT SET DATASET

 TABLE X
 F EDERATED DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR WUSTL-II OT-2021 DATASET

and tested on the WUSTL-IIoT-2021 dataset. In binary its effectiveness in distinguishing network traffic types with
classification, the CDL model correctly identified all benign virtually no false positives and minimal false negatives. For
instances and 99.87% of malicious instances, confirming the 5-class classification, it correctly identified over 99% of
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1617

 TABLE XI TABLE XIII
 P ERFORMANCE OF C ENTRALIZED D EEP L EARNING M ODELS P ERFORMANCE OF C ENTRALIZED D EEP L EARNING M ODELS
 BASED ON X-II OTID DATASET BASED ON WUSTL-II OT-2021 DATASET

 TABLE XIV
 C OMPUTATION E FFICIENCY OF C ENTRALIZED D EEP L EARNING M ODELS

 set. Despite its excellence in detecting benign, DoS, and
 reconnaissance traffic, the model shows higher false negative
 rates for backdoor and command injection attacks.
 4) Computation Efficiency: Table XIV presents the duration required to train and test the CDL models utilizing
 the X-IIoTID, Edge-IIoTset, and WUSTL-IIoT-2021 datasets,
 in the context of both binary and multi-class classification
 TABLE XII
 scenarios. The average training times for the models, using
 P ERFORMANCE OF C ENTRALIZED D EEP L EARNING M ODELS the three datasets, were 215.36, 378.87, and 301.75 seconds,
 BASED ON E DGE -II OT SET DATASET respectively. The training duration exhibited variation depending on the number of samples present in the training set of the
 employed dataset. A larger training set size correlated with a
 more extended training period.
 Conversely, the trained models required an average of
 3.14, 7.17, and 4.30 seconds to categorize samples in the
 testing sets for each of the three datasets, respectively. Similar
 to the training duration, the testing time was also directly
 proportional to the size of the samples in the testing set.

 B. Federated Deep Learning
 1) X-IIoTID Dataset: Figure 1 shows the FDL model’s
 performance in a binary classification scenario using the X-
 IIoTID dataset. The model’s classification accuracy improved
 with increasing communication rounds between clients and
 the aggregation server. After ten rounds, the model reached
 an accuracy of 98.56%, a recall of 98.53%, a precision
 of 98.60%, and an F1 score of 98.55%, closely aligning
 with that of the CDL model with a marginal difference of
 0.45 − 0.49%.
 Within the context of a 10-class classification scenario,
 Figure 2 shows the performance of the FDL model that was
 trained and tested with the X-IIoTID dataset. The model’s classamples in benign, DoS, and reconnaissance classes. However, sification accuracy improved as the number of communication
it misclassified 21.54% of backdoor and 10.26% of command rounds between clients and the aggregation server increased.
injection instances due to the class imbalance in the training At the end of the tenth communication round, the model
1618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Performance of FDL model in binary scenario based on X-IIoTID Fig. 4. Performance of FDL model in binary scenario based on Edge-IIoTset
dataset. dataset.

Fig. 2. Performance of FDL model in 10-class scenario based on X-IIoTID Fig. 5. Performance of FDL model in 6-class scenario based on Edge-IIoTset
dataset. dataset.

 2) Edge-IIoTset Dataset: Figure 4 shows the performance
 of the FDL model which was trained and tested with the
 Edge-IIoTset dataset within the context of binary classification
 scenario. Impressively, the model achieved a perfect classification performance with an accuracy, recall, precision, and
 F1 score of 100%. Of particular interest, the FDL model’s
 performance was identical to that of the CDL model. These
 results indicate the suitability and effectiveness of the FDL
 model for binary classification tasks, while also highlighting
 its parity with the CDL model in terms of performance
 outcomes.
Fig. 3. Performance of FDL model in 19-class scenario based on X-IIoTID Figure 5 illustrates the performance of the FDL model
dataset. trained and tested using the Edge-IIoTset dataset within the
 context of a 6-class classification scenario. The classification
 performance of the model exhibited an improvement with
attained an optimal performance with an accuracy of 99.71%, increasing rounds of communication between clients and the
recall of 94.55%, precision of 96.47%, and an F1 score of aggregation server. The optimal performance was achieved
95.47%. The performance is comparable to that of the CDL at the end of the twenty-first communication round with an
model, with only a negligible difference of 0.02 − 0.82%. accuracy of 98.80%, recall of 84.57%, precision of 90.85%,
 The performance of the FDL model in a 19-class classifica- and an F1 score of 86.23%. These results demonstrate that the
tion scenario, trained and tested with the X-IIoTID dataset, is FDL model’s performance is comparable to that of the CDL
illustrated in Figure 3. The model’s classification performance model, with a negligible difference of 0.03 − 0.73%.
improved with an increase in the number of communication Figure 6 shows the effectiveness of the FDL model when
rounds between clients and the aggregation server. Notably, subjected to the Edge-IIoTset dataset under a 15-class clasthe model achieved optimal performance with an accuracy sification setting. The FDL model’s classification capability
of 99.35%, recall of 74.98%, precision of 79.83%, and an showed a marked improvement as the number of communi-
F1 score of 75.24% after the 25th communication round. cation rounds between the clients and the aggregation server
These results are comparable to those obtained with the CDL increased. The optimal classification performance was attained
model, with a difference of only 0.2 − 4.37%. after the 25th round of communication, with the model
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1619

Fig. 6. Performance of FDL model in 15-class scenario based on Edge- Fig. 8. Performance of FDL model in 5-class scenario based on WUSTL-
IIoTset dataset. IIoT-2021 dataset.

 TABLE XV
 C OMPUTATION E FFICIENCY OF F EDERATED D EEP L EARNING M ODELS

Fig. 7. Performance of FDL model in binary scenario based on WUSTL- respectively. The training time was observed to vary based on
IIoT-2021 dataset. the size of the training set used in each dataset, with larger sets
 requiring a longer duration for training. Our findings indicate
 that FDL models have significantly faster training times, with
achieving an accuracy of 98.80%, recall of 84.57%, precision 30.52 − 75.87% lower training times than CDL models.
of 90.85%, and an F1 score of 86.23%. These results prove By contrast, the average time required by the trained models
that the FDL model can perform comparably to the CDL to classify the testing set samples for the corresponding
model, with a negligible deviation of 0.04 − 2.43%. datasets was 3.05, 7.01, and 4.16 seconds, respectively. The
 3) WUSTL-IIoT-2021 Dataset: The performance of the duration of testing was found to be directly proportional to the
FDL model, trained and tested with the WUSTL-IIoT- size of the testing set employed in each dataset, mirroring the
2021 dataset in a binary classification scenario, is depicted trend observed in training. Notably, our findings indicate that
in Figure 7. The classification performance of the model the FDL model exhibited similar testing times to those of the
increased with an increase in the number of communication CDL model.
rounds between the clients and the aggregation server. The
model achieved a remarkable accuracy of 99.39%, a recall of
99.86%, a precision of 99.95%, and an F1 score of 99.90%. C. Discussion
This performance is comparable to that of the CDL model, In this study, we considered three distinct threat models
with only a marginal difference of 0.02 − 0.08%. that are relevant to CIoT environment. A high classification
 Figure 8 illustrates the performance of the FDL model, performance when the X-IIoTID dataset was used implies that
which was both trained and tested using the WUSTL-IIoT- the CDL and FDL models can effectively detect and prevent
2021 dataset for a 5-class classification scenario. The model’s the nine attack scenarios: reconnaissance, weaponization,
classification performance improved as the number of com- exploitation, lateral movement, C&C, exfiltration, tampering,
munication rounds between clients and the aggregation server crypto ransomware, and RDoS.
increased. The FDL model achieved an accuracy of 99.99%, Reconnaissance involves several potential actions for attacka recall of 94.60%, a precision of 96.27%, and an F1 score ers including: (i) scanning the target machine to gather general
of 95.38%. This level of performance is comparable to that of information, such as listening ports, operating system details,
the CDL model, with only a slight difference of 0 − 0.68%. and available services; (ii) identifying known vulnerabilities
 4) Computation Complexity: Table XV presents the train- and misconfigurations; (iii) discovering system or software
ing and testing duration for FDL models utilizing three errors and exceptions; and (iv) detecting available resources
different datasets, namely X-IIoTID, Edge-IIoTset, and within the target environment. Weaponization enables attackers
WUSTL-IIoT-2021, in both binary and multi-class classifi- to gain entry into the target environment. This could occur
cation settings. The average duration of training the models through methods like brute force attacks, dictionary attacks,
using the three datasets was 52.73, 263.22, and 72.80 seconds, or exploits by malicious insiders.
1620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Exploitation entails attackers capitalizing on known vul- and WUSTL-IIoT-2021), and covered all the binary and
nerabilities within the target to establish a reverse TCP multi-class classification scenarios in the datasets. The results
shell or initiate a Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attack. Lateral of this study show that, across all classification scenarios, the
movement empowers attackers to navigate further within FDL models consistently achieved high performance in terms
the target environment, establishing a stronger foothold and of accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 score. This performance
compromising additional systems and networks. This could was found to be comparable with that of the corresponding
involve accessing MQTT cloud broker subscriptions and CDL models.
Modbus register readings, as well as infiltrating the mail server In assessing the computational efficiency, we observed that
through TCP relay attacks. C&C allows attackers to establish the training and testing times for the models were dependent
communication channels between compromised machines and on the size of the respective training and testing sets for each
their servers. This facilitates the transmission of commands, dataset. As expected, larger datasets required longer duration
enabling the attackers to gain control over compromised for training and testing. Importantly, our findings indicate that
systems. the FDL models exhibited significantly faster training times
 Exfiltration encompasses the theft of private and sensitive compared to the CDL models, while maintaining comparable
data from compromised machines using techniques such as testing times. The findings of this research demonstrate that the
compression and obfuscation. Tampering involves intentional FDL framework exhibits superior efficacy in achieving timely
manipulation, destruction, or alteration of information on and privacy-preserving intrusion detection in CIoT settings.
compromised machines, often through methods like false Moreover, this enhanced performance is attained without any
data injection or counterfeit notifications. Crypto ransomware significant degradation in classification performance.
revolves around attackers encrypting critical data on compro- It is also important to note that the present study does
mised machines and subsequently demanding cryptocurrency not address security and privacy concerns in FL framework,
payments in exchange for providing the decryption key. RDoS which include issues like membership inference, model poiinvolves attackers threatening to launch DDoS attacks against soning, and data poisoning. In future research, a combination
the target’s machines unless a ransom is paid. of cryptographic techniques and adversarial defenses, such
 For the Edge-IIoTset dataset [6], a high classification as differential privacy, homomorphic encryption, multi-party
performance implies that the CDL and FDL models can computation, and blockchain, will be taken into consideration.
effectively detect and prevent the following attack vectors: These measures aim to establish a secure and privacyinformation gathering, DoS/DDoS attack, MITM attack, injec- preserving FL methodology for intrusion detection in the IIoT.
tion attack, and malware attack. DoS/DDoS attacks can be
executed using methods like TCP SYN, UDP, HTTP, or ICMP
flooding, causing a target system to become overwhelmed and R EFERENCES
unavailable.
 [1] M. Breque, L. De Nul, and A. Petridis, Industry 5.0: Towards a
 Information gathering can acquire crucial information about Sustainable, Human-Centric and Resilient European Industry. Eur.
target machines through techniques such as port scanning, Union, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, 2021.
OS fingerprinting, and vulnerability scanning. MITM attacks [2] L. Zong, F. H. Memon, X. Li, H. Wang, and K. Dev, “End-to-end
- the adversaries aim to compromise and manipulate the transmission control for cross-regional industrial Internet of Things in
 industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4215–4223,
communication flow between two endpoints that assume Jun. 2022.
they are communicating directly. Spoofing the Domain Name [3] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
System (DNS) or the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) are O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
 detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
common methods. Injection attacks seek to compromise the pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
confidentiality and integrity of a target machine by injecting [4] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
malicious scripts into websites, altering a running Structured “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
Query Language (SQL) query, or uploading malware onto Web
 [5] S. I. Popoola, G. Gui, B. Adebisi, M. Hammoudeh, and H. Gacanin,
servers. “Federated deep learning for collaborative intrusion detection in hetero-
 Malware attacks take forms such as backdoors, password geneous networks,” in Proc. IEEE 94th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall),
cracking, or ransomware, all of which can lead to unautho- 2021, pp. 1–6.
 [6] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, D. Hamouda, L. Maglaras, and H. Janicke,
rized access, data breaches, or system disruption. Finally, a “Edge-IIoTset: A new comprehensive realistic cyber security dataset of
high classification performance when the WUSTL-IIoT-2021 IoT and IIoT applications for centralized and federated learning,” IEEE
dataset was used implies that the CDL and FDL models Access, vol. 10, pp. 40281–40306, 2022.
 [7] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID: A
can effectively detect and prevent reconnaissance, command connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for indusinjection attacks, DoS attacks, and backdoor attacks in IIoT trial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
environment. pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022.
 [8] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
 H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated learning for
 cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based iiot networks,” IEEE Trans.
 V. C ONCLUSION Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 8356–8366, Nov. 2022.
 In this paper, we developed FDL models for privacy- [9] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, and H. Hawash, “Privacy-preserved
 generative network for trustworthy anomaly detection in smart grids: A
preserving network intrusion detection in CIoT networks using federated semisupervised approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19,
three recent and relevant datasets (X-IIoTID, Edge-IIoTset, no. 1, pp. 995–1005, Jan. 2023.
POPOOLA et al.: FDL FOR INTRUSION DETECTION IN CIoT 1621

[10] A. N. Jahromi, H. Karimipour, and A. Dehghantanha, “Deep federated [30] T. Gaber, J. B. Awotunde, S. O. Folorunso, S. A. Ajagbe, and
 learning-based cyber-attack detection in industrial control systems,” in E. Eldesouky, “Industrial Internet of Things intrusion detection method
 Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2021, pp. 1–6. using machine learning and optimization techniques,” Wireless Commun.
[11] X. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Lai, B. Mao, and H. Lyu, “EEFED: Personalized Mobile Comput., vol. 2023, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 3939895. [Online].
 federated learning of execution&evaluation dual network for CPS intru- Available: https://doi.org/10.1155/2023/3939895
 sion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 41–56, [31] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “Asynchronous peer-
 2023. to-peer federated capability-based targeted ransomware detection model
[12] O. Aouedi, K. Piamrat, G. Muller, and K. Singh, “Federated semisuper- for industrial IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 148738–148755, 2021.
 vised learning for attack detection in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE [32] A. Makkar, T. W. Kim, A. K. Singh, J. Kang, and J. H. Park,
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 286–295, Jan. 2023. “Secureiiot environment: Federated learning empowered approach for
[13] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated securing iiot from data breach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18,
 deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical no. 9, pp. 6406–6414, Sep. 2022.
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, [33] P. Verma, J. G. Breslin, and D. O Shea, “FLDID: Federated
 Aug. 2021. learning enabled deep intrusion detection in smart manufacturing indus-
[14] Z. A. E. Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, L. Khoukhi, and M. Guizani, tries,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 22, p. 8974, 2022.
 “When federated learning meets game theory: A cooperative framework [34] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, M. Benbouzid, T. Berghout, B. Kantarci,
 to secure IIoT applications on edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. and K.-K. R. Choo, “2DF-IDS: Decentralized and differentially pri-
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7988–7997, Nov. 2022. vate federated learning-based intrusion detection system for industrial
[15] S. Islam, S. Badsha, S. Sengupta, I. Khalil, and M. Atiquzzaman, IoT,” Comput. Security, vol. 127, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103097.
 “An intelligent privacy preservation scheme for EV charging infrastruc- [35] O. Aouedi and K. Piamrat, “F-BIDS: Federated-blending based intrusion
 ture,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1238–1247, Feb. detection system,” Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 89, Feb. 2023,
 2023. Art. no. 101750.
[16] J. Zhang, C. Luo, M. Carpenter, and G. Min, “Federated [36] D. Hamouda, M. A. Ferrag, N. Benhamida, and H. Seridi, “PPSS:
 learning for distributed IIoT intrusion detection using transfer A privacy-preserving secure framework using blockchain-enabled fedapproaches,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8159–8169, erated deep learning for industrial IoTs,” Pervasive Mobile Comput.,
 Jul. 2023. vol. 88, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 101738.
[17] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, and H. Hawash, “Privacy-preserved [37] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R. Sabuj,
 Cyberattack detection in industrial edge of things (IEoT): A blockchain- and M. Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach for improving
 orchestrated federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., intrusion detection in industrial Internet of Things networks,” Network,
 vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7920–7934, Nov. 2022. vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 158–179, 2023.
[18] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy- [38] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and L. Khoukhi, “A MECpreserving federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. based architecture to secure IoT applications using federated deep
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023. learning,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 60–63, Mar.
[19] P. T. Duy, T. Van Hung, N. H. Ha, H. Do Hoang, and V.-H. Pham, 2023.
 “Federated learning-based intrusion detection in SDN-enabled IIoT [39] M. Al-Hawawreh and M. S. Hossain, “Federated learning-assisted
 networks,” in Proc. 8th NAFOSTED Conf. Inf. Comput. Sci. (NICS), distributed intrusion detection using mesh satellite nets for autonomous
 2021, pp. 424–429. vehicle protection,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Sep.
[20] A. Zainudin, R. Akter, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee, “FedDDoS: An 25, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318727.
 efficient federated learning-based DDoS attacks classification in SDN- [40] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic
 enabled IIoT networks,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. optimization,” 2017, arXiv:1412.6980.
 Converg. (ICTC), 2022, pp. 1279–1283. [41] M. Zolanvari, M. A. Teixeira, L. Gupta, K. M. Khan, and R. Jain,
[21] M. Zolanvari, M. A. Teixeira, L. Gupta, K. K. M, and R. Jain, 2021, “Machine learning-based network vulnerability analysis of indus-
 “WUSTL-IIOT-2021 Dataset for IIoT cybersecurity research,” WUSTL. trial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 4,
 [Online]. Available: http://www.cse.wustl.edu/ jain/iiot2/index.html pp. 6822–6834, Aug. 2019.
[22] H. Zhao et al., “An enhanced intrusion detection method for AIM of
 smart grid,” J. Ambient Intell. Hum. Comput., vol. 14, pp. 1–13, Feb.
 2023.
[23] H. C. Altunay and Z. Albayrak, “A hybrid CNN+ LSTM based intrusion
 detection system for industrial IoT networks,” Eng. Sci. Technol., Int. Segun I. Popoola (Member, IEEE) received the
 J., vol. 38, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 101322. B.Tech. degree in electronic and electrical engi-
[24] P. L. S. Jayalaxmi, R. Saha, G. Kumar, M. Alazab, M. Conti, neering from the Ladoke Akintola University of
 and X. Cheng, “PIGNUS: A deep learning model for IDS in Technology, Ogbomoso, Nigeria in 2014, the M.Eng.
 industrial Internet-of-Things,” Comput. Secur., vol. 132, Sep. 2023, degree in information and communication engi-
 Art. no. 103315. neering from the Department of Electrical and
[25] M. Zolanvari, Z. Yang, K. Khan, R. Jain, and N. Meskin, “TRUST Information Engineering, Covenant University, Ota,
 XAI: Model-agnostic explanations for AI with a case study on IIoT Nigeria, in 2018, and the Ph.D. degree in cyber secusecurity,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2967–2978, Feb. rity and artificial intelligence from the Department
 2023. of Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
[26] M. M. Alani, E. Damiani, and U. Ghosh, “DeepIIoT: An explain- Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester,
 able deep learning based intrusion detection system for industrial U.K., in 2022. His Ph.D. thesis on federated deep learning for botnet attack
 IOT,” in Proc. IEEE 42nd Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. Workshops detection in IoT networks was a product of an academic-industry partnership
 (ICDCSW), 2022, pp. 169–174. project jointly funded by the department of engineering at Manchester
[27] M. Mohy-eddine, A. Guezzaz, S. Benkirane, and M. Azrour, “An Metropolitan University and a cyber security company, Cyraatek Ltd UK.
 effective intrusion detection approach based on ensemble learning for He is a Lecturer with the Department of Computing and Mathematics,
 IIoT edge computing,” J. Comput. Virology Hack. Techn., vol. 19, Manchester Metropolitan University, U.K. He has published more than 100
 pp. 469–481, Nov. 2023. research papers in reputable journals and conference proceedings, including
[28] A. S. Dina, A. Siddique, and D. Manivannan, “A deep learning IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, IEEE ACCESS, and IEEE Vehicular
 approach for intrusion detection in Internet of Things using focal loss Technology Conference. His research interests include wireless communicafunction,” Internet Things, vol. 22, Jul. 2023, Art. no. 100699. tions, machine/deep learning, cybersecurity, and the Internet of Things. He is
[29] M. M. Alani, “An explainable efficient flow-based industrial IoT a Registered Engineer with the Council for the Regulation of Engineering in
 intrusion detection system,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 108, May 2023, Nigeria. In June 2022, he was endorsed as a Global Exceptional Talent by
 Art. no. 108732. the Royal Society.
1622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Agbotiname Lucky Imoize (Senior Member, IEEE) Olamide Jogunola (Member, IEEE) received the
 is a Lecturer with the Department of Electrical B.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from the
 and Electronics Engineering, University of Lagos, University of Ilorin, Nigeria, in 2011, the M.Sc.
 Nigeria. Before joining the University of Lagos, degree in networking and data communication from
 he was a Lecturer with the Bells University of Kingston University, U.K., in 2015, and the Ph.D.
 Technology, Nigeria. He also worked as a Core degree in electrical engineering from Manchester
 Network Products Manager with ZTE, Nigeria, and Metropolitan University, U.K., in 2020. She is a
 as a Network Switching Subsystem Engineer with Lecturer in Cyber Security and Smart Grids with
 Globacom, Nigeria. He was awarded the Fulbright Manchester Metropolitan University (MMU). Her
 Fellowship as a Visiting Research Scholar with the research interests include energy transitions, local
 Wireless@VT Laboratory, Bradley Department of energy markets, and the cyber security of critical
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, USA, from 2017 to 2018. national infrastructure including smart grid. She was a Research Associate
He is a Research Scholar with Ruhr University Bochum, Germany, under the on several industry and Government-funded projects. She was a recipient of
sponsorship of the Nigerian Petroleum Technology Development Fund and the the MMU Department of Engineering Ph.D. Studentship. She was a PI on a
German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) through the Nigerian-German SuperGen Network/EPSRC-funded project and a Co-PI in a NWPST-funded
Postgraduate Program. His research interests cover the fields of 6G wireless project on interlinked computing. She is currently an academic supervisor on
communication systems, wireless security systems, and artificial intelligence. a KTP with Badger Energy.
He is the Vice Chair of the IEEE Communication Society, Nigeria Chapter,
and a Registered Engineer with the Council for the Regulation of Engineering
in Nigeria.

 Mohammad Hammoudeh (Senior Member, IEEE)
 received the B.Sc. degree in computer communications from Arts Sciences and Technology University
 in 2004, the M.Sc. degree in advanced distributed
 systems from the University of Leicester in 2006,
 and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 University of Wolverhampton in 2008. He is the
 Saudi Aramco Chair Professor of Cyber Security
 with the King Fahd University of Petroleum and
 Minerals. His research interests include the applications of zero trust security to internet-connected
critical national infrastructures, blockchains, and other complex highly decentralized systems.

 Bamidele Adebisi (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from
 Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria, in 1999,
 and the M.S. degree in advanced mobile communication engineering, and the Ph.D. degree in Abiodun M. Aibinu received the Ph.D. degree from
 communication systems from Lancaster University, International Islamic University Malaysia in 2010.
 Lancaster, U.K., in 2003 and 2009, respec- He is currently a Professor with the Department
 tively. He was a Senior Research Associate with of Mechatronics Engineering, Federal University of
 the School of Computing and Communication, Technology, Minna, Nigeria. He is also the Vice-
 Lancaster University from 2005 to 2012. He joined Chancellor of Summit University, Offa, Nigeria.
 Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, His research interests include digital signal and
U.K., in 2012, where he is currently a Professor in Intelligent Infrastructure image processing, instrumentation and measurement,
Systems. He has been involving in several commercial and government intelligent system design, and artificial intelligence
projects focusing on various aspects of wireline and wireless communications. with an emphasis on artificial neural networks and
He is particularly interested in the research and development of communi- genetic algorithm. He has participated and won
cation technologies for electrical energy monitoring/management, transport, several awards at various international and national exhibitions and was
water, critical infrastructures protection, home automation, the IoTs, and cyber nominated for the 2012 Promising Researcher Award and a Best Teacher
physical systems. He has several publications and a patent in the research Award at IIUM Malaysia. He has also won several research grant awards in
area of data communications over power line networks and smart grid. He is and outside Nigeria and has authored/coauthored several publications in both
a member of IET. local and international journals and conferences.