9334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning for Efficient
 Jamming Attack Mitigation in O-RAN
 Zakaria Abou El Houda , Member, IEEE, Hajar Moudoud , Member, IEEE,
 and Bouziane Brik , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Open RAN (ORAN or O-RAN) revolutionizesRadio and compromise user experience. According to a recent report,
Access Networks (RAN) by offering flexibility and cost-efficiency the frequency and severity of jamming attacks have increased
through inter-vendor equipment interoperability.More impor- globally [2], affecting communication systems and disrupting
tantly, it addresses emerging security threats, such as jamming
attacks, by incorporating network softwarization and leveraging critical services [3].
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques. However, AI-based systems Attacking the open radio interface (ORI) in communication
face challenges such as limited training data, slow convergence, and systems can indeed be complex, and adversaries may employ
vulnerability to dynamic attack patterns like Zero-day attacks. To various techniques to disrupt or compromise the communicaenhance jamming attack mitigation in O-RAN, Multi-Agent Re- tion channel. One such method is a jamming attack, where
inforcement Learning (MARL) has been introduced for improved
flexibility and robustness. However, MARL requires data sharing, the adversary intentionally interferes with the radio signals to
which consumes network bandwidth and slows down training, and disrupt communication. These attacks exploit vulnerabilities
the curse of dimensionality limits its benefits due to the exponential in wireless communication protocols, targeting radio signals
growth of the state-action space. To overcome these limitations, and causing interference that hampers the transmission of data
we provide a novel framework that combines federated learning and compromises network performance. The consequences of
(FL) and deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for efficient jamming
attack detection in O-RAN. FL allows decentralized agents to jamming attacks can be severe, leading to service disruptions,
train local models using their data sources, and the models are financial losses, and potential breaches in data privacy. In light
aggregated into a global model at a Non-real-time RAN Intelligent of these alarming statistics, it is imperative to develop robust
Controller (RIC) to guide decision-making. The federated learning countermeasures and mitigation strategies to safeguard O-RAN
process enables distributed intelligence, while deep reinforcement
 networks against jamming attacks, ensuring uninterrupted comlearning ensures adaptive and robust jamming attack detection.
Our proposed framework improves security, privacy, and resilience munication and preserving the integrity of the system.
in ORAN through collaborative FL and adaptive DRL. Exten- AI algorithms can identify patterns and anomalies related to
sive simulations demonstrate its superiority in detection accuracy, jamming attempts by analyzing large amounts of network data.
resource efficiency, and scalability. Additionally, AI algorithms can optimize resource allocation
 Index Terms—Federated learning, jamming attacks, multi-agent and traffic management to mitigate the impact of jamming
reinforcement learning, Open RAN, wireless sensor networks. attacks and ensure efficient network operation [4], [5], [6],
 [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. However,
 these AI-based systems, including those deployed in O-RAN
 I. INTRODUCTION networks, encounter challenges when dealing with jamming
 AMMING attacks have witnessed a significant rise in recent attacks. These challenges include limited training data, slow
J years, emerging as a prominent threat to the security and
reliability of O-RAN networks [1]. Wireless networks, such
 convergence, and vulnerability to dynamic attack patterns like
 zero-day attacks. To enhance the mitigation of jamming attacks
as the Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN), are vulnerable in O-RAN, Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has
to jamming attacks that can severely impact their performance been introduced as a promising approach to improve flexibility
 and robustness. However, the implementation of MARL comes
 with certain challenges. One such challenge is the need for data
 Manuscript received 30 June 2023; revised 11 November 2023 and 11 January
2024; accepted 26 January 2024. Date of publication 29 January 2024; date
 sharing between agents, which can consume significant network
of current version 16 July 2024. The review of this article was coordinated bandwidth and result in slower training processes. Additionally,
by the Guest Editors of the Special Section on Open Radio Access Networks: the curse of dimensionality in MARL refers to the exponential
Architecture, Challenges, Opportuities, and Use Cases in Vehicular Networks.
(Corresponding author: Zakaria Abou El Houda.)
 growth of the state-action space, which can limit the potential
 Zakaria Abou El Houda is with the Centre Énergie Matériaux Télécommuni- benefits of the approach. These challenges need to be addressed
cations, Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS-EMT), Varennes, to fully leverage the capabilities of MARL in enhancing jam-
QC J3X 1S2, Canada (e-mail: zakaria.abouelhouda@inrs.ca).
 Hajar Moudoud is with the L@bISEN, ISEN Yncrea Ouest, 58000 Nevers,
 ming attack mitigation in O-RAN.
France (e-mail: hajar.moudoud@usherbrooke.ca). To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel framework
 Bouziane Brik is with the Computer Science Department, College of Com- that combines FL with DRL for effective jamming attack detecputing and Informatics, Sharjah University, Sharjah J3X 1S2, UAE (e-mail:
bbrik@sharjah.ac.ae).
 tion in O-RAN. FL is a decentralized learning paradigm that
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3359998 allows multiple agents to collaboratively learn from their local

 0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN 9335

data without directly sharing it. In FL, each agent trains its local authentication protocols, are based on the belief in robust trust
model using its local data and periodically communicates only connections. This assumption, however, is at odds with the
the model updates with a centralized server. This approach re- changing architecture and deployment paradigm beyond 5 G
duces the amount of data exchanged between agents, mitigating networks.
the bandwidth and privacy concerns associated with transmitting A handful of research studies have begun to explore the secularge amounts of raw data. In our proposed framework, multiple rity challenges associated with O-RAN deployment and suggest
agents are deployed within the near real-time RIC module solutions to address them [18]. Habler et al. [19] performed
of O-RAN, where they generate local learning models using a systematic Adversarial Machine Learning (AML) threat as-
FL. These models capture the knowledge and insights gained sessment for O-RAN, examining ML use cases and deployment
from their respective local data sources. The agents then com- scenarios, and establishing a threat model that identifies pomunicate the model updates to a centralized Non-real-time RIC, tential adversaries, their capabilities, and objectives. Similarly,
where the local models are aggregated to create a global model Mohammadi et al. [20] presented a comprehensive examination
that represents the collective intelligence of the agent network. of the SVM-based intrusion detection and feature selection
The global model, derived from the FL process, is utilized methods. Nair et al. [21] presented a novel unsupervised ML
within the DRL framework to facilitate effective jamming attack algorithm designed specifically for rapid RF fingerprinting of
detection. The agents interact with the environment, taking ac- LoRa-modulated chirps in emerging networks. The objective is
tions based on the global model’s guidance, and receive rewards to establish a robust method for authenticating IoT sensors in
and system state information. The DRL algorithm, powered the context of new network deployments.
by the deep neural network model, enables the agents to learn To enhance the performance of Intrusion Detection Systems
and update their policies, considering the aggregated knowledge (IDS), researchers have explored the application of RL apfrom the federated learning process [17]. proaches. RL methods are well-suited for the ORAN environ-
 By combining FL with DRL, our approach addresses the chal- ment, as they enable systems to adapt their behavior based
lenges of data sharing and the curse of dimensionality in MARL. on continuous feedback to maximize rewards. Several studies
It enables effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN by have utilized DRL algorithms for intrusion detection in both
utilizing the benefits of distributed learning, localized decision- real-world and simulated environments [22]. Iannucci et al. [23]
making, and the expressive power of deep neural networks. proposed an innovative approach called Intrusion Response
Furthermore, the integration of FL and DRL ensures efficient uti- DRL, which employs a stateful Markov Decision Process to
lization of network resources and promotes scalability in large- handle large-scale systems and sophisticated attack scenarios.
scale wireless networks. The combination of FL and DRL allows Alazizadeh et al. [24] investigated the use of Deep Q-Learning
agents to benefit from the distributed intelligence and localized (DQL), a combination of RL and a deep neural network, for netdecision-making capabilities of FL while leveraging the ex- work intrusion detection. Their approach leverages automated
pressive power and generalization abilities of DRL models. We trial and error and continual learning to effectively detect various
evaluate our approach through extensive simulations, comparing types of intrusions, enhancing overall detection capabilities.
it with existing methods. The results demonstrate the superiority However, while RL techniques have demonstrated effectiveness
of our approach in terms of detection accuracy, resource effi- in detecting intrusions in IoT networks, none of the existing
ciency, and scalability. The federated learning process enables works have considered the impact of low device and agent
distributed intelligence and localized decision-making, while reliability on intrusion detection accuracy. The presence of
the deep reinforcement learning component ensures adaptive malicious software within a network can potentially overwhelm
and robust detection of jamming attacks. Extensive simulations or compromise its functionality, leading to decreased reliability
show that our proposed framework outperforms recent AI-based and accuracy of intrusion detection systems.
models in terms of accuracy and F1 score while significantly FL has emerged as a distributed ML paradigm, specifically
reducing training delay and achieving fast convergence. designed to address privacy concerns associated with large-scale
 The structure of this paper is organised as follows. In Section interactions such as O-RAN. It has become a crucial compo-
II, we overview some of the prominent works in the field nent in securing open networks, offering numerous benefits.
of jamming attack detection. Then, Section III provides our Extensive research has been conducted on various aspects of FL,
system model. In Section IV, we evaluate the performance of including its effectiveness [25], privacy preservation [26], and
our proposed framework in terms of efficiency and compare it security enhancements [27]. In [28], Lu et al. proposed a secure
to recent work. Section V concludes the paper. data sharding framework where the blockchain technology is
 integrated with the FL framework. In this work, the authors
 described the specific mechanisms employed to ensure privacy,
 II. RELATED WORK data integrity, and security in the context of IoV data sharing.
 O-RAN seeks to enhance network performance by employ- The provided experimental evaluations have demonstrated the
ing a virtualized network architecture and open standardized effectiveness and efficiency of their proposed approach based
interfaces for deployment. This novel and distinctive network on metrics such as communication overhead, training accuracy,
environment, however, has given rise to new vulnerabilities and the resilience of the system against attacks. In [29], Yi et al.
that the current security frameworks are ill-equipped to han- proposed a novel methodology that utilizes FL to predict traffic
dle. Traditional cellular network security methods, such as flow while preserving the privacy of individual data sources. The
9336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

proposed FL enables model training to be performed locally on execute a set of actions and receive feedback in the form of
individual devices without sharing sensitive data. By aggregat- rewards and system state information.
ing the locally trained models, a global traffic flow prediction The system architecture, as illustrated in Fig. 1, shows the
model is generated. In [30], Yin et al. proposed a traffic flow hierarchical wireless topology network we consider. Within this
prediction model, called FedGRU (Federated Gated Recurrent architecture, the near real-time RIC module of O-RAN plays
Unit) based on the principles of FL. FedGRU is a solution to a crucial role. It hosts intelligent agents that are responsible
enable secure collaboration and knowledge sharing among IoT for generating local learning models. These agents operate in
devices while protecting the privacy of individual data sources. a federated manner, allowing for distributed intelligence and
FedGRU utilized FL to train deep learning models collabora- localized decision-making. Once the local models are created,
tively without sharing raw data. The mechanism incorporates they are transmitted to the centralized Non-real-time RIC, where
privacy-preserving techniques and secure aggregation methods they are aggregated to create a global model. This collaborative
to ensure data security during the model training process. In approach ensures that the knowledge and insights gathered by
[31], Guowen et al. proposed a framework called Verifynet, the intelligent agents are effectively utilized for system-wide
which aims to enhance the security and veracity of FL. Veri- decision-making.
fynet employs cryptographic techniques and secure multi-party However, the sharing of data, particularly in terms of the
computation protocols to protect the privacy of participants’ data state-action space, between agents in MARL setup can present
during the model training process. It also provides mechanisms challenges such as consuming network bandwidth and potenfor verifying the correctness and integrity of the contributed tially slowing down the training process. Additionally, the curse
model updates from different participants. The authors present of dimensionality in MARL, characterized by the exponential
an in-depth analysis of the Verifynet framework, explaining its growth of the discrete state-action space, can limit the potential
technical components and the cryptographic techniques utilized. benefits of traditional RL approaches. To address these issues
It may discuss the experimental evaluation of Verifynet’s secu- and ensure effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN, we
rity guarantees and the veracity of the properties using real-world propose a novel approach that combines FL with DRL. In our
datasets or simulations. system, intelligent agents are deployed within the near real-time
 While integrating DRL enhances the effectiveness of conven- RIC module of O-RAN, where they generate local learning
tional AI-driven mitigation strategies against jamming attacks, models using FL. These models capture the knowledge and
applying DRL directly to a large-scale network poses challenges. insights gained from their respective local data sources. The
The need for an extensive policy space to govern all nodes agents then communicate the model updates to a centralized
complicates the DRL agent’s ability to reach a stable state and Non-real-time RIC, where the local models are aggregated to
attain optimal performance. Additionally, the substantial data create a global model that represents the collective intelligence
(i.e., state-action space) exchanged among agents can strain net- of the agent network.
work bandwidth, potentially impeding the training process. By The global model, derived from the federated learning procombining FL with DRL, our approach addresses the challenges cess, is utilized within the DRL framework to facilitate effective
of data sharing and the curse of dimensionality in MARL. It en- jamming attack detection. The agents interact with the enviables effective jamming attack detection in O-RAN by utilizing ronment, taking actions based on the global model’s guidance,
the benefits of distributed learning, localized decision-making, and receive rewards and system state information. The DRL
and the expressive power of deep neural networks. Furthermore, algorithm, powered by the deep neural network model, enables
our proposed framework ensures efficient utilization of network the agents to learn and update their policies, considering the
resources and promotes scalability in large-scale wireless net- aggregated knowledge from the federated learning process. To
works. detect jamming attacks, the intelligent agents periodically execute actions via the E2 interface. These actions are aimed at
 identifying and mitigating the effects of jamming in the network
III. FRL-ENABLED JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN (see the following section). For instance, an agent may adjust
 This section starts by presenting the identified problem, fol- the resource allocation and scheduling policy within the O-DU’s
lowed by a comprehensive exploration of our proposed solution MAC layer to isolate and minimize the impact of jammers on the
and its associated mathematical formulation. overall system performance. The rewards obtained by the agents
 are determined based on the consequences of their actions,
 taking into account metrics such as the quality of experience for
A. System Architecture the users. Simultaneously, the new state of the system, including
 We formalize the problem of jamming attack mitigation as information about the total number of allocated resource blocks
a Federated Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (FMARL) and user density, is conveyed to the agents through the E2 interproblem. In FMARL, we consider multiple agents that actively face. This feedback loop allows the agents to continuously learn
cooperate and learn to make effective decisions in an environ- and adapt their strategies in response to changing network conment affected by jamming attacks. The environment in this case ditions and evolving jamming attacks. Our strategy overcomes
represents the Radio Access network, including components the problems with data sharing and the dimensionality curse in
such as O-RU, O-DU, and O-CU. The agents interact with this MARL by merging FL with DRL. It enables effective jamming
environment through the E2 interface, which allows them to attack detection in O-RAN by utilizing the benefits of distributed
HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN 9337

Fig. 1. Proposed O-RAN-based architecture.

learning, localized decision-making, and the expressive power jamming. It is weighted by wprompt .
of deep neural networks. Furthermore, the integration of FL
and DRL ensures efficient utilization of network resources and Rprompt (At )
promotes scalability in large-scale wireless networks. ⎧
 ⎪
 ⎨1 if the agent takes actionAt to encourage
 = prompt action (2)
 ⎪
 ⎩
B. System Model 0 otherwise
 In this subsection, we outline the mathematical approach to r Jamming Detection Reward (Rdetection (St )): Rewards the
the problem we studied.
 agent for successfully detecting jamming based on the
 1) Markov Decision Process (MDP): The MDP is defined
 current state. It is weighted by wdetection .
by the triplet (St , At , Rt ), where St , At , and Rt represent the
 
state space, action space, and reward function at time step t,
 1 if jamming is successfully detected
respectively. State St : Represents the current information or Rdetection (St ) =
observations available to the agent at time step t. It captures 0 otherwise
the relevant aspects of the environment, such as signal strength, (3)
 r Mitigation Reward (Rmitigation (At )): Rewards the agent for
network traffic, and any indications of jamming activity. Action
At : The decision or choice made by the agent at time step t successful actions taken to mitigate the impact of jamming.
based on the current state St . It represents the agent’s response It is weighted by wmitigation .
to the detected or potential jamming activity. Reward Function Rmitigation (At )
R(St , At ): Let St represent the state at time step t, and At 
represent the action taken at time step t. The reward function n if the agent takes n successful actions
R(St , At ) is defined as: computing the immediate reward from = (4)
 0 if no successful actions are taken
action At in state St . The reward function encourages desired
behavior and penalizes undesirable actions. The reward function, where n is a positive integer representing the number of
R(St , At ), can be defined as follows: successful taken actions to mitigate a jamming attack in ORAN.
 To incorporate penalties, let P (St , At ) denote the penalty
 R(St , At ) = wprompt · Rprompt (At ) + wdetection · Rdetection (St ) function penalizing undesirable actions or delays in response.
 Penalty Function P (St , At ): Calculates the penalty for taking
 + wmitigation · Rmitigation (At ) (1)
 action At in state St . The penalty function discourages undesirable behavior and delays in responding to jamming. The penalty
where wprompt , wdetection , wmitigation , and wineffective are weights function can be defined as:
associated with each reward component. More specifically:
 r Prompt Action Reward (Rprompt (At )): Encourages the P (St , At ) = wIneffective · PIneffective (At ) + wdelay · Pdelay (St , At )
 agent to take actions promptly to mitigate or respond to (5)
9338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

where wIneffective and wdelay are weights associated with each The optimal joint value function V ∗ (s) and optimal joint
penalty component. action-value function Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) can be defined as:
 r Ineffective Action Penalty (Rineffective (At )): Ineffective Ac- 
 tion Penalty: Penalizes the agent for taking actions that V ∗ (s) = max . . . max R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
 fail to effectively address the jamming. It is weighted by a1 ∈A1 aN ∈AN

 wineffective . It is be defined as: + . . . + RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
 ⎧
 ⎪ 
 ⎨−m if the agent takes m ineffective +γ P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )V ∗ (s )
 Rineffective (At ) = actions
 ⎪
 ⎩
 
 s ∈S
 0 if no ineffective actions are taken (9)
 (6)
 where m is a positive integer representing the number of Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) = R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) + . . .
 ineffective taken actions. + RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
 r Delay Penalty: Penalizes the agent for delays in responding 
 to jamming. It encourages prompt action and is weighted +γ P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )
 by wdelay . 
 s ∈S
 Thus, the total Reward Rtotal (St , At ) that takes into account . . . max Q∗ (s , a1 , . . . , aN ) (10)
both the reward and penalty components is calculated as the sum aN ∈AN

of the reward function and penalty function, as follows:
 The optimal joint policy π ∗ (a1 |s), . . . , π ∗ (aN |s) can be ob-
 Rtotal (St , At ) = R(St , At ) − P (St , At ) (7) tained by selecting the actions that maximize the joint actionvalue function for each agent:
 2) Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning: MARL stands for
 πi∗ (ai |s) = arg max Q∗ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) (11)
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning, which extends reinforce- ai ∈Ai
ment learning to the setting where multiple agents interact in a
shared environment. 3) Federated Deep Reinforcement Learning: We consider a
 In MARL, there are N agents, and the environment is repre- federated learning scenario with K clients denoted by subscript
sented as a Markov Game, which is an extension of the Markov i = 1, 2, . . ., K and a central server. - Each client i has its local
Decision Process (MDP). The Markov Game is defined by a dataset D i consisting of sequences of states, actions, rewards,
tuple (S, A1 , . . . , AN , P, R1 , . . . , RN , γ), where: and next states, given as Di = {(si,t , ai,t , ri,t , si,t )}Tt=1 i
 . The
 S is the set of states, Ai is the set of actions available to goal is to train a global policy p that can effectively detect and
 
agent i, P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s ) is the state transition probability, mitigate jamming attacks in O-RAN.
representing the probability of transitioning from state s to state Each client i trains its local policy pi using its local dataset
 
s when agents take actions a1 , . . . , aN , Ri (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )  D i and deep reinforcement learning algorithms such as Deep
is the reward function for agent i, representing the immediate Q-Network (DQN) or Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). The
reward obtained by agent i when transitioning from state s to local policy pi is trained to maximize the expected cumulative
 
state s while agents take actions a1 , . . . , aN , γ is the discount rewards by iteratively updating its parameters θi based on the obfactor, determining the importance of future rewards. served rewards. The update rule for the local policy parameters
 The goal in MARL is to find a joint policy π1 (a1 |s), . . . , can be expressed as:
πN (aN |s) for all agents that maximizes the expected cumu- Ti
lative reward over time. This can be represented by the joint θi ← θi + α∇θi ri,t + γ max Qθi (si,t , a)
 π a
value function V (s), which is the expected cumulative reward t=1
starting from state s and following the joint policy π, and the joint
action-value function Qπ (s, a1 , . . . , aN ), which is the expected − Qθi (si,t , ai,t ) , (12)
cumulative reward starting from state s, with agents taking
actions a1 , . . . , aN , and then following the joint policy π. where α is the learning rate, γ is the discount factor, ∇θi repre-
 The joint value function and joint action-value function can sents the gradient of the local policy, Qθi (s, a) is the action-value
be defined using the Bellman equations: function parameterized by θi , and ai,t is the action taken by client
    i at time t.
 π
V (s) = ... R1 (s, a1 , . . . , aN ) Then, after local training, the central server aggregates the
 a1 ∈A1 aN ∈AN local policies to obtain the global policy p by averaging their
 parameters:
 + . . . + RN (s, a1 , . . . , aN )
 K
  1 
 +γ  π 
 P (s, a1 , . . . , aN , s )V (s ) θ = θi , (13)
 K i=1
 s ∈S
 (8) where θ represents the parameters of the global policy.
HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN 9339

 Algorithm 1: Federated Deep Q-Learning for Jamming that mitigates the impact of jamming attacks. Only trustworthy
 Attack Detection. and reliable devices with high reputation scores are allowed to
 Initialize: global replay buffer D utilize the RBs.
 Initialize: global Q-networks with parameters The formulation for the RB allocation problem with repu-
 θ1 , θ2 , . . . , θN for each client tation scores, penalty factors, weight factors, scaling factors,
 For : round = 1 to R cost factors, load balancing, and additional constraints can be
 For : each client c in parallel expressed as follows:
 1: Receive global Q-network parameters θc from the Objective:
 server;
 N
 
 2: Initialize local replay buffer Dc ;
 3: Initialize states s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc ; max wi · Ci · B i
 i=1
 While : s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc are not terminal
 For : each agent i = 1 to Nc Subject to:
 4: Select action ai for agent i using an exploration
 strategy (e.g., epsilon-greedy); Bi ≥ 0 ∀i
 5: Execute joint action a = (a1 , a2 , . . . , aNc ), observe
 N
 
 rewards r = (r1 , r2 , . . . , rNc ) and next states
 s = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sNc ); Bi ≤ Btotal (total available bandwidth constraint)
 6: Compute total reward i=1

 Rtotal (St , At ) = R(St , At ) − P (St , At ); Bi ≤ Bmax ∀i (maximum bandwidth constraint per device)
 7: Store transition (s, a, r, s ) in local replay buffer Dc ;
 Bi ≤ wi · Pi · S · Ri · Btotal ∀i (with penalty/scaling factors)
 8: Sample a mini-batch of experiences from Dc ;
 For : each agent i = 1 to Nc Bi − Bj ≤ Bdiff ∀i, j (load balancing constraint)
 For : each experience (s, a, r, s ) in the mini-batch
 N
 
 9: Compute target Q-value:
 wi = 1 (weight normalization constraint)
 Qitarget (s, a) = ri + γ · maxai Q(s , ai ; θc );
 i=1
 10: Compute predicted Q-value:
 Qipredicted (s, a) = Q(s, a; θc ); Ri ≥ Rmin ∀i (minimum reputation score constraint)
 11: Compute loss: Ri ≤ Rmax ∀i (maximum reputation score constraint)
 Li (θc ) = (Qitarget (s, a) − Qipredicted (s, a))2 ;
 12: Update local Q-network parameters: Bi ≥ Bmin ∀i (minimum bandwidth allocation constraint)
 θc ← θc − α · ∇θc Li (θc );
 13: Update states: s ← s ; where Ci represents the cost factor for device i reflecting the cost
 14: Send local Q-network parameters θc to the server; implications of bandwidth usage; S is the scaling factor that ad-
 15: Send local replay buffer Dc to the server; justs the influence of reputation scores on bandwidth allocation;
 16: Aggregate and update global Q-network parameters θ Bdiff is the maximum allowed difference in bandwidth allocation
 N among devices, promoting load balancing; Btotal is the total
 using federated averaging: θ ← N1 c=1 θc ;
 available bandwidth; Bmax represents the maximum bandwidth
 allocation per device; Rmin and Rmax are the minimum and
 maximum reputation scores, respectively; and Bmin represents
 Algorithm 1 summarizes the process of FMARL for jamming the minimum bandwidth allocation for each device.
attack detection in O-RAN. Each client trains a local policy The objective function aims to maximize the overall system
using its own data, and the central server aggregates the local performance considering the weighted combination of bandpolicies by averaging their parameters to obtain a global policy. width allocation, reputation scores, and cost factors. This mech-
The global policy is then used to detect and mitigate jamming anism can effectively allocate resource blocks to devices based
attacks in O-RAN. on their reputation scores, taking into account penalty factors,
 4) Jamming Attack Mitigation: A Resource Blocks (RB) Al- weight factors, scaling factors, cost factors, load balancing, and
location Problem: The global policy p is deployed in O-RAN additional constraints. The iterative optimization process adjusts
to detect and mitigate jamming attacks. Each client i can use the the resource block allocations until convergence, optimizing the
global policy p to make decisions based on the observed states system performance while considering reputation-based conand take appropriate actions to counteract jamming attacks. straints and other considerations (see Algorithm 2).
We formalize the problem of jamming attack mitigation as a Also, we introduce a scaling factor to adjust the overall impact
problem of RB Allocation in ORAN, where only trustworthy of reputation scores on bandwidth allocation. Let S represent
and reliable devices that have high reputation scores can be the scaling factor. By multiplying the reputation score of each
allowed to use the maximum allowed RBs. In the context of device by S, we can control the influence of reputation scores
ORAN, RBs represent the available communication resources, in the equation. This factor allows for fine-tuning the balance
and the goal is to allocate these RBs to reliable devices in a way between reputation-based allocation and other considerations.
9340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 2. Accuracy of our proposed framework for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

The reputation-based constraint with the scaling factor becomes:
 Algorithm 2: Resource Block Allocation in Open RAN
 ∀i Bi ≤ wi · Pi · S · Ri · Btotal (14) Based on Reputation Scores and Deep Reinforcement
 Learning.
 We also incorporate a cost factor associated with bandwidth
allocation. Let Ci represent the cost factor for device i. By
multiplying the bandwidth allocation of each device by its cost
factor, we can account for the cost implications of bandwidth
usage. The objective function with the cost factor becomes:
 N
 
 max wi · Ci · Bi (objective function with cost factor)
 i=1

 To promote load balancing, we can introduce a constraint that
limits the difference in bandwidth allocation among devices. Let
Bdiff represent the maximum allowed difference in bandwidth
allocation. The load balancing constraint can be defined as:
 Bi − Bj ≤ Bdiff ∀i, j (load balancing constraint)
This constraint ensures that the difference in bandwidth allocation between any two devices does not exceed a specified
threshold, promoting a more equitable distribution of resources.
 By incorporating these additional factors and constraints,
we can further tailor the equation to account for scaling factors, cost considerations, load balancing, and other relevant
aspects of the IoT system, enabling a more comprehensive
and fine-grained bandwidth allocation based on reputation
scores.

 IV. IMPLEMENTATION
 In this section, we present the implementation and evaluation
steps for our proposed framework. Initially, we assess the performance of the framework and then provide a comparison with TABLE I
 WSN-DS LABELS
some recent works.
 To implement our proposed FRL framework, we utilize
Pysyft [32], a privacy-centric deep learning library based on
PyTorch. In our testing environment, multiple agents conduct
local training, each specializing in a specific domain and utilizing a set of deployed wireless devices. To evaluate the feasibility
and effectiveness of our framework, we employ the WSN-DS
dataset [33] for intrusion detection in wireless sensor networks. TABLE II
In our study, we considered two scenarios (i.e., binary scenario CONSIDERED SCENARIOS
and multi-class scenario). In the multi-class scenario, predictions
are made from a set of multiple labels (i.e., Blackhole, Greyhole,
Flooding, and Scheduling), whereas the binary scenario involves
distinguishing between two labels (Normal and Attack). The
HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN 9341

Fig. 3. Confusion matrices of our proposed framework for binary classification during (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 4. Confusion matrices of our proposed framework for Multi-class classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

Fig. 5. ROC Curves of our proposed framework for Binary classification for (a) 10 rounds; (b) 25 rounds; and (c) 50 rounds.

main objective is to assess performance in diverse classification A. Performance Evaluation
tasks, with a particular focus on addressing the challenge of We evaluated our proposed framework using various metnon-independently and identically distributed (non-IID) data
 rics including, accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and AUC.
(see Table II). Considering the wide range of values in the input The ROC curve illustrates the model’s trade-off between senfeatures of the WSN-DS dataset, we apply a standardization sitivity and specificity, while the confusion matrix provides
technique to normalize the feature values.
 a detailed summary of classification results. AUC measures
 Fig. 2(a), (b), and (c) show the obtained accuracy of the trained binary classifier performance on a scale of 0 to 1, with higher
model across the four Real-Time RICs during 10, 25, and 50
 values indicating better performance. Fig. 5 shows the ROC
rounds of training, respectively. We achieve a high accuracy of
 curves of our proposed framework for binary classification
99% for both scenarios. This highlights the framework’s high setup. A micro-average ROC curve is used when classes are
accuracy and privacy in detecting jamming attacks. Figs. 3 and
 imbalanced, while a macro-average ROC curve is useful for
4 depict the confusion matrices for our proposed framework in
 balanced classes. For 10, 25, and 50 rounds, we achieved highbinary classification and multi-class classification, respectively. performance scores of 99%, 99%, and 100% respectively.
In both scenarios, 99% of attack traffic was accurately classified
 Table III and Fig. 6 show the performance metrics of our
as such, indicating that the proposed framework is well-trained proposed framework and AI benchmarks using the WSNand effectively detects jamming attacks. DS dataset, including some recent AI-based solutions (i.e.,
9342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 TABLE III a central server using federated averaging. We evaluated the
PERFORMANCE METRICS OF OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK AND BENCHMARKS
 proposed framework under different settings and proposed a
 resource block allocation algorithm to optimize system performance considering device reputation. Extensive simulations
 showed that the proposed framework achieves superior detection
 accuracy, efficient resource utilization, and high scalability.

 REFERENCES
 [1] M. Liyanage, A. Braeken, S. Shahabuddin, and P. Ranaweera, “Open RAN
 security: Challenges and opportunities,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 214,
 2023, Art. no. 103621. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S1084804523000401
 [2] H. Pirayesh and H. Zeng, “Jamming attacks and anti-jamming strategies
 in wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 Tuts., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 767–809, Secondquarter 2022.
 [3] B. Brik, K. Boutiba, and A. Ksentini, “Deep learning for B5G open radio
 access network: Evolution, survey, case studies, and challenges,” IEEE
 Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 228–250, 2022.
 [4] P. Zhou, Q. Yan, K. Wang, Z. Xu, S. Ji, and K. Bian, “Jamsa: A utility
 optimal contextual online learning framework for anti-jamming wireless
 scheduling under reactive jamming attack,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
 vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1862–1878, Jul.–Sep. 2020.
 [5] Y. Guan and X. Ge, “Distributed attack detection and secure estimation of
 networked cyber-physical systems against false data injection attacks and
 jamming attacks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 4, no. 1,
 pp. 48–59, Mar. 2018.
 [6] L. Yang and C. Wen, “Optimal jamming attack system against remote
 state estimation in wireless network control systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 pp. 51679–51688, 2021.
 [7] A. Garnaev, Y. Liu, and W. Trappe, “Anti-jamming strategy versus a
 low-power jamming attack when intelligence of adversary’s attack type is
 unknown,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Netw., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 49–56,
 Mar. 2016.
 [8] A. A. Elsaeidy, A. Jamalipour, and K. S. Munasinghe, “A hybrid deep
Fig. 6. Performance metrics of our proposed framework and benchmarks. learning approach for replay and DDoS attack detection in a smart city,”
 IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 154864–154875, 2021.
 [9] B. Kannhavong, H. Nakayama, Y. Nemoto, N. Kato, and A. Jamalipour,
Naive Bayes (NB) [29], Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) [34], “A survey of routing attacks in mobile ad hoc networks,” IEEE Wireless
Adaboost [35], and Gradient Boost (GB) [35]) using the same Commun., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 85–91, Oct. 2007.
 [10] C. D. Alwis et al., “Survey on 6G frontiers: Trends, applications, require-
WSN-DS dataset. our proposed framework achieves the highest ments, technologies and future research,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
performance on the WSN-DS dataset, achieving an accuracy, vol. 2, pp. 836–886, 2021.
precision, recall, and F1 score of 99% each. Moreover, our [11] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Ensemble learning for intrusion
 detection in SDN-based zero touch smart grid systems,” in Proc. IEEE 47th
proposed framework only requires 60 seconds of training time Conf. Local Comput. Netw., 2022, pp. 149–156.
to achieve these results, which is relatively fast compared to [12] B. Kannhavong, H. Nakayama, N. Kato, Y. Nemoto, and A. Jamalipour,
other state-of-the-art approaches. These findings indicate that “Analysis of the node isolation attack against OLSR-based mobile
 ad hoc networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Netw., 2006,
our proposed framework is an effective algorithm for intrusion pp. 30–35.
detection in WSNs, and it outperforms other existing approaches [13] G. Raja, N. D. Philips, R. K. Ramasamy, K. Dev, and N. Kumar, “Intelligent
in terms of accuracy and efficiency. This makes it a promising drones trajectory generation for mapping weed infested regions over 6G
 networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 7506–7515,
candidate for real-world applications where detecting intrusions Jul. 2023.
in WSNs is critical. [14] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
 in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12,
 V. CONCLUSION pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023.
 [15] D. Liu, F. Sun, W. Wang, and K. Dev, “Distributed computation offloading
 This paper proposed a novel Federated Deep Reinforcement with low latency for artificial intelligence in vehicular networking,” IEEE
Learning framework for effective jamming attack mitigation in Commun. Standards Mag., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 74–80, Mar. 2023.
 [16] Z. A. El Houda, H. Moudoud, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “Securing federated
Open RAN. The proposed approach leverages the strengths of learning through blockchain and explainable AI for robust intrusion detecfederated learning and deep reinforcement learning to overcome tion in IoT networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops,
the challenges of limited data, slow convergence, and vulnerabil- 2023, pp. 1–6.
 [17] Z. A. El Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, and L. Khoukhi, “A MEC-based
ity to zero-day attacks faced by AI systems. First, we proposed architecture to secure IoT applications using federated deep learning,”
a deep Q-learning model to enable adaptive decision-making IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 60–63, Mar. 2023.
and detect sophisticated jamming attack patterns. Second, we [18] D. Dik and M. S. Berger, “Open-RAN fronthaul transport security architecture and implementation,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 46185–46203,
designed a distributed federated learning approach, where the 2023.
proposed model is trained on distributed devices while preserv- [19] R. Bitton et al., “Adversarial machine learning threat analysis in open radio
ing privacy. The locally trained models were then aggregated at access networks,” 2022, arXiv:2201.06093.
HOUDA et al.: FEDERATED DEEP REINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR EFFICIENT JAMMING ATTACK MITIGATION IN O-RAN 9343

[20] M. Mohammadi et al., “A comprehensive survey and taxonomy of the Zakaria Abou El Houda (Member, IEEE) received
 SVM-based intrusion detection systems,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 178, the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Uni-
 Mar. 2021, Art. no. 102983. versity of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, in 2021,
[21] M. Nair, T. Cappello, S. Dang, and M. A. Beach, “RF fingerprinting of and the second Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
 LoRa transmitters using machine learning with self-organizing maps for from the University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes,
 cyber intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE/MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp., IMS France, in 2021. He is currently a Professor with
 2022, 2022, pp. 491–494. the Energy, Materials, and Telecommunications Cen-
[22] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Net- ter, National Institute of Scientific Research (INRS),
 work intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,” Québec City, QC, Canada. He is also a Member of
 IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, Third Quarter the INRS-UQO Joint Research Unit in Cybersecurity.
 2019. Prior to joining INRS, he was a research scientist in
[23] S. Iannucci, V. Cardellini, O. D. Barba, and I. Banicescu, “A hybrid model- various institutions, contributing to significant research projects on the applifree approach for the near-optimal intrusion response control of non- cation of machine learning for intrusion detection systems, and studying the
 stationary systems,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 109, pp. 111–124, explainability and robustness of these systems. His research interests include
 Aug. 2020. applied AI for intrusion detection systems, security in distributed/federated
[24] H. Alavizadeh, J. Jang-Jaccard, and H. Alavizadeh, “Deep Q-Learning machine learning, and Blockchain for network security.
 based reinforcement learning approach for network intrusion detection,”
 Computers, vol. 11, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 41. Hajar Moudoud (Member, IEEE) received the
[25] Z. A. E. Houda, A. S. Hafid, and L. Khoukhi, “MiTFed: A privacy B.Eng. degree in software engineering from the Mopreserving collaborative network attack mitigation framework based on hammadia School of Engineers, Rabat, Morocco,
 federated learning using SDN and blockchain,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. in 2018, the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1985–2001, Jul.–Aug. 2023. from the University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC,
[26] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A comprehensive survey of privacy-preserving Canada, in 2022, and the second Ph.D. degree in comfederated learning: A taxonomy, review, and future directions,” ACM puter engineering from the University of Technology
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2021. of Troyes, Troyes, France, in 2022. Her research
[27] Y.-A. Xie et al., “Securing federated learning: A covert communication- interests include the security of the Internet of Things,
 based approach,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 118–124, Jan./Feb. 2023. applied machine/deep learning for intrusion detection
[28] Y. Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain em- systems, and leveraging blockchain to enhance the
 powered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing in inter- security of next-generation networks (5G and beyond/6G).
 net of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311,
 Apr. 2020.
[29] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving Bouziane Brik (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 traffic flow prediction: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet Engineer degree (Ranked First) in computer science
 Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763, Aug. 2020. and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from Laghouat Uni-
[30] B. Yin, H. Yin, Y. Wu, and Z. Jiang, “FDC: A secure federated deep versity, Laghouat, Algeria, in 2010, 2013, and 2017,
 learning mechanism for data collaborations in the Internet of Things,” respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6348–6359, Jul. 2020. with the Computer Science Department, Computing
[31] G. Xu, H. Li, S. Liu, K. Yang, and X. Lin, “VerifyNet: Secure and and Informatics College, Sharjah University, Sharverifiable federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 15, jah, UAE. Before joining Sharjah University, he was
 pp. 911–926, 2020. an Assistant Professor with the DRIVE Department,
[32] “Pysyft,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/OpenMined/ Bourgogne University, Dijon, France. He was also a
 PySyft Postdoc with the CESI School, University of Troyes,
[33] A. Iman, A.-K. Bassam, and A.-A. Mousa, “WSN-DS: A dataset for intru- Troyes, France, and Eurecom Research Institute, France. He has been working
 sion detection systems in wireless sensor networks,” J. Sensors, vol. 2016, on resources management and security challenges of 5G network slicing in the
 2016, Art. no. 4731953. context of H2020 European projects, including MonB5G, 5GDrones, InDiD,
[34] S. Ismail and H. Reza, “Evaluation of naïve Bayesian algorithms for cyber- and 5G-INSIGHT. His research interests include 5G and beyond networks,
 attacks detection in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. IEEE World AI IoT explainable AI, and machine/deep learning for wireless networks. He is an
 Congr., 2022, pp. 283–289. active member of many conferences’ organizing committees, such as Globecom,
[35] M. Nouman, U. Qasim, H. Nasir, A. Almasoud, M. Imran, and N. Javaid, WCNC, ICC, GIIS, EAI, and EAI CICom. He actively organized different
 “Malicious node detection using machine learning and distributed data special issues in prestigious journals and conference workshops.
 storage using blockchain in WSNs,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 6106–6121,
 2023.