854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Federated Learning-Assisted Distributed Intrusion
 Detection Using Mesh Satellite Nets for
 Autonomous Vehicle Protection
 Muna Al-Hawawreh, Member, IEEE, and M. Shamim Hossain , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The widespread use of intelligent consumer electron- together to form satellite constellations, which alter the static
ics, specifically autonomous vehicles, has exponentially increased. topology of traditional terrestrial networks entirely and allow
The key enablers of this pervasive are the Internet of Things for flexible, autonomous vehicles deployment [3], [4]. LEO
(IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Satellite communications,
which provide consumers with highly precise and reliable self- satellites are the most dominant and increasingly used to condriving vehicles. However, autonomous vehicles come also with nect directly with autonomous vehicles as they operate in a
significant cybersecurity concerns. Attackers can easily use satel- lower orbit with less latency and provide wideband Internet
lite links to launch cyberattacks against autonomous vehicles. access [5], leading to global coverage, low signal delay times,
An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is one of the most effective and low signal loss. This provides consumers with safer and
mechanisms for providing secure autonomous vehicles. However,
existing IDSs based on machine and deep learning train their more accurate autonomous vehicles than ever in remote or
models in a centralized server, which uploads data or param- low-connectivity areas [6].
eters to the central server for training. This structure of IDS However, one of the key concerns associated with
has challenges with vehicle mobility, brings processing delays, autonomous vehicles is cybersecurity [7]. Attackers could
and increases privacy and security risks, affecting vehicles’ code and make their own keys to get into the car or tamperformance. Therefore, for the first time, this paper proposes
a new federated learning-assisted distributed IDS using a mesh per with the vehicle’s critical parts, such as engines. Recent
satellite net to protect autonomous vehicles. We construct a local demonstrations have shown that attackers could use malmodel using a deep neural network. Then, we provide a mesh ware to control the vehicle via LEO satellites and issue
federated learning approach that keeps model training local and remote commands to unlock it, disable the alarm system, and
lets satellites exchange their parameters in a privacy-preserving start the vehicle engine [8]. Therefore, techniques to protect
way. The simulation results show that our proposed model works
well while keeping the computation cost reasonable. autonomous vehicles and cybersecurity solutions applied in
 the autonomous vehicles-satellite networks should be updated
 Index Terms—Consumer electronics, autonomous vehicles, to reflect the significant advancements in attacker capabilities
LEO satellite, federated learning, intrusion detection.
 and the characteristics of the autonomous vehicles and LEO
 satellites [9], [10]. Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is con-
 I. I NTRODUCTION sidered one of the critical parts of the first line of defence in
 any cybersecurity framework [9], [11].
 ITH the unprecedented deployment of Internet of
W Things (IoT) technologies and the advent of satellite
communications and 5G/6G cellular networks, the digitiza-
 Classical machine learning algorithms, such as decision
 tree, random forest, and support vector machine [12], [13]
 and other common Deep Learning (DL) algorithms, such as
tion of consumer electronics has exponentially increased. One
 a Recurrent Neural Network(RNN), have been widely used
of these intelligent consumer electronics is autonomous vehito build IDSs for satellite communications with intelligent
cles [1], where the idea of self-driving vehicles sharing the
 consumer electronics [14]. Among various DL algorithms,
road has recently become a reality. High-precision satellites
 Deep Neural Networks (DNN) seem to have many potenoffer the accuracy, ubiquitous connectivity, and reliability that
 tials [15]. DNN-based models for detecting cyber-attacks
vehicles need to be self-driving [2]. Hundreds of satellites in
 in autonomous vehicles [16] were also proposed, which
Low Earth orbit (LEO) and Geostationary Orbit (GEO) work
 can accurately differentiate between benign/normal and mali-
 Manuscript received 6 February 2023; revised 5 July 2023; accepted 21 cious traffic. However, IDS-based on DL necessitate powerful
September 2023. Date of publication 25 September 2023; date of current ver- computing capabilities in autonomous vehicles. Not to mension 26 April 2024. The authors extend their appreciation to the Deputyship for
Research & Innovation, Ministry of Education in Saudi Arabia for funding this tion that training models with higher complexities on an
research (IFKSURC-1-0305). (Corresponding author: M. Shamim Hossain.) autonomous vehicle can take time and effort. This central-
 Muna Al-Hawawreh is with the School of Information Technology, Deakin ized training task in the autonomous vehicle or even edge
University (Geelong Waurn Ponds Campus), Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216,
Australia (e-mail: muna.alhawawreh@deakin.edu.au). server places a computational load on the central node, which
 M. Shamim Hossain is with the Research Chair of Pervasive and Mobile attackers can also compromise [17], [18], making imple-
Computing and the Department of Software Engineering, College of Computer menting these centralized IDS on the autonomous vehicles
and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh 11543, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: mshossain@ksu.edu.sa). or edge server impractical. Therefore, training deep and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318727 machine learning model to protect autonomous vehicles while
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
AL-HAWAWREH AND HOSSAIN: FL-ASSISTED DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION USING MESH SATELLITE NETS 855

not leaking the privacy of training data is still a critical II. R ELATED W ORK
problem. Mesh satellite net-based FL-oriented communication, one
 Several approaches proposed in the literature showed that of the main enablers for AI-enabled human-centric con-
Federated Learning (FL) could deliver training tasks to intelli- sumer applications, has the potential to offer advanced vehicle
gent consumer electronics, in particular, autonomous vehicles protection services. Intelligent autonomous vehicles that are
in the intrusion detection field, without leaking training data human-centric and use the FL intrusion detection approach
privacy [11]. All autonomous vehicle nodes can build a global can improve consumers’ safety and are crucial for protecting
model without revealing the data. In traditional FL, each node consumers or drivers in dangerous environments. Therefore,
synchronously shares its parameters with a central server, researchers have recently focused on developing IDS-based
aggregating them and producing new parameters that are sent on FL to detect attacks against human-centric consumer appliback to the connected participants/nodes [19]. After the model cations. For example, Liu et al. [11] presented an FL model
aggregation, a key issue is with the safe storage of the global for protecting vehicular edge computing against attacks. They
model and the parameters at the edge/cloud server. The central- used DL to power many detection models distributed at the
ized server often has some risks of tampering, privacy leakage, vehicular edge and the base station layers. In the study of [21],
and single point of failure [17], [20]. In addition, these existing the authors used the client-server FL with software-defined
and traditional FL models for IDSs inherit the same draw- network architecture to secure vehicles in the IoT environment.
backs and limitations of client-server network architecture In related work, Yang et al. [22] used the client-server FL
in terms of scalability, efficient performance, limited vehicle and ConvLSTM algorithm with a node selection mechanism
resources, latency and bandwidth, making them inefficient for for autonomous vehicles. The experimental results showed
autonomous vehicles. the effectiveness of their proposed frameworks in terms of
 Therefore, we suggest using satellite nodes to build IDS for attack detection rate. Abou El Houda et al. [20] proposed
autonomous vehicles. Specifically, we propose a new paradigm a detection model for protecting IoT applications using FL
that distributes the intrusion detection tasks among a group of and Game theory. The authors used the non-cooperative game
LEO satellites in a mesh architecture (Mesh Satellite Nets) to ensure the provisioning of the required virtual resources
instead of sending all parameters or data to a central server or to deal with the detected attack. Li et al. [3] developed a
deploying the detection models in the vehicle. This integrates distributed network IDS for protecting satellite-terrestrial inteefficient training and asynchronous model sharing among grated networks from DDoS attacks using a CNN and FL
satellite nodes in a mesh network by federated deep learning to approach. While Yazdinejad et al. [23] used the FL and clusterensure reliable and resilient detection systems. By leveraging based machine learning algorithms for anomaly detection in
satellite-based monitoring, cyber-attacks against autonomous blockchain-based IoT systems. However, all the models menvehicles can be quickly and early detected, improving safety tioned above are based on client-server architecture. Privacy
and security. The proposed model collaboratively and auto- and security issues still exist as they use a central server
matically detects the attacks in a privacy-preserving manner. for parameter aggregation, and this server could become a
The main contributions are as follows: bottleneck for the whole network with increasing the num-
 1) We propose a FL-assisted distributed IDS using a satel- ber of connected nodes. In addition, the robustness, latency,
 lite mesh net for protecting the autonomous vehicle bandwidth, and scalability of client-server FL architecture are
 against cyber attacks. The proposed model provides challenging, especially for autonomous vehicles which connect
 more robustness and better privacy and security. To the directly with the LEO satellites.
 best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to present Many collaborative-based IDS are worth mentioning here
 an FL-based IDS in a mesh architecture using satellites to understand the current status of all significant IDSs for
 for intelligent electronic consumers (i.e., autonomous mesh architecture. For example, Arshad et al. [24] proposed
 vehicles). a collaborative approach by correlating the events gener-
 2) We present a new learning framework that employs FL ated by multiple intrusion detection models deployed in edge
 and DNN to enable collaborative mesh learning for LEO nodes and routers. The proposed approach mainly depended
 satellites and enhance attack detection in autonomous on statistics and threshold for correlating these events colvehicles. lected in a central server, making them highly vulnerable
 3) We perform many experiments using three intrusion to false alarms and single-point failure issues. Similarly,
 datasets to determine the efficiency of our proposed Wu et al. [25] presented a “Paradise”, a new real-time dismodel. tributed IDS for IoT systems. They exploited the critical
 4) The performance of the proposed model has been eval- features of provenance graphs to analyze the dependency of
 uated and compared with existing FL-based IDSs using events generated by multiple IDSs and construct new vectors.
 many performance metrics. In addition, a Cerebellar Model Articulation Controller-based
 The remainder of this work is organized as follows. IDS (CMACIDS) was proposed by Kumar et al. [26]. In
Section II presents the related work, and Section III pro- their proposed IDS, the authors used reinforcement learnvides the system model and architecture. Section IV introduces ing and b-spline fit for learning and system adaptability.
the proposed federated learning-assisted distributed intrusion Their proposed model was evaluated and obtained a good
detection using a mesh satellite net. Experimental evaluation precision of attack detection. Although these models mitigate
is introduced in Section V. Section VI concludes the work. the drawbacks of client-server architecture, they suffer from
856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. A mesh satellite net and the threat against autonomous vehicles.

security and privacy challenges that need further studies to model and without needing to communicate with a central
secure. server.
 The above discussion shows several intrusion detection Also, other satellite nodes can easily and quickly learn about
models in the literature, each of which has pros and cons. the attacks that their peers and autonomous vehicles face in
However, this paper proposes a mesh satellite net-based FL- the mesh architecture. Thus, in our proposed model, each node
assisted distributed intrusion detection for autonomous vehicle (i.e., LEO satellite) can get a trained intrusion detection model
protection. Our proposed model differs from what has been from other connected nodes in the mesh satellite net. It also
presented in the literature 1) it presents the idea of protect- acts as an IDS and uses the newly collected data from coning autonomous vehicles using satellite nodes and distributing nected autonomous vehicles to further train and update its
intrusion detection tasks among these nodes, and 2) it presents local model. Then, the node aggregates the network models of
a mesh architecture for exchanging training DL model param- multiple nodes to update their current detection model. Each
eters in a privacy-preserving manner. LEO satellite node communicates asynchronously with other
 network models. It should be noted that each LEO satellite
 node in the autonomous vehicle network has only one IDS
 III. P ROPOSED M ESH S ATELLITE N ET model and aggregates the received network models with its
 FOR AUTONOMOUS V EHICLES local model.
 The proposed mesh satellite net for the autonomous vehi- To ensure the privacy of the local data of each connected
cles’ network and the attacker activities against connected node in the network, each satellite node uses its own intrusion
vehicles through satellites are illustrated in Figure 1. The detection data to train its local model and then aggregates the
system consists of many connected autonomous vehicles that parameters of other trained models in the network without
use LEO satellites in their communications and navigation. disclosing local data, thereby ensuring the privacy and secu-
The LEO satellites form a mesh network (mesh satellite net) rity of their data. Our proposed model is fully decentralized
and exchange their training parameters asynchronously in the and distributed as multiple LEO satellites in mesh architecture
FL approach. In the attack scenario, attackers could exploit aggregate and update their network models asynchronously.
the direct satellite communication links to communicate with
LEO satellites, create a backdoor and inject malware into
 IV. P ROPOSED M ESH S ATELLITE N ET-BASED F EDERATED
the autonomous vehicle. The injected malware communicates
 L EARNING I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ODEL
back with the compromised PC, which acts as a command
& control server in the traffic control office (to avoid detec- A. Mesh Federated Learning Model
tion). With IDS based on mesh architecture and FL, each LEO Federated learning is used to train the DL-based intrusion
satellite node can quickly detect attacks against connected detection model (i.e., DNN) as described in Algorithm 1. The
autonomous vehicles as it depends on its local aggregation LEO satellite nodes (V) are the training nodes and aggregators
AL-HAWAWREH AND HOSSAIN: FL-ASSISTED DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION USING MESH SATELLITE NETS 857

Algorithm 1 Mesh Federated Learning Procedure Algorithm 2 Collaborative DNN Learning Procedure
Data: Initial model parameters (e.g., i, Di , Wi , m, Ai|j , μ) Data: Initial DNN parameters
Result: Global model Result: Trained DNN
for k ≤ K − 1 do for epoch ∈ Epoch_max do
 Update parameters for each node i Call Model.train()
 for i ∈ m do
 for i, Di ∈ training_data do
 Calculate wk+1
 i  Equation (5)
 using  Calculate optimizer.zero_grad()
 k k 2
 Calculate inf Ex i∈V qi (Wi ) + j∈M(i) ρ/2||Ai|j wi + Aj|i wj ||2 Calculate output = Model(input)
 wi |i∈V Calculate Li (w) using Equation (10)
 for i ∈ m do
 Select randomly j ∈ M(i) Calculate optimizer.zero_grad()
 Pull (wk+1 yk+1
 , Calculate Model.backward()
 j j|i ) from j
 Calculate Optimizer.step()
 zk+1
 Calculate  zki|j
 ykj|i + (1 − θ )
 i|j = (θ Calculate Optimizer.update()
 end end
 end end
end

  conjugate [27] of sum over the local-node cost
 the convex
for other network models. These LEO satellite nodes collect f k (w) = i∈V fik (wi ) = qk (w).
data from connected autonomous vehicles. The dataset vec-  ∗ 
 
tor of (ith) node Vi (i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , m), (m is the number of inf Ex f k AT λ + ι(1−P) (λ) (4)
connected nodes in the mesh satellite network), is defined as λ
(Di ). The weight vector trained on (Di ) is represented by (wi ). However, to reduce the loss function and update each node
When training node’s network model, we seek to minimize in the training process, the new weight parameter of the node
the sum of local-node costs while keeping the model param- after receiving the network models can be calculated using
eters the same across all connected nodes. This optimization Equation (5) and Equation (6) [17], [27].
problem can be formulated in Equation (1) and is subject to   
Ai|j wi + Aj|i wj = 0, (i ∈ V, j ∈ M(i)), where M(i) is the num- wk+1
 i = μw k
 i − F i wki
 ⎛ ⎞
ber of LEO satellite nodes connected with node (i) which is
   
similar for the whole other connected LEO satellite nodes in +⎝ zi|j + ρwj ⎠
 τi|j Ai|j
 T k k
our model (i.e., M(i) = m), and Ai|j ∈ R is the constraint j∈N(i)
parameter for the edge between two nodes (i, j). ⎛ ⎞
   
 inf Fi (Wi ) (1)  ⎝μ + diag τi|j + ρ|M(i)|⎠ (5)
 wi |i∈V i∈V j∈M(i)
  
 Because each step of the statistic gradient can be interpreted yk+1
  zki|j − 2Ai|j wk+1
 i|j =  i (6)
as minimizing a local quadratic function qki with Lipschitz
continuous gradient, and the DNN is continuously differen- Each pair of LEO satellite nodes exchanges and updates
tiable, the new value for weight parameters can be calculated its variables/parameters per around (R) updates for each conusing Equation (2) (where μ is a condition that forms the nected node in the mesh net (using a pull protocol). These
step size). Also, the previous cost function can be reformu- parameters include weights (wk+1 j yk+1
 ) and dual variable (j|i ).
lated in Equation (3) as a linearly constrained expectation It also use these values to calculate the new value of ( zk+1
 i|j )
minimization problem which is also subject to Ai|j wi +Aj|i wj = using Equation (7)
0, (i ∈ V, j ∈ M(i)) [27]. To find a robust solution to this con-  
 zk+1
 i|j = θ
 yk
 i|j + (1 − θ )
 z k
 i|j (7)
strained minimization problem, we also use the Augmented
Lagrangian method with ρ > 0.
     B. Collaborative Mesh Satellite Learning
 wk+1
 i = argmin qki (wi ) = wki − 1/μFi wki (2) A Deep Neural Network (DNN) algorithm is selected to
 w
 ⎡ i ⎤ accomplish the classification task of intrusion detection while
   protecting data privacy. DNN is a feedforward neural network
 inf Ex ⎣ qki (Wi ) + ρ/2||Ai|j wi + Aj|i wkj ||22 ⎦ (3)
 wi |i∈V
 that consists of an input layer, many hidden layers and one
 i∈V j∈M(i)
 output layer. The input layer maps the multiple inputs (Di ) to
 However, as we have a lifted dual-variable, i.e., λi|j and λj|i a single output. Assuming (Xi ) is the input samples of data
associated with the connected nodes that enable asynchronous owner (Di ), a simple DNN model (i.e., input, one hidden, and
and peer-to-peer communication in mesh architecture, the cost output layers) can be expressed as the hypothesis h(Xi , w),
function in Equation (3) is also reformulated to support this and trained locally by the data owner (Di ) as described in
communication and the learning process among nodes in the Algorithm 2.
mesh satellite net (as described in Equation (4) [27]). Where
 h(Xi , w) = FC1(FC2(FC3(Xi , wF C3), wF C2), wF C1) (8)
(ι(1−P) (λ)) is an indicator function that forces (λi|j ) and (λj|i )
to be identical and the permutation matrix (P) enables the where FC1(∗), FC2(∗), and FC3(∗) stand for the three fully
lifted dual variables between satellite nodes. Also, (f k )∗ is connected layers and (w∗) is the parameters of the DNN
858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 2. Training and communication among LEO satellite nodes based on FL in the autonomous vehicle environment.

layers. The output of h(Xi , w) is calculated using a softmax X-IIoTID [29] and Ton-IoT datasets [30] as they represent
classifier as described in Equation (9). the modern network traffic and system activities of consumer
 electronics, including autonomous vehicles in the era of IoT.
 Ypred = softmax(h(Xi , w)) (9) Also, we use the NSL-KDD [31] as a benchmark dataset for
 Moreover, we use the negative log-likelihood as a cost intrusion detection. The X-IIoTID includes more than 421,400
function as the proposed model has many attack types. It is records for normal data and provides 399,417 attack records,
computed over a batch of collected observations (B) for data which correspond to various new and critical attacks. The
owner Di using Equation (10). TON-IoT dataset consists of 300000 records for normal traf-
 ⎧ ⎫ fic and 161044 for attacks. The NSL-KDD dataset consists
 ⎨ B cat    B ⎬
  T T i of 77,054 normal and 71460 attack records. The datasets are
LI (w) = −1/B Y i = P log ewp X n / ewp X divided into two forms: 1) The IID data, where data is evenly
 ⎩ ⎭
 q=1 p=1 q=1 distributed among the LEO satellite nodes (i.e., they have the
 (10) same number of classes), 2) The non-IID, where the data is dis-
 Each connected LEO satellite node pulls the network tributed differently, and each LEO satellite node has different
models and then uses the data collected from connected data records and classes.
autonomous vehicles to perform local learning to train The experiments tested many performance metrics, includits local model. The weight wk+1 yk+1
 and dual variable  ing loss, accuracy (Acc), precision (P), recall (R), and
 i i|j
are calculated under the specified data and then this node F1-Score (F1). The experimental parameters were selected
exchanges and pulls these parameters at random time (k) based on many experiments where they achieved the best
from other network nodes wk+1 yk+1
 , performance (as listed in Table I). We also choose to test 3,
 j j|i . It should be noted
that only the encrypted parameters are exchanged among the 5, and 7 nodes, similar to most studies in the literature. In
connected LEO satellite nodes. Figure 2 shows the training addition, we evaluate the performance of our proposed model
and parameter sharing process among the connected LEO compared with the centralized DNN, where the entire training
satellite nodes in the mesh architecture. data is in a central server (e.g., a ground station). We start by
 assessing the effectiveness of the proposed model’s learning.
 The proposed model’s training process is examined by observ-
 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
 ing how the loss decreases during the aggregation process of
A. Model Evaluation the network model. Figures 3 and 4 show the value of loss dur-
 The third-party library Pytorch was used for the implemen- ing the training of both models using IID and non-IID data for
tation and system model’s simulation on the high-performance NSL-KDD, Ton-IoT, and X-IIoTID datasets, respectively. It is
computer (National Computational Infrastructure (NCI)- clear that both models tended to converge and reduce the loss
Australia) [28]. The datasets used in this experiment include with an increasing number of epochs, and both models are
AL-HAWAWREH AND HOSSAIN: FL-ASSISTED DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION USING MESH SATELLITE NETS 859

 TABLE I
 PARAMETERS OF P ROPOSED M ODEL

 Fig. 5. Accuracy in the case of IID data distribution.

Fig. 3. Loss in the case of IID data distribution.

 Fig. 6. Accuracy in the case of non-IID data distribution.

 its capabilities in dealing with the mobility and heterogeneous
 data of autonomous vehicles.
 Table II shows the detailed performance of the proposed
 model in terms of Acc, P, R, and F1 under a different number of LEO satellite nodes (i.e., 3, 5, and 7) and for IID data
 distribution of X-IIoTID, TON-IoT, and NSL-KDD datasets.
Fig. 4. Loss in the case of non-IID data distribution. It can be easily seen that when the number of nodes =3,
 all LEO satellite nodes (i.e., 1, 2, 3) have approximately the
 same values for performance metrics and for all datasets. We
equivalent in their loss values. Notably, the proposed model also obtained the same observation in our experiments with
performs well with non-IID data and performs better than the 5 and 7 nodes, where all nodes have identical performance.
centralized one, particularly for the NSL-KDD and TON-IoT Also, as the number of LEO satellite nodes increases from
datasets. 3 to 7, the performance of each model in each node gener-
 The experiment tested the accuracy of models under differ- ally improves for the X-IIoTID dataset. For instance, from 3
ent epochs. Figures 5 and 6 show that the accuracy increases to 7 nodes, it increased from 96.24% to 97.52%, 97.31% to
with the increasing number of epochs. When the epoch is in 98.03%, 96.24% to 97.52%, and 96.74% to 97.70% for Acc, P,
the range of 15-50, the accuracy slightly increases, and the R, and F1, respectively. However, the experiments with TONmodels start reaching convergence. While for the TON-IoT IoT dataset show that the proposed model achieved the best
dataset, the increase is not apparent between 15-50 epochs, performance when the number of LEO satellite nodes is 3,
it quickly reaches convergence in both figures and for both and the performance decreases when the number of nodes
IID and non-IID data. This is because TON-IoT is an easy increases. For example, when the number of LEO satellite
dataset and can be understood quickly. Overall, the proposed nodes is 3, all nodes achieved 100% for all performance metmodel performed stably for the non-IID data (as described in rics. Also, the performance with 5 and 7 LEO satellite nodes
Figure 6) and the same results are obtained for IID and for all ranges between 99.97% to 99.98% for all metrics.
datasets. The convergence-curve behavior, i.e., accuracy and Table III also presents the numerical results of all considloss curves, did not significantly change with data distribution ered intrusion detection models with non-IID data and varying
among LEO satellite nodes. Therefore, the proposed algo- datasets under a different number of nodes (i.e., 3, 5, and 7).
rithm is robust against non-IID and IID data, demonstrating The proposed model generally has a good performance with
860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 T HE P ERFORMANCE OF O UR P ROPOSED M ODEL ON IID DATA

 TABLE III
 T HE P ERFORMANCE OF O UR P ROPOSED M ODEL ON N ON -IID DATA

 TABLE IV
all datasets and nodes. Importantly, it has stable performance AVERAGE P ROCESSING T IME (S ECONDS ) P ER E POCH AND N ODE
and is similar to the IID data. The experiments with X-IIoTID
show that accuracy ranges from 97.27% to 97.96%, and from
97.53% to 98.01%, 97.27% to 97.96%, 97.11% to 97.92%
for P, R, and F1, respectively. With the TON-IoT dataset, the
Acc and R range from 98.67% to 99.99%, 99.38% to 99.99%,
and from 98.63% to 99.99% for P and F1, respectively. Also,
the results of the NSL-KDD dataset range from 94.27% to
95.66% for Acc and R while 96.07% to 96.75% and 94.95%
 high for the three datasets, proving our proposed model’s
to 96.02% for P and F1, respectively.
 efficiency.
 The detection rates for the different attacks and three
datasets are shown in Figure 7(a), 7(b), and 7(c). The results
include the detection rate for each attack under centralized, B. Time Complexity Analysis
IID, and Non-IID data distribution. It can be seen that the We calculated the average processing time, including the
performance of our proposed model in classifying different time of training, transferring, exchanging and updating paramtypes of attacks in the TON-IoT dataset is approximately eters. Each node exchanges its parameters 220 communication
identical. This is mainly because of the distinguishable fea- rounds, with 11000 total communication rounds. Table IV
tures of each attack in this dataset. For NSL-KDD, the attack shows the calculated value for three datasets. As described in
detection was a bit challenging due to the minor classes and the Table, the average processing time (seconds) per epoch and
lack of the appropriate number of attack observations for the node is varied between the number of LEO satellite nodes and
training model appropriately. However, most importantly, we the data distribution (i.e., IID or non-IID). More specifically,
can observe that the detection rate of attacks is relatively the value of average processing increases with the number
AL-HAWAWREH AND HOSSAIN: FL-ASSISTED DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION USING MESH SATELLITE NETS 861

Fig. 7. Detection rate of different attack type.

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH AVAILABLE W ORKS cost limitations in autonomous vehicles, making them unsuitable for consumer electronics (i.e., vehicles) and even satellite
 networks. All these weaknesses of the existing models have
 been resolved in our proposed model using a mesh satellite net
 architecture.
 Our proposed model is fully decentralized and employs
 a mesh architecture without a centralized server or a need
 to select participants to provide better flexibility. It can
of connected nodes (i.e., 3, 5, 7). It ranges from 23.31 to handle heterogeneous data efficiently, as demonstrated in
32.23 seconds for X-IIoTID, 12.84 to 18.85 seconds for TON- non-IID experiments. It is also able to detect malicious behav-
IoT, and 4.92 to 7.88 seconds for NSL-KDD datasets. Also, ior and identify its type efficiently. However, our proposed
the average processing time for non-IID data is less than for model has some limitations associated with trust in the con-
IID for three datasets. The model seems to learn quickly when nected nodes, necessitating blockchain implementation. Also,
it has less number of classes. In addition, because of its small selecting the best DNN structure is challenging and may
size, the NSL-KDD dataset has the least average process- affect the detection model performance. This limitation could
ing time. Overall, the proposed model consumes a reasonable be solved using evolutionary algorithms such as a genetic
amount of time, irrespective of the data size and distribu- algorithm.
tion, which makes it suitable for detecting attacks against
autonomous vehicles quickly and without any overhead on
LEO satellites. VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 Autonomous vehicles are one of the recent advances in intelligent consumer electronics. While this advent of technology
C. Comparison With Available Works has provided more efficient infrastructure and increased road
 This subsection explores other works comparable to our safety, it has also come with challenges associated with cybermodel and evaluates their accuracy and detection rate/recall security. Therefore, this paper proposed a new detection model
performance. We selected L-MGVN [32] and FedCNN- that uses a mesh satellite net architecture and asynchronous
MLP [19] using the NSL-KDD dataset in this comparison. FL to identify cyber-attacks against autonomous vehicles. Our
Table V shows that our proposed model achieves high accu- proposed model mainly focuses on enabling distributed intelracy and recall compared with other models. Both FL-MGVN ligence and decision-making related to attack detection for
and FedCNN-MLP have low-performance detecting attacks, autonomous vehicles using LEO satellite nodes securely and
ranging from 57.10% to 66.88%. This is because FedCNN- reliably. Its performance was evaluated using three datasets
MLP and FL-MGVN models use client-server FL, where (including IID and non-IID), demonstrating its efficiency in
the average of parameters of selected connected nodes (not attack detection.
all) is calculated in the server to create a global model, In future work, we will focus on improving the model
and the selected connected nodes upload their models syn- performance and studying the effect of implementing the
chronously. Thus, choosing specific nodes in the training blockchain in the communication and exchange of parameters
process for the global model could lead to not learning about among LEO satellites on the model performance. We also plan
all attacks. These client-server FL models also have some to test the model in a simulated environment of autonomous
risks of tampering, privacy leakage, and a single point of vehicles communicating with LEO satellites and investigate its
failure on the server side. It also has scalability, flexibility, and performance in such a setup.
862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 R EFERENCES [22] J. Yang, J. Hu, and T. Yu, “Federated AI-enabled in-vehicle network
 intrusion detection for Internet of Vehicles,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 22,
 [1] J. Georgy, A. Noureldin, and C. Goodall, “Vehicle navigator p. 3658, 2022.
 using a mixture particle filter for inertial sensors/odometer/mapdata/ [23] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, M. Hammoudeh,
 GPSintegration,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 58, no. 2, H. Karimipour, and G. Srivastava, “Block hunter: Federated learning for
 pp. 544–552, May 2012. cyber threat hunting in blockchain-based IIoT networks,” IEEE Trans.
 [2] D. Parekh et al., “A review on autonomous vehicles: Progress, methods Ind. Inform., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 8356–8366, Nov. 2022.
 and challenges,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 14, p. 2162, 2022. [24] J. Arshad, M. A. Azad, M. M. Abdellatif, M. H. U. Rehman, and
 [3] C. Li, L. Zhu, M. Luglio, Z. Luo, and Z. Zhang, “Research on satellite K. Salah, “COLIDE: A collaborative intrusion detection framework for
 network security mechanism based on blockchain technology,” in Proc. Internet of Things,” IET Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 3–14, 2019.
 IEEE Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Commun. (ISNCC), 2021, pp. 1–6. [25] Y. Wu et al., “Paradise: Real-time, generalized, and distributed
 [4] C.-Y. Yang, J.-F. J. Yao, C.-E. Yen, and M.-S. Hwang, “Overview on provenance-based intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure
 physical layer security in low earth orbit (LEO) satellite system,” in Comput., vol. 20,no. 2, pp. 1624–1640, Mar./Apr. 2020.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE-TW), 2021, pp. 1–2. [26] G. Kumar, R. Saha, M. Conti, R. Thomas, T. Devgun, and J. Rodrigues,
 [5] H. Guo, J. Li, J. Liu, N. Tian, and N. Kato, “A survey on space-air- “Adaptive intrusion detection in edge computing using cerebellar model
 ground-sea integrated network security in 6G,” IEEE Commun. Surveys articulation controller and spline fit,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput.,
 Tuts., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 53–87, 1st Quart., 2021. vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 900–912, Mar./Apr. 2023.
 [6] S. Kuutti, S. Fallah, K. Katsaros, M. Dianati, F. Mccullough, and [27] K. Niwa, N. Harada, G. Zhang, and W. B. Kleijn, “Edge-consensus
 A. Mouzakitis, “A survey of the state-of-the-art localization techniques learning: Deep learning on P2P networks with nonhomogeneous data,”
 and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications,” IEEE Internet in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
 Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 829–846, Apr. 2018. pp. 668–678.
 [7] S. McLachlan, B. Schafer, K. Dube, E. Kyrimi, and N. Fenton, [28] “National computational infrastructure.” Accessed: Aug. 2021. [Online].
 “Tempting the fate of the furious: Cyber security and autonomous cars,” Available: https://nci.org.au/
 Int. Rev. Law Comput. Technol., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 181–201, 2022. [29] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “X-IIoTID:
 [8] T. Pultarova, “News-cyber security-hacking behind third of London’s A connectivity-agnostic and device-agnostic intrusion data set for
 car theft [news briefing],” Eng. Technol., vol. 9, no. 9, p. 10, 2014. Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 [9] L. Yang, A. Shami, G. Stevens, and S. De Rusett, “LCCDE: A decision- pp. 3962–3977, Mar. 2022.
 based ensemble framework for intrusion detection in the Internet of [30] M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, N. Moustafa, and M. Portmann, “Netflow
 Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2022, datasets for machine learning-based network intrusion detection
 pp. 3545–3550. systems,” in Big Data Technologies and Applications. Heidelberg,
[10] A. R. Mahlous, “Cyber security challenges in self-driving cars,” Comput. Germany: Springer, 2020, pp. 117–135.
 Fraud Security, vol. 2022, no. 7, pp. 1–8, 2022. [31] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed anal-
[11] H. Liu et al., “Blockchain and federated learning for collaborative intru- ysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Intell.
 sion detection in vehicular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., Security Defense Appl., 2009, pp. 1–6.
 vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 6073–6084, Jun. 2021. [32] D. Wu, Y. Deng, and M. Li, “FL-MGVN: Federated learning for
[12] Y. Goh, D. Jung, G. Hwang, and J.-M. Chung, “Consumer electronics anomaly detection using mixed gaussian variational self-encoding
 product manufacturing time reduction and optimization using AI-based network,” Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 59, no. 2, 2022, Art. no. 102839.
 PCB and VLSI circuit designing,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron.,
 vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 240–249, Aug. 2023.
[13] R. Gundu and M. Maleki, “Securing CAN bus in connected and
 autonomous vehicles using supervised machine learning approaches,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Technol. (eIT), 2022, pp. 42–46.
[14] S. Dasgupta, M. Rahman, M. Islam, and M. Chowdhury, “A sensor fusion-based GNSS spoofing attack detection framework for
 autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, Muna Al-Hawawreh (Member, IEEE) is an Assistant Professor of
 pp. 23559–23572, Dec. 2022. Cybersecurity with the School of Information Technology, Deakin University
[15] P. Dixit and S. Silakari, “Deep learning algorithms for cybersecurity (Geelong Waurn Ponds Campus), Waurn Ponds, VIC, Australia.
 applications: A technological and status review,” Comput. Sci. Rev.,
 vol. 39, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 100317.
[16] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage
 intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems
 using rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., early access, Sep. 8, 2022,
 doi: 10.1109/TITS.2022.3202869.
[17] M. Al-Hawawreh, E. Sitnikova, and N. Aboutorab, “Asynchronous peer- M. Shamim Hossain (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently a Professor with the
 to-peer federated capability-based targeted ransomware detection model Department of Software Engineering, College of Computer and Information
 for Industrial IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 148738–148755, 2021. Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. He is the Highly Cited
[18] Y. Yang et al., “ASTREAM: Data-stream-driven scalable anomaly detec- Researcher in the field of Computer Science (Web of Science). He is the Chair
 tion with accuracy guarantee in IIoT environment,” IEEE Trans. Netw. of the IEEE Special Interest Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health with
 Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 3007–3016, Sep./Oct. 2023. the IEEE ComSoc eHealth Technical Committee. He is the Symposium Chair
[19] W. Liu et al., “Intrusion detection for maritime transportation systems of Selected Areas in Communications (E-Health) with IEEE GLOBECOM
 with batch federated aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2024. He is the Technical Program Co-Chair of ACM Multimedia 2023. He
 vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2503–2514, Feb. 2023. is currently the Chair of the Saudi Arabia Section of the Instrumentation
[20] Z. Abou El Houda, B. Brik, A. Ksentini, L. Khoukhi, and M. Guizani, and Measurement Society Chapter. He is on the editorial board of
 “When federated learning meets game theory: A cooperative frame- the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NSTRUMENTATION AND M EASUREMENT,
 work to secure IIoT applications on edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Ind. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M ULTIMEDIA, ACM Transactions on Multimedia
 Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7988–7997, Nov. 2022. Computing, Communications, and Applications, IEEE M ULTIMEDIA, IEEE
[21] A. Hbaieb, S. Ayed, and L. Chaari, “Federated learning based IDS N ETWORK, IEEE W IRELESS C OMMUNICATIONS, and Journal of Network
 approach for the IoV,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Availability Rel. Security, and Computer Applications (Elsevier). He is a Distinguished Member of
 2022, pp. 1–6. ACM. He is an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer.