2618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Federated Learning-Based Personalized
 Recommendation Systems: An Overview on
 Security and Privacy Challenges
 Danish Javeed , Student Member, IEEE, Muhammad Shahid Saeed, Prabhat Kumar , Member, IEEE,
 Alireza Jolfaei , Senior Member, IEEE, Shareeful Islam, and A. K. M. Najmul Islam , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The recent advancement in next-generation show an increase of U.S.$ 125.5 billion between 2023 and
Consumer Electronics (CE) has created the problems of 2028 [1]. These facts show the tremendous and steep growth
information overload and information loss. The significance of of the CE devices and as a result, a “data lake” is expected to
Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS) to efficiently and
effectively extract useful user information is seen as an ideal be formed. The majority of CE is connected to the Internet to
solution to provide users with personalized content and services offer consumers countless services [2]. However, the amount of
and therefore is used in different application domains including information on the Internet has significantly outpaced the need
healthcare, e-commerce, social media, etc. Security and privacy of consumer requirements and, thus poses an information overare the two major challenges of the existing PRS for next-gen load problem that prevents timely access to online resources
CE data. Federated learning (FL) has the potential to elevate
the aforementioned challenges by sharing local recommender of interest [3]. This has led to a greater-than-ever growth
parameters while keeping all the training data on the device and in demand for recommender systems. Recommender systems
therefore is seen as a promising technique to enhance security are information filtering systems that address the issue of
and privacy in PRS for the next-gen CE data. In this survey, information overload by selecting key information fragments
we have first discussed the enhancement of the existing CE from enormous amounts of dynamically generated data in accortechnologies, a holistic review of security and privacy challenges
in current PRS, and the advantage of FL-based PRS for dance with user choices, interests, or observed behavior towards
next-gen CE. Finally, we list a few open issues and challenges the item [4]. Furthermore, there is a lot of research being
that can guide researchers and practitioners to further drive done on Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS), which
research in this promising area. leverage personalization in the domain of product recommenda-
 Index Terms—Consumer electronics, federated learning, pri- tions [5]. On another hand, most PRS uses centralized servers
vacy, personalized recommendation systems, security. to store and process consumer data. Specifically, the cloud
 servers are equipped with powerful computing resources and
 I. I NTRODUCTION therefore are used to understand, visualize and extract perti-
 HE RECENT advancement in Artificial Intelligence nent information. However, sending the consumer confidential
T (AI) Virtual Reality (VR)/Augmented Reality (AR), and
Internet of Things (IoT) has significantly revolutionized the
 data to cloud servers brings some inherent challenges related
 to security and privacy, where the attacker or malicious cloud
Consumer Electronics (CE) market. According to the “Statista can hack or steal PRS data, and it can result in data leaks and
Research Department”, the global revenue of CE market will identity theft [6], [7]. The data might also be sold to third-party
 companies that want to utilize it for product recommendation,
 Manuscript received 25 April 2023; revised 21 July 2023; accepted 21 which is another potential privacy problem.
September 2023. Date of publication 25 September 2023; date of current
version 26 April 2024. This work was supported by the European Union’s Federated Learning (FL) is one of the emerging technolo-
Horizon Europe Research and Innovation Program under Grant 101120779, gies that enable the execution of machine learning models
CyberSecDome—An innovative virtual reality based intrusion detection, inci- in a distributed manner. In FL-based PRS, CE devices are
dent investigation and response approach for enhancing the resilience, security,
privacy and accountability of complex and heterogeneous digital systems and not needed to exchange their own data; instead, they train
infrastructures. (Corresponding author: Prabhat Kumar.) on-device using model parameters that are given by a coor-
 Danish Javeed is with the Software College, Northeastern University, dinating server [8]. The model is specifically trained locally
Shenyang 110169, China (e-mail: 2027016@stu.neu.edu.cn).
 Muhammad Shahid Saeed is with the Department of Computer by all participating users, and updated model parameters are
Science, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China (e-mail: communicated with the cloud server to conduct aggregashahidsaeedrana@gmail.com). tion and to create a new set of parameters to be utilized
 Prabhat Kumar and A. K. M. Najmul Islam are with the Department
of Software Engineering, LUT School of Engineering Science, LUT in the following iteration [9]. Until a specific degree of
University, 53850 Lappeenranta, Finland (e-mail: prabhat.kumar@lut.fi; accuracy is reached, this procedure is repeated continuously
najmul.islam@lut.fi). over a number of iterations. Even though the FL-based
 Alireza Jolfaei is with the College of Science and Engineering,
Flinders University, Adelaide, SA 5042, Australia (e-mail: alireza.jolfaei@ PRS solves the security and privacy issues of consumers
flinders.edu.au). but still it has some other challenges related to compu-
 Shareeful Islam is with the School of Computing and Information tation and communication cost, explainability in FL-based
Science, Anglia Ruskin University, CB1 1PT Cambridge, U.K.
(e-mail: shareeful.islam@aru.ac.uk). PRS, and working of FL-based PRS in 5G and beyond
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3318754 networks.
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 2619

Fig. 1. Advancements in the Next-gen Consumer Electronics.

A. Our Contribution potentially revolutionize how we interact with our devices
 The main contributions of this survey paper are as follows: in CE. For instance, smart homes and virtual assistants have
First, we discussed the relationship between consumer elec- made significant progress in recent years, allowing us to contronics with personalized recommendation systems (PRS) and trol our home devices with our voices. The Next-gen CE will
how federated learning can enhance the security and privacy have more sophisticated AI and ML algorithms, enabling them
challenges in PRS for the next-gen CE data. Second, we have to learn from our behavior and provide personalized experidiscussed the state-of-the-art techniques used to enhance data ences [3]. Moreover, AI and ML can enhance the cameras
privacy and security and low-latency network communication. and sensors on our devices. They can automatically adjust the
The rest of the article is organized as follows: In Section II, we lighting, contrast, and focus based on the user’s environment,
gave an overview of next-gen CE, PRS, and FL. In Section III, ensuring the best possible photo or video. Furthermore, AI
we discussed the shortcoming of PRS and how FL-based PRS can be used to power facial recognition technology, allowing
can enhance security and privacy. In Section IV, we discussed our devices to unlock or authenticate purchases with a single
the challenges in implementing FL-based PRS for next-gen glance [17].
CE and finally, we conclude the paper in Section V. 2) Augmented Reality: Augmented reality (AR) is another
 technology molding the Next-gen CE. AR can lay over digital
 content in the real world, resulting in a flawless blend of the
 II. P RELIMINARIES physical and virtual worlds [18]. It is already being used in
A. Overview of Next-Gen Consumer Electronics mobile apps, such as Pokemon Go and Snapchat, but it is
 Consumer electronics have always been a driving force in expected to be used in a wider range of CE devices in the
technology innovation. From the invention of the television future. AR could be used in smart glasses, for example, to
to the first mobile phone, these devices have changed how provide users with a heads-up display of information or to
we communicate, entertain ourselves, and our daily lives [10], overlay digital content onto real-world objects.
[11]. Today, we are on the edge of the next generation of 3) Virtual Reality: Virtual reality (VR) is another techconsumer electronics (Next-gen CE), and the possibilities are nology that is shifting the Next-gen CE. VR can generate
endless. Next-gen CE is the latest and upcoming electronic immersive digital atmospheres in which users can interrelate
device designed to enhance user experience and offer advanced and explore. VR is already used in entertainment and gamfeatures, capabilities, and performance. These devices are built ing [19], but it is likely to be used in a wider range of CE
using cutting-edge technologies characterized by their ability devices in the upcoming years. It could be used in education
to connect seamlessly with other devices, services, and plat- to create mesmerizing learning experiences, or in healthcare
forms. Fig. 1 shows the recent advancement in the next-gen to imitate medical procedures.
CE. Some of the key trends and advancements in the next-gen 4) Extended Reality (XR): Extended Reality (XR) is a term
CE include [2]: that defines the spectrum of technologies encompassing VR,
 1) Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML): AR, and mixed reality (MR). XR is capable of changing the
One of the most significant technological advancements over way we experience education, medical treatment, entertainthe past decade has been the rise of AI and ML. These tech- ment, and education [20]. The advancement in standalone VR
nologies have been integrated into various industries, including and AR headsets is one of the most substantial progresses in
smart agriculture [12], healthcare [13], finance [14], smart XR. Such devices provide users with complete mobility by
industries [15], and transportation [16]. AI and ML can not needing a smartphone or a PC to function. Further, they
2620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

are also affordable in price, making them more reachable to algorithm accounted for more than 30% of the total sales
the average consumer. XR can also be used to improve educa- volume. Moreover, RS is a vital component of cloud comtional experiences by letting students discover historical sites, puting [6], [7]. While the CF systems have seen significant
witness scientific phenomena, and even conduct experiments success, several disadvantages still remain, i.e., scalability
in a simulated environment [21]. cold-start, etc. The researchers have proposed various tech-
 5) Wearables: Wearable Technology (WT) has been niques to solve such issues. For example, the authors of [36]
around for a while, with devices like smartwatches and fitness and [37] proposed hybrid recommendation models to elimtrackers, becoming progressively popular in recent years. The inate the cold-start. Moreover, in [38], the authors claim
next generation of WT promises to be even more influential, that Singular Value Decomposition and Matrix Factorization
with devices that can measure the activity of a human brain, models can efficiently eliminate sparsity issues.
monitor health metrics, and even analyze sweat to analyze
hydration levels [22]. WT will also become more integrated
into our daily lives. For example, smart clothing, which is C. Federated Learning Concept
capable of monitoring vital signs and adjusting its temperature The demand for a significant amount of data for ML/DL
based on the environment of the user. Wearables will also grow model training in CE has prompted a slew of projects aiming
more sophisticated, with gadgets that look like jewellery [23]. at pooling data from disparate sources. The CE data, on the
 6) Smart Homes: The rise of smart homes will also change other hand, may have substantial commercial value, making it
the Next-gen CE. It uses Internet-connected devices to auto- less to freely share with cloud providers.
mate and regulate several household tasks, such as light Federated Learning (FL) addresses data governance chalsystems, security, and heating [24]. Smart home devices are lenges and privacy concerns by empowering shared learning
already popular, with products like Amazon Echo and Nest without data centralization. For example, FL resolves the
Thermostat [25]. Nevertheless, the next generation of smart issue of insufficient data by providing data privacy, trust fachome devices is expected to be even more advanced. For exam- tor between heterogeneous domains, and delocalization [39].
ple, smart home devices could be furnished with AI abilities to It is an ML-based method that allows multiple devices or
learn from the behavior of the user and make decisions about systems to collaboratively train a model without sharing their
controlling numerous household functions [26]. raw data with a Central Server (CS). Instead, the training
 takes place locally on each device or system, and only the
 updates to the model parameters are communicated to a CS,
B. Personalized Recommendation System where they are aggregated to form an improved model. At
 Recommendation Technology (RT) is a key component the same time, having a model trained on larger landscape
of IoT services since it may be in assistance of con- data is another advantage of this federated environment. With
sumers in getting information and better service anytime, its advanced architectures, it has transformed many AI-based
anyplace [27]. A personalized recommendation system (PRS) applications by providing novel privacy-enhancing and disis a type of information filtering system that anticipates a tributed AI solutions [40]. FL is especially appealing for
user’s interests or preferences and recommends content that constructing dispersed CE systems because it pushes AI tasks,
is likely to be of interest to them. These technologies are such as data training, to the network edge at CE devices where
often employed to deliver a more personalized experience for the data resides. Consequently, the data of the user is never
users in e-commerce, social networking, and entertainment exchanged openly with a third party, consenting to cooperplatforms [4]. Some key concepts in PRS are Content-Based ative training of a shared Global Model (GM) that benefits
Filtering (CBF), Collaborative Filtering (CF), Hybrid Filtering the CE users and network operators with regard to privacy
(HF), User Profile (UP), and Item Profile (IP). The CF is improvement and network resource savings.
considered the most well-known and adopted recommendation The FL concept in CE networks comprises CE devices and
technique [28], [29]. It predicts a user’s preferences based on an Aggregation Server (AS). The AS is located at the Access
the preferences of other users who exhibit similar behavior or Point (AP) or Base Station (BS), as shown in Fig. 2. In the
have comparable interests. It can be based on user-based or Next-gen CE network, the FL plays a vital role in achievitem-based similarity [30], [31]. The CF has no specific cri- ing complete intelligence in CE system at the network edge
teria, such as metadata or description for the recommended since the BS is not capable of gathering the data from the
goods. It is capable of dealing with a wide range of things, scattered CE devices for training. In the FL process, each CE
including books and music [32]. As a result, it has been widely user trains a shared model where each device or system has
used in commercial applications [33]. its own dataset, and they are not all combined into a cen-
 On the other hand, CPF predicts a user’s preferences based tral dataset. After this, a Local Model (LM) trains the ML
on the characteristics of the items that the user has interacted model on a device or system using the local data. The LM is
with or shown interest in. It can be based on item features or updated with each training iteration and is used to compute
item descriptions [5]. Moreover, the HF combines CF and CBF the updates that are sent to the CS. It is responsible for coorto provide personalized recommendations. It can overcome dinating the training process across the devices and systems.
the limitations of each technique and provide more accu- Hereinafter, the CS receives updates from LMs and aggregates
rate and diverse recommendations [34]. According to a recent them to form an improved GM without considerably comproanalysis by the authors of [35], Amazon’s recommendation mising the privacy of the user data. The model aggregation can
JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 2621

 superficially precarious approach that is technically complex
 in nature. The adversarial elements send a series of specially
 constructed queries to the recommendation system and then
 analyze the system’s responses against identical queries to
 draw an answering pattern. After examining a handful of
 streams of queries along with recommendations, the attacker
 may retrieve sensitive information about the consumers that
 was not intended to be disclosed. In the absence of an adequate
 security matrix, PRS may be a desired target for such crucial
 attacks that flash an alarming situation to exploit the privacy
 and confidentiality of consumers [44]. Various research studies
 objectify the algorithm of PRS in terms of its limited immunity
 against mega-security threats. The algorithm is highly susceptible to systematic alterations, leading to unfair analysis of data
 and biased recommendations. The weakness of the algorithm
Fig. 2. Architecture of FL for CE. makes the overall durability of PRS a question mark [45].
 In the case of next-gen CE, higher accuracy in recommendations is a vital objective to be achieved. Additionally, the
be performed using various techniques, including federated recommendation system should be capable enough to provide
averaging and FL with differential privacy [48]. consumers with diversified recommendations for preferable
 decision-making. The adaptability of new preferences from
 the consumer side is another common phenomenon that mod-
 III. OVERVIEW OF FL-BASED PRS FOR N EXT-G EN
 ern recommendation systems are suffering from. An effective
 C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS
 PRS should be responsive enough to adopt new preferences
A. Security and Privacy Challenges in PRS for Next-Gen and return up-to-date recommendations. The weak algorithm
Consumer Electronics may not only lack the ability to provide accurate and diversi-
 Personalized Recommendation Systems (PRS) have sur- fied recommendations but may also lack the ability to maintain
prisingly revolutionized the way users interact with next- updated recommendations [46].
gen CE by acting as an advisory bridge between CE and The next major challenge is operational transparency to
end-consumers. However, some potential security and pri- avoid any misconceptions regarding the large amounts of
vacy challenges are associated with it that possess notorious consumer data taken by PRS. While considering the confidenimpacts [49]. PRS majorly relies on collecting tons of con- tiality and privacy norms of consumers’ data, the information
sumers’ data, including their interaction patterns, browsing collected from individuals must be treated in an ethical way by
history, cookies, frequently called queries, etc. [50]. The data ensuring transparency in its usage [47]. Transparency should
may also contain personally Identifiable Information (PII), also be provided in practical aspects by educating the end consuch as an identity number, credit card details, and banking sumers about the way recommendations are generated. Some
credentials. The data stored in PRS is then analyzed to predict recommendation systems obtain consumer data irrespective
the behavior of consumers towards a specific entity [31]. The of future use, including location and their interaction patentire process of collecting, storing, and analyzing consumers’ terns with other devices. Consumers must be aware of the
data increases the probability of malicious activities and makes futuristic scope of this data and its possible relevance to get-
PRS a favorite target for attackers. Unauthorized access to ting more personalized recommendations. The negligence may
the system’s resources is one of the most common adver- encourage the unwanted sharing of this data with third-party
sarial practices performed by the bad elements. Despite such organizations for various other purposes. Hence, there must
unauthorized access, the extensive operational process of PRS be an appropriate framework to provide consumers with usemay have consequences that may disclose the confidentiality, ful insight into their data and its processing operations to
authenticity, and even integrity of consumers’ data in some get recommendations about next-gen CE. Table I provides a
scenarios [41]. Data breaching is another possible malicious comprehensive insight into the existing security and privacy
approach that may be performed by attackers to obtain valu- challenges for PRS in next-gen CE.
able information from consumers. Such a hazardous situation 1) Secure Data Sharing Issues: While employing a PRS
leads to a variety of serious risks, including identity theft, mis- for specific recommendations in next-gen CE, secure data
use of data, and reputational damage [42]. Access to online sharing between authorized entities should be the promibanking data opens the door to a variety of finance-related nent objective. To meet such desired secure communication
fraudulent activities as well, which is another serious challenge challenges, PRS must be competent enough to mitigate the
currently surrounding PRS [43]. possibilities of any unwanted data security threat in the
 Inference attack is another major challenge in PRS that may future. PRS collects a diversified variety of consumer data to
have critical outcomes. This attack is knowingly performed ensure its smooth operations and to provide optimized recomwith the bad intention of exploiting deterministic information mendations. Generally, the more detailed information about
about the targeted audience. The inference attack adopts a the consumers is, the more accurate will be the generated
2622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
 A NALYSIS OF E XISTING C HALLENGES FOR PRS IN N EXT-G EN CE

 TABLE II
 S ECURE DATA C OMMUNICATION C HALLENGES IN PRS

 and ensure instant recommendations in return. If a secure
 communication protocol does not leverage the data transmission, the swear data exposure may occur to sabotage the
 confidentiality and privacy of consumers’ data [58]. The possible data communication challenges for PRS in next-gen CE
 are enlisted in Table II.
 2) Resource-Constrained Consumer Devices: The term
 “Resource-Constrained” describes the availability of limited
 resources. From a CE perspective, the resource-constrained
 nature of devices indicates small devices with less compu-
Fig. 3. Architecture of the Federated Recommender System [51]. tation power, storage, and processing units. The integration
 of PRS with next-gen resource-constrained CE is encircled
 by an extensive range of challenges that must be addressed
recommendation [52]. Accordingly, the risks of significant appropriately. Most next-gen CE, such as wearables, smartdata security threats increase, urging the need for a secure watches, and small gaming units, come with limited compudata exchange framework between end-consumers and PRS. tational resources. That fact hinders their way of reflecting
When the extracted data consists of critical information of con- effective collaboration with PRS [59]. The availability of
sumers, e.g., PII, financial details, and medical data, the need limited computational capacity is not an ideal situation for
for secure data sharing increases exponentially [53], there are running complex and optimized PRS algorithms. These cirseveral possible ways for data leakage in PRS designed for cumstances introduce the concept of lightweight algorithms.
next-gen CE. However, various studies have proven the compromised nature
 The data obtained from consumers is stored in PRS data of lightweight algorithms. Hence, there is a trade-off between
repositories, and insufficient access control over such data the security and convenient execution of PRS algorithms on
databases offers a smooth ground for malicious attempts on next-gen CE. Resource-constrained CE may also negatively
consumers’ data. The successful attempts result in data leak- impact the trustworthiness of PRS by blocking their way of
age, data tempering, or even the elimination of important implementing complex security measures. The high-efficiency
information [54]. Hence, it becomes a vital challenge to protect privacy and data security protocols have convoluted processing
these databases from attackers by designing comprehensive that expects an adequate implementation ecosystem. Resourceaccess controls. PRS formulates a generic systematic archi- constrained CE needs to welcome such complex computational
tecture in which the data communication from consumers to alliances resulting in unsatisfactory security practices [60].
PRS repositories is regulated through a central server [55]. The next dominant challenge is finite memory units in CE
This plane transmission channel is easier to take over than that are good enough for their own. However, it requires large
a secure communication line containing end-to-end encrypted memory units to be compatible enough with PRS as broad
data [56]. In the case of next-gen CE, most consumers’ devices memory bases invite extended data arrays that act as a supare integrated with third-party mobile applications that take plement for more accurate recommendations by PRS [61].
unauthorized control of that particular device. Hence, the data Communication limitations are another notable challenge for
transmitted from or to such devices is observed by some third- PRS to be operational for next-gen CE. Most of the PRS
party element triggering the chances of data breaches [57]. are empowered by various cloud services to respond to CE
Most of the back-end algorithms of PRS are empowered by with personalized recommendations instantly. However, the
cloud services to instantly adopt new consumer preferences resource-constrained CE may suffer from poor connectivity
JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 2623

 TABLE III
 C RITICAL A NALYSIS OF PRS IN NEXT-GEN CE

issues because of limited communication resources. This may process of PRS raises serious security and privacy challenges
impact the overall quality of the communication stream by due to the fact that the CE data is often stored and analyzed
causing latency, unwanted noise, and even communication on centralized cloud storage. FL has the ability to overcome
breakage in the worst cases. As a result of this resource- this challenge by training the model on the devices. FL-based
constrained nature of CE, it becomes a hectic task to inter- PRS are well-trained, which made them an excellent choice
act and be synchronized with the cloud service configured for next-generation consumer electronics.
between PRS and next-gen CE [62]. The instant response 1) Data Privacy and Security Enhancement: FL enables
from CE is also a significant challenge for PRS. As the participant devices to jointly learn a shared prediction model.
resource-constrained CE are equipped with limited resources, This method keeps the training data on the device, rather than
it becomes difficult for such devices to exhibit synchronized uploading and storing the data on a central server. FL also
progress with the cloud server connecting PRS with CE. employs secure aggregation to maintain the confidentiality of
This scenario results in the slow performance of PRS and client updates. As a result, the server is unable to determine
unnecessary communication delays [63]. Power consumption the value or source of the users’ model updates. This diminis another crucial factor in resource-constrained CE. These ishes the probability of inference and data attribution attacks.
devices are powered by small-scale batteries that do not In case of sensitive communications, the local storage of peroffer enough support to cater to intensive recommendation sonal information helps to maintain strict privacy regulations.
algorithms [64]. It alleviates the burden of aggregating data on a central and
 Moving forward, scalability is another serious challenge external server, thereby making the data less vulnerable to
PRS must face while entertaining next-gen CE. It is observed breaches. The central server is the core coordinator, and it
that each CE device has its predefined working attributes and manages clients, centralizes their local models, and keeps the
processing patterns. To obtain more accurate recommenda- global model up-to-date. FL optimization is an iterative protions, it is advised to broaden the databases containing data cess that improves the global ML model with each iteration.
from various identical units by creating a cluster of relevant FL is generally based on pre-defined parameters in an initial
CE devices. This practice helps to collect vast amounts of data training phase. The model parameters are then disseminated
and, after necessary processing, yields comprehensive recom- to the participating clients and will be revised based on client
mendations to all participant CE devices. Due to the predefined feedback in subsequent steps. In the local model training, a
interaction pattern, and lack of quick alterations, CE devices list of participants is established where each client receives
lack to shake hands with other identical CE devices. While the global model and fine-tuning parameters, which are based
expanding the application brackets of PRS over multiple CE on their local data for a given number of training epochs. The
devices becomes an unsettled task to configure multiple CE updated model weights are then transmitted to the central server
over PRS [65]. A broader overview of challenges for PRS in to update the global model. The central server accumulates the
resource-constrained next-gen CE is given in Table III. updated models of all participating clients. Then by combining
 their parameters, it produces an updated general model.
B. FL-Based PRS for Next-Gen Consumer Electronics: To reduce biases, this step must incorporate multiple fac-
Characteristics and Impact tors, including client confidence and participation frequency.
 The next-generation consumer electronics environs smart In a decentralized system, there is no longer a central server
devices purely designed at the consumer grade such as wear- that acts as an initiator, coordinator, or model aggregator.
able, body implants, virtual reality gadgets, personal entertain- Researchers have designed an anomaly detection framework
ment units, etc. Their intelligent nature makes them entirely to investigate the presence of unwanted entities in IoT-enabled
different from traditional electronic devices. The warm adapt- smart environments. The proposed scheme classifies possible
ability of such next-generation consumer electronics devices attacks by consuming minimal computational resources. The
demands these devices to be more functional and efficient. FL-based operational segment is devoted to ensuring on-device
Therefore, PRS are integrated to make the user experience training of local data models, and the Gated Recurrent Unit
better. A PRS effectively analyzes scalable data and provides (GRU) offers extra layers of security to ensure the privacy
optimal suggestions recommended by the recommendation of clients. The model proves a protected shield against comengines. PRS must be capable of accommodating the expec- mon adversaries, e.g., man-in-the-middle attacks, Denial of
tations of clients. However, we have seen that the learning Service (DoS) attacks, and Modbus query flood attacks [66].
2624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Another effort towards privacy preservation is made in [67], and they do not even need to propagate an entire stream of data.
which mainly focuses to prohibit the retrieval of irrelevant Rather, they transmit only the updated models. In this way, FL
information. The model filters the spam images in the raw calculates the time consumption of each iteration, which makes
data, and after that, these responsible clients are flagged to the communication process more robust, and responsive [75].
take part in the training phase. The system is employed with
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and is trained on a cus- IV. C HALLENGES AND F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS
tomized dataset. In [68], the authors addressed the integration
 In this section, we have discussed the challenges of impleof blockchain technologies with the FL to enhance the security
 menting FL for PRS. The main challenges are listed below:
and privacy metrics. A smart contract-based secure algorithm
is proposed that directly measures the accuracy of the updated
global model. Thus, it is unnecessary to assume that partici- A. Computation and Communication Cost
pants in the FL training process are trustworthy. Initial findings Computing and communication play a critical role to
indicate that the algorithm offers a high degree of protec- achieve PRS optimized performance. User devices need to
tion against model poisoning attacks. They anticipate that the communicate and update various intermediate parameter valobtained results can be used as a baseline for implementing ues with the server to generate recommendation results in their
the algorithm on various blockchain technologies. local system. This can pose a huge communication overhead
 In [69], a blockchain security approach is described, which directly impacts the model performance. Additionally,
where the authors developed a blockchain-enabled decen- users of consumer electronics devices and infrastructure may
tralized and asynchronous FL-based IoT anomaly detection have varying capabilities relating to storage, speed, and comscheme. The proposed method has the potential to boost effi- putational power that certainly impact the overall training
ciency while remaining robust and privacy-preservative. In efficiency, delaying the whole process and reducing the effianother approach, researchers, have designed a novel privacy- ciency of the global recommendation model [76]. However,
preserving tree-boosting algorithm named Secure Boost [70]. communication cost incurs much great overhead cost than
The core objective is to train a high-quality model with computation in case numerous users’ devices are sending their
private data separated over multiple clients. Secure Boost model parameters to the central server [77]. There is a pressaligns entities under a privacy-preserving protocol and then ing need to reduce the computation and communication cost
builds boosting trees across multiple parties using a carefully within Next-gen CE for an efficient recommendation model
designed encryption strategy. This FL system lets multiple for individual users’ needs.
parties with common user samples but different feature sets Several methods are proposed which aim to improve the
jointly learn from a vertically partitioned dataset. The Secure model efficiency and reduce the computation and commu-
Boost model embraces identical accuracy with non-federated nication overhead notably important-based model updating,
gradient tree-boosting algorithms. client selection, model compression, asynchronous communi-
 2) Low-Latency Network Communication: Latency is an cation, etc. Important-based model update strategy considers
imperative component to evaluate the performance of a com- an important part of the global model to reduce the commumunication system. It states the duration taken by a data nicate parameterized size instead of choosing all parameters.
packet to travel from the sender to the receiver end. In tra- A multi-arm bandit method based on Federated Collaborative
ditional ML approaches, the clients send raw data to the Filtering and Bayesian Thompson Sampling (FCF-BTS) is
server end, unnecessarily occupying the bandwidth for a sus- proposed which aims to select a specific part of the global
tainable period [71]. However, FL has outpaced this concept model for a smaller payload to the client [78]. However, this
by introducing a new pattern of communication. It enables approach also reduces the overall model accuracy. The client
the clients to transmit only the updated model parameters selection approach selects clients based on resource constraints
rather than sending whole chunks of raw data. In this way, the such as limited computation resources or poor wireless channel
network resources are efficiently managed, and considerably conditions instead of random client selection to enhance the
low latency occurs in the communication channel [72]. The efficiency and performance of the global model. Researchers
latency in FL systems is remarkably lower than the central- introduced the Fedcs protocol by which the server sends a
ized systems. Such performance makes FL an ideal choice for resource request to each client to check the downloading,
sensitive networks where minor communication delays may updating, and uploading time of local models so that the server
result in severe reactions. Health monitoring systems, sensi- can update the clients during the restricted time by following
tive manufacturing units, and smart grids are some valuable the greedy approach [79]. The shortest upload time is considexamples of aforementioned sensitive networks [73]. ered to select the client followed by a scheduling mechanism
 The second major FL component is latency-based schedul- based on the maximum remaining bandwidth for enhancing the
ing or preferred scheduling. In normal ML approaches, the uploading efficiency [8]. Model compression is another widely
clients are required to send a whole stream containing the used method that compresses the communication parameters
raw data, and this data is revised in each iteration [74]. That for each communication which reduces the scale of paramemechanism overburdened the system resources, especially the ter transmission. Researchers have designed a Coreset-Based
network bandwidth remain occupied. However, FL permits Federated Learning (CBFL) framework to remove redundant
preferred scheduling in which the parameters are preferably data values from the main dataset. Rather it extracts a coreset
defined. The clients are supposed to follow these parameters, and uses a smaller network model to train on this extracted
JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 2625

coreset yielding similar accuracy as the training of a regu- for the recommendation results. However, this task is quite
lar network model on the main dataset [9]. Structured and challenging specifically the development of a trustworthy,
sketched updates are considered to decrease the uplink com- unbiased, and understandable PRS model requires multiple
munication costs by updating from a pre-specified structure stages including data presentation, recommendation, and evalparameterized using fewer variables or compressing the full uation in a complex and dynamic environment. To this end,
local update before communicating to the server. future work needs to focus on developing methods and models
 Despite all these methods, there are still challenges to tackle within multiple aspects including novel data processing techthe computation and communication cost issues. In particular, niques, FL-based explainable learning models, and advanced
important-based model updating reduces the recommendation representation learning techniques that aim to remove the bias
performance as well as raises privacy concerns. Due to the and retain the genuine data while preserving the privacy of the
diversity of the users’ devices and the inherent complexity extracted data [76], [84]. Additionally, the PRS model needs
of the users’ network environment client selection problem to consider beyond accuracy oriented approach for an effective
requires an optimized selection approach. Model compression trustworthy model evaluation. In this context, future direction
significantly reduces the communication cost but at the same needs to consider the development of novel trustworthiness
time increases the overall computational overhead. To this end, evaluation schemes and metrics from both technical and ethifuture research directions need to investigate trade-off issues cal dimensions taking into account the accuracy, transparency,
between computation and communication cost based on the explainability, and privacy of the model as well as the model’s
users’ consumer devices capacity and infrastructure as well as impact on the potential user groups. The aforementioned future
develop methods to achieve optimal compression of network directions advocate to consider human-centric approaches for
model parameters taken into account the trade-off parame- achieving explainability in FL-based PRS.
ters. Additionally, the design of efficient and trustworthy FL
for PRS is also required to improve overall efficiency and C. Integration of 5G and Beyond Networks
reduce communications costs. Generally consumer electronic The emergence of 5G technology significantly increases the
devices are intelligent and numerous devices are connected to wider adoption of PRS due to the high data transmission rate
the dynamic and complex infrastructure, therefore client selec- and low energy consumption across the networks within diverse
tion model should also need to follow the dynamic schedule platforms. This technology facilities faster high-volume data
strategy to ensure robust performance from the users’ devices. transmission and supports the development of real-time PRS
 by reducing the time interval between the user’s behavior and
 the system’s feedback and updating the recommendation model
B. Explainability in FL-Based PRS
 accordingly. 5G accelerates the development of the PRS based
 As stated previously, FL empowers data sharing while on the evolving needs of the relevant stakeholder. Data for the
preserving privacy within a decentralized context. PRS heav- PRS can be collected from various sources including cloud
ily relies on the data for developing informed recommendation infrastructure which certainly increase the transmission latency
models. Federated Recommended Systems (FedRS) is now and volume and the processing model of 5G can determine based
widely considered to improve recommendation performance on the data and latency. The application of 5G technology in the
with the ability to collaborate the data from different systems. PRS will improve efficiency and enhance the user experience
However, despite these significant benefits, FEdRS exhibits with the recommended system. Despite the benefits, 5G can
many challenges some of which are discussed notably relat- also pose challenges specifically relating to potential cybering to the computation and communication costs and privacy. attacks and data leakage due to the transmission of huge data
Additionally, stakeholders within the PRS ecosystem includ- volume [85], [86]. Therefore, there is a need to develop methods
ing users and service providers also demand a transparent, and techniques to enhance the capability of real-time PRS with
fair, and understandable PRS model which should be accu- the integration of 5G technology.
rate and meaningful to them [80]. Explainability (XAI) is A direction of future research in PRS is about the integration
the core for the development of trustworthy FedRS models, of real-time models with 5G and beyond networks. PRS needs
which ensure a certain level of explainability (i.e., details to provide a good user interface so that the user can easily
and reasons a model gives to make its functioning clear or understand and operate with the personalized recommendation
easy to understand) and transparency (i.e., characteristics of model and value the identified products. 5G can process large
a model to be inherently understandable for a human) of the volumes of data which can provide better-customized recomgenerated models [81], [82]. European Commission’s Ethic mendations, but this can pose data leakage and loss [87]. It
Guidelines for Trustworthy AI mentioned that “AI systems is necessary to develop new models and techniques to reduce
and their decisions should be explained in a manner adapted the transmission delay and filter unnecessary information for
to the stakeholder concerned” [83]. The XAI in FL should a more secure and reliable recommendation system.
ensure an adequate degree of explainability of the FL-based
PRS to develop FedRS. To this end, XAI in FL aims to contribute trustworthy PRS that ensures a transparent, fair, and V. C ONCLUSION
understandable recommended system to all user levels. In this paper, we discussed the next-generation consumer
 Explainability for PRS ensures that the models should be electronics and how personalized recommendation systems
easily understandable and provide straightforward reasoning can accurately model user preferences from their historical
2626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

interactions. We discussed the security and privacy challenges [20] M. Darwish, S. Kamel, and A. Assem, “Extended reality for enhancof personalized recommendation systems and the importance ing spatial ability in architecture design education,” Ain Shams Eng. J.,
 vol. 14, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 102104.
of federated learning to enhance data privacy and security [21] L. Gong, Å. Fast-Berglund, and B. Johansson, “A framework for
with low-latency network communication. Finally, we outlined extended reality system development in manufacturing,” IEEE Access,
challenges, that need to be addressed while implementing fed- vol. 9, pp. 24796–24813, 2021.
 [22] S. M. Iqbal, I. Mahgoub, E. Du, M. A. Leavitt, and W. Asghar,
erated learning-based personalized recommendation systems “Advances in healthcare wearable devices,” NPJ Flexible Electron.,
for next-gen consumer electronics. vol. 5, no. 1, p. 9, 2021.
 [23] J. J. Ferreira, C. I. Fernandes, H. G. Rammal, and P. M. Veiga, “Wearable
 technology and consumer interaction: A systematic review and research
 agenda,” Comput. Human Behav., vol. 118, May 2021, Art. no. 106710.
 R EFERENCES [24] X. M. Alimdjanovna et al., “Climate control and light control in a smart
 [1] S. C. M. Insights. “Revenue of the consumer electronics mar- home,” Eur. J. Interdiscipl. Res. Develop., vol. 8, pp. 149–155, 2022.
 ket worldwide from 2018 to 2028.” 2023. Accessed: Apr. 10, [25] L. Reid and G. Sisel, “Digital care at home: Exploring the role
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/forecasts/1286653/ of smart consumer devices,” Health Place, vol. 80, Mar. 2023,
 worldwide-consumer-electronics-market-revenue Art. no. 102961.
 [2] M. A. Kesselman and W. Esquivel, “Technology on the move, consumer [26] S. S. Gill et al., “AI for next generation computing: Emerging
 electronics show 2022: The evolving metaverse and much more,” Library trends and future directions,” Internet Things, vol. 19, Aug. 2022,
 Hi Tech News, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1–4, 2022. Art. no. 100514.
 [3] M. G. Kibria, K. Nguyen, G. P. Villardi, O. Zhao, K. Ishizu, and [27] R. Ranjan et al., “The next grand challenges: Integrating the Internet of
 F. Kojima, “Big data analytics, machine learning, and artificial intel- Things and data science,” IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 12–26,
 ligence in next-generation wireless networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, May/Jun. 2018.
 pp. 32328–32338, 2018. [28] Y. Koren, S. Rendle, and R. Bell, “Advances in collaborative filtering,”
 [4] Y. Tian, B. Zheng, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Q. Wu, “College library in Recommender Systems Handbook. Boston, MA, USA: Springer, 2021,
 personalized recommendation system based on hybrid recommendation pp. 91–142.
 algorithm,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 83, no. 8, pp. 490–494, 2019. [29] N. Nassar, A. Jafar, and Y. Rahhal, “A novel deep multi-criteria collabo-
 [5] U. Javed, K. Shaukat, I. A. Hameed, F. Iqbal, T. M. Alam, and S. Luo, “A rative filtering model for recommendation system,” Knowl.-Based Syst.,
 review of content-based and context-based recommendation systems,” vol. 187, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 104811.
 Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 274–306, 2021. [30] J. Bu, X. Shen, B. Xu, C. Chen, X. He, and D. Cai, “Improving collab-
 [6] M. Rahhali, L. Oughdir, Y. Jedidi, Y. Lahmadi, and M. Z. El Khattabi, orative recommendation via user-item subgroups,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 “E-learning recommendation system based on cloud computing,” in Data Eng., vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 2363–2375, Sep. 2016.
 Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Wireless Technol. Embedded Intell. Syst., 2022, [31] F. Wang, H. Zhu, G. Srivastava, S. Li, M. R. Khosravi, and L. Qi,
 pp. 89–99. “Robust collaborative filtering recommendation with user-item-trust
 [7] A. Khoshkbarforoushha, A. Khosravian, and R. Ranjan, “Elasticity man- records,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 986–996,
 agement of streaming data analytics flows on clouds,” J. Comput. Syst. Aug. 2022.
 Sci., vol. 89, pp. 24–40, Nov. 2017. [32] X. Wu, B. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Collaborative filtering service
 [8] C. Du, “Bandwidth constrained client selection and scheduling for feder- recommendation based on a novel similarity computation method,”
 ated learning over SD-WAN,” IET Commun., vol. 16, pp. 187–194, no. 7, IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 352–365,
 Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://digital-library.theiet.org/content/ May/Jun. 2015.
 journals/10.1049/cmu2.12333 [33] F. Xue, X. He, X. Wang, J. Xu, K. Liu, and R. Hong, “Deep item-based
 [9] K. Li and C. Xiao, “CBFL: A communication-efficient federated learn- collaborative filtering for top-N recommendation,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst.,
 ing framework from data redundancy perspective,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 16, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1–25, 2019.
 no. 4, pp. 5572–5583, Dec. 2022. [34] H. Ning, S. Dhelim, and N. Aung, “PersoNet: Friend recommendation
[10] B. Burke, “Gartner top strategic technology trends for 2022,” system based on big-five personality traits and hybrid filtering,” IEEE
 Information Age, London, U.K., 2020. Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 394–402, Jun. 2019.
[11] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, I. Ahmad, P. Kumar, A. Jolfaei, and M. Tahir, [35] B. Smith and G. Linden, “Two decades of recommender systems
 “An intelligent intrusion detection system for smart consumer electronics at amazon.com,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 12–18,
 network,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, May 19, 2023, May/Jun. 2017.
 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3277856. [36] Z. Zhou, Z. Cheng, L.-J. Zhang, W. Gaaloul, and K. Ning, “Scientific
[12] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. S. Saeed, and P. Kumar, “An intrusion workflow clustering and recommendation leveraging layer hierarchical
 detection system for edge-envisioned smart agriculture in extreme analysis,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 169–183,
 environment,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Jun. 22, 2023, Jan./Feb. 2018.
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3288544. [37] W. Zhang and J. Wang, “A collective Bayesian poisson factorization
[13] T. Panch, H. Mattie, and L. A. Celi, “The “inconvenient truth” about AI model for cold-start local event recommendation,” in Proc. 21th ACM
 in healthcare,” NPJ Digit. Med., vol. 2, no. 1, p. 77, 2019. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2015, pp. 1455–1464.
[14] L. Cao, “AI in finance: Challenges, techniques, and opportunities,” ACM [38] A. Paterek, “Improving regularized singular value decomposition for
 Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–38, 2022. collaborative filtering,” in Proc. KDD Cup Workshop, 2007, pp. 5–8.
[15] D. Javeed, T. Gao, M. S. Saeed, and M. T. Khan, “FOG-empowered [39] S. R. Pokhrel and J. Choi, “Federated learning with blockchain for
 augmented intelligence-based proactive defensive mechanism for IoT- autonomous vehicles: Analysis and design challenges,” IEEE Trans.
 enabled smart industries,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Jun. 22, Commun., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4734–4746, Aug. 2020.
 2023, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3288563. [40] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning
[16] E. K. Nti, S. J. Cobbina, E. E. Attafuah, E. Opoku, and M. A. Gyan, for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet
 “Environmental sustainability technologies in biodiversity, energy, trans- of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249,
 portation and water management using artificial intelligence: A system- Jun. 2022.
 atic review,” Sustain. Futur., vol. 4, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 100068. [41] A. A. Khaliq, A. Anjum, A. B. Ajmal, J. L. Webber, A. Mehbodniya,
[17] J. Singh, Y. Goel, S. Jain, and S. Yadav, “Virtual mouse and and S. Khan, “A secure and privacy preserved parking recommender
 assistant: A technological revolution of artificial intelligence,” 2023, system using elliptic curve cryptography and local differential privacy,”
 arXiv:2303.06309. IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 56410–56426, 2022.
[18] Y. Yin, P. Zheng, C. Li, and L. Wang, “A state-of-the-art survey on aug- [42] Y. Himeur et al., “Blockchain-based recommender systems:
 mented reality-assisted digital twin for futuristic human-centric industry Applications, challenges and future opportunities,” Comput. Sci.
 transformation,” Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf., vol. 81, Jun. 2023, Rev., vol. 43, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 100439.
 Art. no. 102515. [43] K. Sruthi and S. Prabhu, “Influence of consumer decisions by
[19] R. Llamas, Worldwide Augmented and Virtual Reality Hardware recommendar system in fashion e-commerce website,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Forecast, IDC, Needham, MA, USA, 2018,” Decis. Aid Sci. Appl. (DASA), 2022, pp. 421–424.
JAVEED et al.: FL-BASED PRS: AN OVERVIEW ON SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES 2627

[44] S. Zhang, W. Yuan, and H. Yin, “Comprehensive privacy anal- [66] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha,
 ysis on federated recommender system against attribute inference and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for iot
 attacks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Jul. 14, 2023, security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554,
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3295601. Feb. 2022.
[45] M. Dong, F. Yuan, L. Yao, X. Wang, X. Xu, and L. Zhu, “A survey [67] A. Makkar, U. Ghosh, D. B. Rawat, and J. H. Abawajy, “FedLearnSP:
 for trust-aware recommender systems: A deep learning perspective,” Preserving privacy and security using federated learning and edge com-
 Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 249, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 108954. puting,” IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 21–27,
[46] D. Nawara and R. Kashef, “Context-aware recommendation systems in Mar. 2022.
 the IoT environment (IoT-CARS)—A comprehensive overview,” IEEE [68] A. R. Short, H. C. Leligou, M. Papoutsidakis, and E. Theocharis,
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 144270–144284, 2021. “Using blockchain technologies to improve security in federated learn-
[47] A. Vultureanu-Albişi and C. Bădică, “Recommender systems: An ing systems,” in Proc. IEEE 44th Annu. Comput. Softw. Appl. Conf.
 explainable AI perspective,” in Proc. Int. Conf. INnovat. Intell. SysT. (COMPSAC), 2020, pp. 1183–1188.
 Appl. (INISTA), 2021, pp. 1–6. [69] L. Cui et al., “Security and privacy-enhanced federated learning for
[48] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas, anomaly detection in IoT infrastructures,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3492–3500, May 2022.
 data,” in Proc. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2017, pp. 1273–1282. [70] K. Cheng et al., “SecureBoost: A lossless federated learning framework,”
[49] G. Wei, Q. Wu, and M. Zhou, “A hybrid probabilistic multiobjective IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 87–98, Nov./Dec. 2021.
 evolutionary algorithm for commercial recommendation systems,” IEEE [71] E. Samikwa, A. Di Maio, and T. Braun, “Adaptive early exit of com-
 Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 589–598, Jun. 2021. putation for energy-efficient and low-latency machine learning over IoT
[50] B. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Liu, Ł. Skonieczny, and Z. Lv, networks,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf.
 “Recommendation based on large-scale many-objective optimization for (CCNC), 2022, pp. 200–206.
 the Intelligent Internet of Things system,” IEEE Internet Things J., [72] M. Asad, A. Moustafa, T. Ito, and M. Aslam, “Evaluating the commuvol. 9, no. 16, pp. 15030–15038, Aug. 2022. nication efficiency in federated learning algorithms,” in Proc. IEEE 24th
[51] B. Tan, B. Liu, V. Zheng, and Q. Yang, “A federated recommender Int. Conf. Comput. Support. Cooperat. Work Design (CSCWD), 2021,
 system for online services,” in Proc. 14th ACM Conf. Recommen. Syst., pp. 552–557.
 2020, pp. 579–581. [73] W. Qi and H. Su, “A cybertwin based multimodal network for ECG
[52] S. Kanwal, S. Nawaz, M. K. Malik, and Z. Nawaz, “A review of text- patterns monitoring using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
 based recommendation systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 31638–31661, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 6663–6670, Oct. 2022.
 2021. [74] W. Y. Bryan Lim et al., “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
[53] P. M. Alamdari, N. J. Navimipour, M. Hosseinzadeh, A. A. Safaei, and A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 3,
 A. Darwesh, “A systematic study on the recommender systems in the pp. 2031–2063, 3rd Quart., 2020.
 E-commerce,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 115694–115716, 2020. [75] W. Xia, W. Wen, K.-K. Wong, T. Q. Quek, J. Zhang, and H. Zhu,
[54] K. Yu, Z. Guo, Y. Shen, W. Wang, J. C.-W. Lin, and T. Sato, “Secure arti- “Federated-learning-based client scheduling for low-latency wireless
 ficial intelligence of things for implicit group recommendations,” IEEE communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 32–38,
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2698–2707, Feb. 2022. Apr. 2021.
[55] Y. Himeur, S. S. Sohail, F. Bensaali, A. Amira, and M. Alazab, “Latest
 [76] Z. Sun et al., “A survey on federated recommendation systems,” 2023,
 trends of security and privacy in recommender systems: A comprearXiv:2301.00767.
 hensive review and future perspectives,” Comput. Security, vol. 118,
 [77] J. Wen, Z. Zhang, Y. Lan, Z. Cui, J. Cai, and W. Zhang, “A survey on
 Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102746.
 federated learning: Challenges and applications,” Int. J. Mach. Learn.
[56] A. B. Suhaim and J. Berri, “Context-aware recommender systems for
 Cyber., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 513–535, 2023.
 social networks: Review, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 9, pp. 57440–57463, 2021. [78] F. K. Khan, A. Flanagan, K. E. Tan, Z. Alamgir, and M. A. Ud Din,
[57] T. B. Ogunseyi, T. Bo, and C. Yang, “A privacy-preserving framework “A payload optimization method for federated recommender systems,” in
 for cross-domain recommender systems,” Comput. Elect. Eng., vol. 93, Proc. 15th ACM Conf. Recomm. Syst., Sep. 2021, pp. 432–442. [Online].
 Jul. 2021, Art. no. 107213. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145%2F3460231.3474257
[58] M. del Carmen Rodríguez-Hernández and S. Ilarri, “AI-based mobile [79] T. Nishio and R. Yonetani, “Client selection for federated learning with
 context-aware recommender systems from an information management heterogeneous resources in mobile edge,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 perspective: Progress and directions,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 215, Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
 Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106740. org/10.1109%2Ficc.2019.8761315
[59] C. Li, J. Zhang, X. Yang, and L. Youlong, “Lightweight blockchain con- [80] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Liu, and F. Ricci, “Trustworthy
 sensus mechanism and storage optimization for resource-constrained IoT recommender systems,” 2022, arXiv:2208.06265.
 devices,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 58, no. 4, 2021, Art. no. 102602. [81] A. B. Arrieta et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): Concepts,
[60] Z. Xue et al., “A resource-constrained and privacy-preserving edge- taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI,”
 computing-enabled clinical decision system: A federated reinforce- vol. 58, pp. 82–115, Jun. 2020.
 ment learning approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 11, [82] D. Javeed, T. Gao, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “An explainable and resilient
 pp. 9122–9138, Jun. 2021. intrusion detection system for industry 5.0,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
[61] J. H. Khor, M. Sidorov, and P. Y. Woon, “Public blockchains for Electron., early access, Jun. 7, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3283704.
 resource-constrained IoT devices—A state-of-the-art survey,” IEEE [83] “High-level expert group on AI, report, european commission.” 2019.
 Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 11960–11982, Aug. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
[62] V. A. Thakor, M. A. Razzaque, and M. R. Khandaker, “Lightweight ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
 cryptography algorithms for resource-constrained IoT devices: A [84] Y. Xiong, M. Ren, and R. Urtasun, “LoCo: Local contrastive representareview, comparison and research opportunities,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, tion learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
 pp. 28177–28193, 2021. pp. 1–12.
[63] S. J. Nawaz, S. K. Sharma, M. N. Patwary, and M. Asaduzzaman, “Next- [85] Z. Cai and Z. He, “Trading private range counting over big IoT data,”
 generation consumer electronics for 6G wireless era,” IEEE Access, in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), 2019,
 vol. 9, pp. 143198–143211, 2021. pp. 144–153.
[64] M. Savi and F. Olivadese, “Short-term energy consumption forecast- [86] W. Huang, B. Liu, and H. Tang, “Privacy protection for recommendaing at the edge: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, tion system: A survey,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol. 1325, no. 1, Oct. 2019,
 pp. 95949–95969, 2021. Art. no. 12087. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742–
[65] C. K. Wu, C.-T. Cheng, Y. Uwate, G. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and K. F. Tsang, 6596/1325/1/012087
 “State-of-the-art and research opportunities for next-generation con- [87] G. Li, G. Yin, J. Yang, F. Chen, and J. Wang. “SDRM-LDP: A recomsumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, mendation model based on local differential privacy.” 2021. [Online].
 Dec. 27, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2022.3232478. Available: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6640667