4844 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 FedPot: A Quality-Aware Collaborative and
 Incentivized Honeypot-Based Detector
 for Smart Grid Networks
 Abdullatif Albaseer , Member, IEEE, Nima Abdi , Mohamed Abdallah , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Marwa Qaraqe , Senior Member, IEEE, and Saif Al-Kuwari , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Honeypot technologies provide an effective defense N OMENCLATURE
strategy for the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), particularly
in enhancing the Advanced Metering Infrastructure’s (AMI)
 V (z ) global model at z-th training round
security by bolstering the network intrusion detection system. Vm local model of SPS m
For this security paradigm to be fully realized, it necessitates V m (j ) the local model update at j local iteration
the active participation of small-scale power suppliers (SPSs) η the learning rate
in implementing honeypots and engaging in collaborative data Λ(xi , δ) an open ball space with a radius of δ
sharing with traditional power retailers (TPRs). To motivate this
 centered at xi
interaction, TPRs incentivize data sharing with tangible rewards.
However, without access to an SPS’s confidential data, it is Sz the selection set at round z
daunting for TPRs to validate shared data, thereby risking SPSs’ πm the model and its rewards of type m
privacy and increasing sharing costs due to voluminous honeypot θm SPS type: θ1 ≤ . . . ≤ θm ≤ . . . ≤ θM
logs. These challenges can be resolved by utilizing Federated ϕ(Dm ) the estimation of the local VDD quality
Learning (FL), a distributed machine learning (ML) technique ξ the defense model size
that allows for model training without data relocation. However,
the conventional FL algorithm lacks the requisite functionality Cd the honeypot deploying cost
for both the security defense model and the rewards system of Cm the local deployment, training, and uploadthe AMI network. This work presents two solutions: first, an ing costs
enhanced and cost-efficient FedAvg algorithm incorporating a Ct the local training cost to update the defense
novel data quality measure, and second, FedPot, the development model
of an effective security model with a fair incentives mechanism
under an FL architecture. Accordingly, SPSs are limited to
 Cu the uploading cost of the local defense
sharing the ML model they learn after efficiently measuring their model
local data quality, whereas TPRs can verify the participants’ E number of local training epochs
uploaded models and fairly compensate each participant for their Fm (V m (j )) the local loss function at j local iteration
contributions through rewards. Moreover, the proposed scheme Fm (V m ) the updated local loss function
addresses the problem of harmful participants who share subpar
 G(Vm ) the revenue given by each SPS m
models while claiming high-quality data through a two-step
verification approach. Simulation results, drawn from realistic M number of connected SPSs
mircorgrid network log datasets, demonstrate that the proposed Rm the reward given to SPS m
solutions outperform state-of-the-art techniques by enhancing the Szm the selection binary variable
security model and guaranteeing fair reward distributions. T max the maximum latency in each round
 Index Terms—AMI, honeypot-based detector, security model, Um the utility of SPS m
machine learning, incentive mechanism, collaborative learning. UTPR the utility of TPR (i.e., utility company)
 Π Incentive set for all types
 Fi (V m , xi , yi ) loss function on sample i
 AMI Advanced Metering Infrastructure
 CPU Central Processing Unit
 Manuscript received 30 October 2023; revised 10 February 2024 and 5
April 2024; accepted 6 April 2024. Date of publication 12 April 2024; date of DDoS Distributed Denial-of-Service
current version 21 August 2024. This publication was made possible by NPRP DL Deep Learning
Cluster project (NPRP-C) Twelve (12th) Cycle grant # NPRP12C-33905-SP- DoS Denial-of-Service
67 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation).
Preliminary results in this work are presented at the IEEE CCNC Conference, FL Federated Learning
2023 [1] [DOI: 10.1109/CCNC51644.2023.10060393]. The associate editor GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was IC Incentive Compatibility
Y. D. Lin. (Corresponding author: Abdullatif Albaseer.)
 The authors are with the Division of Information and Computing IID Independent and Identically Distributed
Technology, College of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin IIoT Industrial Internet of Things
Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: aalbaseer@hbku.edu.qa; IR Individual Rationality
niab52126@hbku.edu.qa; moabdallah@hbku.edu.qa; mqaraqe@hbku.edu.qa;
smalkuwari@hbku.edu.qa).
 LDIC Local Downward Incentive Compatibility
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3387710 LUIC Local Upward Incentive Compatibility
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4845

 MITM Man-in-the-Middle mimics the regular operations of a meter with the intent
 ML Machine Learning to deceive, misdirect, and analyze the activities of potential
 NIDS Network Intrusion Detection System intruders. Employing such tactics allows SPSs to develop
 PLCs Programmable Logic Controllers independent, streamlined security measures. Furthermore, it
 RTUs Remote Terminal Units facilitates the exchange of defensive information with TPRs,
 SG Smart Grid eliminating the need for TPRs to purchase costly security
 SPSs Small-Scale Power Suppliers models from security retailers. This approach amplifies the
 TNR True Negative Rate protective layers of AMI, creating a more robust defense
 TPRate True Positive Rate mechanism. Simultaneously, it alleviates the financial strain
 TPRs Traditional power retailers associated with defense strategies for TPRs, presenting a dual
 VDD Valid Defense Data advantage by strengthening network security while managing
 costs effectively [8].
 Significant effort in the literature has been devoted to
 I. I NTRODUCTION developing incentive mechanisms and designing contracts to
 SMART Grid (SG) is an advanced electricity system that encourage SPSs to implement honeypots and share protective
A leverages digital tech, IIoT, and networking to boost efficiency, reliability, and sustainability. It achieves this through
 information with TPRs while maintaining a balance such
 that SPSs do not reap excessive benefits beyond their due.
a cyber-physical system for the bidirectional flow of power For example, in [9], [10], the authors proposed information
and information, automating supply-demand balance with real- asymmetry-based contract theory approaches considering diftime data [2]. SG allows individuals to become small-scale ferent communication systems. Concentrating on the SG
power suppliers (SPSs) using renewable sources, reducing the network, the work in [11] introduced a recent motivationburden on traditional power retailers (TPRs) and fostering driven approach where TPR motivates SPSs to deploy
advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) integration [3], [4]. honeypots and exchange defensive information to enhance
 However, integrating different network technologies to the security framework. This approach relies on a range of
interconnect SPSs and TPRs, which lack a proper defense essential prerequisites, including the dimensions of the shared
system, is raising concerns about the security and privacy data and the related expenses. However, all the prior work
of SG systems. Adversaries have access to numerous vul- may violate the SPSs’ privacy while increasing the cost of
nerabilities, including ways to launch destructive attacks and sharing the obtained raw data. The recent enforcement of
access sensitive information such as a homeowner’s residen- stringent data privacy regulations, such as the General Data
tial address, social security number, daily habits, and any Protection Regulation (GDPR) [12], further underscores the
information related to unauthorized electricity consumption or importance of maintaining data privacy. Additionally, the large
disruption in the network. As an example of such attacks, the volume of honeypot logs can lead to excessive transmission
2015 Ukrainian power outage illustrates the critical vulnerabil- costs and network congestion. It is also worth noting that the
ities to cyber-attacks in both the control center and the smart shared honeypot logs may not always yield benefits, as they
devices employed for managing and observing the electrical could contain redundant information that does not enhance
system [5]. the existing protection strategy. Given the aforementioned
 In addition, SG is subject to denial-of-service (DoS) concerns, federated learning (FL) [13] has become an effective
attacks, which can flood the network with traffic, caus- distributed ML/DL method to maintain privacy and minimize
ing delays in data transmission and processing. This can communication costs by exclusively sharing the ML model
lead to disruptions in the system’s normal operation and while retaining the raw data in its original repository. This
potentially cause critical elements of the energy system to seamlessly connects the need for privacy preservation and
fail [6]. To protect the communication infrastructure, imple- cost-efficiency with the advantages of shared data for network
menting a Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) is security. Current research on FL typically assumes that entities
crucial. NIDS serves as a robust shield, detecting numerous are willing to participate in the FL training process and use
threats that extend beyond the capacity of traditional fire- the collected data to improve the shared model [14], [15].
walls. The protective capability of NIDS has been notably In reality, entities may be reluctant to join without properly
enhanced by the advent of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep designed incentives (i.e., contracts) because FL consumes
Learning (DL)-based approaches, pushing their performance significant resources (i.e., computation and communication
to a significantly higher level. This interconnected relationship costs). Furthermore, entities in FL are autonomous actors who
between NIDS, ML, and DL demonstrates a synergis- decide when and how to interact. When dealing with different
tic blend of network security and advanced computational reward strategies from different alliances, participants may use
methodologies [7]. different training techniques, influencing the performance of
 Building upon this security paradigm, incorporating hon- the resulting models. To that end, it is critical to develop an
eypot technology further enriches the protective capabilities efficient reward mechanism to encourage entities to participate
of ML/DL-based NIDSs. Honeypots empower these systems in FL while maintaining the required level of data quality.
to meticulously map the attack surface, discern patterns, and Researchers have recently presented several incentive schemes
thwart malicious actions by delivering detailed insights into aimed at compensating the involved parties (i.e., SPSs) using
potential intruder behavior. Within the realm of SG, a honeypot financial incentives according to the magnitude of their data
4846 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

contributions [16], [17], [18]. Utilizing current FL methodolo- state-of-the-art techniques in multiple application
gies, all participants acquire the same model upon the end domains.
of the training phase, regardless of the produced data quality
(i.e., honeypot logs) or the impact of the submitted local B. Organization
models. Consequently, certain participants possessing large The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
datasets may provide inadequate contributions yet attain a Section II briefly reviews the relevant literature on NIDSs
higher proficiency level than others who possess high-quality and honeypot deployment. The system models, including
data. This scenario gives rise to a challenging issue called the the learning, cost, and reward, are presented in Section III.
FL free-rider problem. The problem is formulated in Section IV, and the proposed
 solution, including the problem reformulation and transformation, is presented in Section V. In Section VI, we discuss
A. Contribution
 the experimental setup and present the numerical results.
 Considering the previously mentioned remarks, we intro- Finally, Section VII concludes this paper and suggests possible
duce FedPot, an FL framework initially designed for SG directions for further research.
networks but validated across diverse scenarios, including
IEC 104 and N-BaIoT datasets. This architecture incorporates II. R ELATED W ORK
refined, efficient, and resilient aggregation and averaging
 With the proliferation of microgrids, major concerns about
techniques complemented by a fair rewards system based on
 cyberattacks on such systems via smart meters have arisen.
data quality. While our primary case study is centered on
 The United States Department of Homeland Security reported
SGs, our approach of combining honeypot logs and FL has
 224 destructive cyber intrusions against local electric utilities
shown adaptability and effectiveness across multiple domains.
 between 2013 and 2014 [19].
We introduce novel schemes for local data quality, participant
selection, and global model averaging, where the TPR resolves
 A. AMI Security
a convex optimization problem that prioritizes data quality
over data size. Each SPS fine-tunes the global model received Security concerns have been intensively investigated in the
from the TPR using its honeypot logs and transmits back the past few years as a key component of the IIoT. Authors in [20]
model parameters. After that, the TPR combines and enhances studied the security approach to mitigate cyber-attacks in the
the defensive model employing the proposed approaches, as context of the IIoT. The main assumption was that the attackers
detailed later. To overcome the FL free-rider problem within have sufficient tools to identify advanced vulnerabilities that
AMI networks, we propose a novel metric to measure local enable them to attack IIoT systems. In [21], Li et al. used
data quality and contributions instead of data size, which consortium blockchain technology to overcome transaction
may contain redundant information that does not improve the constraints in the IIoT. However, fewer studies have been consecurity defense model. We devised a two-step verification ducted on the security of various components of AMI systems.
process to tackle malicious or poorly performing participants. The work in [22] introduced a security protocol that preserves
The TPR verifies submitted models, then updates the global AMI private information while securely delivering control
model and allocates incentives based on contribution. In packets at the exact time. In [23], Fasial et al. investigated
summary, the primary contributions of this work are: the feasibility of employing data stream mining to improve
 • Develop an effective architecture for privacy-preserving AMI cybersecurity via NIDS. Yan et al. [24] describe an SG
 honeypot-based detectors, FedPot, that protects user pri- AMI security framework where different security concerns
 vacy while considering data quality, an efficient global associated with AMI deployment are considered.
 model, and fair incentives. The proposed solution handles
 and ensures a reliable FL training process based on valid B. ML/DL-Based and FL-Based NIDSs
 defense data acquired by implementing honeypots on the Many ML algorithms have been utilized to boost the
 SPS side. NIDS in the past years to understand complicated network
 • Formulate the problem as an optimization problem, then traffic better [25], [26], [27]. ML/DL-based NIDSs are used
 provide solutions incorporating (i) problem reformulation to identify unknown intrusions by analyzing the statistical
 and transformation, (ii) the prior quality determination characteristics of the network traffic. However, DL-based soluof the local data through novel metrics, and (iii) two tions have shown better performance, especially in extracting
 schemes for reliable global averaging and contribution- knowledge from complicated features rather than the shallow
 based reward distributions. features in ML-based detectors [25], [26], [27]. Recently, FL
 • In response to the challenge of adversarial perturbations has been increasingly employed in the realm of NIDSs
 in model uploads, we introduce a universally applicable for the collaborative design of ML and DL-based detectwo-step verification system. This robust approach is tors [28]. Specifically, the work presented in [29] developed
 designed to ensure the integrity of model contributions. a cooperative detector capable of identifying zero-day botnet
 • Carry out comprehensive simulations using realistic attacks in oT networks using FL. Extending FL’s utility to
 log data from various datasets (i.e., N-BaIoT, IEC energy systems, [30] introduced a privacy-preserving and
 104, and IEC MMS datasets). The results affirm communication-efficient FL-based energy predictor for netthat our proposed framework outperforms existing metering systems. This approach combines a hybrid DL
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4847

 honeypot remains an attractive target while collecting diverse
 attack patterns to evolve with the changing landscape of
 threats. In this work, we consider two types of traffic captured
 by honeypots: fake traffic, which enables us to understand
 attacker tactics without data centralization, and legitimate
 traffic, which provides valuable insights into user behavior
 patterns processed in a decentralized manner to maintain
Fig. 1. Micro-grid system where M SPSs deploy honeypot and transfer
 privacy. To foster a diverse range of defense data, TPR may
security model with a single TPR. provide incentives to stimulate SPSs to establish honeypots,
 gather cyber-attack intelligence, encapsulate the defensive
 data, and transmit it to the TPR.
model for high-accuracy energy forecasting with an Inner- Though SPSs can exchange defense data in the AMI
Product Functional Encryption scheme to encrypt local model network, there is an information imbalance between the TPR
parameters, maintaining data privacy. and SPS. This discrepancy arises because the SPS knows its
 valid defense data (VDD) while the TPR is not. The VDD
C. Honeypot Deployment Based Incentive Mechanisms includes the undisclosed attack event logs gathered by honeypots and used by the currently deployed TPR defensive system
 Honeypots are practical security tools that deceive cyber
 to improve the existing architecture. Practically, the honeypot
attackers by acting as vulnerability traps [31]. It has been
 logs amassed are extensive and could include users’ sensitive
widely used to enhance defensive performance on different
 information, leading to concerns surrounding computation and
systems [8], [32]. Tian et al. [32] developed a honeypot system
 communication costs and potential privacy violations. FL can
to defend against APT attacks in the SG, mainly in the bus
 mitigate these issues by utilizing ML algorithms to extract
nodes. In their system, low-interaction and high-interaction
 knowledge from the local VDD of each SPS and share only
honeypots were applied. Similarly, Wang et al. [33] proposed a
 the model attributes with the TPR. Nevertheless, traditional
honeypot scheme with various mixed distributions to detect the
 FL Integration algorithms and incentive techniques are not
AMI network traffic. However, Wang et al. failed to consider
 ideally suited for the security defense framework within the
how using a honeypot system could reduce TPR defensive
 AMI network. As a result, we introduce a privacy-preserving
pressure while increasing AMI defensive effectiveness. Using
 framework for effective honeypot-based detection. Our objeca honeypot, Liu et al. [8] captured distributed denial of
 tive is to develop a method that promotes effective assurance
service attacks (DDoS) attacks in AMI. The implemented
 of local model quality and provides incentives to bolster the
methodology uses incomplete information static game and
 defense system of the AMI network. We presume the SPSs
honeypot deployment to investigate non-cooperative problems.
 hold M distinct data types that are separately distributed.
Householders, for example, install small wind turbines for
 Let θ1 ≤ . . . ≤ θm ≤ . . . ≤ θM denote the VDD type for
small enterprises to sell excess electricity and get a profit
 each SPS, with a higher type signifying superior quality. To
from utility companies [3]. The work in [11] proposed a game
 conduct FL model training, the TPR must ensure the desired
theory-based approach to designing an incentive mechanism
 quality at every global training round by devising an incentive
that allows SPSs to share their defense data with TPRs; thus,
 set (i.e., contract) Π = {πm = (V m , Rm )|m ∈ {1, . . . , M }},
the TPR can pay the rewards accordingly.
 which establishes the relationship between rewards and local
 To summarize, significant effort has been made in the
 model quality based on the type, where V m denotes the
literature to overcome the challenge of deploying the honeypot
 local model attributes of m VDD type and Rm represents
and exchanging the obtained defensive data in AMI. However,
 the incentives provided by the TPR. For participant selection,
most of these studies focused on log size and overlooked
 the TPR needs initial information such as how many SPSs
data redundancy that may be received from multiple SPSs.
 are available to participate in defense model training, effort
Furthermore, the privacy of the SPSs was completely ignored,
 duration, declared data quality, and associated costs. To guarposing an undesirable privacy risk to target consumers. Finally,
 antee an efficient training procedure, the TPR imposes a time
there are additional costs associated with uploading large
 constraint for every global round z, beyond which the model
logs. Thus, in this paper, we propose FedPot. This efficient
 modifying and transferring must be finalized. The chosen SPSs
framework not only focuses on all these challenges but also
 employ their VDD to refine the global model and subsequently
solves advanced issues associated with malicious SPSs and
 transfer the upgraded model to the TPR. According to [14],
ensures a more reliable defense model.
 the local model is formulated as follows:

 III. S YSTEM M ODEL V m (j ) = V m (j − 1) − η∇Fm (V m (j )), (1)
 This paper considers singular TPR within an AMI network,
which gathers defensive data from M interconnected SPSs, as where j = 1, 2, . . . , E Dbm represents the index of local update
depicted in Fig. 1. In our microgrid system, SPSs can acquire for batch b and the epoch count E, and
defense data by implementing and deploying honeypots. This
 1 
includes mimicking real and different services (i.e., IEC 104 Fm (V m )  F i V m , x i , yi , (2)
and GOOSE), applications, and typical vulnerabilities. The Dm
 i∈Dm
4848 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

denotes the local loss function, quantifying the model’s error denotes the number of processing cycles to execute one
concerning local data samples, Dm signifies the quantity of sample, and fm (cycles/second) is the central processing unit
data examples in the gathered records (i.e., traffic logs), and η (CPU) frequency. Accordingly, the training cost is defined as:
stands for the learning rate. Upon completion of local training Ct = κ̂m fm3 Tcmp
 m , where κ
 m is the capacitor’s coefficient
by all chosen SPSs, their updates are transmitted to the TPR. related to the chip. As a result, the combined latency for
Then, the TPR consolidates these updates and modifies the computation and uploading for each m-th participant during
global model given by: m
 the z-th round is expressed as: Ttotal m
 = Ttrans m . In a
 + Tcmp
 real FL scenario, the coordinating server (i.e., TPR) establishes
 
 M
 Dm
 V (z) = V m, (3) a time constraint, i.e., round deadline constraint, ensuring
 D that every SPS participant completes their tasks within this
 m=1
 M specified timeframe. Specifically, this time can be identified
where D = m=1 Dm , represents the aggregate samples based on the latency of the slowest chosen SPS m ∈ Sz , which
across all SPSs. Moreover, to guarantee that the attained is defined as:
accuracy is generalized, the TPR evaluates the uploaded  m m 
models and provides incentives only to SPSs exceeding the T max = max{Szm Ttrans + Tcmp }. (5)
threshold, ψm , as determined by the quality assessment It is worth emphasizing that while SPSs do benefit from the
algorithm discussed subsequently. SPSs that pass the quality globally trained model, this alone does not ensure a model
evaluation receive rewards. The TPR iterates this procedure tailored to their unique threat landscape. Incentives encourage
for Z global iterations until the shared security model reaches SPSs to actively contribute quality data, keeping the model
the target accuracy level. In this paper, we highlight that the updated and effective against evolving cybersecurity threats,
incentive set is constructed every global round, where the TPR leading to solving the free-rider problem in FL. Incentives
aims to sustain the desired accuracy while allowing for a slight also offset the operational costs of maintaining honeypots and
increment in succeeding rounds. promote diverse participation. This results in a more robust and
 tailored global model, rewarding contributors with a system
A. Participation Willingness better suited to their security needs.
 In addition to the cost of deploying the honeypot, the
suppliers bear the cost of training and uploading the local B. SPS and TPR Utilities
models. This cost includes the time and energy consumption
 To calculate the SPS utility, which involves implementing
for the honeypot deployment as well as training and uploading
 the honeypot and exchanging information associated with the
their local models. As such, the TPR cannot serve all existing
 VDD data (i.e., the updated local model), we initially have to
devices due to insufficient bandwidth sub-channels. Thus, in
 compute the total incurred cost in the following manner:
every FL round, just a subset of the participants Sz can send
their updates. The chosen set is described as follows: Cm = Cd + C t + C u , (6)
 Sz = {m | Szm = 1, m = 1, 2, . . . , M }, (4) where Cd represents the cost related to running the honeypot,
 Ct is the cost related to updating the local model utilizing the
where Szm = 1 denotes that device m is in the selected set Sz ,
 gathered logs, and Cu is the cost related to uploading the local
otherwise Szm = 0. The latency among the chosen set consists
 update. Accordingly, the utility of each SPS is expressed as:
of two parts: uploading latency and computing latency. For
the uploading latency, all devices have the same defense Um = ln(θm Rm ) − Cm . (7)
model structure determined by TPR, with a size v z denoted
by ξ. Generally, we consider that the orthogonal frequency Equ. (7) implies that while the reward increases, the utility
division multiple access (OFDMA) scheme is used for the does not increase at the same rate due to the diminishing
communication between the BS and the devices, where each returns property of the logarithmic function. Once all SPSs
m-th device is given bandwidth of size λm taking part in the updating and uploading of the global defense
 z B . Additionally,
based on the size of the model, the system bandwidth is split model finish their tasks, the utility of the TPR is computed as
into N sub-channels given by: N = Bξ , where each participant follows:
is assigned an 1-th sub-channel of size λm z B . As a result, 
 M
the m-th device is capable of achieving a data rate of αm z = UTPR = (θm G(Vm ) − Rm ), (8)
 m m
 Pz |hz |2
λmz B ln (1 + N0 ), where hzm represents the channel gain m=1
between the BS and client m, while Pzm denotes the transmit where G(Vm ) represents the revenue obtained from each
power of the m-th client, and N0 denotes background noise SPS’s update. Specifically, each SPS shares its model, Vm ,
(i.e., Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN)). Hence, the which will add a profit, G(Vm ) to TPR with associated costs.
uploading latency is given by: Tm trans = ξ , · and the related
 αzm
transmission cost is defined as: Cu = Tm trans p trans , where C. Adversarial Model and Assumption
 m
pmtrans is the transmit power. Regarding the calculated latency,
 m
 In this research paper, we analyze two stages of adversarial
every device requires a time duration defined as: Tcmp = behavior using the N-BaIoT dataset. The first stage involves
 φm D m
E fm , to train its local model, where φm (cycles/sample) deploying botnets to carry out DDoS attacks by introducing
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4849

networked zombies into the SPSs. The SPS implements a in which the retailer can redesign the contracts every round.
honeypot system to counter these threats, collect valuable The problem is reformulated as:
information about the attack surface, and document all activi-
 
 M
ties. These logs are then integrated into a collaborative model P2. max : Szm (θm G(Vm ) − Rm ) (15)
training approach, enabling information exchange with the Π
 m=1
TPR and enhancing understanding of the attacker’s behavior.
 such that
The second stage of adversarial conduct occurs during the
FL process when a malicious SPS falsely claims superior C 1: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ 0, ∀m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, (16)
local data quality while contributing subpar updates to the m
 C 2: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ ln(θm Rm  ) − Cm ,
model. To develop a secure and efficient FL process that can  
mitigate such issues, we put forward two distinct aggregation ∀m = m, m, m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, (17)
and averaging techniques. These methods will be discussed in M

greater detail later in the paper, providing insight into their C 3: Rm ≤ B z , (18)
practical applications and advantages. m=1
 total
 C 4: Tm < T max ∀m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }, (19)
 IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION C 5: Rm > 0, (20)
 The TPR aims to optimize data quality to boost the where Bz is the budget allocated for round z. For example,
performance of the target model and assures fair incentives to Bz = B Z , if we aim to allocate a fixed budget in each round,
all participating SPSs. This is equivalent to the optimization it can be adjusted depending on the TPR’s gain.
problem given by: Clearly, (15) is intractable, and the constraints are coupled.
 In particular, constraint C1 in (15) related to IR and M(M − 1)
 
 Z 
 M
 P1. max : Szm (θm G(Vm ) − Rm ) (9) constraints related to IC make finding a direct solution for (15)
 Π very challenging. Thus, we start by reducing the IR and
 z =1 m=1
 IC constraints. Then, we propose FedPot, a framework that
such that includes tractable solutions to these challenges. FedPot is
 C 1: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ 0, ∀m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }, (10) divided into two blocks, one on the SPS side and one on
   the TPR side. On the TPR side, we initially use the local
 m
 C 2: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ θm Rm  − Cm , data quality to ensure maximum utility for the TPR. Then we
 ∀m  = m, m, m  ∈ {1, . . . , M }, (11) relax the problem to enable the TPR to select the optimal
 participating SPS. Next, we propose two averaging schemes
 Z  M
 C 3: Rm ≤ B , (12) considering the security aspects. To ensure fair incentives, we
 z =1 m=1 also proposed two reward schemes based on the claimed data
 total quality and the contribution to the global model.
 C 4: Tm < T max , ∀m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }, (13)
 C 5: Rm > 0, (14) V. P ROPOSED S OLUTION
 
 m is the cost of the supplier in type m, selecting
where Cm This section introduces the proposed solutions, including
a contract of type m  , and B is the allocated total budget how we reduced the constraints’ complexity, the prior quality
for upgrading the security defense model. In (9), C1 is the determination of the local VDD, the trusted and untrusted
individual rationality (IR) constraint in which each supplier model averaging schemes, and the rewards distribution. The
has to gain non-negative utility. Constraint C2 is incentive proposed solution for the SPS side starts by deploying a
compatibility (IC), in which each supplier should choose honeypot on the SPS side to record all network traffic into
the exact incentive aligned with its type. In C3, the retailer log files. The logs are then transformed into a readable
guarantees that the rewards delivered to the participants do not format (i.e., CSV) and cleaned with an extensive preprocessing
surpass the allocated budget. The delay constraint given by step. It is worth mentioning that the practice of anonymizing
C4 ensures that participants complete the assigned tasks in a data (i.e., CSV files) is a commonly used method to protect
defined period. In C5, each participating SPS should receive sensitive information. However, several factors motivate us to
non-negative rewards. It is worth noting that the TPR can pay use FL rather than simply anonymizing the data. First, FL
for the model upgrade from the security market if the required mitigates the risk of data re-identification, a vulnerability in
rewards are high and exceed its allocated budget. anonymization. Second, unlike anonymized CSV files, FL only
 Finding the direct solution for (9) is extremely intricate shares aggregated model parameters, preserving data patterns
due to the need for previous knowledge of all participants while reducing exposure risks. Third, FL minimizes the chance
over all rounds, which is nearly unattainable. Additionally, the of large-scale breaches by avoiding centralized data storage.
contracts must be adjusted based on the SPSs’ participation Lastly, FL enables collaborative learning across distributed
over the training period since contributions decrease over time, honeypots without centralization, reducing communication and
and the model may converge to various stationary points, storage costs. We propose a local evaluation scheme in which
resulting in slower convergence. To address these challenges, each SPS evaluates its local VDD to determine whether
we propose to transform the problem into an online problem to participate in the FL learning process. It is important
4850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 2. FedPot Architecture.

to mention that the SPS is willing to participate only if Hence, this analysis of IC constraints reduces the IR conthe required quality is achieved. Fig. 2 illustrates the whole straints as indicated in the following lemma.
procedure performed at both the SPS and TPR. Lemma 2: Given the Bz , and Lemma 1 related to IC
 constraints and the sorted participants based on their data
A. Constraints Complexity Reduction quality, the IR condition can be reduced as:
 As stated previously, it is almost intractable to directly ln(θ1 R1 ) − C1 ≥ 0 (24)
solve (15). To simplify, we present the subsequent lemmas.
 Lemma 1: Given the budget for each round Bz , for any Proof: Given the sorted SPSs based on their types as defined
feasible contract (V m , Rm ), Rm ≥ Rm  ⇐⇒ m ≥ m  in Section III, the IC constraints are used as follows:
∀ m, m  ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }. ln(θm Rm )−Cm ≥ ln(θm R1 ) − C1 ≥ ln(θ1 R1 ) − C1 ≥ 0. (25)
 Proof: We first prove that if θm ≥ θm  where m ≥ m  ,
then Rm ≥ Rm  . Adding the IC constraints for both types θm From Section V-A, we note that if the first SPS’s type meets
and θm  , yields: the IR constraint, all other SPSs’ types will automatically meet
 other IR constraints. Therefore, the IR of type 1 is sufficient
 ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ ln(θm Rm  ) − Cm  , (21) to achieve all other IR constraints.
 According to Lemma 1, Lemma 2, we can transform the IC
and
 constraint into local downward incentive compatibility (LDIC)
 ln(θm  Rm  ) − Cm  ≥ ln(θm  Rm ) − Cm , (22) as follows [34]:

We add both (21) and (22), we have: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ ln(θm Rm−1 ) − Cm−1 ,
 ∀n ∈ {2, 3, . . . , M }, (26)
 ln(θm − θm  )(Rm − Rm  ) ≥ 0. (23)
 and local upward incentive compatibility (LUIC) as follows:
Thus, Rm ≥ Rm  .
 From Lemma 1, we note that more rewards will be given ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≤ ln(θm Rm+1 ) − Cm+1 ,
to more participants. This means that Lemma 1 is monotonic. ∀n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M − 1}. (27)
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4851

From Equations (26), (27), we note that participants should be
given rewards based solely on their contributions. Moreover,
we observe that the objective function in (15) is decreasing
w.r.t Rm and increasing w.r.t G(Vm ).

B. Quality Measure of the SPSs’ VDD
 The SPSs asymmetrically exchange information, sharing
only the local model updated using the collected VDD with the
TPR, rather than the VDD itself. Hence, the TPR is necessary
to validate the uploaded models. The quality of the local model
depends on several factors, including the variety of the data,
the number of contained classes, and the number of updates
 Fig. 3. Schematic illustrating how the luring score can be determined.
performed. In this regard, we first model the SPS’s data by
considering the data quality, and , then by assessing the impact
of the local models on the generalization of the global model.
 action. As a result, the quantity of ϕ(Dm ) can be utilized to
This strategy allows the TPR to guarantee a robust model even
 measure local VDD quality before a given SPS is selected.
in the presence of malicious participants. Each local dataset
 This approach allows the TPR to select high-quality data and
Dm generally comprises traffic data with input-output pairs of
 (m) (m) m (m) avoid using models from participants with low-quality data,
{xi,d , yi }D i=1 , where xi,d ∈ R denotes the input holding
 d
 which can negatively impact the global model’s performance.
 (m)
d attributes, and yi ∈ R denotes the matching class label. By employing this technique, the TPR can ensure that the final
Given that every SPS has its own network traffic patterns and model is robust, even in the presence of malicious participants.
a varying response according to its activity, the honeypot logs We can substitute πm = (V m , Rm ) in Section III by
produce data of various sizes and follow a non-identical and πm = (Ω, Rm ). Accordingly, we can further reformulate the
independently distributed (non-i.i.d.) manner. Furthermore, the optimization problem in (15) as follows:
logs in each SPS may have distinct attack types, and some
 
 M
of the SPSs might not have any malicious samples. Let D = P3. max : Szm ϕ(Dm ) (31)
{D1 ∪ D2 ∪ . . . , ∪ DM } represent the aggregated dataset from Π
 m=1
all SPSs. We define the probability of a sample, i, being
included in the local logs as: such that
 
 1 : i ∈ Dm C 1: ln(θ1 R1 ) − C1 ≥ 0, (32)
 ρ(Dm |i ) = . (28)
 0 : otherwise C 2: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≥ ln(θm Rm−1 ) − Cm−1 , ∀m, (33)
 Definition 1 (δ-Data Coverage): With a predetermined C 3: ln(θm Rm ) − Cm ≤ ln(θm Rm ) − Cm+1 , ∀m, (34)
radius, the coverage of data collection through sampling is 
 M
obtained by: C 4: Rm ≤ B z , (35)
 m=1
 ρ(Dm , δ) = D ∩ ∪xi ∈Dm Λ(xi , δ), (29)
 total
 C 5: Tm ≤ T max ∀m ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }, (36)
where Λ(xi , δ) is an open ball space with a radius of δ centered
 C 6: Rm > 0. (37)
at xi .
 Considering the data space among all SPSs is an √ Euclidean It is worth mentioning that the optimization problem (P3)
space, the range of δ is confined to the interval [0, d ]. considers the lure score to adaptively place honeypots in
 Definition 2 (VDD Quality): ϕ(Dm ) gives the estimation the network to maximize their luring potential. As in our
of the local VDD quality measurements defined as: proposed approach, the lure score can be calculated based
 √
 d on various factors such as network traffic patterns, historical
 1
 ϕ(Dm ) = √ ρ(Dm , δ) dδ (30) attack vectors, and even machine learning models trained for
 d 0 this specific purpose. Fig. 3 illustrates how the luring score
 Remark 1: The value of ϕ(Dm ) can indicate the quality of can be determined. The system ensures that honeypots are
the local VDD. A more increased value of ϕ(Dm ) implies effectively deployed by considering the lure score, which will
improved data diversity, resulting in a better quality of the most likely capture meaningful data and contribute to better
locally updated model. This is because greater spaces between FL. Specifically, high-quality data, signifying that the user’s
traffic samples grasp more patterns during model training, honeypot has successfully deceived the attackers, is defined by
enhancing the overall generalization of the global model. Let a luring score. This leads to the development of more accurate
φ = ϕ1 , . . . , ϕM be the quality set of all SPS with M types, and comprehensive models, which are essential for detecting
and all SPSs with ϕ(Dm ) ∈ [ m−1 m
 M , M ] hold a data of type m. and mitigating sophisticated cyber threats.
 To solve Equation (15), the TPR can leverage each partici- However, we note that the problem in (31) is still challengpant’s previous performance, which might be time-consuming ing to be solved directly due to the monotonic constraints in
since assessing all upgraded models is a post-processing C1, C2, and C3. The authors in [34] proposed relaxing such
4852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

constraints, enabling the problem to be directly solvable as an In contrast to the conventional FedAvg, which utilizes the
optimization problem. However, in the context of FL, it is not amount of data samples, this enhanced FedAvg does model
practical to apply such solutions due to the following: averaging by weighting the local models according to the
 • The server cannot adequately analyze local updates even local data quality. Practically, weighting the model parameters
 if all selected SPSs are trusted. The VDD quality metric according to the amount of data is futile since the data may
 can only be utilized as described in Section V-B only if contain redundancies and slightly affect the global model.
 all participants are completely trusted. Further details can be found in Section VI, where the conven-
 • Similar data may have varying contributions during the tional FedAvg approach demonstrates inferior performance.
 global training rounds, wherein it could initially make
 a higher contribution but gets reduced over time. For D. Two-Steps Verification Mechanism
 instance, the training process slows down if the model is
 In this approach, the retailer initially selects the participating
 closer to its stationary point, regardless of the associated
 suppliers based on their local data quality. As explained
 cost or local data quality. Thus, the rewards should be
 in Section V-B, the higher the data quality, the better the
 given based on the value added to the global model every
 model update. Thus, the server adopts the value of ϕ(Dm ) to
 round, not as a fixed contract.
 prioritize the suppliers and select the best set. However, the
 • The server should ensure fairness between the particimalicious supplier may claim higher data quality. Therefore,
 pants where the higher cost does not imply higher quality.
 the server needs to apply a further verification step by testing
 In the following section, we solve this problem iteratively
 the model update before confirming the supplier’s reward. This
by implementing a smooth FL process, including novel seleccan be done by estimating the Euclidean distance between
tion, aggregation, and averaging schemes. Then, we design
 two consecutive updates of the global model and the updated
a fair and efficient postprocessing rewards mechanism that
 local model, respectively, or by having global data samples
fully ensures fairness so that the constraints (36–39) can
 and feeding them into the uploaded models one by one before
be implicitly satisfied. The introduced solutions incorporate
 conducting the global averaging.
three phases; the first phase (i.e., the Preprocessing Phase)
 1) Untrust-Based Model Averaging: In this scenario, some
aims to solve an optimized relaxation problem to select
 participating SPSs might declare to have valuable data, yet
the proper participants. The selected participants receive the
 the shared models may be perturbed or generated randomly.
global model, update it locally, and upload it to the TPR.
 Consequently, a two-step verification is proposed, where the
In the second phase, the locally upgraded models by all
 TPR initially assesses the obtained model employing the
participating SPSs are aggregated. The TPR evaluates the
 Euclidean distance or utilizing generalized test data evaluating
received models using two schemes (discussed below) and
 every model independently. Assuming the latter is utilized,
assigns a contribution rank for each model. In the third phase,
 the adjusted averaging weights can be determined using the
the enhanced FedAvg based on adopted weights is applied
 formula as follows:
under two scenarios when the participants are fully trusted and
when some participants are malicious. The rewards are then G(vm )
 w m = M (40)
given based on the contribution rank given to each participant m=1 G(vm )
(i.e., based on the uploaded model). Following that, the model is generated and updated based
 on (39).
C. Quality-Assurance Model Averaging
 The phases of the proposed solution are as follows. By E. Incentive Reward design
resolving (31) during the initial phase (i.e., the preprocessing We propose applying the Soft-max function to determine
phase), it attempts to identify the appropriate SPSs. The the incentives provided to the selected SPSs after computing
identified participants will then receive the global model for the authentic average weights employing one of the methods
local updating. The second phase combines the local updates outlined in the preceding section. This will guarantee equality
from all SPSs to mitigate the challenges arising using the according to the contribution provided by each SPS. It can be
traditional FedAvg approach being assessed in two different expressed as follows:
settings.
 e vm
 1) Trust-Based Model Averaging: The TPR trusts all par- w m = M . (41)
 vm
ticipants, and the weight of each participant is determined m=1 e
according to their reported data quality: It is important to note that for each round z, the total
 ϕ(Dm ) rewards will be less than the budget assigned. As a result, the
 vm = M (38) participants receive the earned rewards from:
 m=1 ϕ(Dm )
Following that, the global model is generated and updated Rm = wm Bz . (42)
given by We may infer from (41) and (42) that the obtained rewards
 ensure equality for all SPSs participants and completely meet
 
 M
 V (z) = vm V m . (39) the assigned budget. It is worth noting that our approach
 m=1 considers the heterogeneity of threats and their distribution
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4853

 Algorithm 1: FedPot Framework N-BaIoT dataset in Section VI) are located. These devices
 Input: All available SPSs M are responsible for collecting real-time information such as
 Output: Upgraded Security Model V voltage, current, and frequency from different points in the
 1 Initialize: starting global model V0 , local epochs ε, step size η, rounds
 Z, and assigned budget for every global round;
 grid. Control Layer: where the real-time data is analyzed
 2 TPR collects previous information (e.g, ϕ(Dm ), from existing SPSs and control signals are generated. This layer integrates the
 M.; security protocols as studied through the IEC 104 dataset
 3 for z = 1 to Z do
 4 The TPR establishes the time limit (i.e., deadline);
 in section VI-C. The layer includes controllers like Remote
 5 TPR addresses the optimization problem, P3, to choose the best Terminal Units (RTUs) and programmable logic controllers
 entities for participating in the model update; (PLCs), which interact directly with the devices in the Data
 6 TPR shares the model Vz −1 to chosen SPSs;
 7 for Each SPS m ∈ M synchronously do
 Acquisition Layer. The control layer continuously monitors
 8 SPS m gets Vz −1 ; and analyzes real-time data, identifying potential cyber threats
 9 SPS m updates m employing its VDD obtained data for E or operational anomalies. This layer generates signals, exeepochs;
10 SPS m uploads Vm to TPR;
 cutes responses to mitigate threats, and integrates various
 security protocols. A key feature is the strategic deployment
11 The TPR gathers all submitted updates from participating SPSs;
12 if Every participant is trusted then of honeypots within the network. These honeypots serve as
13 TPR employs Equation (38) to recompute the weight decoy systems designed to attract cyber attackers. This allows
 associated with each update. for an in-depth analysis of attack strategies, significantly
14 else enhancing the grid’s cyber resilience and providing valuable
15 TPR assesses each model using the generalization test data;
16 TPR utilizes Equation (40) to recompute the weight for every insights into potential vulnerabilities. Decision Layer: This
 update is the topmost layer, consisting of control centers or cloud-
17 TPR utilizes equation (39) to generate a modified global model. based systems where higher-level decision-making processes
 occur. Here, our proposed anomaly detection algorithms and
 security measures are implemented (i.e., ML-based detector).
 To generate realistic grid scenarios, we employed both the Nimplying that most SPSs, over a reasonable time frame, are BaIoT and IEC 104 datasets, creating a diverse set of operating
exposed to some kind of malicious activity. It might be conditions and cyber-attack vectors. Our framework is also
accurate that at certain times, specific SPS face a higher designed to be scalable and robust, which allows for the
volume or intensity of attacks, but when viewed over an integration of additional sensors and control units as required.
extended period, the distribution becomes relatively even. We The proposed incentive-based model is implemented at the
have designed the reward mechanism to factor in not just the Decision Layer, ensuring that it benefits from the real-time
volume but also the quality of the data. This way, even if an data collected and analyzed at the lower layers and addressing
SPS does not face a high number of attacks, the uniqueness the free-rider problem. This facilitates more effective and
or novelty of a single quality data point they contribute could timely decision-making. It is worth noting that in this layer
be of immense value, ensuring they are adequately rewarded. of the context of cybersecurity, test datasets cannot remain
Alg. 1 outlines the overall process of the suggested approach. static. When a new type of attack is detected by a honeypot, it
In Alg. 1, the TPR starts by initializing the model and the may initially be evaluated through heuristics, expert rules, and
hyper-parameters (step 1), then gathering prior information anomaly detection methods for interim validation. Contextual
from all SPSs (step 2). From steps 3–17, the TPR runs the information provided by the SPS also helps the TPR to assess
FL algorithm by determining the deadline for each round the contribution’s potential impact. To corroborate new threats,
(step 4) and solving the relaxed P3 (step 5) to select the best we propose sharing them (anonymously) with a subset of
participants while accounting for the stated data quality. The trusted SPS for additional verification. As these new types
global model is then sent (step 6), and all selected participants of attacks are validated, they will be incorporated into future
undertake local training and submit all local models once iterations of the test data, ensuring a relevant benchmark for
finished (steps 7–10). The TPR aggregates all models (step 11) subsequent evaluations.
before deciding on one of the proposed schemes. If the TPR
can confirm the trustworthiness of the participating SPSs, the
solution in Section V-C is applied (steps 12 and 13), and the G. Theoretical Analysis of Robustness Against Malicious
solution in Section V-D is applied (steps 15 and 16) if TPR SPSs
can not. Finally, as explained in Section V-E, the rewards are To validate the resilience of our Quality-Assurance Model
fairly given to the participants efficiently. Averaging and Two-step Verification Mechanism against malicious activity, we introduce some theoretical metrics and
F. Architectural Mapping of the Proposed Solution analysis. Let ΔV (z ) denote the deviation of the global model
 V (z ) under the Trust-based Model Averaging scheme given
 It is worth noting that our control framework is designed
 by (39):
to emulate the hierarchical architecture commonly observed
in modern SG systems. It comprises three main layers: the ΔV (z ) = V (z ) − V ∗ (43)
Data Acquisition Layer, the Control Layer, and the Decision
Layer. Data Acquisition Layer: This is the base layer where Here, V ∗ represents the optimal global model that would have
all sensors and IoT devices (as represented by our use of the been achieved without any malicious activity. We aim to bound
4854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 4. Label distribution among the logs of the first three devices.

ΔV (z ): overloaded with traffic; bot attacks that take advantage of
 device flaws; man-in-the-middle attacks that intercept commu-
 ΔV (z ) ≤ f (ϕ(Dm ), M , vm , . . .) (44)
 nications; SQL injection that manipulates databases; and XSS
Here, f is a function that encapsulates the contributions of which injects malicious scripts. Firmware flashing, physical
local data quality ϕ(Dm ), the total number of participants tampering, and side-channel attacks also represent advanced
M, and their respective weights vm , among other parameters. threats. In SG, DDoS attacks can disrupt grid communications,
Similarly, we define ΔW (z ) as the deviation under the Bot attacks may compromise grid control systems, and MitM
Untrust-based Model Averaging scheme given by (40). attacks pose risks to data integrity. SQL injection and XSS are
 relevant where SGs use Web interfaces or databases. Firmware
 ΔW (z ) = V (z ) − V ∗ (45) flashing and physical Tampering highlight the need to secure
We aim to bound ΔW (z ) as follows: grid hardware, while side-channel attacks demonstrate the
 importance of protecting against indirect data leaks.
 ΔW (z ) ≤ g(G(vm ), M , wm , . . .) (46) We compare our proposed method with the traditional
Here, g is a function capturing the effects of the generalized FedAvg technique, where the server allocates weights to the
test G(vm ), total number of participants M, and the adjusted local model updates based on the amount of traffic data
weights wm , among others. In essence, the bounded nature samples they include. Furthermore, we evaluate the incentivesof ΔV (z ) and ΔW (z ) implies that our proposed schemes based algorithm against a customized-based algorithm. We
are robust against a variable number of malicious SPSs, employ a supervised deep neural network (DNN) model conmaintaining the global model’s efficacy. sisting of 115 input layers followed by 115, 62, and 32 hidden
 layers in which 12 , 14 , and 18 inputs follow each hidden layer,
 respectively. The cross-entropy is used as a loss function. We
 VI. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION
 initially consider the N-BaIoT dataset’s initial device count,
 In this section, we establish an experimental setting to consisting of nine devices exhibiting non-i.i.d. characteristics.
evaluate the efficacy of our proposed methods for improving Similar parameters are adopted for all experiments. There are
the security defense model and allocating fair incentives. eight SPSs as participants in the FL configurations, with each
 SPS possessing one out of the nine devices present in the N-
A. Experimental Setup BaIoT datasets, including both benign and adversarial samples.
 We employ the N-BaIoT [35] as well as IEC 104 and IEC One device is solely utilized to evaluate the overall model
MMS datasets [36]. N-BaIoT was initially designed to cover developed by each of the other eight participants. We conduct
the security aspects of IoT devices. This dataset is crucial each experiment five times to ensure the accuracy of the
for modern SG systems increasingly relying on IoT sensors findings. Then, 50 devices are added to the data distribution.
and actuators for efficient and intelligent grid management. Every device uses a 10 local epoch and a 32 local batch size.
It includes data from benign operations as well as from a We employ an adjustable learning rate with a default value of
range of attacks like Mirai and Gafgyt (Bashlite). Mirai attacks 0.01.
focus on different flooding techniques using ACK, SYN, UDP, We assess the efficiency of our proposed scheme using
and other protocols while performing device vulnerability the following metrics accuracy, loss, true positive rate
scans. Gafgyt attacks, similarly, engage in device scanning (TPRate), false positive rate (FPR), and F1-measure given by:
and deploy a mix of attack strategies, including TCP and TPRate = TPTP TN
 +FN , TNR = TN +FP , and F 1−score =
UDP flooding. As in Fig. 4 for the first three devices, it 2∗Precision∗Recall . To assess the model’s efficacy, we utilize
 Precision+Recall
consists of eleven classes, one benign, while the remaining ten the testing accuracy, which measures the proportion of accurepresent adversarial classes (i.e., indicating malicious data), rately identified used incursions as a performance indicator.
with each sample including 115 attributes. These datasets, in Finally, we use rewards distribution fairness to showcase the
particular, include DDoS, which causes networks to become efficiency of the proposed rewards allocation framework.
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4855

 TABLE I
 C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR TPR ATE AND TNR OF C ONVENTIONAL
 F EDAVG AND P ROPOSED S OLUTIONS U NDER ATTACK AND N ON -ATTACK
 S CENARIOS ( I . I . D . DATA D ISTRIBUTION , N-BA I OT DATASET )

 malicious participants affects the performance of the models,
Fig. 5. Comparative Analysis of Test Accuracy: Enhanced FedAvg, especially as the number of SPSs increases. Nevertheless, the
Conventional FedAvg, and Centralized-Based Algorithms.
 untrust-based averaging scheme still performs better than the
 trust-based scheme. Yet, the accuracy is slightly decreased as
 the number of SPSs increases.
B. Numerical Results on BaIoT Dataset Furthermore, we assess the efficacy of the proposed
 In this section, we perform our numerical analysis on IDD approaches regarding the fairness of the reward using the
and non-i.i.d assumptions. true positive rate (TPRate) and the true negative rate (TNR),
 1) The IID Setting: Fig. 5 provides an overview of the critical performance indicators for the rewards allocation and
trust-based model averaging framework performance under detection rate, and in the security defense model. Table I
several distinct settings: complete data offloading to TPR (cen- shows that, whether malicious participants are present or
tralized training), the conventional FedAvg, and the proposed not, both proposed approaches exceed the traditional FedAvg.
enhanced-FedAvg (FedAvg based on data quality). The results Nonetheless, in the presence of malicious participants, the
of the proposed algorithm demonstrate that it outperforms proposed trust-based model averaging (PTrusted) performance
the conventional FL approach, which can be attributed to the exhibits a considerable decline in TPRate, TNR, and fairness
effect of assigning model weights according to the local data of rewards. This degradation occurs as we solely depend on
quality instead of the data size as in conventional FedAvg. the claimed data quality. On the other hand, the proposed
Furthermore, the enhanced FedAvg scheme can attain almost untrust-based model averaging ensures adequate outcomes
traditional centralized performance. In contrast, the traditional despite malicious participants. This is achieved through a
FedAvg algorithm needs more rounds to obtain the required two-step verification process that excludes altered models
accuracy, which increases the cost, leading to surpassing the and accordingly assigns rewards, thereby achieving a high
budget assigned. level of fairness. Meanwhile, FedAvg distributes the incentives
 Fig. 6(a) shows the impact of the untrust-based model aver- randomly depending on the data size.
aging framework under two scenarios: when all participants 2) The Non-IID setting: For the non-i.i.d. setting, we
are completely trusted and when some are malicious. Our assume that each SPS holds only a maximum of 2 types
observations reveal that depending solely on the data quality of attacks (i.e., Mirai UDP and combo). We consider three
asserted by SPSs, the presence of corrupted models leads to scenarios regarding the number of devices: 9, 50, and 100.
subpar models. This outcome arises due to malicious partic- We assign only a maximum of two classes for each SPS to
ipants who assert high-quality data yet disperse it arbitrarily ensure that the datasets amongst SPSs are non-i.i.d. The default
or manipulate local models. The suggested untrusted model data distribution is considered non-i.i.d. However, as illustrated
averaging approach may efficiently remove detrimental models in Fig. 4, the labels’ distribution across all devices is almost
by assigning weights to the shared models according to the identical, even for those holding only 6 classes. Hence, in this
generalization test data. This causes the effects of adversarial work, we consider a realistic non-i.i.d. distribution to evaluate
or disturbed models to vanish during the averaging phase or the performance in the worst situations.
at least reduces their negative impact on the designed global As shown in Fig. 7(a), we initially run the first scenario
model utilized for NIDS. Contrarily, malicious participants when the number of devices is only 9. One can see that
may significantly reduce the defensive model’s effectiveness, the performance in general drops by approximately 15%
despite the data quality they claimed throughout the selection for both proposed averaging schemes. However, when some
process. We repeat similar experiments while splitting the data participants maliciously claimed high-quality local logs durbetween 50 and 100 SPSs to showcase the effectiveness of the ing the selection phase and uploaded perturbed models, the
proposed approaches. performance of the first proposed scheme (i.e., trust-based
 As shown in Fig. 6(b) and 6 (c), we use similar settings but model averaging) dramatically dropped by almost 50% to
distribute the data across 50 and 100 SPSs and keep the labels reach 46% accuracy. This is due to adopting inaccurate
in an i.i.d fashion. We follow the original data distribution, weights during the evaluation phase, thereby impacting the
where the labels across the SPSs follow the same distribution. performance of the global model. In contrast, the second
We observe that even if the data is i.i.d, the presence of some proposed scheme (i.e., untrust-based model averaging) shows
4856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 6. Test Accuracy Comparison of Proposed Schemes in the Presence of Malicious SPSs Claiming High-Quality Data While Uploading Defective Models
(i.i.d. Data Distribution, N-BaIoT dataset).

Fig. 7. Test Accuracy Comparison of Proposed Schemes in the Presence of Malicious SPSs Claiming High-Quality Data While Uploading Defective Models
(non-I.I.D. Data Distribution, N-BaIoT dataset).

 TABLE II
 C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR TPR ATE AND TNR OF C ONVENTIONAL are adversarial, the proposed trust-based model averaging (P-
F EDAVG AND P ROPOSED S OLUTIONS U NDER ATTACK AND N ON -ATTACK Trusted) suffers drastically in terms of TPRate, TNR, and
 S CENARIOS (N ON - I . I . D . DATA D ISTRIBUTION , N-BA I OT DATASET ) reward fairness, which is unsurprising as these are heavily
 based on the data quality. In contrast, the proposed untrustbased model averaging successfully filters the contaminated
 uploaded models using a two-stage verification process. It
 distributes the rewards appropriately, achieving a high degree
 of fairness despite the presence of adversarial participants.
 FedAvg, on the other hand, distributes its incentives randomly
 according to the amount of data gathered. Nevertheless, all
 schemes are affected by the data distribution amongst SPSs,
 as we note when comparing the i.i.d. to non-i.i.d. results.
immunity against the perturbed models even when the data is
non-i.i.d. C. Numerical Results on IEC 104 Dataset
 In Fig. 7(b) and 7(c), we repeat the same experiments, The IEC 104 Dataset was released by Brno University
distributing the data across 50 and 100 SPSs, respectively. in March 2022 and represents a significant resource in
From a security perspective, the performance in both figures the field of SG security [36]. It comprises IEC 104 and
almost matches the performance in Fig. 7(a), where the second IEC MMS headers and is primarily designed for anomaly
scheme outperforms the first averaging scheme when attacks detection and security monitoring. The dataset captures a
are present. However, the convergence becomes slightly slower broad spectrum of attack scenarios across different folders.
as the number of SPSs grows. In the case of massively For instance, the but-iec104-i folder contains various attacks,
distributed data due to the increased number of SPSs, more including Denial of Service (DoS), Injection, and Man-in-therounds are required to capture patterns from all available SPSs. Middle (MITM) attacks. These offer a comprehensive view
 We also investigate the effect of all proposed schemes, of the threat landscape in the Industrial. Control Systems
including the reward mechanisms, on the overall performance (ICS) communications. Another folder, vrt-iec104, presents
in terms of detection rate (i.e., TPRate and TNR) and the a different set of intriguing attacks, such as value change
fairness of reward distribution. From Table II, it can be and masquerading attacks. It is worth mentioning that The
shown that proposed averaging methods significantly surpass IEC 60870-104 (IEC 104) and IEC 61850 (MMS) datasets,
the conventional FedAvg, whether or not adversarial par- produced by the “Security monitoring of communication in
ticipants are present. However, when particular participants the smart grid (Bonnet)” project at the Brno University of
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4857

Fig. 8. Test Accuracy Comparison of Proposed Schemes in the Presence of Malicious SPSs Claiming High-Quality Data While Uploading Defective Models
(I.I.D. Data Distribution, IEC 104 dataset).

Fig. 9. Test Accuracy Comparison of Proposed Schemes in the Presence of Malicious SPSs Claiming High-Quality Data While Uploading Defective Models
(non-I.I.D. Data Distribution, IEC 104 dataset).

Technology, Czech Republic (2019-2022), include CSV traces both trust-based and untrust-based schemes when the data
from PCAP files [36]. These datasets, derived from both is IID (i.e., all clients have the same data distribution). Our
real device observations and virtual application monitoring, results clearly demonstrate the superiority of the enhanced
provide a comprehensive view of normal and attack traffic FedAvg, which achieves performance levels nearly identical
patterns within smart grid environments. This dual approach, to centralized models. This can be attributed to our focus on
blending real-world operational traffic with simulated attack local data quality for model weight assignment as opposed
scenarios, ensures the datasets support robust model training to merely considering data volume, as in traditional FedAvg.
and validation, preparing the models to detect and mitigate This advantage holds even when malicious participants are
both existing and emerging threats effectively. Despite its involved. Performance significantly drops and fluctuates when
richness, the dataset was originally unlabeled and required sub- only the trust-based scheme is employed. This drop is due
stantial preprocessing. This step was critical to ensure that our to the exclusive reliance on local data quality. However,
subsequent analyses were based on accurate, well-defined data. our untrust-based averaging scheme effectively mitigates this
The dataset is organized into multiple folders, each containing by leveraging generalization test data to allocate weights,
data related to either IEC 104 or IEC MMS headers. Each neutralizing the impact of corrupted local models.
folder has a readme.txt file that provides valuable information, 2) The Non-IID Setting: In this setting, we assume that
including data types and timestamps related to the attacks. This each SPS is limited to specific types of IEC 104 traffic patterns.
level of detail enabled us to better understand the structure and Fig. 9(a)–9(c) show that our proposed untrust-based averaging
implications of the data. We performed preprocessing steps scheme performs exceptionally well, even in the presence of
through a multi-stage process to adequately prepare the data malicious activity. Trust-based model averaging struggles in
for our experimental framework. This involved labeling the this context, experiencing a significant decline in accuracy due
samples into categories such as benign, switching, scanning, or to its reliance on claimed data quality. Furthermore, Table III
communication interruption; cleaning the data to remove any reveals that our approaches outperform traditional FedAvg in
irrelevant or inaccurate information, and finally transforming it critical security metrics such as TPRate and TNR, especially
into a format suitable for our machine learning algorithms. The when adversarial participants are present. The trust-based
encoding was significant for nominal or categorical data. The model sees a decline in these metrics due to its dependence
following section focuses on the numerical analysis conducted on claimed data quality. In contrast, our untrust-based model
using the IEC 104 dataset. We examine performance under averaging maintains robust performance, demonstrating its
two conditions: the i.i.d. and non-i.i.d settings. value in real-world scenarios where malicious activity is a
 1) The IID Setting: We consider three scenarios featuring concern. Notably, our proposed approaches exhibit superior
varying numbers of substations: 20, 50, and 100. Fig. 8(a)– performance in non-IID settings. This is due to our emphasis
8(c) display the performance of our framework, which includes on evaluating the quality of returned contributions rather
4858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 10. Test Accuracy Comparison of Proposed Schemes in the Presence of Malicious SPSs Claiming High-Quality Data While Uploading Defective Models
(non-I.I.D. Data Distribution, IEC 61850 (MMS) dataset).

 TABLE III
 C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR TPR ATE AND TNR OF C ONVENTIONAL applicability of our framework. It shows that our untrust-based
F EDAVG AND P ROPOSED S OLUTIONS U NDER ATTACK AND N ON -ATTACK averaging scheme, which assesses the quality of contributions
 S CENARIOS (N ON - I . I . D DATA D ISTRIBUTION AND IEC 104 DATASET ) through generalization on test data, can effectively neutralize
 the influence of corrupted local models, ensuring stable and
 reliable model performance even in the face of malicious
 activity. This result demonstrates the generalizability and
 robustness of our approach across different SG communication
 protocols, further validating the effectiveness of our method in
 enhancing security and reliability in real-world, heterogeneous
 SG network environments.

than just data quantity, leading to a more generalizable VII. C ONCLUSION
global model. In summary, our numerical evaluation of the In this paper, we introduced FedPot, a novel quality assur-
IEC 104 dataset validates the effectiveness of our proposed ance honeypot-based FL framework designed for network
methodologies, particularly in non-i.i.d settings and when security in SG. FedPot incorporates a novel, efficient, and
malicious participants are involved. The insights gained from resilient aggregation and averaging schemes coupled with a
this analysis will be crucial for refining and optimizing our fair rewards mechanism. We presented novel schemes for local
models for intrusion detection in ICS. data quality, participant selection, and global model upgrading
 using the N-BaIoT, IEC 104, and IEC MMS datasets. In
D. Verification With IEC 61850 Manufacturing Message FedPot, the TPR addresses a convex optimization problem,
Specification (MMS) Dataset prioritizing data quality over data size. Each SPS optimizes
 the global model with its honeypot logs and transmits the
 To further verify our results, we carry out experimodel updates back to the TPR. Subsequently, the TPR
ments using the IEC 61850 (MMS) dataset. IEC 61850
 enhances the defensive model using the approaches proposed
(MMS) is extensively employed in electric utility companies,
 in this study. To mitigate the free-rider issue prevalent in AMI
predominantly for substation automation and ensuring internetworks within the FL framework, we proposed a new metric
operability between different manufacturers’ systems. This
 to gauge local data quality and contributions, eliminating
global standard is important for streamlining the communicathe need to rely on data size. We also devised a two-step
tion infrastructure of electrical substations and facilitating the
 verification process to address the challenge of adversaries
integration, operation, and maintenance of diverse devices and
 or underperforming SPSs. Additionally, we introduced an
systems in SG. Its usage spans various applications, including
 improved FedAvg scheme for local model aggregations. The
real-time monitoring, control of substation components, and
 results obtained from extensive simulations with realistic log
ensuring robust, reliable data exchange. The dataset used
 data attest to the effectiveness of our proposed scheme, which
includes both benign and malicious data samples. Remarkably,
 outperforms current state-of-the-art techniques. As a direction
the performance trends observed with this dataset closely
 for future research, investigating the real-time implementamirror those identified using the IEC 104 protocol data.
 tion and assessment of FedPot in streaming, diverse, and
Specifically, under non-IID settings as a most challenging
 larger-scale environments would be insightful. Lastly, adapting
scenario, our enhanced FedAvg framework, which includes
 the FedPot framework to address other cybersecurity threats
both trust-based and untrust-based schemes, continued to
 within various IIoT applications could also be advantageous.
demonstrate superior performance, closely approximating that
of centralized models. This consistency highlights the robust-
 R EFERENCES
ness of our approach, particularly our novel method of
weighting model updates based on the quality of local data [1] A. Albaseer and M. Abdallah, “Privacy-preserving honeypot-based
 detector in smart grid networks: A new design for quality-assurance
rather than its volume. Including the IEC 61850 dataset and fair incentives federated learning framework,” in Proc. IEEE 20th
not only verifies our initial findings but also broadens the Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), 2023, pp. 722–727.
ALBASEER et al.: FedPot: A QUALITY-AWARE COLLABORATIVE AND INCENTIVIZED HONEYPOT 4859

 [2] P. Kumar, Y. Lin, G. Bai, A. Paverd, J. S. Dong, and A. Martin, “Smart [25] H. Teryak, A. Albaseer, M. Abdallah, S. Al-Kuwari, and M. Qaraqe,
 grid metering networks: A survey on security, privacy and open research “Double-edged defense: Thwarting Cyber attacks and adversarial
 issues,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2886–2927, machine learning in IEC 60870-5-104 smart grids,” IEEE Open J. Ind.
 3rd Quart., 2019. Electron. Soc., vol. 4, pp. 629–642, 2023.
 [3] T. Morstyn, A. Teytelboym, and M. D. McCulloch, “Bilateral contract [26] M. E. Eddin et al., “Fine-tuned RNN-based detector for electricity theft
 networks for peer-to-peer energy trading,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, attacks in smart grid generation domain,” IEEE Open J. Ind. Electron.
 vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 2026–2035, Mar. 2019. Soc., vol. 3, pp. 733–750, 2022.
 [4] B. Zhang, C. Jiang, J.-L. Yu, and Z. Han, “A contract game for direct [27] A. Albaseer and M. Abdallah, “Fine-tuned LSTM-based model for
 energy trading in smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 4, efficient honeypot-based network intrusion detection system in smart
 pp. 2873–2884, Jul. 2018. grid networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Commun., Signal Process., Their
 [5] G. Liang, S. R. Weller, J. Zhao, F. Luo, and Z. Y. Dong, “The 2015 Appl. (ICCSPA), Dec. 2022, pp. 1–6.
 Ukraine blackout: Implications for false data injection attacks,” IEEE [28] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, S. Xie, and J. Zhang, “Incentive
 Trans. Power Syst., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3317–3318, Jul. 2017. mechanism for reliable federated learning: A joint optimization approach
 [6] D. Du, X. Li, W. Li, R. Chen, M. Fei, and L. Wu, “ADMM-based to combining reputation and contract theory,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 distributed state estimation of smart grid under data deception and denial vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 10700–10714, Dec. 2019.
 of service attacks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 49, no. 8, [29] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
 pp. 1698–1711, Aug. 2019. O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
 [7] N. Abdi, A. Albaseer, and M. Abdallah, “The role of deep learning detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 in advancing proactive cybersecurity measures for smart grid networks: pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
 A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., early access, Jan. 17, 2024, [30] M. M. Badr et al., “Privacy-preserving and communication-efficient
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3354045. energy prediction scheme based on federated learning for smart grids,”
 [8] J. Liu, X. Wang, S. Shen, G. Yue, S. Yu, and M. Li, “A Bayesian IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 7719–7736, May 2023.
 Q-learning game for dependable task offloading against DDoS attacks [31] M. Ammar, M. Rizk, A. Abdel-Hamid, and A. K. Aboul-Seoud, “A
 in sensor edge cloud,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 9, framework for security enhancement in SDN-based datacenters,” in
 pp. 7546–7561, May 2021. Proc. 8th IFIP Int. Conf. New Technol., Mobility Security (NTMS), 2016,
 [9] P. Bolton and M. Dewatripont, Contract Theory. Cambridge, MA, USA: pp. 1–4.
 MIT Press, 2004. [32] W. Tian et al., “Honeypot game-theoretical model for defending against
[10] K. Hamidouche, W. Saad, M. Debbah, M. T. Thai, and Z. Han, APT attacks with limited resources in cyber-physical systems,” ETRI J.,
 “Contract-based incentive mechanism for LTE over unlicensed chan- vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 585–598, 2019.
 nels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 6427–6440, Sep. 2019. [33] K. Wang, M. Du, S. Maharjan, and Y. Sun, “Strategic honeypot game
[11] W. Tian, M. Du, X. Ji, G. Liu, Y. Dai, and Z. Han, “Contract- model for distributed denial of service attacks in the smart grid,” IEEE
 based incentive mechanisms for honeypot defense in advanced metering Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 2474–2482, Sep. 2017.
 infrastructure,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 4259–4268, [34] D. Ye, R. Yu, M. Pan, and Z. Han, “Federated learning in vehicular
 Sep. 2021. edge computing: A selective model aggregation approach,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 8, pp. 23920–23935, 2020.
[12] P. Voigt and A. Von dem Bussche, “The EU general data protection
 [35] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
 regulation (GDPR),” in A Practical Guide, vol. 10, 1st ed., Cham,
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
 Switzerland: Springer Int. Publ., 2017.
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul.–Sep. 2018.
[13] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and
 [36] “Bezpecnostní monitorování rídící komunikace ICS v
 H. V. Poor, “Federated learning for Internet of Things: A comprehensive
 energetických sítích (BONNET).” 2022. [Online]. Available:
 survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1622–1658,
 https://www.fit.vut.cz/research/project/1303/.en
 3rd Quart., 2021.
[14] A. M. Albaseer, M. Abdallah, A. Al-Fuqaha, and A. Erbad, “Finegrained data selection for improved energy efficiency of federated edge
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3258–3271,
 Sep./Oct. 2022.
[15] Z. Wang, M. Song, Z. Zhang, Y. Song, Q. Wang, and H. Qi, “Beyond
 inferring class representatives: User-level privacy leakage from federated Abdullatif Albaseer (Member, IEEE) received
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 2512–2520. an M.Sc. degree in computer networks from the
[16] A. Ghorbani and J. Zou, “Data Shapley: Equitable valuation of King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals,
 data for machine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, in 2017, and the Ph.D.
 pp. 2242–2251. degree in computer science and engineering from
[17] J. Zhang, Y. Wu, and R. Pan, “Incentive mechanism for horizontal Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar, in 2022,
 federated learning based on reputation and reverse auction,” in Proc. where he is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with
 Web Conf., 2021, pp. 947–956. Smart Cities and IoT Lab. He has authored and
[18] L. Lyu, X. Xu, Q. Wang, and H. Yu, “Collaborative fairness in federated coauthored over 30 conference and journal papers
 learning,” in Federated Learning. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, in IEEE ICC, IEEE Globecom, IEEE CCNC, IEEE
 pp. 189–204. WCNC, and IEEE Transactions. He also has six U.S.
[19] W. Chen, D. Ding, H. Dong, and G. Wei, “Distributed resilient filtering patents in the area of the wireless network edge. His current research interests
 for power systems subject to denial-of-service attacks,” IEEE Trans. include AI for networking, AI for cybersecurity, distributed AI, and edge
 Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1688–1697, Aug. 2019. LLMs.
[20] M. Du and K. Wang, “An SDN-enabled pseudo-honeypot strategy for
 distributed denial of service attacks in Industrial Internet of Things,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 648–657, Jan. 2020.
[21] Z. Li, J. Kang, R. Yu, D. Ye, Q. Deng, and Y. Zhang, “Consortium
 blockchain for secure energy trading in Industrial Internet of Things,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3690–3700, Aug. 2018.
[22] F. Ye, Y. Qian, and R. Q. Hu, “A security protocol for advanced metering Nima Abdi received the B.Sc. degree in electrical
 infrastructure in smart grid,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., engineering from Qatar University in 2020. She is
 2014, pp. 649–654. currently pursuing the M.Sc. degree in data science
 and engineering with Hamad Bin Khalifa University.
[23] M. A. Faisal, Z. Aung, J. R. Williams, and A. Sanchez, “Data-stream-
 Her research focus is on the application of artificial
 based intrusion detection system for advanced metering infrastructure in
 intelligence on smart grid security, specifically the
 smart grid: A feasibility study,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 31–44,
 physical layer.
 Mar. 2015.
[24] Y. Yan, R. Q. Hu, S. K. Das, H. Sharif, and Y. Qian, “An efficient
 security protocol for advanced metering infrastructure in smart grid,”
 IEEE Netw., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 64–71, Jul./Aug. 2013.
4860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

 Mohamed Abdallah (Senior Member, IEEE) Saif Al-Kuwari (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 received the B.Sc. degree from Cairo University, the Bachelor of Engineering degree in computers
 Giza, Egypt, in 1996, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. and networks from the University of Essex, U.K.,
 degrees from the University of Maryland at College in 2006, the first Ph.D. degree in computer sci-
 Park, College Park, MD, USA, in 2001 and 2006, ence from the University of Bath in 2011, and the
 respectively. From 2006 to 2016, he held academic second Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 and research positions with Cairo University and Royal Holloway, University of London, U.K. He
 Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar. He is currently a Faculty with the College of Science
 is currently a Founding Faculty Member with the and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University
 rank of an Associate Professor with the College and the Director of the Qatar Center for Quantum
 of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa Computing. His current research interests include,
University, Doha. He has published more than 150 journals and confer- mainly, quantum cryptography, and quantum machine learning. He is a Fellow
ences and four book chapters and co-invented four patents. His current of IET and BCS, and a Senior Member of ACM.
research interests include wireless networks, wireless security, smart grids,
optical wireless communication, and blockchain applications for emerging
networks. He is a recipient of the Research Fellow Excellence Award
at Texas A&M University in Qatar in 2016, the Best Paper Award in
multiple IEEE conferences, including IEEE BlackSeaCom 2019 and the
IEEE First Workshop on Smart Grid and Renewable Energy in 2015, and
the Nortel Networks Industrial Fellowship for five consecutive years from
1999 to 2003. His professional activities include an Associate Editor of the
IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS and the IEEE O PEN ACCESS
J OURNAL OF C OMMUNICATIONS, the Track Co-Chair of the IEEE VTC
Fall 2019 Conference, the Technical Program Chair of the 10th International
Conference on Cognitive Radio-Oriented Wireless Networks, and a technical
program committee member of several major IEEE conferences.

 Marwa Qaraqe (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from
 Texas A&M University at Qatar, Qatar, in 2010,
 and the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Texas A&M University in College
 Station, College Station, TX, USA, in August 2012
 and May 2016, respectively. She is an Associate
 Professor within the Division of Information and
 Communication Technology, College of Science and
 Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa University. Her
 research focuses on various aspects of wireless
communication, signal processing, and machine learning, with applications
spanning multidisciplinary areas, such as security, IoT, and health. Her specific
interests lie in physical layer security, federated learning across wireless
networks, and employing machine learning techniques for enhancing wireless
communication, security, and healthcare systems. She has been actively
involved in developing physical layer security protocols for IoT networks and
has secured a NATO SPS grant for her work in this domain. Additionally, she
is engaged in research exploring emerging technologies like reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces and reinforcement learning to advance the capabilities of
wireless communication, particularly in the context of enabling efficient and
highly secure communication infrastructures for smart cities.