2492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

FRHIDS: Federated Learning Recommender Hybrid
 Intrusion Detection System Model in
 Software-Defined Networking
 for Consumer Devices
 Himanshi Babbar and Shalli Rani , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In the past few years, numerous methods of modify the recommendation of consumer devices to transmit
attack against recommendation systems have been developed. the data. Due to the remote connectivity of the consumer
Cellphones, smart devices, and self-driving cars are instances of devices to the cloud server, hackers try to target the consumer
distributed IoT consumer devices that generate massive amounts
of data on a daily basis and pose security threats to the cloud device and hence the server. It is a major requirement for
server. Due to the higher exchange of data, the challenges in the cloud server to recognize malicious and safe data from
this domain lead to increased security issues. Therefore, intrusion the devices [1], [2], [3]. The known attacks, such as the
detection systems are important for the security and privacy of Mirai botnet and its more ongoing variants show the necessity
IoT consumer devices and hence to the cloud server. Due to of enhancing IoT device security to safeguard massive IoTthe prediction, classification of attacks and recommendation of
malware devices, the accuracy of machine learning and deep enabled systems [4]. In recent decades of IoT, the employment
learning approaches for research in security for IoT consumer of machine learning methods has indeed been discussed extendevices has gained tremendous popularity. Federated learning sively for the recognition and mitigation of these attacks due to
(FL), is a privacy-preserving decentralized learning technique the growth of such increasingly sophisticated attacks. In fact,
that does not transport data but instead trains the model locally using a variety of techniques (such as neural networks) to infer
before sending the parameters to a cloud server, which helps in
ensuring the security of data. However, communication channels probable attacks [5], the implementation of ML techniques has
can still be attacked by hackers, so blocking malicious data been suggested in ongoing studies to enhance the recognition
is a major requirement for the cloud server. In this paper, capabilities of well-known network intrusion detection systems
a federated learning recommender hybrid intrusion detection (IDS). A NIDS is software installed at the network gateways
system (FRHIDS) model has been proposed that detects the that are designed to determine whether the traffic is considered
attacks on the SDN network incoming from the IoT consumer
devices and recommends that the safety devices transmit the to be an attack or not and to protect federated cloud server
decrypted data to the federated cloud server. In this model, the information systems. “Signature-based” and “anomaly-based
preservation of the security and privacy model parameters by uti- systems” are two significant approaches that can be integrated
lizing the process of testing and training has been implemented. with NIDS [6], [7], [8].
Simulation shows that the proposed approach’s well-designed Depending on certain characteristics in the Internet traffic,
recommender system has outperformed state-of-the-art models.
The performance of the proposed technique is evaluated based on including the number of bytes or the number of 1s or 0s,
its computational complexity and validation, which have shown signature-based IDS can identify attacks. Additionally, it rec-
12% improvement over the already existing techniques. ognizes attacks depending on the malware’s identified harmful
 Index Terms—Recommender system, federated learning, intru- instruction sequence. The anomaly-based IDS was developed
sion detection system, hybrid deep learning model, consumer to identify unidentified malware attacks, whereas the IDS
devices. detects characteristics that are known as signatures [9]. The
 fundamental conceptual difference between signature-based
 and anomaly-based detection is that the former is designed to
 I. I NTRODUCTION find a specific, known attack, while the latter is not ideal for
 HE RECOMMENDER System has nowadays become the
T essential channel for people to extract information that
can directly influence the perceptions of people while recdetecting new, unknown attacks [10], [11], [12]. For example,
 using the multi-classification model to tag traffic data, implies
 that the assault has already been understood. It will be
ommending consumer devices. Therefore, there are numerous unable to detect any new malicious events, resulting in data
vulnerabilities in the cloud server that can be exploited to leakage [13]. The latter system, on either side, has a greater
 capability for identifying unknown attacks and performs better
 Manuscript received 1 June 2023; revised 4 October 2023; accepted 29
October 2023. Date of publication 1 November 2023; date of current version in intrusion detection analysis [14].
26 April 2024. (Corresponding author: Shalli Rani.) The focus of this article is on data poisoning attacks for
 The authors are with the Chitkara University Institute of Engineering anomaly-based detection methods and hence recommends only
and Technology, Chitkara University, Rajpura 140401, India (e-mail:
himanshi.babbar@chitkara.edu.in; shallir79@gmail.com). the safety devices to transmit the data whereas to block the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3329151 malicious nodes’ data [15].
 1558-4127 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
BABBAR AND RANI: FRHIDS MODEL IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKING FOR CONSUMER DEVICES 2493

A. Main Contributions
 The main contributions of the paper:
 1) In this paper, a FRHIDS model is proposed to detect
 malicious attacks on consumer devices on the cloud
 server. Later, a federated cloud server approach is
 developed which generates the detailed intrusion detection model by overtaking the benefits of the benign data
 resources from the SDN network. Malicious nodes’ are
 blocked from sending the data to the cloud through the
 recommended approach for a cloud server. Fig. 1. Proposed Methodology.
 2) To improve the learning performance of the proposed
 model, the computational complexity is calculated based
 on the overall effectiveness of the proposed FRHIDS where μ denotes the domain and consumer devices interaction
 model with regard to the baseline models. The regular- function. For modeling the feedback signals with a maximum
 ization technique is applied to the proposed model to level of nonlinearity, NCRF utilizes the multi-layer perceptron
 reduce the complication of overfitting. (MLP) for learning the function μ has been shown in eq. (2):
    
 3) The experimental analysis and results are conducted μ(eu , fi ) = aout hT φ eu fi (2)
 to compute the efficiency of the proposed model in 
 comparison to the other solutions for pervasive IoT in which out, h, φ and indicate the activation functions
 consumer devices and hence recommendations to the and the weight vector, i.e., MLP function and concatenation
 cloud are made. The results have shown an improvement of vector respectively. The use of the sigmoid function as out
 of 12% in the proposed model with regard to accuracy, to restrict the model’s output to be in the binary form, i.e., 0
 precision, recall and f1-measure. and 1. Furthermore, let us say aj , Wj signifies the activation
 function, the weight matrix and the bias vector in the jth of
B. Paper Organization the perceptron respectively. The NCRF with H hidden layers,
 the MLP function φ is as shown in eq. (3):
 The rest of the paper is organized as: Section II brief
about the preliminaries of the neural collaborative recom- φ(x) = L (. . . (2 (1 (x))) . . . ) (3)
mended filtering model and work carried out by the existing
 where φj (x) = aj (WjT xbj ).
 For acquiring the effective
authors; Section III discusses the methodology of the proposed
 performance of recommendation, the utilization of Rectifier
work; Section IV explains the federated recommender hybrid
 (ReLU) as the activation function aj in all the layers of the
IDS framework; Section V showcase the result analysis and
 perceptron. In the case of FL, there are attacks that are applied
performance evaluation; Section VI depicts the comparative
 to various recommender models as long as the interaction
analysis of proposed with existing literature; Section VII
 between domain and consumer devices.
concludes the paper.
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 II. P RELIMINARIES The idea of a HIDS architecture is proposed initially in this
 In this, the detailed description of state-of-the-art recom- section and the UNSW-NB15 dataset is utilized to train our
mender models is studied based on the intrusion detection model.
recommender model in the SDN network as well as federated
recommender learning-based IDS for consumer devices. A. Machine and Deep Learning Intrusion Detection Model
 The proposed architecture facilitates the deep learning
A. Neural Collaborative Recommender Filtering Model architecture for the detection of IDS in SDN-IoT. The hybrid
 In neural collaborative model, authors have used NCRF as deep learning model is deployed for the detection of threats
primary recommendation model without any loss of generality. in IoT networks [5] and is tested and trained with higher
Let us assume, N and M are the numbers of domains and accuracy and the least false positives. This utilizes the Keras
consumer devices respectively in the recommender system. framework with TensorFlow for the implementation in Python.
Let’s say, U and I represent the set of domains and set The comparison is made with four ML algorithms and CNN
of consumer devices. Every domain u ∈ U acquires the based DL algorithm having one layer of CNN and one layer
embedding vector eu denotes the latent features. In the same of LSTM with kernel size ‘1’ for both layers. Rather, we
way, each consumer device i ∈ I acquires the embedding have compared our proposed model with existing literature as
vector fi . The utilization of Zui denotes the score predicted shown in Table I.
between the domain u and consumer device i, which signifies The proposed model consists of the CNN module, softmax
the domain u preference for each consumer device i. In NCRF, layer, dropout, and hidden layer. The CNN module shows the
Zui is shown as following in eq. (1): concatenation operation; Dropout layer depicts the technique
 that is used for model prevention from overfitting, Softmax
 Zui = μ(eu , fi ) (1) layer is the activation function being used with multi-class
2494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
 CNN-LSTM D ESCRIPTION also has a softmax function [17]. This function calculates the
 probability distribution of m intrusion classes as follows:
 exp ya
 qa = n for a = 1, 2, 3, . . . . ., m (6)
 b=1
 where y depicts the input data. The values generated as output
 of q are between zero and one, with the sum of the outputs
 equal to one depicted in eq. (6). The number of CNN filters,
 number of epochs, learning rate, number of LSTM hidden
 units, drop-connect ratio, batch size and maximum pooling
 length are the characteristics of the hybrid model that are most
 crucial. As during the training stage, each of these parameters
 is learned by doing. The feature extraction phases employ the
 ReLu functions for both convolutions and pooling. For the first
 layer we utilized 49*1 for domain1, 59*1 for domain2 and
 52*1 for domain3 with 3*3 kernel size and the output size
 for the LSTM is set to 70. The function softmax is applied
 to the types of attack. The optimizer “adam” is deployed for
 gradient descent and dropout value 0.01.

 IV. F EDERATED R ECOMMENDER H YBRID
 IDS F RAMEWORK
 In order to avoid ambiguity, the basic objective of the
categorization when more than two class labels necessitate proposed FRHIDS scheme is to network numerous domains
classifier. to collectively build the deep learning IDS model based on the
 proposed model. The workflow of the attacks against the rec-
B. Proposed Federated Hybrid Recommender Model for IDS ommender system in the proposed FRHIDS can be explained
 Our base recommender model utilizes a hybrid recom- into different phases which are described in Algorithm 1:
mended CNN-LSTM deep learning recommendation model, 1) Initialization Process: In this processing phase, the
also referred to as a deep learning hybrid model, enabling entire system of the SDN network is accomplished by
intrusion categorization of authentic data traffic [16]. The computing the KeyGenerate(g), the public key UK =
advantages of the hybrid model are it works more effi- (n,f) and private key PRK = (γ , τ ), therefore, the secure
ciently and detects intrusions as compared to other neural link between the federated server and SDN network is
network–based models. This model is a combination of two developed. The federated cloud server chooses an array
1-D convolutional layers, one 1-D maximum pooling layer, of parameters m0 for the deep learning IDS model and
one 1-D LSTM layer and one fully connected layer. The various other parameters to train the model. Thus, the
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) function is the activation func- learning rate μ, decay rates for moment estimates ν1 ,
tion employed to train the model in the two convolutional ν2 ∈ (0,1), loss function , numerical stabilization
layers. The hybrid architecture consists of 1D CNN and LSTM and batch size B. Furthermore, the SDN network Ng
are depicted. reports the size Lg of its private data resources Hg to
 the federated server where g [1, 2, . . . , G] where G
 δva(t + 1) = −βg(va) − β/m ∗ ϑH/ϑva + nδva(t) (4) is the cloud server for training the discriminator I, g
 As shown in eq. (4), va refer to the weights with respect to indicates SDN generator and therefore, the federated
β and g representing the regularization parameter and learning server that evaluates the ratio for the SDN network by
 Lg
rate; m and n denotes the total number of samples trained βg = (L1 ,L2 ,...,L g)
 . Between the federated server and
and momentum; t is the updated step. These parameters are SDN network the integer (N) should be denoted as the
updated and tuned by the use of a training process to fulfill total number of communication rounds.
the optimal performance. The eq. (5) is shown below: 2) Training the local model by SDN controller: From the
 federated server, after the model parameters are acquired
 σ (y) = maximum(0, y) (5)
 m0 and μ, ν1 , ν2 , , , B deep learning model is trained
 The output of the maximum-pooling layer is passed to on the SDN controller utilizing their own data resources
the 1-D LSTM layer which is then transferred to the 1-D Hg based on the IDS.
LSTM network. The 1-D LSTM layer receives input from the 3) SDN network encryption for model parameters: Every
maximum-pooling layer. The 1-D LSTM network discovers data incoming from the domains Bg is collected in the
correlations between the extracted characteristics while arbi- SDN network and the deep learning model is trained on
trarily disabling some weights to avoid overfitting. In order the SDN network which later will encrypt the parameters
 q q q
to categorize incursions for identification, the output of the mg and deploying the ParaEncrypt(mg,x , UK) where mg
 q q q
1-D LSTM layer is sent to the fully connected layer, which = (mg,1 , mg,2 , . . . , mg,T ) and x ∈ τ = 1, 2, . . . , T.
BABBAR AND RANI: FRHIDS MODEL IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKING FOR CONSUMER DEVICES 2495

Algorithm 1 Federated Cloud Server With Data Protection ParaDecrypt(cex , PRK(x ∈ τ ). Therefore, the parameters
 Input: Protected parameter g, data resources Hg |g ∈ G, are updated by mq of the local model and transmitted to
communication rounds N. the federated cloud server.
 Output: Deep Learning Model A detailed deep learning-based intrusion detection model is
Initialize: i. the KeyGenerate(g) utilizing the public key UK developed in Algorithm 1 after N rounds (an experimentally
= (n,f) and private key PRK = (γ , τ ) defined threshold) of exchanges between both the federated
ii. the learning rate μ, decay rates for moment estimates ν1 , cloud server and SDN network via IoT domains. The private
ν2 ∈ (0,1), loss function , numerical stabilization and data resources in SDN network Hg are required to compute the
batch size B. encrypted parameters and decrypted tasks which in all needs
iii. the SDN network Ng reports the size Lg of its private multiplied operations in every round of communication. In
resources of data Hg , to the federated server where g G = such a way, in the deep learning model, the computational
1, 2, . . . , G cost is calculated for each SDN network Hg and is linearly
iv. Initialize the communication rounds to q=1 proportional to the number of parameters.
For SDN network: for N>=q
 A. Algorithm for Hybrid IDS Training on SDN Network
 1: procedure B EGIN :
 In the training on the HIDS model, the SDN network is
 2: ∀g ∈ G do evaluates the q-th model communication
 q depicted as an SDN controller, the LSTM (encoder) Om having
 round for the localized model with parameters mg having
 the parameters pem and the CNN (generator) Gm having its
 inputs: μ, ν1 , ν2 , , , B
 parameters pgm . The LSTM is a multi-layer perceptron that
 3: for x ∈ τ do
 q q maps the flow of traffic f to the latent representation r, The
 4: EPja (mg,1 ) = ParaEncrypt(mg,x , UK) of the deep
 CNN maps the random vector r to the flow generated f.
 learning model are trained
 In every global iteration, SDNm generates the benign and
 5: end
 malicious data, if malicious data is encountered error is
 6: Hg transmits the model parameters that are encrypted
 q generated on which it transmits the benign data outputs Om (f )
 EPja (mg,1 )|x ∈ τ to the federated server
 and Gm (r) post-training the discriminator I and the parameters
 7: end
 of its encoder Om and generator Gm is updated to the federated
 8: For Federated Cloud Server:
 cloud server. The flow Gm (rm ), rm is generated from the
 9: for x ∈ τ do
 q q SDN controller SDNm and the valid flow fm , Om (fm ) is also
10: cex = ParaAggregate(EPja (mg,1 ), . . . , mg,T , α1 ,
 transmitted.
 . . . , αG ) the ciphertexts encrypted ce = cex |x ∈ τ and are
 After the error terms Eem and Egm are generated at the SDN
 transmitted back to the IoT domains
 network, the controller will update the parameters pem and pgm
11: end
 of the generator Gm and encoder Om . The parameters that are
12: For SDN Network:
 q computed in eq. (7):
13: for N>=q ∀g ∈ G do mg =
 ParaDecrypt(cex , PRK(x ∈ τ ) −ϑlog(I(Gm (rm ), rm ))
 δpgm,l =
14: end ϑpgm,l
15: q=q+1 1  −ϑlog(I(Gm (rm ), rm )) ϑGm (rm )n
 Receive error terms Eem and Egm within the SDN ∗
16: b ϑGm (rm )n ϑpgm,l
 Gm (rm )∈Gm (rm )
 network
 1  ϑGm (rm )n
17: return ∗pmn (7)
18: Deep learning model having model parameters mN b ϑpgm,l
 Gm (rm )∈Gm (rm )

 where pgm,l depicts the lth parameter of pgm . The parameter
 updated of encoder Om can be computed in eq. (8):
 Furthermore, the model parameters that are encrypted
 q −ϑlog(I(fm , Om (fm )))
 EPja (mg,1 )|x ∈ τ of the deep learning model are given δpom,l =
 the training and then transferred to the federated server ϑpom,l
 1  −ϑlog(fm , I(Om (fm ))) ϑOm (fm )n
 by every IoT device; where T symbolizes how many ∗
 variables are there in the local model? b ϑOm (fm )n ϑpom,l
 Om (fm )∈Om (fm )
 4) Federated server aggregation for model parame- (8)
 ters: The ratios and model parameters that are
 encrypted from all IoT domains, the aggregation We have utilized the “adam” optimizer for updating the
 of the federated server is done by ParaAggregate parameters.
 q q
 (EPja (mg,1 ), . . . , mg,T , α1 , . . . , αG ). lastly, the cipher- Once the discriminator is trained, the federated server
 texts encrypted ce = cex |x ∈ τ and are transmitted back transmits a version of the I to the SDN controller for intrusion
 to the IoT domains. identification, as described in the Algorithm 2. For computing
 5) Model update by SDN network: Every SDN network the traffic anomaly incoming from the IoT domains, function
 acquires the updated model parameters mq by D(f) is described as the integration of “reconstruction loss” RS
 decrypting the ciphertexts ce and deploying the and a loss of discriminator RI , is depicted in eq. (9):
2496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE III
Algorithm 2 Hybrid IDS Model for Training SDN Network H YBRID M ODEL D ESCRIPTION
 Input: SDN Network (T,b,s)
 Initialize: pgm , pem for Gm and Om

 1: procedure B EGIN :
 2: Lm ← ReadDataset(m)
 3: for each n ∈ [1,T] do
 4: for each s ∈ [1, Lbm ] do fm ← FlowSample(Lm ,b)
 5: set rm as a randomized vector
 6: Om (fm ) ← Encoder(fm )
 7: Gm (rm ) ← Generator(rm )
 8: Receive error terms Eem and Egm within the SDN
 network
 9: Transmit (fm , Om (fm )) to the federated cloud server A. Dataset and Preprocessing
10: pgm ← GeneratorUpdate(Egm , Gm ) The UNSW-NB15 dataset is deployed to validate the effi-
11: pem ← EncoderUpdate(Eom , Om ) ciency of the proposed DL model. The dataset wraps the
12: endfor recent types of attacks: Backdoor, DoS, Exploits, Fuzzers,
13: endfor Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, Worms, and Analysis.
 Furthermore, the normal traffic in the dataset enfolds the
 TABLE II service-based applications including TCP, FTP, UDP, SNMP,
 S IMULATION E NVIRONMENT
 etc. and the analysis of traffic is explained for the flows that
 are cumulative at the time of simulations while developing the
 dataset. The statistical analysis of the dataset represents the
 simulation period which shows the number of bytes used for
 transmission and receiving, the number of packets transmitted
 and received, type of protocol, source and destination IP
 addresses that is different for all the flows of data.

 B. Dataset Features
 D(f ) = βRS (f ) + (1 − β)RI (f ) (9) This section explains a few features that are showcased
 which can be gathered in the SDN. In SDN network, from the
where β is the coefficient of weights, RS (f ) = ||f − G(f ))||1 devices of IoT, the controller can gather only the statistical
and RI (f ) = σ (I(f , O(f )), 1) ∗ RI (f ) deploys the binary cross features. The entire framework is facilitated in producing the
entropy loss σ from the discriminator of f considered as a true final output of the dataset from pcap files to CSV files. The
sample, which later gathers the confidence of discriminator’s first category, the OVS group, consists of intrusions into the
that a flow is inherited from the true data bifurcation. For every internal SDN network that originate from the outside world.
flow that is incoming f, the SDN controller SDNm evaluates its The assaults on the Metasploitable 2 server are included in
anomaly score D(f). If D(f) is higher than the preset threshold the second category. The final group is the traffic that is
value which justifies the flow f as abnormal. not harmful. There are 1,75,341 and 82,332 records in total
 for training and testing the entire dataset, correspondingly.
 The three different domains in Fig. 2 shows the benign and
 V. R ESULT A NALYSIS AND D ISCUSSION malicious attacks happened in each domain. The domains
 The final layer in a CNN’s architecture works similarly to comprised of various traffic data whose main task is to
other neural network activation functions. For such multiclass transmit the data to the SDN network. Therefore, by utilizing
classification issues, our model employs a softmax function. the tcpdump tool, pcap files are produced. The features of
To obtain the most accurate value for a class, the activation UNSW-NB15 dataset are extracted by deploying the Argus and
function is used to compute the chances of every class and Bro-IDS tool. The major categories of the records are benign
chooses the greatest value among some of the range of and malicious. The malicious records are comprised of nine
possibilities. During the tuning process, the several parameters malware families as per the nature of the attack. The number
are changed. The number of epochs were tested between of dataset records is shown in Table III.
100 and 500, and the 500 epochs were selected because it The UNSW-NB15 dataset’s numeric features are denoted as
performed better across all data categories (TCP, UDP, ICMP). integers has the value 41, while the non-numeric character-
For three distinct domains, the batch size is 1, and there istics are denoted as strings has the value 3. We could only
are 512 nodes within every layer. The metrics are preset to train our deep learning models with numerical input values,
“linear regression equality”, the loss is preset to “mse” and so the conversion of non-numeric data to numeric features
the optimizer is preset to “adam” with default parameters. The is a must. Non-numeric characteristics are treated similarly
simulation’s inputs are displayed in Table II. in other KDD cup99 and NSL-KDD. We also changed the
BABBAR AND RANI: FRHIDS MODEL IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKING FOR CONSUMER DEVICES 2497

Fig. 2. Normal and Malicious Attacks in three domains.

 TABLE IV
 E XTRACTION OF 30 F EATURES VI. C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS AND E VALUATION
 This section explains how the holdout strategy, which is
 used in machine learning to assess models, was used to
 validate the proposed approach. Throughout this method, the
 dataset is divided into two subsets, one of which is employed
 to train the model and another to assess it. For this experiment,
 the dataset is divided into three domains, with 30% used as
 testing and 70% as training. Table III illustrates the assigning
 of training and testing sets.
 For the model’s hyperparameters, training chooses a starting
 range of approximate values that are then tuned through trial
 and error to provide the optimal outcomes. The tuning method
 generates the desired results using 50 tuning epochs, a learning
 rate of 0.005, an output size of 70 for the LSTM and a dropconnect ratio of 0.01. Additionally, the layer’s convolution
 filters were configured to have 32 in total. The maximum
 pooling length was limited to two, while the kernel size was
 tuned to three.
array’s data type to float and eliminated features like ‘id’ and The Fig. 3(a) and 3(b) shows the comparative analysis of
‘string label’. There are two tools used for the implementation the baseline studies with proposed model and it has been
of the dataset. It is comprised of 49 features and 2,540,044 observed that proposed model achieves 99.8% and 78.7%
instances which are deployed in four CSV files. The dataset respectively; whereas 99.8%, 77.6%, 99.6%, 56.4%, 94.5%,
consists of Transmission Control Protocol, User Datagram 98.5% is computed for Decision Tree, K-Nearest Neighbor,
Protocol, number of source packets, total of source and Random Forest, Naive Bayes, CNN, LSTM.
destination bytes, and Normal and Malicious network traffic. The Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) indicates the comparative analysis
For computing the DL and ML IDS, the dataset is converted of the baseline studies with proposed model which shows the
into CSV format comprising of benign and malicious traffic improvement of 84% and 78.7% over the baseline studies that
in different domains. displays 65%, 81.7%, 68%, 68.4%, 69%, 68.7% computed
 The Table IV shows the features that are processed from the for Decision Tree, K-Nearest Neighbor, Random Forest, Naive
raw network packets (pcap files) and produces the attributes or Bayes, CNN, LSTM.
features of the flow packets in the network. In this experiment, The confusion metric of the proposed model is shown in
out of 49 only 30 features are elected from the dataset. These Fig. 5.
features are elected based on the data that can be utilized to
train the model where utilizing too many features may retrieve
the overfitting and underfitting problem and are insufficient for VII. C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY
the huge range of applications. For training, the large amount Complexity means the number of trainable parameters
of data can give rise to random errors in the dataset. Instead (weights and bias) which says the higher the number of
of computing the relationship among the variables using DL trainable parameters, the more the complexity of the model.
and ML IDS, the dataset is converted into CSV format and We compute the time and space complexity of the proposed
comprises benign and malicious traffic in different domains. hybrid model on the SDN network in the CNN and LSTM
2498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Accuracy and Precision with regard to IDS.

Fig. 4. Recall and F1-Measure with regard to IDS.

 Since the number of operations per input increases quadratically with kernel length and number, the CNN layer’s
 complexity results. The length of the input, on the other hand,
 doesn’t really impact the amount of storage needed by the
 network because LSTM is localised in space and time, and
 for each stage, the time complexity per weight is O. (1).
 Consequently, O(X), where X is the number of weights in the
 LSTM, represents the overall complexity of LSTM every time
 stage.
 The complexity of proposed hybrid model per time stage
 can be computed as the total of the complexity of CNN and
 LSTM layers: O( si=1 mi−1 ∗ p2i ∗ mi ∗ n2i ) + x) and for all the
 processes of training, the complexity is O( si=1 mi−1 ∗ p2i ∗
 mi ∗ n2i ) + x) ∗ l ∗ c), where, l depicts the input length and c
Fig. 5. Confusion metric of proposed model. depicts the number of epochs.
  Therefore, we can say that our
 proposed model has O( si=1 mi−1 ∗ p2i ∗ mi ∗ n2i ) + x) ∗ l ∗ c)
 complexity in the typical asymptotic notation.
layers. The complexity
  of both the layers for one epoch is
evaluated as O( si=1 mi−1 ∗p2i ∗mi ∗n2i ); where s represents the
number of convolutional layers; mi shows the number of filters VIII. C ONCLUSION
in the ith layer; mi−1 denotes the number of input channels of In this article, the FRHIDS model is developed to detect
the ith layer; pi is assigned the spatial size of filter and lastly the attacks on SDN network traffic generated by IoT domains
ni shows the spatial size of the output feature map. The time against the data collected at the SDN network for recomcomplexity for training the model is evaluated by inserting the mender systems. Firstly, the novel algorithm is proposed for
computations on each training round: S signifies the number of the HIDS model to train the SDN networks and federated
devices that perform the computations on each training round; cloud servers to protect data using a deep learning detection
T refers to the majority of training rounds in which each device model. Furthermore, it enables HIDS to detect various attacks
maintains the local dataset, and U denotes the size of the local effectively. IDS and federated learning framework are applied
minibatch used for the device updating. The computational to preserve the security and privacy of the model during
complexity of baseline studies over the proposed model is training. The experiment is conducted and evaluated in terms
shown in Table V. of effectiveness, accuracy, precision, recall and f1-measure
BABBAR AND RANI: FRHIDS MODEL IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKING FOR CONSUMER DEVICES 2499

 TABLE V
 OVERALL C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON OF BASELINE S TUDIES W ITH P ROPOSED F EDERATED L EARNING R ECOMMENDER H YBRID M ODEL

of the proposed model as compared to the other baseline [12] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “DeepFed: Federated
solutions. This study has shown 12% improvement. In the deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical
 systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624,
future, Aug. 2021.
 1) Machine and Deep learning can be proposed to the next [13] S. I. Popoola, R. Ande, B. Adebisi, G. Gui, M. Hammoudeh, and
 generation wireless networks, i.e., 6G and preservation O. Jogunola, “Federated deep learning for zero-day botnet attack
 detection in IoT-edge devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 5,
 of privacy will give pivotal importance in 6G which pp. 3930–3944, Mar. 2022.
 therefore describes the homomorphic encryption against [14] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R. Sabuj,
 the malicious global aggregation server. and M. Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach for improving
 intrusion detection in Industrial Internet of Things networks,” Network,
 2) The further improvement and exploration will be done vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 158–179, 2023.
 on the methods to detect the attacks in federated recom- [15] C. Choudhary, I. Singh, and M. Kumar, “SARWAS: Deep ensemble
 mendation learning. learning techniques for sentiment based recommendation system,” Exp.
 Syst. Appl., vol. 216, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 119420.
 [16] A. Meliboev, J. Alikhanov, and W. Kim, “Performance evaluation of
 deep learning based network intrusion detection system across multiple
 R EFERENCES balanced and imbalanced datasets,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 515,
 2022.
 [1] M. Ammad-Ud-Din et al., “Federated collaborative filtering for [17] S. Potluri, S. Ahmed, and C. Diedrich, “Convolutional neural networks
 privacy-preserving personalized recommendation system,” 2019, for multi-class intrusion detection system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mining
 arXiv:1901.09888. Intell. Knowl. Explor., 2018, pp. 225–238.
 [2] M. Fang, G. Yang, N. Z. Gong, and J. Liu, “Poisoning attacks to graph- [18] S. M. Kasongo and Y. Sun, “Performance analysis of intrusion detection
 based recommender systems,” in Proc. 34th Annu. Comput. Security systems using a feature selection method on the UNSW-NB15 dataset,”
 Appl. Conf., 2018, pp. 381–392. J. Big Data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–20, 2020.
 [3] D. Rong, S. Ye, R. Zhao, H. N. Yuen, J. Chen, and Q. He, [19] R. A. Disha and S. Waheed, “Performance analysis of machine
 “FedRecAttack: Model poisoning attack to federated recommendation,” learning models for intrusion detection system using Gini impurityin Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE), 2022, pp. 2643–2655. based weighted random forest (GIWRF) feature selection technique,”
 [4] S. Nanda, F. Zafari, C. DeCusatis, E. Wedaa, and B. Yang, “Predicting Cybersecurity, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2022.
 network attack patterns in SDN using machine learning approach,” in [20] S. Haider et al., “A deep CNN ensemble framework for efficient DDoS
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Netw. Funct. Virtualizat. Softw. Defined Netw. (NFV- attack detection in software defined networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 SDN), 2016, pp. 167–172. pp. 53972–53983, 2020.
 [5] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “A review on machine learning and deep [21] M. S. ElSayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, M. A. Albahar, and A. Jurcut, “A novel
 learning perspectives of IDS for IoT: Recent updates, security issues, and hybrid model for intrusion detection systems in SDNs based on CNN
 challenges,” Arch. Comput. Methods Eng., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 3211–3243, and a new regularization technique,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 191,
 2021. Oct. 2021, Art. no. 103160.
 [6] P. Dhiman et al., “A novel deep learning model for detection of severity
 level of the disease in citrus fruits,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 495,
 2022. Himanshi Babbar received the M.C.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Chitkara
 [7] S. Meftah, T. Rachidi, and N. Assem, “Network based intrusion University (Punjab Campus), India, in 2015 and 2021, respectively, and the
 detection using the UNSW-NB15 dataset,” Int. J. Comput. Digit. Syst., Doctoral degree in computer applications from Zayed University, UAE, in
 vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 478–487, 2019. 2022. She is working as an Assistant Professor of Research in CSE with
 [8] S. Bagui, E. Kalaimannan, S. Bagui, D. Nandi, and A. Pinto, “Using Chitkara University (Punjab Campus).
 machine learning techniques to identify rare cyber-attacks on the UNSW-
 NB15 dataset,” Security Privacy, vol. 2, no. 6, 2019, Art. no. e91.
 [9] D. Kumar, V. Kukreja, V. Kadyan, and M. Mittal, “Detection of DoS
 attacks using machine learning techniques,” Int. J. Veh. Auton. Syst.,
 vol. 15, nos. 3–4, pp. 256–270, 2020.
[10] D. K. Talapula, K. K. Ravulakollu, M. Kumar, and A. Kumar, Shalli Rani (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Punjab
 “SAR-BSO meta-heuristic hybridization for feature selection and clas- Technical University, Jalandhar, in 2017, and the M.Tech. degree in computer
 sification using DBNover stream data,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 56, science from JRNV, Udaipur, India, in 2007. She was a Postdoctoral Fellow
 pp. 14327–14365, Dec. 2023. with Manchester Metropolitan University, U.K., in 2023. She is a Professor
[11] Y. Fan, Y. Li, M. Zhan, H. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “IoTDefender: A federated of CSE with Chitkara University (Punjab Campus), India. She has more than
 transfer learning intrusion detection framework for 5G IoT,” in Proc. 18 years of teaching experience. Her main areas of interest are WSN, IoT,
 IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng. (BigDataSE), 2020, pp. 88–95. machine and deep learning, and security.