8760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fusion Graph Structure Learning-Based Multivariate
 Time Series Anomaly Detection With Structured
 Prior Knowledge
 Shiming He , Genxin Li , Kun Xie , Member, IEEE, and Pradip Kumar Sharma , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Multivariate time series anomaly detection I. I NTRODUCTION
(MTSAD) plays a crucial role in the Internet of Things (IoT)
to identify device malfunction or system attacks. Graph neural
networks (GNN) are widely applied in MTSAD to capture
the spatial features among sensors. However, GNNs depend
on a graph structure and explicit graph structures are not
 I N THE Internet of Things (IoT), more and more critical
 infrastructures are being deployed by various sensors. The
 data generated by these multiple sensors is known as multialways available. To solve the problem of missing explicit graph variate time series data (MTS). When abnormal changes occur
structure, graph structure learning is introduced to learn an in the MTS, it indicates that the equipment has failed or
accurate graph structure joint with a GNNs-based anomaly
detection task. However, the existing GSL-based methods provide
 the system is under attack. If the anomaly is not discovered
only a partial view of the graph structure and cannot represent and dealt with in time, the whole system may fail and lead
multiple and complex relationships. The noise of data also brings to economic losses [1]. Therefore, multivariate time series
noisy edges. Therefore, we propose a fusion graph structure anomaly detection (MTSAD) stands as a crucial undertaking
learning-based multivariate time-series anomaly detection with within the domain of IoT [2]. In the IoT, sensors rely on
structured prior knowledge (FuGLAD). To the best of our
knowledge, it appears to be the first application of fusion graphs and interact with each other. Therefore, when conducting
in time series anomaly detection. FuGLAD selects three kinds of MTSAD, it is crucial to understand both the temporal relatypical graph structure learners to learn as many relationship tionships of individual indicators1 and the interrelationships
types among sensors as possible and exploits the prior similarity among these indicators. In recent years, graph neural networks
to evaluate the importance of all learned graphs and adaptively (GNNs) have been introduced into the field of multivariate
learn the fusion weight instead of the direct average weight.
To handle noise in raw data, FuGLAD compares the neighbors time series anomaly detection for modeling the relationships
of nodes by Jaccard similarity to identify and remove the noisy among indicators. Existing GNNs-based anomaly detection
edges in the prior graph. Extensive experiments demonstrate methods, such as the Arvalus and its variant D-Arvalus [3]
that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art single-graph utilize a fixed graph structure constructed from domain expert
structure learning techniques in detection performance across knowledge for modeling the relationships among indicators.
four public and real-world datasets.
 However, explicit graph structures are not always available
 Index Terms— Multivariate time series, anomaly detection, in every application. Therefore, how to define an accurate
graph structure learning, fusion graph. graph structure becomes a key task for GNNs-based anomaly
 detection.
 Received 3 January 2024; revised 6 August 2024; accepted 3 September As a result, graph structure learning (GSL) has arisen in
2024. Date of publication 12 September 2024; date of current version MTSAD [4], [5], [6]. It learns an optimal graph structure in
30 September 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural conjunction with the subsequent downstream anomaly detec-
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272062 and Grant 62025201; in
part by the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province tion task. Fig. 1 shows the GSL-based anomaly detection
under Grant 2023RC3139; in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan process. However, GSL-based methods still face several chal-
Provincial Transportation Department under Grant 202143; and in part by lenges.
the Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Safety Control of Bridge Engineering,
Ministry of Education (Changsha University of Science and Technology), • Existing methods provide only a partial view of the
under Grant 21KB07. The associate editor coordinating the review of this graph structure, which cannot represent the multiple
article and approving it for publication was Prof. Kun Sun. (Corresponding
author: Kun Xie.)
 and complex relationships that exist between indi-
 Shiming He and Genxin Li are with the School of Computer and Com- cators. The existing graph structure learning methods
munication Engineering and Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligent can be classified into three categories [7]: metric-based,
Processing of Big Data on Transportation, Changsha University of Science
and Technology, Changsha 410114, China (e-mail: smhe_cs@csust.edu.cn; neural network-based, and direct methods. The current
22108031619@stu.csust.edu.cn). GSL-based anomaly detection methods all solely adopt
 Kun Xie is with the College of Computer Science and Electronics Engi- one of these three methods to learn a partial view of the
neering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Fusion Computing of
Supercomputing and Artificial Intelligence, Hunan University, Changsha graph structure. The ideal graph structure is not always
410082, China (e-mail: xiekun@hnu.edu.cn). available or may be incomplete due to the difficulty
 Pradip Kumar Sharma is with the Department of Computing Science, in obtaining such information or deliberate shielding to
University of Aberdeen, AB24 3UE Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail: Pradip.sharma@
abdn.ac.uk).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3459631 1 Here, “indicator” signifies the time series of a particular variable.

 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8761

 • In basic graph structure learner selection, to learn as many
 relationship types among sensors as possible, we choose
 three graph structure learning methods that have been
 widely proven to be effective. K -Nearest Neighbour
 method is for the association, causal graph learning is
 for causality, and the fully parameterized method treats all
 elements in the adjacency matrix as independent variables
 which is the replenishment of the two former.
Fig. 1. A framework for anomaly detection based on graph structure learning.
 • In graph fusion, we propose a prior similarity-based
 weighted fusion method (PSF) instead of average fusion
 since a prior graph (such as a kNN graph derived from
 protect sensitive information [8]. The learned graph data) still serves as reasonable knowledge [8]. It exploits
 structure is only an estimate of the ideal graph and only the cosine similarity between the prior graph and the
 represents the relationships from a single view, which learning graph to evaluate the importance of all learned
 inevitably has a certain degree of information loss or graphs and adaptively learn the fusion weight, rather than
 misconnection [9]. simply taking the average of the learned graphs.
 i) The metric-based approach only focuses on the sim- • To handle noise in raw data, we design a structured prior
 ilarity relationship. It establishes connections between graph (SPG) generator to construct a prior graph in the
 nodes with higher similarity of node embedding vec- structured space. SPG compares the neighbors of nodes
 tor to form edges. However, the relationships between by Jaccard similarity to identify and remove the noise
 nodes still include causality and distance except for edges in the prior graph.
 similarity. ii) Neural network-based graph learning • Extensive experiments on four public and real-world
 methods depend on the type of neural network. If datasets are conducted to evaluate the performance of
 simple linear neural networks are used, learned graph FuGLAD. Compared to the thirteen baseline methods,
 structure learning may not yield satisfactory results. Con- FuGLAD consistently has the highest F1 score.
 versely, complex neural network structures increase the The following sections of this paper are organized as
 training cost of the model. follows: Section II reviews the related work. Section III covers
 iii) The direct approach offers great flexibility as it preliminary knowledge and problem definition. Section V
 does not rely solely on node representation. It treats details the FuGLAD approach. Section VI discusses perforthe adjacency matrix of the target graph as a free variable mance evaluation through experiments. Finally, Section VII
 for learning. Nonetheless, in many practical applications, summarizes the findings and explores future work.
 node features are equally crucial for comprehending and
 predicting the behavior of sensors. II. R ELATED W ORK
 • Noise in the raw data can affect the quality of the prior A. Temporal Feature-Based Anomaly Detection Method
 graph. To constrain the learning of graph structure, some LSTM is widely used in multivariate time series anomaly
 prior information is usually added to the graph learning detection because of its ability to process sequence data.
 process. Existing methods usually utilize the original LSTM-NDT [10] utilizes LSTM for accurate predictions while
 data to generate a K -nearest Neighbors (KNN) graph maintaining the interpretability of the whole system. A nonas prior information, termed a prior graph. However, parametric, dynamic, and unsupervised threshold method
 there is usually noise in the raw data resulting in an is provided to detect anomalies. MSCRED [11] constructs
 inevitable presence of uncertain, redundant, incorrect, and a multi-scale feature matrix and uses conv-LSTM neural
 incomplete connections within the prior graph, termed networks to encode the correlation between sensors and reconnoisy edges. Such noisy information in the prior may struct the multi-scale feature matrix. The residual feature
 damage the performance of GNNs. matrix helps to detect and diagnose anomalies. MAD-GAN
 To address these challenges, we propose FuGLAD, a tech- [12] employs LSTM as the foundational model within the
nique that fuses multiple graph structures to refine the quality GAN framework, capturing the temporal correlation of time
of the learning graph and uses the structured prior graph to series, extracting potential interactions, and detecting anomaeliminate the effects of noise in the original data. To the best lies by discrimination and reconstruction. LSTM-VAE [13]
of our knowledge, this is the first work to apply fusion graphs introduces the multi-modal observation and time dependence
in time series anomaly detection. Our major contributions can into the potential space, reconstructs the expected distribube summarized as follows: tion, and evaluates the anomalies based on the reconstructed
 • To address the single view representation of individual anomaly scores. OmniAnomaly [14] utilizes a stochastic
 graph structures, we propose a fusion graph structure recurrent neural network to capture the robust representation
 learning method that merges various graph structures of normal patterns and reconstruct observations. DAGMM
 to mine multiple view relationships between sensors. [15] utilizes depth self-coding and Gaussian mixture model
 It consists of two key steps: the basic graph structure to obtain low-dimensional representation and exploit reconlearner selection and graph fusion. struction errors to detect anomalies. CAE-M [16] employs a
8762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Convolutional Autoencoding Memory Network to effectively intraspinal correlations, while GSLAD [24] uses a diffusion
handle time series data. By utilizing a Convolutional Neural convolutional recurrent neural network for anomaly detection.
Network (CNN), CAE-M efficiently processes the input time Although anomaly detection methods based on graph learnseries. The resulting output of CNN is then subjected to a ing are able to adaptively generate a suitable graph structure
bi-directional Long LSTM network, enabling the model to for the downstream task through backpropagation, it is imporeffectively capture and analyze long-term time trends. tant to note that current approaches solely produce a partial
 Although LSTM networks have demonstrated promising view of the graph structure, consequently leading to the
results in modeling the temporal dependencies of MTS, they unavoidable loss of information.
are unable to directly capture the correlations between different
indicators [17]. III. P ROBLEM D EFINITION AND P RELIMINARIES
 A. Multivariate Time Series
B. Graph-Based Anomaly Detection Method Multivariate time series can be described as X = (x 1 , x 2 ,
 . . . , x N )T ∈ R K ×N , where K represents the number of
 Recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of graph
 indicators and N signifies the number of timestamps. The
neural networks in predicting temporal dependencies and modvalues of i-th indicator are represented as x i = (x1i , x2i ,
eling correlations between indicators. For example, MTAD-TF i ). The values at timestamp t are represented as
 . . . , xN
[18] uses multi-scale convolution and graph attention networks
 x t = (xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtK )T . A history window of length ω at
to capture temporal pattern information. Similarly, MTADtimestamp t is defined as the subsequence X t = (x t−ω ,
GAT [19] employs two parallel graph attention layers to model
 x t−ω+1 , . . . , x t−1 )T ∈ R K ×ω .
both temporal features and correlations between indicators,
which are then passed to a lightweight Gated Recurrent
Unit (GRU) network. Additionally, Arvalus and its variant B. Graph Structure Learning in MTS
D-Arvalus [3] represent system components as nodes and Given the time series X ∈ R K ×N , graph structure learning
their dependencies and locations as edges to improve anomaly aims to construct a graph G = (V, E) and its adjacency
identification and localization. matrix A ∈ R K ×K . In this graph, the nodes v represent
 Although graph neural network-based anomaly detection the sensors that produce the indicators, while the edges E
methods have effectively modeled time-series correlations denote the hidden relationships between these sensors. The
between indicators, they still have some limitations. Most of adjacency matrix A stores the edge information, which reflects
the existing graph neural network-based anomaly detection the underlying dependencies among the indicators.
methods [3], [18], [19] assume that the relationship between
indicators is known or assume there is a relationship between C. GSL-Based Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
any two indicators, which increases computational overhead
 Multivariate time series anomaly detection calculates an
with increasing dimensionality [20].
 anomaly score for each timestamp, denoted as st , according
 to the historical subsequence X t and the adjacency matrix A
C. Graph Structure Learning-Based Anomaly Detection generated by GSL. An anomaly is deemed to have transpired at
Method timestamp t if the anomaly score st surpasses a predetermined
 threshold. The process is shown as follows:
 To address MTSAD without a predefined graph structure,
Graph Structure Learning-based methods have been devel- A = G S L(X ) (1)
oped. For example, GDN [4] generates an embedding vector x̂t = f (X t , A) (2)
for each node and settles to compute the similarity between the
 st = ϕ(xt , x̂t ) (3)
embedding vectors between any two nodes, and subsequently (
selects the top k nodes with the highest similarity to form the 1, if st > T
 ŷt = (4)
graph. This graph is then used by a graph attention network to 0, if st ≤ T
forecast future sensor behavior. FuSAGNet [5] categorizes the
sensor nodes by function and recursively encodes the nodes in where f () denotes the prediction function, x̂t represents the
each category. Subsequently, it uses the resulting embeddings forecasted value of xt at timestamp t, ϕ is the function used
to compute the similarity between the nodes and selects the to calculate the anomaly score, and T stands for the threshold.
top k nodes with the highest similarity to form the graph.
ACGSL [21] generates dynamic graphs for each subsequence IV. M OTIVATION
by minimizing differences between consecutive ones. The current graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 GTA [6] treats adjacency matrix elements as learnable methods are all based on a partial view of the graph strucparameters and uses a Transformer-based model to automat- ture [25]. In the world, objects might form different kinds of
ically learn the graph structure and temporal dependencies. relationships with others (e.g., sensor distance and data seman-
GLAD [22] combines GAT and Transformer to extract tic relationship on IoT). This results in multi-view graphs that
global and local features for anomaly detection. MGCLAD contain more than one type of edge between two nodes [26],
[23] employs two directed graphs to learn intersignal and [27]. Therefore, anomaly detection can be performed using
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8763

Fig. 2. The FuGLAD framework includes three primary modules. The first module, illustrated in blue, captures the relationships between indicators. The
second module, in gold, generates a structured prior graph that aids the graph structure learner with prior information. The third module, in green, uses a
DCRNN predictor to produce precise indicator forecasts.

a multi-view approach, where multiple views allow us to information and not the same to provide complementary
analyze the characteristics of a physical object from different information for each other.
perspectives. Each view can offer complementary information
to the other views. For example, an anomaly may not be V. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
identifiable in one view but can be in another. There exists
a plethora of research in data mining focusing on multi-view A. Overview
learning [28], [29]. However, multi-view learning for anomaly To address the single-view representation of individual
detection is still in its infancy. For this reason, we pro- graph structures, we propose FuGLAD, which fuses multiple
pose a multi-graph structure learning method for anomaly basic learned graph structures to accurately represent relationdetection. ships. Fig. 2 shows the framework of FuGLAD. It primarily
 Although multiple views contain rich information, there consists of three main components:
may be inconsistencies among them. Digesting the relation- • Structured Prior Graph Generator: It acquires a
ship between views is crucial for the success of multi-graph structured prior graph from noise data that offers prior
learning algorithms, as two views may provide oppo- information for graph learning.
site/complementary information for anomaly detection [25]. • Fusion Graph Structure Learner: It utilizes three
To this end, we propose a fusion approach based on a priori mainstream graph structure learners to generate multiple
graph. The constraints of a priori graph make the learned graphs and fuse them to characterize complex relationgraphs as close as possible without generating opposite ships among sensors.
8764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE I It goes beyond the direct connection between two nodes and
 L IST OF N OTATIONS takes into account their position in the entire space and their
 relationships with other nodes. Nodes with a greater number
 of common neighbors display higher similarity. Consequently,
 the presence of a noisy edge can be alleviated by tallying the
 count of common neighbors, as long as this noisy edge is not
 shared among multiple nodes, which is typically unlikely.
 We calculate the Jaccard similarity among nodes on the
 KNN graph and generate a structured graph by selecting
 the top-k nodes with the highest Jaccard similarity for each
 node as its neighbor. This process effectively transforms
 the traditional KNN graph into a structured space. In the
 structure space, the features have the capability to encode a
 greater amount of texture information by perceiving the data
 distribution thus being more robust [32].
 Initially, we construct a feature extractor for characterizing
 the behavior of each sensor as follows:
 (t) (t)
 Vi = FC(Conv(Conv(xi ))) (5)
 (t)
 where xi ∈ R w represents the subsequence for sensor i at
 (t)
 • DCRNN Predictor and Anomaly Score: It utilizes timestamp t, Vi denotes the feature vector of sensor i at
 the diffusion convolutional recurrent neural network timestamp t, Conv refers to the one-dimensional convolutional
 (DCRNN) for predicting the future values of each sen- layer, and FC refers to the fully connected layer.
 sor and calculates the anomaly score by the difference Subsequently, the cosine similarity is computed for the
 between the prediction and ground truth. feature vectors of every node pair as follows:
 The process of FuGLAD can be summarized as follows: (t) (t)
Firstly, the fusion graph structure learner learns multiple basic (t) (t)
 Vi • V j
 cos(Vi , V j ) = (t) (t)
 (6)
graph structures and fuses them to obtain a fused adjacency ||V i || • ||V j ||
matrix A. Secondly, based on the fused adjacency matrix A,
a DCRNN predictor predicts the value x̂ t of the t-th timestamp where ∥ · ∥ denotes magnitude. Afterward, the top-k nodes
from the historical observations x t−w , . . . , x t−1 . Then, the with the highest similarity are selected as the neighbors of
basic graph structures are jointly trained with the prediction Ni , noted as ν (t) (Ni , k) = {Ni,1 , Ni,2 , . . . , Ni,k }. It generate a
 (t)
task, and the normalized prediction error between the predicted KNN graph θ K N N .
value x̂ t and the ground truth x t is treated as the anomaly Finally, we compute the Jaccard similarity of the node pair
score. Finally, a grid search algorithm is used to select a on the KNN graph to compare the common-neighbor. The k
threshold for best detection accuracy. Once the anomaly score nodes with the highest Jaccard similarity are designated as
at timestamp t exceeds the threshold, timestamp t is taken the neighbors of node Ni to generate a structured graph as
as an anomaly. The notation employed here is outlined in follows:
Table I. |ν(Ni , k) ∩ ν(N j , k)|
 S J ac (ν(Ni , k), ν(N j , k)) = (7)
 |ν(Ni , k) ∪ ν(N j , k)|
B. Structured Prior Graph Generator (t)
 θi j = 1, j ∈ topk(S J ac (ν(Ni , k), ν(N j , k))) (8)
 Using prior graphs extracted from raw data as a guide
 (t)
is an effective and widely applied approach to constrain where S J ac represents the Jaccard similarity, θi j denotes the
the direction during the training of graph structure learning, element in the i-th row and j-th column of the prior graph,
ensuring the quality of the learned graph [8], [30]. Many and topk(·) function extracts the top k values, enabling focus
prior graph generation methods extract node features from on the most relevant data points based on the specified criteria.
the raw data. The features are then utilized to compute a [4].
K -Nearest Neighbor (KNN) graph, which serves as the prior We take an example to illuminate how Jaccard similarity
knowledge for the learned graph. Nevertheless, the presence removes the noisy edge. As shown in Fig. 3, there are nine
of noise in the data may corrupt the node feature vectors, nodes, and Ci represents the neighbor set of node i. The
resulting in an inevitable presence of uncertain, redundant, edge between nodes 2 and 3 is a noisy edge (marked in red).
incorrect, and incomplete connections within the prior graph, According to Eq. (7), we can obtain the Jaccard similarity of
termed noisy edges. To reduce the noisy edges, inspired nodes 1 and 2, which is S J ac (C1, C2) = C1∪C2
 C1∩C2 2
 = 2+2+3 =
by the common-neighbor-based metric [31], we propose a 0.286. Similarly, the Jaccard similarity of node 2 and 3 is
structured prior graph generator based on Jaccard similarity. S J ac (C2, C3) = C2∩C3 3
 C2∪C3 = 1+3+2 = 0.5. S
 J ac (C2, C3) is

Jaccard similarity compares the common neighbors between smaller than S (C1, C2). When selecting the top-k neigh-
 J ac

nodes, enabling the consideration of a broader spatial structure. bors, node 2 prioritizes choosing node 1 as a neighbor over
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8765

 where ∥ · ∥ denotes the magnitude, and topk(·) extracts the
 top k values, enabling focus on the most relevant data points
 based on the specified criteria [4].
 b) Causal graph learning (CGL) method: Among the
 neural network-based graph learning methods, we select a
 unidirectional graph structure learning method that can model
 causal relationships between sensors [33]. It defines a source
 and a destination node embedding for each node and generates
 the second adjacency matrix A2 . It is referred to as CGL,
 whose procedure is shown as follows:
 M1 = tanh(α E 1 β1 ) (11)
 M2 = tanh(α E 2 β2 ) (12)
 A2 = ReLU(tanh(α(M1 M2T − M2 M1T ))) (13)
Fig. 3. A simple example of eliminating the noisy edge by the Jaccard
similarity. for i = 1, 2, . . . , K :
 (i,:)
 id x = arg topk(A2 )
 (i, j)
node 3. Consequently, by doing so, we can eliminate the noisy A2 = 1, j ∈ id x (14)
edge (2, 3) and obtain the correct edge (1, 2). where E 1 and E 2 denote the source and destination node
 embeddings, β1 , β2 are model parameters, α represents the
 activation function’s saturation rate, and arg topk(·) returns
C. Fusion Graph Structure Learner
 the indices of the top-k largest values in a vector.
 In graph structure learning-based anomaly detection, the To reduce the training cost, the CGL method only employs
ideal graph structure is not always available or may be a single-layer network, while it can be complemented by the
incomplete. The currently given adjacency matrix is only an other two graph learning approaches to ensure performance.
approximation of the ideal graph structure. Consequently, this c) Fully Parameterized Method (FPM): Among
approximation leads to a certain extent of information loss. the direct methods, we select one that employs the
To address this issue, it is advantageous to have multiple Gumbel-softmax technique to construct the graph structure
adjacency matrices that represent various viewpoints of the [6]. It exploits a probability matrix to generate the third
graph structure and fusion them for anomaly detection. There- adjacency matrix A3 . It is referred to as FPM, whose
fore, we propose fusion graph structure learning. As shown in procedure is shown as follows::
Fig. 2, fusion graph structure learning consists of two main
parts: basic graph structure learners and graph fusion. gi = − log(− log(u)), u ∼ Uniform(0, 1) (15)
   
 i, j
 1) Basic Graph Structure Leaner: The existing graph exp log π1 +g i, j /τ
 i, j
structure learning methods can be classified into three cat- z1 = P    (16)
 i, j
egories [7]: metric-based, neural network-based, and direct exp log πv +g i, j /τ
methods. From these three types of methods, we select the v∈{0,1}
three most representative graph structure learners to indi- where u represents samples drawn from the Uniform(0,1)
 i, j
vidually characterize the relationships between nodes from distribution, g i, j denotes the Gumbel distribution, and π1
different perspectives: K -Nearest neighbor, causal graph learn- is the value in row i and column j of the probability matrix
ing, and fully parameterized method. K -Nearest neighbor π1 ∈ R K ×K , indicating the probability that node i is connected
method is for the association, causal graph learning is for to node j in the graph. The temperature parameter τ controls
 i, j
causality, and the fully parameterized method treats all ele- the distribution, with z 1 approaching 0 or 1 as τ approaches 0,
ments in the adjacency matrix as independent variables which making the Gumbel-Softmax distribution converge to the class
is the replenishment of the two formers. distribution. Finally, the element in row i and column j of the
 a) K neighbor Method (K neighbor): Among the (i, j) i, j
 third adjacency matrix A3 is set to z 1 , which is 1 with
metric-based graph learning methods, we select the method i, j
 probability π1 .
based on pairwise cosine similarity [4] for the association. 2) Fusion Graph: After generating these three graph struc-
It defines a node embedding for each node and the top-k tures, the most important step is how to fuse them. The
highest cosine similarity nodes are treated as neighbors, which simplest approach is fusing them by average. However,
generates the first adjacency matrix A1 . It is referred to as the it ignores the importance and qualities of all learned graph
K neighbor, whose procedure is shown as follows: structures. Therefore, we propose the prior similarity-based
 (t) (t) weighted fusion method to adaptively learn the fusion weight
 (t) (t)
 Ei • E j
 cos(E i , E j ) = (9) instead of the direct average weight.
 (t) (t)
 ||E i || • ||E j || We obtain a quantitative assessment of the similarity
 (i, j) (t) (t) between each learned graph and the prior structured graph
 A1 = 1, j ∈ topk(cos(E i , E j )) (10) to evaluate the importance. Subsequently, we normalize the
8766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

importance by softmax to derive probability weights for where x̂ti and xti represent the predicted value and ground truth
learned graphs. Finally, the probability weights are used to of the i-th indicator at timestamp t, respectively.
compute a weighted sum of multiple learned graphs to gener- Secondly, We utilize the cross-entropy between the prior
ate a fusion adjacency matrix to characterize the relationship graph structure θ (t) and the fusion graph structure A as graph
between sensors. learning loss to constraints the learning graph during model
 training.
 αi = Softmax(cos(Ai , θ (t) )) (17) X (t) (t)
 3
 X lossg = −θi, j log Ai, j − (1 − θi, j ) log(1 − Ai, j ) (25)
 A= αi Ai (18) ij
 i=1 Our aim is to optimize the model’s performance in accuwhere cos(A, B) denotes the cosine similarity of A and B. rately predicting the indicators and capturing the underlying
 relationships among them. We achieve this by balancing
D. DCRNN Predictor the MAE loss function for the prediction task and the
 DCRNN [34] is an exceptional spatio-temporal graph con- cross-entropy loss function for the graph learning task. To
volutional networks, which can capture the temporal and mitigate over-fitting, an L 2 regularization term is incorporated
spatial features simultaneously. It captures spatial dependen- into the loss function. The total loss function of the model is
cies through diffusion convolution and temporal dependencies as follows:
with an encoder-decoder architecture. In the diffusion convo- loss = loss p + λ1lossg + λ2 ∥w∥22 (26)
lution operation, each node aggregates information from its
neighbors up to L steps away, where L is referred as the where the parameters λ1 and λ2 is the regularization magnidiffusion degree. This operation can be performed in both the tude.
outward and inward directions, meaning that a node can gather
information from its outgoing neighbors (i.e., nodes it points F. Anomaly Score and Threshold Selection
to) and its incoming neighbors (i.e., nodes that point to it). The purpose of anomaly detection is to identify the abnor-
Therefore, we utilize DCRNN instead of GCN. The formula mal situation that deviates from the normal behavior according
for DCRNN is as follows: to the ground truth and prediction. Therefore, we first compute
 the prediction error Erri (t) of the sensor i at timestamp t
   
 Rt = sigmoid W R ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + b R (19)
 by calculating the difference between ground truth and the
 Ct = tanh WC ◦ xt ||(Rt ⊙ H(t−1) ) + bC
   
 (20)
    prediction.
 Ut = sigmoid WU ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + bU (21)
 H(t) = Ut ⊙ H(t−1) + (1−Ut ) ⊙ Ct (22) Erri (t) = xti − b
 xti (27)
 XL  Q  l  l 
 wl,1 D −1
 Q Secondly, we normalize the prediction error and compute
 O A + wl,2 D I A
 −1 T
 WQ ◦ Y = Y
 l=0 the anomaly score at timestamp t by selecting the highest value
 (23) among all sensors.
where D O and D I are the out-degree matrix and in-degree Erri (t) − µi
 s(t) = max si (t) = max (28)
matrix, || is concatenation operation, Rt is the reset gate, Ct i i σi
 Q Q
is the candidate hidden state, Ut is the update gate, wl,1 , wl,2 , where µi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of
b Q are the model parameter, and the diffusion degree L is a Erri (t), respectively.
hyperparameter. Grid search is crucial for finding the optimal threshold.
 The DCRNN-based predictor works as follows. In the It involves defining the threshold bounds as the maximum and
encoder, xt ′ and node feature H(t ′ −1) enter diffusion convo- minimum values of s(t). We exhaustively search all possible
lutional lay to get node feature H(t ′ ) at the next timestamp t ′ . thresholds with a step size of 0.01, selecting the threshold that
The encoder updates node feature H(·) from timestamp t − w yields the highest F1 score. Additionally, we apply a point
to timestamp t − 1 and obtains the total node feature H(t−1) of adjustment strategy for anomaly scores.
this subsequence. In the decoder, the total node feature H(t−1)
is the input. After a layer of the decoder model, a hidden VI. E XPERIMENTS E VALUATION
feature and predicted value x̂t at timestamp t are obtained,
 We thoroughly describe our experiments and address the
as shown in Fig. 2.
 following research questions:
 • RQ1 (Effectiveness and Efficiency): Does FuGLAD
E. Loss Function exceed the baseline methods in both effectiveness and
 Firstly, we use the mean absolute error (MAE) loss p efficiency?
between the prediction and ground truth as the loss function • RQ2 (Parameter Sensitivity): How sensitive is
for the prediction task. FuGLAD to various hyperparameters?
 K • RQ3 (Structured Prior Graph Performance): Whether
 1 X i
 loss p = |x̂t − xti | (24) the structured prior graph can effectively handle data with
 K noise?
 i=1
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8767

 TABLE II C. Baselines
 D ETAILED I NFORMATION OF DATASETS
 The baselines are the following thirteen methods.
 • AE: The input data is reconstructed by an autoencoder,
 and the resulting reconstruction error is used as the
 anomaly score.
 • IF [35]: The Isolation Forest algorithm identifies anomalies by isolating data points in a tree-based model,
 effectively detecting outliers.
 • DAGMM [15]: This method combines deep autoencoders
 • RQ4 (Fusion Graph Structure Learning Perfor- with Gaussian Mixture Models to model normal data
 mance): Does our proposed fusion graph structure distribution and identify anomalies through reconstruction
 learning method outperform other single graph structure errors.
 learning methods and other fusion methods? • LSTM-NDT [10]: This method utilizes LSTM networks
 to capture contextual information and dependencies in
A. Datasets sequential data for anomaly detection.
 • LSTM-VAE [13]: This method projects multimodal
 We use four real-world public datasets, whose detailed
information is shown in Table II. observations and time dependencies into a latent space,
 • Safe Water Treatment (SWAT) Dataset: Collected by
 using a VAE based on LSTM to reconstruct the expected
 the Singapore Public Utilities Bureau, this dataset spans distribution.
 • MAD-GAN [12]: This method uses LSTM within a GAN
 11 days with continuous 24-hour monitoring. It includes
 network traffic and data from 51 sensors and actuators on framework to model temporal correlations in time series
 a water treatment test bench. data.
 • OmniAnomaly [14]: This method is a priori-driven
 • Water Distribution (WADI) Dataset: An extension of
 the SWAT platform, WADI offers a more comprehensive stochastic model used to detect timestamp anomalies,
 view of water treatment, storage, and distribution. It cov- returning the reconstruction probability directly.
 • USAD [36]: This method trains an encoder-decoder
 ers 16 days (14 for routine operations and 2 for attack
 simulations) using 127 sensors and actuators. framework in an adversarial manner to achieve fast and
 • Mars Science Laboratory Rover (MSL) Dataset:
 efficient training.
 This dataset from NASA features 55 indicators across • AT-DCAEP [37]: This method integrates a convolutional

 27 unique entities related to the Mars rover’s sensors and autoencoder for feature extraction and an attention-based
 actuators. prediction network to capture temporal dependencies,
 • Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) Dataset: Col- which operates in an unsupervised manner, eliminating
 lected by NASA using the Mars probe, this dataset the need for extensive data labeling.
 includes 25 indicators for 55 soil samples and telemetry • MTAD-GAT [19]: This method considers the relationdata. ships between sensors as a complete graph and uses a
 In order to handle voluminous raw data, the SWAT and graph attention neural network for anomaly detection.
 • GDN [4]: This method builds a graph structure based
WADI datasets undergo a down-sampling process every
10 seconds, capturing the median. During this period, once on pairwise cosine similarity between nodes, uses
an anomaly occurs, it is tagged as an anomaly. attention-based graph neural networks to learn time series
 dependencies, and predicts future behaviors.
 • FuSAGNet [5]: The graph structure is learned by pairwise
B. Evaluation Metrics cosine similarity between recursive sensor embeddings.
 We utilize F1-Score (F1), precision (Pre), and recall (Rec) Subsequently, it employs a sparse autoencoder to derive
to evaluate the effectiveness of anomaly detection. a sparse representation of the input data, which is then
 TP inputted into a graph attention network for forecasting.
 Prec = (29) • GTA [6]: This method automatically learns the graph
 TP + FP
 structure by a direct approach and leverages graph con-
 TP
 Rec = (30) volution along with a transformer-based architecture to
 TP + FN capture temporal dependencies.
 2 × Prec × Rec
 F1 = . (31)
 Prec + Rec
where TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the numbers of true D. Settings
positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, The experimental parameters are listed in Table III. The
respectively. experiments were run with Python 3.8, PyTorch 1.10, and
 Additionally, the efficiencies of training and inference can CUDA 11.3, on a server featuring an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platbe evaluated by metrics such as training time per epoch, inum 8255C CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. In
inference time, memory usage, and the number of parameters. the case of the baseline methods, we utilized the default
8768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTAL PARAMETER S ETTING

 on Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs), which classifies sensors
 by their specific process functions [5]. FuSAGNet incorporates sensors tailored to these specific processes, whereas the
 sensors in the SMAP and MSL datasets do not have a clear
 functional classification, leading to reduced effectiveness.
 2) Efficiency: We compare our method with the existing
 GSL-based anomaly detection methods in terms of training
 time on four datasets and inference efficiency on the SWAT
 dataset. The results are shown in Table V and Table VI.
 Compared to FuSAGNet [5] and GTA [6], FuGLAD has
 shorter training time and inference time. The training time of
 GDN [4] is shorter than that of FuGLAD, but the performance
 of GTA is much worse than that of FuGLAD. GDN’s shorter
 training time and inference time can be attributed to its simplistic architecture, which only uses a graph attention network.
 In contrast, GTA has the longest training time and inference
 Fig. 4. Distributions of the F1 scores on the four datasets.
 time because it uses Transformer, increasing its complexity.
 FuSAGNet, which employs a sparse encoder SAE and a graph
experimental parameters as outlined in the paper. Specifically, attention network, requires joint training of reconstruction and
the window size ω for GDN and FuSAGNet is set to 5, while prediction models, resulting in performance and time that fall
for GTA, it is set to 60. between those of GDN and GTA. FuGLAD, with DCRNN
 for prediction, significantly reduces time while maintaining
 model performance. When considering memory usage and the
E. RQ1. Effectiveness and Efficiency number of parameters, GDN and FuSAGNet exhibit lower
 Initially, a performance comparison is made between memory usage and parameters than the other two methods.
FuGLAD and all baselines. The recorded outcomes are pre- FuGLAD demonstrates lower memory usage and parameters
sented in Table IV. Moreover, to demonstrate the stability of compared to GTA, attributed to FuGLAD’s efficient network
our model, we conduct several experiments and plot box plots structure.
of the model’s F1 scores on four datasets, which are shown in
Fig. 4. Finally, a comparison between existing graph structure
 F. RQ2. Parameter Sensitivity
learning-based anomaly detection methods [4], [5], [6] and our
method is conducted in regard to efficiency. The findings of To show the robustness of our approach to varying paramthis analysis are displayed in Table V and Table VI. eters, we examine how different hyperparameters affect the
 1) Effectiveness: FuGLAD demonstrates significant supe- model’s performance.
riority over other baseline methods. Compared to the most 1) Window Size: In this experiment, we examine the impact
recent GSL-based anomaly detection methods, such as GDN of window size on our model’s effectiveness and training time.
[4], FuSAGNet [5] and GTA [6], FuGLAD enhances learning The performance of the FuGLAD model with various window
graph quality through the fusion graph structure and structured sizes can be observed in Fig. 5. Additionally, Table VII
prior graph. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4, FuGLAD has illustrates the training time per epoch of FuGLAD, also with
stable performance. different window sizes. The experimental findings indicate
 All methods perform worse on the WADI dataset compared that the window size has an impact on both the anomaly
to others due to its lower anomaly rates, as shown in Table II. detection performance and training time. In situations where
However, FuGLAD still shows the best performance on WADI a smaller window is utilized, FuGLAD can detect anomalies
over the baseline methods. This demonstrates FuGLAD ’s more swiftly due to the shorter training time for smaller inputs.
effectiveness in handling high dimensional time series data However, if the window size is excessively large, shorter
and imbalanced samples, rendering it well-suited for practical anomalies may be concealed among a substantial number
applications. of data points within the window, resulting in a decrease
 FuSAGNet’s subpar anomaly detection performance on the in the model’s effectiveness. To strike a reasonable balance
SMAP and MSL datasets can be attributed to its design focus between the F1 score and training time, a window size of 15 is
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8769

 TABLE IV
P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE ON THE F OUR DATASETS . T HE H IGHEST AND S ECOND -H IGHEST R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED W ITH B OLDFACE
 AND U NDERLINE , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 T RAINING T IME P ER EPOCH ( S ) T RAINING T IME P ER EPOCH ( S ) W ITH D IFFERENT W INDOW S IZE

 TABLE VI
 I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY O FDIFFERENT GSL-BASED M ETHODS

 Fig. 6. The impact of regularization parameter.

 λ2 from 0.0001 to 0.0008. Based on the results shown in Fig. 6,
 FuGLAD demonstrates that the model has stable performance
 at different regulation parameters.

 Fig. 5. The impact of window size.
 G. RQ3. Structured Prior Graph Performance
 To demonstrate the effectiveness of the structured prior
employed for the SWAT and WADI datasets, while a window graph in mitigating the impact of noise in data, we conduct
size of 12 is utilized for the MSL and SMAP datasets. some experiments. We randomly generate noise from a normal
 2) Regularization Parameter: In this subsection, we present distribution Z ∼ N (0, 0.2) and add it to the raw data.
the impact of regularization parameters on the anomaly detec- Subsequently, we compare the anomaly detection performance
 (t)
tion results across four datasets. In this experiment, we vary of models using KNN prior graph θ K N N and structured prior
8770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VIII
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE W ITH D IFFERENT P RIOR G RAPHS AND DATA

 TABLE IX
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE W ITH D IFFERENT G RAPH S TRUCTURE L EARNERS

 Fig. 7. Left: Partial graph structure learned on SWAT dataset. Right: Understand the relationship between sensors with ground truth and prediction.

 TABLE X data inherently introduces noise. Additionally, the larger the
I NFERENCE E FFICIENCY W ITH D IFFERENT G RAPH S TRUCTURE L EARNERS dataset, the greater the amount of noise it contains.

 H. RQ4. Fusion Graph Structure Learner Performance
 To validate the effectiveness of fusion graphs, we compare
 this method with the three single graph learning methods in
 Section V, as well as a method that directly trains DCRNN
 with the prior graph from original data without graph learning
 (ω/o GSL). For the three single graph learning methods,
 we replace the fusion graph learning by K neighbor, CGL,
graph θ (t) . This comparison was done with both the raw data or FPM, while the rest modules are the same as FuGLAD.
and the noisy data. ω/o GSL takes the prior graph as the graph structure of
 The experimental results are depicted in Table VIII. When DCRNN without graph learning. As shown in Table IX,
noisy data is utilized, FuGLAD demonstrates a noteworthy FuGLAD with multiple graphs outperforms other single graph
improvement compared to the model that relies on the KNN learning methods and prior graphs on all four datasets. Moreprior graph. This is due to the effective avoidance of data over, we evaluate the model’s inference efficiency, including
noise when the prior graph is mapped into the structured inference time, memory usage, and parameters. As shown in
space. Furthermore, even when raw data is employed, the Table X, FuGLAD requires slightly more inference time, memstructured prior continues to outperform the KNN prior graph. ory, and parameters compared with the other four methods.
This superiority is especially pronounced when considering the Furthermore, to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
SWAT and WADI datasets, as the collection process of raw proposed prior similarity-based weighted fusion method,
HE et al.: FUSION GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD WITH STRUCTURED PRIOR KNOWLEDGE 8771

 TABLE XI
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE W ITH D IFFERENT F USION M ETHODS

we conduct a comparative analysis with two other fusion [5] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representaapproaches. The first approach stochastically selects one of tions for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022,
the three graphs for model training (Random SG), while the pp. 2977–2986.
second approach fuses the three graphs by averaging them [6] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
(AVG). As shown in Table XI, PSF outperforms other fusion graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
 detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
methods on all four datasets, validating the effectiveness of Jun. 2022.
our proposed method. [7] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and
 We conduct a case study, as depicted in Fig. 7. Fig. 7 opportunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036.
(left) illustrates a partial graph structure learned by FuGLAD, [8] C. Shang, J. Chen, and J. Bi, “Discrete graph structure learning for
 forecasting multiple time series,” 2021, arXiv:2101.06861.
while Fig. 7 (right) presents the predictions of our model for [9] K. Yao, J. Liang, J. Liang, M. Li, and F. Cao, “Multi-view graph conrelevant sensors. In this scenario, sensor AI T − 202 was com- volutional networks with attention mechanism,” Artif. Intell., vol. 307,
promised between timestamps 710 to 730. FuGLAD detected Jun. 2022, Art. no. 103708.
the attack by identifying a significant difference between the [10] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
 T. Söderström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonpredictions and the ground truth for AI T − 202 during this parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
time period. Owing to the correlation between sensors in Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
the water treatment process, the attack on AI T − 202 led [11] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
to the shutdown of the dosing pump P − 203 and affected Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
the permeate conductivity analyzer AI T − 503. FuGLAD [12] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
accurately predicted the changes in P-203 from timestamps Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
710 to 730 and in AI T − 503 from timestamps 800 to 900. adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN).
 Munich, Germany: Springer, 2019, pp. 703–716.
The values of P −203 and AI T −503 followed the changes in [13] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
the ground truth and were not anomalies, as demonstrated in robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
Fig. 7 (right). This success is attributed to FuGLAD’s ability IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 [14] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
to correctly learn the correlation among the three sensors, detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
as illustrated in Fig. 7 (left). network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [15] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu-
 VII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 In this paper, we propose FuGLAD, a technique that fuses pp. 1–19.
graph structures to refine the quality of the learning graph [16] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
and exploits the structured prior graph to eliminate the effects Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
of noise in the data. Besides, we combine the learned graph [17] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
with the DCRNN predictor to efficiently forecast future sensor networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” 2022,
 arXiv:2201.07284.
behavior and detect anomalies based on prediction errors. Our [18] Q. He, Y. J. Zheng, C. L. Zhang, and H. Y. Wang, “MTAD-TF:
method outperforms the baselines on four public datasets, Multivariate time series anomaly detection using the combination of
delivering the best performance with short-term data and temporal pattern and feature pattern,” Complexity, vol. 2020, pp. 1–9,
 Oct. 2020.
reduced training overhead. Future work will focus on improv-
 [19] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
ing the model’s scalability for large graphs. attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
 [20] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 R EFERENCES anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
 [1] S. He et al., “A joint matrix factorization and clustering scheme for Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
 irregular time series data,” Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119220. [21] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for mul-
 [2] S. He, Z. Li, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Intelligent detection for tivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 key performance indicators in industrial-based cyber-physical systems,” vol. 73, pp. 1–10, 2024, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2024.3369159.
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5799–5809, Aug. 2021. [22] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global–local association
 [3] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao, discrepancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,”
 “Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, Apr. 2024,
 localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3330696.
 May 2021, pp. 7–12. [23] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive
 [4] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection learning for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023, doi:
 pp. 4027–4035. 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3303946.
8772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[24] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series Genxin Li received the B.S. degree from Jiangxi
 anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric consumer Science and Technology Normal University in 2021.
 applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Jun. 4, 2024, He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer
 doi: 10.1109/TCE.2024.3409391. science and technology with Changsha University
[25] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection of Science and Technology. His research interests
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, include deep learning, data analysis, and anomaly
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. detection.
[26] M. R. Khan and J. E. Blumenstock, “Multi-GCN: Graph convolutional
 networks for multi-view networks, with applications to global poverty,”
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2019, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 606–613.
[27] S. Fan, X. Wang, C. Shi, E. Lu, K. Lin, and B. Wang, “One2Multi
 graph autoencoder for multi-view graph clustering,” in Proc. Web Conf.,
 Apr. 2020, pp. 3070–3076. Kun Xie (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[28] H. Xiao, J. Gao, D. S. Turaga, L. H. Vu, and A. Biem, “Temporal multi- degree in computer application from Hunan Univerview inconsistency detection for network traffic analysis,” in Proc. 24th sity, Changsha, China, in 2007. She has published
 Int. Conf. World Wide Web, May 2015, pp. 455–465. over 100 papers in major journals and con-
[29] E. Gujral, R. Pasricha, and E. Papalexakis, “Beyond rank-1: Discovering ference proceedings, including journals such as
 rich community structure in multi-aspect graphs,” in Proc. Web Conf., IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
 Apr. 2020, pp. 452–462. IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING,
[30] H. Yu et al., “Regularized graph structure learning with seman- IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMPUTERS, IEEE
 tic knowledge for multi-variates time-series forecasting,” 2022, T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED
 arXiv:2210.06126. S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON W IRELESS
[31] Z. Zhong, L. Zheng, D. Cao, and S. Li, “Re-ranking person re- C OMMUNICATIONS, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 identification with K-reciprocal encoding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. S ERVICES C OMPUTING, and conferences, including SIGMOD, INFOCOM,
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jul. 2017, pp. 1318–1327. ICDCS, SECON, DSN, and IWQoS. Her research interests include network
 measurement, network security, big data, and AI.
[32] X. Zhang, M. Jiang, Z. Zheng, X. Tan, E. Ding, and Y. Yang,
 “Understanding image retrieval re-ranking: A graph neural network
 perspective,” 2020, arXiv:2012.07620.
 Pradip Kumar Sharma (Senior Member, IEEE)
[33] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Con- received the Ph.D. degree in CSE from Seoul
 necting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural National University of Science and Technology,
 networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery South Korea, in August 2019.
 Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 753–763. He was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the
[34] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional Department of Multimedia Engineering, Dongguk
 recurrent neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” 2017, University, South Korea. He was a Software EngiarXiv:1707.01926. neer with MAQ Software, India, and was involved
[35] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th in a variety of projects, proficient in building
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, Jun. 2008, pp. 413–422. largescale complex data warehouses, OLAP models,
[36] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, and reporting solutions that meet business objectives
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” and align IT with business. He is currently an Assistant Professor of cyberin Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, security with the Department of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen,
 2020, pp. 3395–3404. U.K. He has published many technical research articles in leading journals
[37] W. Liu et al., “Unsupervised deep anomaly detection for industrial from IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, and MDPI. Some of his research findings are
 multivariate time series data,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 2, p. 774, Jan. 2024. published in the most cited journals. His current research interests include
 cybersecurity, blockchain, edge computing, SDN, and the IoT security. He has
 also been invited to serve as a Technical Program Committee Member and
 the Chair in several reputed international conferences, such as IEEE DASC
 2021, IEEE CNCC 2021, CSA 2020, IEEE ICC 2019, IEEE MENACOMM
 Shiming He received the B.S. degree in information 2019, and 3ICT 2019. He received a Top 1% Reviewer in computer science by
 security and the Ph.D. degree in computer science Publons Peer Review Awards 2018 and 2019, Clarivate Analytics. He has been
 and technology from Hunan University, China, in an expert reviewer for IEEE T RANSACTIONS, Elsevier, Springer, and MDPI
 2006 and 2013, respectively. She is currently an journals and magazines. He is an Associate Editor of Peer-to-Peer Network-
 Associate Professor with the School of Computer ing and Applications (PPNA), Human-Centric Computing and Information
 and Communication Engineering, Changsha Univer- Sciences (HCIS), Electronics (MDPI), and Journal of Information Processing
 sity of Science and Technology, Changsha, China. Systems (JIPS). He has been serving as the Guest Editor for international
 Her research interests include machine learning, data journals of certain publishers, such as IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, MDPI, and
 analysis, and anomaly detection. JIPS. He is listed in the World’s Top 2% Scientists for citation impact during
 the calendar year 2019 by Stanford University.