Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computers & Security
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cose

GCN-MHSA: A novel malicious traffic detection method based on graph
convolutional neural network and multi-head self-attention mechanism
Jinfu Chen a,b , Haodi Xie a,b , Saihua Cai a,b ,∗, Luo Song a,b , Bo Geng a,b , Wuhao Guo c
a
 School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China
b
 Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Security Technology for Industrial Cyberspace, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China
c
 Asiainfo Security Technology Co., Ltd Nanjing, 210012, Jiangsu, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: With the increasing size and complexity of network, network traffic becomes more and more correlated with
Malicious traffic detection each other, and the traditional manner of presenting network traffic in a Euclidean structure is difficult
Graph convolutional neural network to effectively capture the correlation information of network traffic. In contrast, graph structured data has
Multi-head self-attention mechanism
 gained much attention in recent years due to its ability to represent the correlation between different traffic
Feature extending
 flows; In addition, models and algorithms related to Graph Convolution Neural network (GCN) have been
 used for malicious traffic detection. However, existing GCN-based malicious traffic detection methods still
 suffer from incomplete description of the flow-level features of network traffic, imperfect traffic correlation
 establishment mechanism and failure to distinguish the importance of features during model training. Based on
 this, this study proposes a malicious traffic detection method called GCN-MHSA based on Graph Convolutional
 Neural network and Multi-Head Self-Attention mechanism. Firstly, the flow-level features of network traffic
 are populated and more information close to the features are selected to describe the network traffic; And
 then, the link homogeneity is used to establish the correlations between network traffic; Moreover, multi-head
 self-attention mechanism is introduced in the GCN model to provide larger weight to important features;
 Finally, an improved GCN is used as a deep learning model to detect malicious traffic. Extensive experimental
 results on three publicly available network traffic datasets and a real network traffic dataset show that the
 proposed GCN-MHSA method performs better than five baselines in terms of detection effect and stability,
 with an improvement of about 2.4% in accuracy, recall and F1-measure as well as an improvement of about
 2.1% in precision.

1. Introduction resources and a response of a service may require multiple requests
 and responses, which leads to the strong correlation of network traffic
 With the popularization of Internet, the scale of network traffic reflecting users’ operations. These correlated flows create complex
shows a continuous growth trend, and the complexity of network traffic interactions and dependencies in the network, therefore, understanding
is also increasing. Complex network architecture allows hackers to and analyzing such correlations can provide a more comprehensive
utilize more avenues for malicious attacks or performing abnormal view, which can help to more accurately detect malicious traffic. Graph
behaviors, such as the communication in computer networks with structure can pay better attention on the correlation between network
attack behavior (Eswaran and Faloutsos, 2018) and the spread of false traffic due to its strong information expression ability, and some cominformation in social networks (Gupta et al., 2012), which brings mon dynamic networks, such as social networks, transaction networks
great challenges to network security. Compared with normal access, for transferring money between accounts and computer communication
malicious attacks often generate malicious traffic with attack attributes, networks, are all represented by graph-structured data. However, trathus, we can identify the type of malicious attacks through detecting
 ditional malicious traffic detection methods based on recurrent neural
traffic and then take relevant measures to defend against network
 network, convolutional neural network and their variants are not apthreats (Chen et al., 2023c). However, in real life scenarios, an acplicable to the detection task oriented to graph structure. Therefore,
cess to a web page by users may trigger the download of multiple

 ∗ Corresponding author at: School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu,
China.
 E-mail addresses: jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn (J. Chen), 2222108039@stmail.ujs.edu.cn (H. Xie), caisaih@ujs.edu.cn (S. Cai), 2212108063@stmail.ujs.edu.cn
(L. Song), 2212308011@stmail.ujs.edu.cn (B. Geng), guo.wuhao@asiainfo-sec.com (W. Guo).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2024.104083
Received 24 December 2023; Received in revised form 11 July 2024; Accepted 26 August 2024
Available online 30 August 2024
0167-4048/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

how to build graph structures for the correlated network traffic and 2. Related work
effectively detect malicious traffic with the help of graph structures that
can better reflect the correlation of network traffic, has become a hot Malicious traffic detection aims to detect abnormal network traffic
research topic. from large-scale network traffic to seek for the attack behavior or
 In recent years, researchers tried to use graph neural network mod- unusual operations, it is an important aspect of network security.
els to detect malicious traffic in large-scale network traffic. However, With the development of artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep
the existing researches on of network flow-level characterization still learning and graph neural network techniques have been widely used
remains in the 5-tuple features of network traffic (including: source in malicious traffic detection.
IP, source port, destination IP, destination port, protocol), which leads
to the fact that these methods cannot fully reflect the complexity of 2.1. Machine learning-based malicious detection methods
network traffic characterization in the representation of traffic information (Sun et al., 2020). The existing methods also suffer from the
 Machine learning-based malicious detection methods distinguish
problems of incomplete traffic correlation mechanism and not focusing
 malicious traffic from normal traffic by learning the features of neton important features, which means that they may not be able to fully
 work traffic usingmachine learning models. For example, Moore and
capture the correlations and interactions between different nodes in
 Zuev (2005) proposed a Bayesian classifier-based malicious detection
traffic data (Zheng et al., 2022). The incomplete correlation mechanism
 method, it had high detection accuracy, but the time consumption used
may cause the model ignoring some important information and patterns
when analyzing network traffic, thus affecting its performance and in feature extraction process is very high. Zhang et al. (2018) proposed
accuracy. Moreover, existing methods fail to pay sufficient attention a network intrusion detection method that combines Principal Comon important features when dealing with network traffic (Chen et al., ponent Analysis (PCA) and Gaussian naive Bayes to detect malicious
2023a). There is a large amount of information in network traffic traffic, it weighted the first few features obtained by traditional PCA
data, but not all features are equally important to our study or task, to reduce the data dimension, thereby reducing the time consumption.
while current methods may underutilize some key features due to Alshammari and Zincir-Heywood (2009) conducted a large number
not accurately evaluate and select the importance of features, thereby of experiments and found that using C4.5 classification can improve
affecting the performance and accuracy of the model (Niu et al., 2022). the detection accuracy and robustness on SSH and Skype networks
 To address the problems of existing methods, we first propose a compared with Adabost, Naive Bayes and RIPPER, but this approach
feature extending scheme to describe the network traffic as much detail produced a high false positive rate. Okada et al. (2011) proposed an
as possible. More specifically, we extend the original network traffic EFM method based on SVM to detect malicious traffic from encrypted
features in the feature preprocessing stage and extract 12-tuple features traffic with an overall accuracy of 97.2%, but this method did not
of network traffic, where the source IP and port, the destination IP and consider the optimal combination of features for network traffic. Shams
port are used as two node features of in the graph structure, and other and Rizaner (2018) introduced a network traffic intrusion detection
features such as the number of incoming and outgoing bytes, the num- tool using support vector machine, which significantly improved netber of incoming and outgoing packets, and the interval time are used as work reliability by detecting and removing malicious nodes in the
the edge features in the graph structure. In the constructing of graph network. In 2016, Anderson and McGrew (2016) proposed a supervised
structure for network traffic, we also consider the link homogeneity machine learning model, it combined context information and observbetween network traffic (i.e., the similar network traffic may originate able data in the network traffic to detect malicious traffic. Wu et al.
from same application) as well as further introduce the indirect corre- (2021) preprocessed network packets by collecting network traffic data,
lation and direct correlation between network traffic to assign different system logs, user behavior and host information, and then used random
weights to different degrees of correlation, thereby fully reflecting the
 forest algorithm to train the data; In addition, they also calculated the
correlation information between network traffic and take advantages of
 importance of features to reduce data dimensionality. Barradas et al.
graph structure data. After constructing network traffic graph structure,
 (2021) developed the Flowlens, it relied on programmable switches
we combine the Graph Convolutional Neural network and a Multito collect flow distribution information on the data-plane for feature
Head Self-Attention mechanism to form an effective malicious traffic
 extraction and detected the attacks by applying a random forest algodetection method called GCN-MHSA, thereby further improving the
stability of detection model and the detection efficiency of malicious rithm. However, this method did not consider the external relationships
network traffic. between traffic flows, which may limit its effectiveness in capturing
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows: complex network behaviors and interactions. Holland et al. (2021)
 proposed nPrint, a tool that generated a unified packet representation
 1. We extend the traditional 5-tuple flow-level features of network by using the maximum header length allowed for each protocol and
 traffic into 12-tuples to describe the network traffic with richer concatenating different protocol headers into a fixed-length header,
 information. it integrated the nPrint with automated machine learning (AutoML)
 2. We introduce the indirect and direct correlations between net- for automatically classifying network traffic. However, nPrint offered
 work traffic using link homogeneity between network traffic only a little assistance in extracting flow-level sequence information,
 and assign different weights to different degrees of correlation, which limited its effectiveness in feature extraction of network traffic.
 thereby more effectively describing the correlations between In recent years, several studies have made significant contributions
 network traffic. to the field of real-time malicious traffic detection. For example, Fu
 3. We introduce the multi-head self-attention mechanism into et al. (2021) developed the Whisper leveraging frequency domain feagraph convolutional neural network to provide larger weight tures, it realized the robust and real-time detection in high throughput
 for more important features, thereby improving the stability and network. Zhou et al. (2023) proposed a multi-phase sequential model
 detection efficiency of malicious network traffic method.
 architecture, this method introduced a new paradigm for the joint de-
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sign and deployment of intelligent network models and programmable
presents the related work on malicious traffic detection. Section 3 network hardware. Fu et al. (2023) proposed the HyperVision, an
describes the proposed GCN-MHSA method, including the preprocess- unsupervised graph learning method, which used the DBSCAN and KDing of network traffic, the establishment of graph structure, and the Tree to analyze the connectivity, sparsity and statistical features of the
construction of GCN-MHSA method. Section 4 makes an experimental graph for flow interaction patterns, thereby detecting the unknown patcomparison between the proposed GCN-MHSA method and state-of-the- terns in encrypted malicious traffic. Compared with these methods, the
art methods. Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper and discusses the GCN-based methods require the construction of extensive graph strucfuture work. tures and entail higher computational overhead, they offer a distinct

 2
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

advantage by capturing the complex dependencies and relationships schemes and model optimization. For example, Kipf and Welling (2017)
between different network traffic, leading to more effective detection proposed a scalable semi-supervised GNN-based learning method, it
of malicious traffic. directly acted on GNN structure based on an effective variant of CNN
 In general, machine learning-based malicious traffic detection meth- to effectively improve the detection efficiency. Fang et al. (2022)
ods attempt to discriminate normal network traffic and malicious net- proposed a switching aware spatio-temporal GNN model based on
work traffic using machine learning models. Although this kind of dynamic graph convolution and gated linear unit to predict the traffic
malicious traffic detection methods has made some progress, they consumption in short, medium and long time frames, but this method
suffer from the following problems: (1) The feature extraction process could not obtain a hybrid graph structure with detailed information
is time-consuming in large-scale networks and the dimensionality re- about network traffic. After a lot of analysis, Zola et al. (2022) found
duction techniques do not always preserve all essential information, that the key to malicious traffic detection is not only to detect a
leading to the loss of potential information; (2) Most methods face high single malicious connection, but also to detect which node in the
false positive rate due to the need of feature extraction with greater network is generating malicious traffic in many cases, and then they
subjectivity. tool corresponding measures to reduce the threat and improve the
 network security of system; However, this method had a bad detection
2.2. Deep learning-based malicious detection methods efficiency problem due to the lack of denoising processing on network
 traffic. Xiao et al. (2023) proposed a control area network-based graph
 Compared with traditional machine learning-based malicious de- attention network (CAN-GAT) model to realize anomaly detection for
tection methods, deep learning-based models have the advantage of in-vehicle network, and then proposed a malicious detection framework
directly extracting features from original network traffic, thus, it has based on graph convolution network and graph attention network to
been widely used in the detection of malicious traffic in recent years. detect anomalies in CAN bus in-vehicle network, but the detection
For example, Prasse et al. (2017) proposed a long short-term memory stability of this method needs to be further verified. Guo et al. (2020)
(LSTM)-based model to detect malware based on the Https traffic with proposed a GNN-based anomaly detection algorithm, it introduced
the focus on host address, timestamp and data information. Wang graph structure, attribute and dynamic change information into the
et al. (2017a) proposed an automatic malware detection method, it model to learn the representation vector of anomaly detection, but
used the natural language processing to extract text features from the operation efficiency of this method needs to be improved. Zheng
network traffic and then used the text features to construct an effective et al. (2022) proposed an encrypted malicious traffic detection method
malware detection model based on text semantic features. Wang et al. called GCN-ETA based on graph convolutional network as well as a
(2017b) proposed a malicious traffic detection method based on one- new traffic representation and correlation construction scheme, but the
dimensional convolutional neural network (1D-CNN), but this method traffic direction and the weights of different correlation types were
only used spatial features and ignored temporal features. Marín et al. not considered in the traffic correlation. Lan et al. (2022) proposed
(2019) used raw measurements of monitored byte streams as input E-minBatch, a model based on GraphSAGE, it took the application
to the proposed model and evaluated different raw traffic represen- layer source port and source IP address as the source node, the aptation to better capture the basic statistics of malicious traffic. In plication layer target port and target IP address as the target node,
addition, Chen et al. (2023b) proposed a malicious traffic detection and the remaining traffic information as the edge information, thereby
method based on temporal convolutional network (TCN), it used expo- completing the construction of graph structure, but this method was
nential linear units (ELU) activation function to solve the problem of limited to the detection of industrial Internet traffic. Jiang et al. (2022)
low detection accuracy caused by the neuron ‘‘death’’ in the training designed a new trust evaluation framework called GATrust based on
process. Sun et al. (2020) developed an intrusion detection system GAT, it could assign different attention coefficients to various attributes
called DL-IDS with the use of hybrid network (containing CNN and of users in online social networks and improve the prediction accuracy
LSTM) to extract the spatial and temporal features of network traffic, of social trust evaluation; However, the generality of this method on
but its detection accuracy for some attack types needs to be im- graph structure data needs to be verified. Niu et al. (2022) proposed
proved. Wu et al. (2020) designed a LDoS attack classifier using HSMM a method based on adaptive online analysis to accurately determine
network model as well as proposed a LDoS attack detection method malware via analyzing the encrypted, drifting and unbalanced network
based on wavelet energy spectrum entropy and hidden semi-Markov traffic. The GNN-based model Euler (King and Huang, 2022) belonged
model, they had better detection performance. Mirsky et al. (2018) to unsupervised method, it utilized the temporal graph link prediction
developed the Kitsune to learn the per-packet features by adopting to incorporate the temporal nature of data along with GNN model for
auto-encoders, it was an unsupervised method and could eliminate the anomaly-based intrusion detection. The unsupervised learning method
need for labeled datasets as well as was capable of handling zero-day Euler exhibited higher false positive rate and false negative rate in some
attacks. However, this packet-level method used the statistics as the cases, it was owing to that unsupervised methods rely on the inherent
context information, resulting in unable to achieve robust detection structure of the data without the guidance of supervised signals, making
under evasion attacks. them more susceptible to noise compared to supervised methods. (1)
 In general, deep learning-based methods provide an effective way In the feature extraction, the edges in the graph structure of Euler
to detect malicious network traffic, they also have better accuracy and model did not include any information of network traffic, they only
portability compared with traditional machine learning-based methods. represented the existence of relationships between two entity nodes,
However, deep learning-based methods primarily focus on extract- leading to the loss of much useful information. (2) Regarding the coring spatial and temporal features from network traffic, these meth- relation between network traffic, Euler model treated all correlations
ods face the challenges in effectively capturing the intricate network between network traffic uniformly and fails to account for the varying
relationships and graph structures associated with malicious activities. degrees of relevance and importance among different network traffic,
 it may hinder the effectiveness of malicious activities detection. (3) In
2.3. Graph neural network-based malicious detection methods the training of the detection model, Euler had the advantage of not
 requiring labeled data, it outperformed other unsupervised anomaly-
 Considering the advantages of graph structure in representing net- based intrusion detection methods; However, Euler model assigned
work traffic, researchers have begun to study graph neural network equal weights to each feature, this manner could significantly limit its
(GNN)-based models and algorithms in recent years. In GNN-based ma- ability to capture the importance of different features.
licious traffic detection methods, researchers ensure the detection relia- In summary, the studies on GNN-based malicious detection have
bility through different data preprocessing methods, feature extraction become a hot research topic in recent years. However, the existing

 3
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Table 1
 The comparison of malicious traffic detection methods.
 Method Feature extraction Using graph structure Considering feature weights
 Zhang et al. (2018) Processed × ×
 Shams and Rizaner (2018) Processed × ×
 Wang et al. (2017a) Direct × ×
 Wang et al. (2017b) Direct × ×
 Marín et al. (2019) Direct × ×
 Zheng et al. (2022) Direct ✓ ×
 Lan et al. (2022) Direct ✓ ×
 Jiang et al. (2022) Direct ✓ ×
 Niu et al. (2022) Processed × ×
 Sun et al. (2020) Direct × ×
 GCN-MHSA (ours) Direct ✓ ✓

 Fig. 1. The workflow of GCN-MHSA method.

researches do not give a complete set of flow-level features to describe mechanism. The overall workflow of proposed GCN-MHSA method is
network traffic and ignore the link homogeneity between network shown in Fig. 1.
traffic when establishing their correlation, which seriously affect the Firstly, the basic preprocessing operations such as data segmenefficiency of GNN-based malicious traffic detection methods. Therefore, tation, filtering and dumping are performed on the original network
it is necessary to strengthen the preprocessing process of original net- traffic. Then, the features of processed network traffic are extracted
work traffic, improve the attention to the correlation between network and extended with the flow-level features, and the selected features
traffic, enhance the effectiveness of GNN-based model in the training are evaluated to ensure that the selected features have positive feedphase and strengthen the attention on important features of network back. Next, the correlation between network traffic is established using
traffic, thereby further improving the detection efficiency of malicious link homogeneity to assign different degrees for indirect and direct
traffic. correlations. Finally, different features are assigned different weights
 The comparison of some aforementioned malicious traffic detection through multi-head self-attention mechanism based on their impormethods is shown in Table 1. tance to the determination of malicious traffic. With above operations,
 the adjacency matrix, flow-level features and other information are
3. Proposed model provided for the training of malicious traffic detection model to more
 accurately detect malicious traffic. Compared with existing methods,
 To solve the problems of existing GCN-based malicious traffic detec- the proposed method extends the flow-level features of network traffic,
tion methods, such as the incomplete description of flow-level features that is, selecting more information close to the features of network
of network traffic, the incomplete traffic correlation mechanism and traffic to describe it, as well as analyze the homogeneity between
not focusing on important features in the model training process, we network traffic, and then introduces the multi-headed self-attention
propose a malicious traffic detection method called GCN-MHSA based mechanism into GCN model to assign different weights for features.
on graph convolution neural network and multi-head self-attention Through these improvements, the effect of malicious traffic detection is

 4
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

improved while fully considering the relevant information and features
between network traffic.

3.1. The preprocessing of network traffic based on feature extending and
network correlation analysis

 The GCN-based malicious traffic detection method can use the traffic trajectory graph to construct graph structure. Generally, the nodes in
the graph structure are represented by the IP and port, and the edges in
the graph structure represent the information of network traffic. From
the perspective of logical reasoning, the node information in the graph
structure is IP and port and the edge information in the graph structure
is the related network protocol number, that is, the flow-level feature Fig. 2. The extended schematic of flow-level features.

tuple of network flow is 𝐹 (𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝐼𝑃 , 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝐼𝑃 , 𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝑃 , 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝑃 , 𝑃 𝑟𝑜).
 Although this practice considers the advantages of using graph
structure to represent network traffic, but the contained information 3. int(𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒), dur(𝑛𝑡): Different types of applications or protocols
is far from covering the specific characteristics of a network traffic. usually have different traffic time interval and different dura-
In order to take full advantage of graph structure to store network tion, observing the interval time between current network traffic
traffic, the feature information to be stored on each network traffic is and last network traffic as well as duration of current network
first extended with the features. Specifically, because the IP address traffic can reveal regular, periodic or abnormal traffic events,
and port of each network traffic are sufficient to describe each node, which can help to distinguish and identify specific applications,
and too much description of endpoint information of each network user behaviors or network events.
traffic may not only cause data redundancy, but also affect the con-
 With the above considered factors, the extended 12-tuple is
struction efficiency of graph structure, thus, the information of features
 𝐹 (𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝐼𝑃 , 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝐼𝑃 , 𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝑃 , 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝑃 , 𝑖𝑛_𝑏, 𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑏, 𝑖𝑛_𝑝, 𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑝, 𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑝, 𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑏, 𝑖𝑛𝑡,
contained in each node of graph structure is not changed. For the
 𝑑𝑢𝑟), where 𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝐼𝑃 : 𝑠𝑟𝑐_𝑃 and 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝐼𝑃 : 𝑑𝑠𝑡_𝑃 are the direct relationship
description information on the edges of graph structure, the protocol
 between each IP and its port, 𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑝 = 𝑖𝑛_𝑝+𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑝, 𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑏 = 𝑖𝑛_𝑏+𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑏.
number information used by most researchers to describe the features
 The extended schematic of flow-level features is shown in Fig. 2,
of network traffic is obviously insufficient, where the protocol number where Fig. 2(a) is the features of network traffic before extending and
usually only provides rough information about the protocol to which Fig. 2(b) is the features of network traffic after extending. This study
the traffic belongs but lacks more specific information about the details uses these information of features to describe each network traffic in
and behavior of traffic camouflage, which will have a negative effect on more detail, so as to improve the detection efficiency of malicious
the detection efficiency of malicious traffic. For this reason, this study network traffic.
not chooses to use protocol number to describe the network traffic, but
selects some features most relevant to each network flow, including
 3.2. The correlation conversion of network traffic based on link homogenethe number of inflow bytes (num(𝑖𝑛_𝑏)), the number of outflow bytes ity and weight assignment
(num(𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑏)), the sum number of bytes (num(𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑏)), the length of
inflow packets (len(𝑖𝑛_𝑝)), the length of outflow packets (len(𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑝)), the
 The network traffic with same IP host are more likely to be the
sum number of packets (num(𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑝)), the interval time between current
 same software compared with randomly selected network traffic, that
network traffic and last network traffic (int(𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒)), and the duration of is, there is link homogeneity in the network (Zheng et al., 2022)
current network traffic (dur(𝑛𝑡)). The above key features of network (link homogeneity refers to the degree of similarity between network
traffic are extracted by the tshark (a Wireshark’s built-in command-line correlations and transmission paths in the network). Taking whether
tool). This process aims to build a more comprehensive and accurate set there is a common IP between two network traffic as the basis for
of features to support subsequent tasks of network traffic analysis and judging whether there is a correlation between network traffic, the edge
malicious traffic detection. These features are described as follows: classification in network traffic detection can be transformed into a
 node classification problem. The edge classification problem is usually
 1. num(𝑖𝑛_𝑏), num(𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑏), num(𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑏): The number of inflow bytes more complex and requires more time overhead because it needs to
 of malicious traffic (num(𝑖𝑛_𝑏)), the number of outflow bytes consider every edge in the network. Compared with edge classification
 of malicious traffic (num(𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑏)) and the sum number of inflow problem, the node classification focuses on the classification at the
 and outflow bytes of malicious traffic (num(𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑏)) may indi- node level, and it is easier to obtain label because nodes are usually
 cate potential malicious behavior or intrusion attempts, thus, directly related to specific identifiers (such as IP address or hostname).
 the malicious traffic patterns of network attacks or other ab- Considering that network traffic has flow direction, this study improves
 normal conditions can be detected by counting the number of the original undirected graph of traffic correlation into a directed graph
 bytes flowing in and out, thereby detecting and preventing the and further defines the direct and indirect correlation between network
 network security threats. traffic, as well as assigns different weights to the direct and indirect
 2. len(𝑖𝑛_𝑝), len(𝑜𝑢𝑡_𝑝), num(𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑝): Different types of applications correlation to consider more important correlated information. The
 or protocols usually have different distributions of packet length improved structure of graph conversion is shown in Fig. 3.
 and different sum number of packet, these features can be used The definition of graph in Fig. 3 is 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐴), where 𝑉 is the set
 to identify and distinguish different types of network traffic, of nodes and 𝐴 is a symmetric adjacency matrix. The elements 𝑎𝑖𝑗 of
 such as Web browsing, file transfer or video streaming. In ad- adjacency matrix are the weights of edges between nodes 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 ,
 dition, the packet length also can be used to analyze the delay where 𝑎𝑖𝑗 = 0 indicates that there is no edge correlation between two
 characteristics of network traffic. Therefore, the malicious traffic nodes, 𝑎𝑖𝑗 = 1 indicates that there is an indirect correlation between two
 patterns of network attacks or other abnormal conditions can be edges, and 𝑎𝑖𝑗 = 2 indicates that there is a direct correlation between
 detected by counting the length and total number of packets. two edges. In addition, we also define the degree matrix 𝐷 = diag

 5
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 nodes, but it is difficult to model the complex dependency between the
 nodes in network traffic. To solve this problem, we introduce multihead self-attention mechanism and correlation matrix into the GCN
 model to assign different weights to direct correlation and indirect
 correlation. Among them, the correlation matrix allows the weights of
 edges in the graph to be adjusted to more accurately reflect the degree
 of dependency between nodes, which can help GCN to aggregate more
 accurate features of network traffic nodes. The overall framework of
 GCN-MHSA model is shown in Fig. 4.
 GCN is a multi-layer neural network model that provides a powerful
 tool for malicious traffic detection. It can directly process the data in
 Fig. 3. The correlation conversion of network traffic.
 graph structure and use the attributes of adjacent nodes to guide the
 embedding vector learning of each node, thereby obtaining the feature
 representations of new node. These feature representations are further
 used as input to a linear classifier for the classification task of nodes.
(𝑑1 , . . . , 𝑑𝑛 ), where each node 𝑣𝑖 in the graph has a corresponding d-
 In addition, through the stacking of multi-layer GCN, a wider range
dimensional feature vector. The feature vectors of all n nodes form a
 of information can be gradually integrated to effectively analyze the
complete feature matrix 𝑋.
 relationship between network topology and node attributes as well as
 According to the above definition, suppose there are n network
 identify abnormal behavior, thereby more comprehensively capturing
flows and each has d-dimensional features, feature matrix 𝑋 and adjathe relevant information in the detection of malicious traffic. For the
cency matrix 𝐴. Specifically, when two network traffic share the same
 𝑘th graph convolution layer, the matrices 𝐻 (𝑘−1) and 𝐻 (𝑘) represent the
IP host, 𝑎𝑖𝑗 can take the value of 1 or 2, respectively, which represents
 representations of input node and output node, respectively. In general,
the degree of correlation between network traffic. If there is no IP
 the representation of initial node is the original input feature 𝐻 (0) = 𝑋,
host sharing, 𝑎𝑖𝑗 is set to 0, indicating that there is no correlation
 which represents the input of first graph convolution layer. For a singlebetween network traffic. In addition, in order to better distinguish the
 layer GCN, the new d’-dimensional node feature matrix 𝐻 (1) is shown
importance of different correlations, we define the cases in which there
 in formula (1).
is a correlation between two network traffic:
 𝐻 (1) = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑀𝑋𝜃 (1) ) (1)
 1. Direct correlation: When the source IP address of one traffic is
 the same as the destination IP address of another network, these In formula (1), the normalized adjacency matrix 𝑀 of self-loop is
 two network traffic are regarded as direct correlation, where added, that is, the connection between nodes and themselves in the
 the value of corresponding position is set to 2 in the adjacency graph is also considered when the adjacency matrix is normalized,
 matrix, indicating that they are more connected, and this higher which is shown in formula (2).
 weight helps to highlight the importance of direct connected 1
 ̃− 2
 ̃ − 2 𝐴̃𝐷
 1
 𝑀 =𝐷 (2)
 network traffic.
 2. Indirect correlation: When two network traffic has same source ̃ is a degree matrix, the weight matrix
 In formula (2), 𝐴̃ = 𝐴 + 𝐼, 𝐷
 IP address or destination IP address, these two network traffic 𝜃 (1) used to smooth the linear transformation of the hidden feature
 are regarded as indirect connected, where the value of corre- representation. In the GCN model, multiple GCN layers can be stacked
 sponding position is set to 1 in the adjacency matrix. This lower to capture higher-order domain information, which is shown in formula
 weight indicates that although they may be connected with same (3).
 IP address, they may not have close communication, therefore,
 their relevance is not as high as that of direct connected network 𝐻 (𝑘) = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑀𝐻 (𝑘−1) 𝜃 (𝑘) ) (3)
 traffic. For node classification, the last layer of GCN uses classifier to
 predict labels. The predicted class of 𝑛 nodes is defined as 𝑌̂ = 𝑌̂𝑖𝑐 𝑛×𝑐,
 This strategy of different weight allocation can better distinguish
 where 𝑌̂𝑖𝑐 represents the probability that node 𝑖 belongs to class 𝐶.
the importance of different correlations. Typically, direct connected
 Therefore, the e-class prediction of GCN at layer 𝐾 is shown in formula
network traffic imply the closer communication and they should be
 (4).
assigned larger weights; While indirect correlations imply that although
such correlations are still considered in the connected network traffic, 𝑌̂𝐺𝐶𝑁 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑀𝐻(𝐾 − 1)(𝐾)) (4)
they may involve the same IP address but do not necessarily indicate
direct communication, they should be assigned smaller weights. This Assuming constructing a two-layer GCN (𝐾 = 2), the overall forward
strategy helps to more accurately capture the correlation information propagation mode is shown in formula (5).
between network traffic and reflect the degree of these correlations in 𝑌̂ = 𝑓 (𝑋, 𝐴) = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑀 × 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝑀𝑋𝜃 (1) )𝜃 (2) ) (5)
the adjacency matrix.
 As shown in Fig. 3, the destination IP of traffic A is the source IP of Finally, the cross-entropy loss function of all labeled nodes is calcutraffic B, so there is a direct correlation between them, thus, the value lated, and the sequence of features in high-dimensional network traffic
of its corresponding position in the adjacency matrix is set to 2. Traffic is obtained by inputting the traffic features of graph structure into GCN.
B and E have the same source IP, and traffic C and F have the same In view of the complex inter-correlations between network traffic,
destination IP, that is, B and E, C and F are indirectly connected, thus, it is urgent to deeply focus on and clearly express the complex relathe value of their corresponding position in the adjacency matrix is set tionships between different network traffic. Therefore, we introduce a
to 1. multi-head self-attention mechanism into GCN model, it uses multiple
 different attention heads to calculate the relationships between nodes,
3.3. The framework and algorithm of GCN-MHSA thereby improving the expressive ability of the model. In particular, it
 is worth noting that the application of multi-head self-attention mech-
 After constructing graph structure for network traffic, we use an anism in the GCN-MHSA hidden layer means that the self-attention
improved GCN model called GCN-MHSA to detect malicious traffic. Tra- mechanism is introduced between the node representations of each
ditional GCN-based methods can learn the correlated features between layer, thereby accurately capturing the dependency between nodes.

 6
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Fig. 4. The framework of GCN-MHSA model.

This improvement permits a more detailed analysis and understand- and then obtain labels based on classification results of GCN model
ing of the correlations between different network traffic, thus further as well as calculate the loss and update the weight matrices to obtain
improving the accuracy and performance of the model detection. a high-dimensional set of correlated features after each training batch.
 Assuming that the input feature matrix is 𝑋𝑛×𝑑 , where 𝑛 represents Subsequently, apply the multi-head self-attention mechanism to process
the number of traffic sequences and 𝑑 represents the feature dimension the correlated features and focus on the most important features.
of each traffic sequence. Firstly, the multi-head attention mechanism Finally, the detection operation is performed to obtain the malicious
is used to weight the input features and produce an attention matrix traffic.
𝐴𝑛×𝑛 , as shown in formula (6).
 𝑋𝑊 𝑄 (𝑋𝑊 𝐾 )𝑇 Algorithm 1 GCN-MHSA
𝐴 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥( √ ) (6)
 Input: 𝐺(𝑉 , 𝐴), learning rate, epoch, dropout, batch
 𝑑𝑘
 Output: Detection result
 In formula (6), 𝑊 𝑄 and 𝑊 𝐾 are matrices used to project input 1: SetParameters(𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒, 𝑒𝑝𝑜𝑐ℎ, 𝑑𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑜𝑢𝑡)
feature 𝑋 onto query matrix 𝑄 and key matrix 𝐾, and 𝑑𝑘 represents 2: LoadData(𝐺)
the dimension of each head. Multi-head attention mechanism uses 3: 𝐺 → GCN-MHSA model
ℎ different 𝑊 𝑄 and 𝑊 𝐾 to learn the dependency between nodes, 4: for each epoch do
resulting in ℎ attention matrices 𝐴1 , 𝐴2 , . . . , 𝐴ℎ . Softmax operation
 √ 5: for each epoch do
normalizes the weights in the attention matrix to range [0,1], 𝑑𝑘 is 6: ExtractFeatures()
used for scaling to prevent excessive inner product being too large. The 7: classification result based on GCN → label
calculation of attention matrix for each head is shown in formula (7). 8: CalculateLoss()
 𝑋𝑊𝑖𝑄 (𝑋𝑊𝑖𝐾 )𝑇 9: renew weight values 𝑊
ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖 = 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥( √ ), 𝑖 = 1, … , ℎ (7) 10: obtain the association feature 𝐴𝐹
 𝑑𝑘
 11: end for
 For each attention matrix ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑖 , we can use the same way as the 12: 𝐴𝐹 = MultiHeadAttention(𝐴𝐹 )
traditional GCN to calculate its feature representation 𝑍𝑖 , which is 13: end for
shown in formula (8). 14: 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑢𝑙𝑡 = Classification (𝐴𝐹 )
 1 1 15: return Result
 ̃− 2 𝐴
𝑍𝑖 = 𝜎(𝐷 ̃ − 2 𝑋𝑊 𝑉 )
 ̃𝑖 𝐷 (8)
 𝑖

 In formula (8), 𝑍𝑖 is obtained by encoding the feature 𝑋 of the
 ̃𝑖 is the attention matrix with self-loop added, 𝐷
 ̃ is The proposed GCN-MHSA model can achieve more powerful and
𝑖th head node, 𝐴
 flexible feature extraction through multi-head self-attention mechathe diagonal matrix, and the weight matrix 𝑊𝑖 is used to perform
 nism, multi-head feature representation and multi-head feature fusion.
linear transformation on 𝑋 and project the input feature onto the
 In the multi-head self-attention mechanism, each head focuses on difvalue 𝑉 . 𝑑×𝑣 is the output dimension of each head. The multi-head
 ferent features, which provides the model with multiple attention
feature representation 𝑍𝑑×𝑣 can be obtained by connecting the feature
 methods to better capture complex patterns in network traffic. In adrepresentation of each head, which is shown in formula (9).
 dition, multi-head feature representation and multi-head feature fusion
𝑍 = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡(𝑍1 , … , 𝑍ℎ ) (9) enhance the feature representation and help to characterize network
 traffic more comprehensively. This manner also allows weighted ag-
 Finally, a fully connected layer is used to fuse the multi-head feature gregation of nodes’ neighboring nodes, which further enriches the
representation 𝑍, which is shown in formula (10). representation of nodes and enables the model to capture the complex
 1 relationships among nodes more accurately.
 ̃ − 2 𝑍𝑊 𝑜𝑢𝑡 )
𝐻 𝑙+1 = 𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈 (𝐷 (10)
 Through flexibly combining the attention weights of different heads,
 In formula (10), 𝑊 𝑜𝑢𝑡 is the weight matrix used to project the multi- the model can more accurately express the relationship between nodes,
head feature representation to the next hidden layer, and 𝐻 𝑙+1 is the which improves the generalization ability of the model and enables it
feature representation of the next hidden layer. better adapt to different network traffic datasets and tasks. In addition,
 The detailed process of malicious traffic detecting by GCN-MHSA the introduction of multi-head self-attention mechanism helps to reduce
model is shown in Algorithm 1. Firstly, the parameters including the impact of noise on the model for improving the robustness of
learning rate, number of epoch and dropout rate are set to initialize the model as well as significantly improves the learning efficiency
the model; And then, the data in graph structure is input into the and training convergence speed of the model, thereby accelerating the
GCN-MHSA model for processing. Within each training epoch, iterate training process of the model, improving the detection performance and
through each batch of data to extract features from graph structure, better adapting to the changing network environment.

 7
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

Table 2 Negative) refers to the number of normal traffic correctly identified by
The description of UJS-IDS2022 dataset.
 the GCN-MHSA method as normal traffic; 𝐹 𝑁 (False Negative) refers to
 Normal Filesize (KB) Malware Filesize (KB) the number of malicious traffic incorrectly identified by the GCN-MHSA
 Tencent video 32 450 ArkeiStealer 159 477 method as normal traffic.
 QQ music 30 220 AsyncRAT 27 492
 Thunder 492 530 AveMariaRAT 297 535
 Youku 288 026 Formbook 379 488 4.3. Experimental setup
 Iqiyi 40 592 Hive 560 345
 Mango video 179 003 Kutaki 234 207 The hardware environment of the experiment is two 20-core 40-
 Himalaya 8944 Loki 17 261 thread CPUs, 128G RAM and two RTX3090 GPUs, and the software
 Baidu post bar 89 530 MassLogger 171 313
 environment is Ubuntu 20.04.2 LTS x86_64, TensorFlow 2.4.0 and
 League of legends 13 096 OskiStealer 77 368
 Bilibili 108 RedLineStealer 160 061 Python 3.8.
 To determine the optimal model parameters, we employ grid search
 to systematically explore a wide range of configurations. The parameters includes the batch_size of 16, 32 and 64; the dropout rate of 0.4,
4. Experiment 0.5 and 0.6; the epoch_size of 10, 30, 50 and 70; and the learning
 rate of 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001. Each parameter combination is evaluated
 This section first describes the dataset, evaluation metrics, experi- for 30 times and the hyperparameter under highest detection accumental settings and baselines used in the experiment, and then verifies racy is selected as the parameter of our GCN-MHSA model, including
the effectiveness of the proposed GCN-MHSA method with five state-of- batch_size = 64, dropout rate = 0.5, epoch_size = 50, and learning
the-art methods and discusses the experimental results. Subsequently, rate = 0.01. To ensure the fairness across experiments, all baselines
the ablation experiment is conducted to verify the effectiveness of the are trained using identical hyperparameter settings. Additionally, after
improved scheme proposed in this study. several experimental iterations, we incorporate three layers of multihead self-attention mechanism with four attention heads in the model
4.1. Dataset description to balance the performance with computational cost. The ratio of
 training datasets to testing datasets is 8:2 for all used four network
 CIC-IDS2017 dataset is a collection of network attack data collected traffic datasets.
by the Canadian Cyber Security Research Institute from computer
simulated network attack scenarios on multiple local area networks, 4.4. Baselines
it is produced and maintained by researchers from the University of
New Brunswick, Canada. This dataset is generated from a large-scale In order to verify the validity of the proposed GCN-MHSA model,
simulation of network traffic, including both normal network traffic five advanced and representative baselines are used in the experiment
and malicious network traffic. Among them, malicious network traffic for comparison.
includes 16 different types of network attack, such as DoS, Scan, R2L,
U2R and others. 1. E-minBatch GraphSAGE (Lan et al., 2022). It is an improved
 CTU-13 is a dataset for cybersecurity research, it is provided by GraphSAGE neural network model that can adapt to complex
the researchers from Computer Science Department of Czech Tech- network environment.
nical University. The dataset contains network traffic captured in a 2. GATrust (Jiang et al., 2022). It is an improved graph attention
real network environment, which contains normal network traffic as network that can assign different attention coefficients in the
well as samples from 13 different types of attacks, including: worms, network.
Trojans, DDoS attacks, botnets, sniffing, scanning, malware downloads, 3. IARF (Niu et al., 2022). It is an improved encryption malicious
etc. Each attack sample contains multiple network sessions, and each traffic detection method based on adaptive random forest.
session has a set of packets and associated metadata information, such 4. CNN-LSTM (Sun et al., 2020). It is a hybrid network of CNN
as timestamp, IP address, port number and so on. and LSTM that can effectively capture and extract the spatio-
 USTC-TFC2016 dataset is created and collected by the University temporal features of network traffic.
of Science and Technology of China (USTC) to analyze and detect 5. GCN-ETA (Zheng et al., 2022). It is an encrypted malicious
malicious traffic, it contains multiple types of malicious traffic. The traffic detection method based on graph convolutional neural
images in the dataset come from different scenes and environments networks.
in the real world and cover multiple categories of objects to make it
having diversity and representative. 4.5. Experimental results and analysis
 UJS-IDS2022 dataset is the collected network traffic produced by
multiple normal software and malware in the real environment by the 4.5.1. The performance analysis of multiclassification
Key Laboratory of Industrial Cyberspace Security Technology of Jiangsu In order to evaluate the multi-classification performance of the
University from June 5, 2022 to June 18, 2022. The number of network proposed GCN-MHSA method, we conduct a large number of expertraffic in this dataset is 7.67 million (2.76 million for benign, 4.91 iments on three public network traffic datasets and a real network
million for malicious). The specific software and the size of PCAP files traffic dataset with the comparison of five baselines. Fig. 5 shows the
corresponding to their network traffic are shown in Table 2. experimental results on CICIDS-2017 dataset using confusion matrix,
 where the horizontal axis represents the class predicted by the GCN-
4.2. Evaluation metrics MHSA method and the vertical axis represents the true class of network
 traffic. The values in the matrix have been normalized, and the diagonal
 In the experiments, four evaluation metrics are selected to evaluate elements correspond to the detection accuracy of the model.
the detection efficiency of proposed GCN-MHSA model for malicious As is shown in Fig. 5(f), GCN-MHSA method has good performance
network traffic, they are shown in Table 3. in malicious traffic detection with an accuracy close to 98%. Fig. 5(a)
 In Table 3, 𝑇 𝑃 (True Positive) refers to the number of malicious traf- shows that the E-minBatch GraphSAGE method has a poor detection
fic correctly identified by the GCN-MHSA method as malicious traffic; efficiency on certain types of malicious traffic when processing a small
𝐹 𝑃 (False Positive) refers to the number of normal traffic incorrectly number of samples, and its overall performance is lower than that of
identified by the GCN-MHSA method as malicious traffic; 𝑇 𝑁 (True proposed GCN-MHSA method due to it is prone to overfitting in the

 8
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Table 3
 Evaluation metric.
 Metric Formula Meaning
 Precision 𝑃
 𝑃 = 𝑇 𝑃𝑇+𝐹 𝑃
 The proportion of samples predicted to be positive that are actually positive.
 +𝑇 𝑁
 Accuracy 𝐴 = 𝑇 𝑃 +𝐹𝑇 𝑃𝑃 +𝑇 𝑁+𝐹 𝑁
 The proportion of samples whose predictions are correct.
 Recall 𝑃
 𝑅 = 𝑇 𝑃𝑇+𝐹 𝑁
 The proportion of positive samples that are predicted to be positive.
 2×𝑅×𝑃
 F1-measure 𝐹 1 = 𝑅+𝑃 The accuracy rate and recall rate are considered comprehensively, it is the harmonic average of the two metrics.

 Fig. 5. The confusion matrix of six compared malicious traffic detection methods.

learning process. The experimental results in Fig. 5(b) and (c) show 4.5.2. The performance of GCN-MHSA
that the GATrust and IARF methods exhibit poor detection performance To verify whether the proposed GCN-MHSA method can obtain
compared to the GCN-MHSA model in identifying network traffic with better detection capability of malicious traffic, we compare it with
certain types of attack (such as Dos, Heartbleed, synflood, PortScan and five methods, including E-minBatch GraphSAGE, GATrust, IARF, CNN-
SSH-Patator), which indicates the poor generalization ability of these LSTM, and GCN-ETA. Each experiment is conducted for 30 times and
 the average experimental result is shown in Table 4, where the positive
two methods. As is shown in Fig. 5(d) that the CNN-LSTM method
 and negative errors are the standard deviations of 30 repetitions.
also has some shortcomings similar to the IARF method. Neverthe-
 The experimental results on CICIDS-2017 dataset show that the
less, the CNN-LSTM method shows comparable detection accuracy to proposed GCN-MHSA method has better performance in malicious
the GCN-MHSA method in identifying normal network traffic as well traffic detection than E-minBatch GraphSAGE, GATrust, IARF, CNNas the malicious traffic with the attack types of Dos and PortScan. LSTM and GCN-ETA methods. Specifically, compared with E-minBatch
Fig. 5(e) shows that although the detection efficiency of GCN-ETA GraphSAGE method, the accuracy, precision, recall and F1-measure
method on Dos and PortScan attacks is close to that of GCN-MHSA, of GCN-MHSA method improve by 2.15%, 2.05%, 1.89% and 2.31%,
but its detection efficiency on other types of attack is not good. respectively; Compared with GATrust, these evaluation metrics im-
 The experimental results show that traditional malicious traffic prove by 1.92%, 1.46%, 1.48% and 1.62%, respectively; Compared
methods that do not include feature weight learning can successfully with IARF, the accuracy, precision, recall and F1-measure metrics of
 GCN-MHSA method increase by 2.6%, 2.24%, 2.5% and 2.77%, respeclearn most of the correlated features in both normal traffic and largetively; Compared with CNN-LSTM, these metrics improve by 1.26%,
scale malicious traffic. However, they are not efficient in detecting
 1.14%, 2.2% and 2.0%, respectively; Compared with GCN-ETA, the
malicious traffic in small sample categories. In contrast, the proposed above metrics increase by 4.3%, 3.9%, 4.36% and 4.42%, respectively.
GCN-MHSA method introduces a multi-head self-attention mechanism, Similarly, a similar effect is also can be observed on the CTU-13 dataset
which can weight each element in the input sequence according to the and USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
correlation of different positions in the input sequence, thus obtaining In addition, in order to verify the detection efficiency of the proaccurate and reliable detection results. posed GCN-MHSA method in a real data environment, we conduct a

 9
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Table 4
 The comparison of six malicious traffic detection methods.
 Methods Dataset Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-measure (%)
 E-minBatch GraphSAGE CICIDS-2017 95.86 ± 0.35 96.02 ± 0.77 96.32 ± 1.64 95.83 ± 0.84
 CTU-13 96.33 ± 0.73 96.76 ± 0.89 95.18 ± 1.52 96.34 ± 0.52
 USTC-TFC2016 97.55 ± 0.66 96.98 ± 0.91 97.76 ± 0.82 97.33 ± 0.69
 UJS-IDS2022 91.36 ± 1.71 91.82 ± 1.56 92.55 ± 0.49 92.18 ± 1.32
 GATrust CICIDS-2017 96.11 ± 0.87 96.61 ± 1.42 96.73 ± 0.53 96.52 ± 0.48
 CTU-13 97.67 ± 1.02 97.77 ± 1.36 97.41 ± 0.76 97.25 ± 0.93
 USTC-TFC2016 98.22 ± 0.54 98.56 ± 0.75 97.93 ± 0.42 98.20 ± 0.77
 UJS-IDS2022 96.28 ± 1.02 96.96 ± 0.98 97.16 ± 1.29 97.06 ± 0.67
 IARF CICIDS-2017 95.43 ± 0.92 95.83 ± 0.96 95.71 ± 0.96 95.37 ± 0.86
 CTU-13 96.13 ± 0.85 96.23 ± 0.62 95.43 ± 0.65 95.43 ± 0.79
 USTC-TFC2016 96.81 ± 0.93 97.04 ± 0.73 96.57 ± 0.88 96.82 ± 1.07
 UJS-IDS2022 92.66 ± 1.02 92.49 ± 0.89 93.19 ± 0.98 92.84 ± 0.91
 CNN-LSTM CICIDS-2017 96.77 ± 1.32 96.93 ± 0.92 96.01 ± 0.72 96.11 ± 0.39
 CTU-13 97.12 ± 1.63 97.37 ± 0.63 96.96 ± 0.34 97.04 ± 0.81
 USTC-TFC2016 97.98 ± 0.92 98.48 ± 0.25 98.18 ± 0.32 98.39 ± 0.63
 UJS-IDS2022 95.67 ± 2.03 95.96 ± 1.75 96.18 ± 1.44 96.07 ± 1.69
 GCN-ETA CICIDS-2017 93.73 ± 0.57 94.17 ± 0.89 93.85 ± 1.00 93.85 ± 1.00
 CTU-13 95.72 ± 0.74 94.90 ± 1.12 95.47 ± 0.57 95.18 ± 0.35
 USTC-TFC2016 97.48 ± 0.21 97.57 ± 0.64 96.44 ± 0.71 96.99 ± 0.45
 UJS-IDS2022 90.51 ± 1.45 90.78 ± 1.22 91.37 ± 0.89 91.07 ± 1.01
 GCN-MHSA CICIDS-2017 98.03 ± 0.15 98.07 ± 0.15 98.21 ± 0.23 98.14 ± 0.08
 CTU-13 99.06 ± 0.19 98.76 ± 0.13 99.03 ± 0.18 98.90 ± 0.06
 USTC-TFC2016 99.31 ± 0.13 99.03 ± 0.21 99.47 ± 0.23 99.12 ± 0.19
 UJS-IDS2022 96.38 ± 0.36 96.87 ± 0.27 97.18 ± 0.42 97.02 ± 0.34

series of experiments on the UJS-IDS2022 dataset. The experimental CNN-LSTM. In addition, the detection performance of IARF model is
results show that compared with the experiments on public network weaker than other models except GCN-ETA because it only learns the
traffic, the detection efficiency in the real environment are generally features from online streaming data, which limits its ability to learn
lower because of the diversity and complexity of collected network from large-scale datasets. Compared with above compared methods,
traffic. Nevertheless, the proposed GCN-MHSA method still achieves the the detection results of GCN-ETA are weak, it is owing to that it does
best results in the real environment. It is worth noting that GCN-MHSA not assign different weights to different levels of traffic correlations, so
performs slightly worse than the GATrust method on the evaluation unimportant features produce a greater impact on its detection results.
metrics of precision and F1-measure, it is possibly due to the GATrust
method has the ability of feature representation with strong learn- 4.5.3. The stability of GCN-MHSA
ing adaptability, which results in it adapting to different topologies To verify the stability of the proposed GCN-MHSA method, we
and sizes of network traffic. Compared with the state-of-the-arts, the conduct the experiments on four datasets for 30 times with all comproposed GCN-MHSA method has greater stability, which shows that pared methods, and the boxplot according to the experimental results
GCN-MHSA is an excellent detection method in the real environment, is shown in Fig. 6.
especially in the face of diversity and complexity of network traffic. As can be seen from Fig. 6 that compared with E-minBatch Graph-
 Compared with other methods, the proposed GCN-MHSA method SAGE, GATrust, IARF, CNN-LSTM and GCN-ETA methods, the proposed
achieves excellent experimental results on multiple evaluation metrics GCN-MHSA method has significant performance advantages and higher
due to the following advantages: (1) In the model preprocessing stage, stability. The GCN-MHSA model always show higher accuracy, prethrough considering and utilizing the information embedded in the cision, recall and F1-measure, and no outliers are observed in the
network traffic, we extend the features of network traffic to make experimental results. It is worth to note from Fig. 6(a) to (d) that
the model capturing the overall structure and attributes of network the interquartile range (indicating by the box length) is significantly
traffic more comprehensively as well as avoiding information loss or narrower for the GCN-MHSA model, indicating a higher stability of
bias caused by missing data; (2) We introduce the multi-head self- its detection efficiency. The higher stability of GCN-MHSA method is
attention mechanism to capture different types of interactions between owing to that it extends the flow-level features of network traffic and
nodes more comprehensively and focus on important features, thereby optimizes the correlation algorithm of network traffic; In addition, it
making the model able to learn different attention weights in par- also use the multi-head self-attention mechanism to focus on those
allel to assign different weights for the features in network traffic; more important features. In contrast, the compared methods exhibit a
(3) Through modeling and analyzing network topology, GCN-MHSA wider range of fluctuations and have some outliers. The experimental
model can extract valuable information and patterns from complex results on stability show that compared with five state-of-the-art manetwork traffic, this graph structure-based manner enables GCN-MHSA licious detection models, the proposed GCN-MHSA method has higher
method to capture the relationship and interaction between nodes accuracy and more stable detection effect.
effectively, which is benefit it for learning the hidden features in
network traffic. In the compared methods, GATrust performs best be- 4.5.4. Ablation experiment
cause it considers more relationships among nodes in the process of To verify the influence of each module on the proposed GCN-MHSA
constructing graph structure through feature transformation. The CNN- model, we perform a series of ablation experiments, each experiment
LSTM hybrid network has the third highest detection performance on is conducted for 30 times and the average experimental result is shown
all datasets by extracting the spatiotemporal features of network traffic. in Table 5, where the positive and negative errors are the standard
In contrast, E-minBatch GraphSAGE model only uses the information deviations of 30 repetitions. Among them, GCN is the original graph
of local neighbor node but not uses the global information, that is, convolutional neural network model, it uses 5-tuples of features for
it does not make full use of the overall graph structure information, detection. GCN-FF adds the feature extending technology on the basis of
which results in its detection performance weaker than GATrust and GCN model in the preprocessing stage, and it uses extended 12-tuples

 10
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Fig. 6. The stability of six compared malicious detection methods.

of features for detection. GCN-CO optimizes the mechanism of traffic Table 5
 The influence of different modules on detection accuracy of GCN-MHSA.
correlation establishment on the basis of GCN model, that is, setting the
indirect correlation and direct correlation, and uses 5-tuples of features Model CICIDS-2017 CTU-13 (%) USTC-TFC2016 UJSIDS2022
 (%) (%) (%)
for detection. GCN-M introduces a multi-head self-attention mechanism
 GCN 91.47 ± 1.71 94.81 ± 1.05 97.96 ± 0.97 93.11 ± 1.98
on the basis of GCN model, it uses 5-tuples of features for detection.
 GCN-FF 92.09 ± 1.67 95.29 ± 1.23 98.33 ± 0.85 93.76 ± 1.34
GCN-FF-CO adds feature extending module and optimizes traffic cor- GCN-CO 91.93 ± 1.55 95.04 ± 1.47 98.17 ± 1.01 94.03 ± 1.61
relation mechanism on the basis of GCN-FF. GCN-FF-M introduces the GCN-M 95.72 ± 1.21 98.19 ± 1.57 99.08 ± 1.01 95.43 ± 1.33
multi-head self-attention mechanism based on the GCN-FF model. GCN- GCN-FF-CO 95.37 ± 1.12 95.53 ± 1.08 98.43 ± 0.46 94.51 ± 1.40
CO-M introduces a multi-head self-attention mechanism based on the GCN-FF-M 97.84 ± 0.17 99.01 ± 0.24 99.19 ± 0.15 96.23 ± 0.68
 GCN-CO-M 97.91 ± 0.24 98.45 ± 0.41 94.14 ± 0.17 94.03 ± 0.52
GCN-CO model, and it uses 5-tuples of features for detection.
 GCN-MHSA 98.03 ± 0.15 99.06 ± 0.19 99.31 ± 0.13 96.38 ± 0.36
 It can be seen from the results of ablation experiments in Table 5
that removing any module will lead to a decrease in the detection efficiency of malicious traffic, and the multi-head self-attention mechanism
plays the most critical role among these modules. After the introduc- a significant role in improving the detection accuracy, especially on
tion of multi-head self-attention mechanism, the detection accuracy the CICIDS-2017 dataset. This is because the dataset contains many
on all datasets has been significantly improved, which is due to the attack types and provides detailed attack labels, which results in the
fact that multi-head self-attention mechanism can adaptively learn the optimization of these modules can get better experimental results.
correlation and importance between features, which is benefit for the It can be seen from Table 5 that the proposed GCN-MHSA method
model to flexibly assign different weights for the features according to achieves the best detection efficiency and has better generalization on
task requirements, and thus making the model has good universality all four datasets, which also shows that these improvements in the GCNability. In addition, the feature extending and optimizing traffic cor- MHSA method have a good effect on improving the detection efficiency
relation establishment mechanism in the preprocessing stage also play of malicious traffic.

 11
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

 Table 6
 The time cost of six malicious traffic detection methods (s).
 Model Time cost USTC-TFC2016 CTU-13 Stratosphere
 Training process 236.33 323.57 217.53
 E-minBatch GraphSAGE Detecting process 4.48 7.99 7.37
 Overall 240.81 331.56 224.90
 Training process 231.32 361.55 317.31
 GATrust Detecting process 7.76 9.01 7.31
 Overall 239.08 370.56 324.62
 Training process 282.51 272.56 262.06
 IARF Detecting process 12.33 17.51 9.98
 Overall 294.84 290.07 272.04
 Training process 137.13 148.65 123.01
 CNN-LSTM Detecting process 5.37 5.09 7.32
 Overall 142.50 153.74 130.33
 Training process 166.41 173.38 153.33
 GCN-ETA Detecting process 8.53 11.71 8.87
 Overall 174.94 185.09 162.20
 Training process 172.49 170.20 161.51
 GCN-MHSA Detecting process 9.01 7.88 7.35
 Overall 181.50 178.08 168.86

4.5.5. Time efficiency of GCN-MHSA number and the size of packets, the interval time, the duration of
 In addition to detection accuracy, the time efficiency is another current network traffic, etc. (that is, the twelve-tuple features used
important factor to measure the efficiency of malicious traffic detection in GCN-MHSA), thereby detecting the malicious activities with high
method. To verify the time efficiency, we conduct extensive experi- accuracy.
ments on three widely used public network traffic datasets, and the GCN-MHSA model is designed to detect a variety types of malicious
experimental result is shown in Table 6. traffic, including but not limited to: (1) Brute Force FTP: Attacks
 It can be seen from the experimental results in Table 6 that the targeting FTP services by attempting numerous username and password
time cost of GCN-MHSA is only slightly higher than that of CNN-LSTM combinations to gain unauthorized access. (2) Brute Force SSH: It
and GCN-ETA, it consumes less time than other graph neural network- is similar to FTP brute force attacks, but the targeting is SSH login
based malicious traffic detection. For the CNN-LSTM model, it achieves credentials. (3) DoS: Attacks that overload the target system with a
 flood of requests, rendering it unable to provide normal services. (4)
the highest time efficiency because it is not a graph neural network,
 Heartbleed: Exploits vulnerabilities in OpenSSL to read protected memthus inherently faster in processing; However, CNN-LSTM neglects the
 ory, leading to the leakage of sensitive information. (5) Web Attacks:
inter-node relationships, resulting in the lower detection accuracy. The
 Attacks against web applications such as SQL injection and cross-site
reason for consuming shorter time of GCN-ETA is that it uses an identity
 scripting (XSS), aiming to gain the unauthorized access or corrupt data
matrix to replace the weight matrix, which simplifies the computations;
 integrity. (6) Infiltration: Attacks gain the initial access and subse-
However, this simplification decreases the classification accuracy. quently penetrate deeper into the network to access more resources or
 The superior time efficiency of our model compared to other mod- cause damage. (7) Botnet: Networks of compromised devices coordiels can be largely attributed to the incorporation of multi-head self- nated to perform attacks such as DDoS or spam distribution. (8) DDoS:
attention (MHSA) mechanism, which enhances efficiency of GCN- Large-scale attacks using multiple controlled devices to overwhelm and
MHSA model through two key aspects. (1) MHSA enables simultaneous incapacitate a target system.
attention to multiple parts of the graph, which allows the model to Although the proposed GCN-MHSA model is not specifically decapture diverse node relationships and interactions comprehensively. signed against evasion attacks, it can possess the robust defenses against
This distributed focus facilitates more efficient learning by ensuring evasion tactics due to it combines the global feature extraction, multithat the model integrates a broader range of graph features during head self-attention mechanism, dynamic adaptability and the stability
each training iteration. With the use of MHSA, GCN-MHSA model can of graph structures. In the GCN-MHSA model, GCN is adept at capturconverge more quickly because it gathers richer and more nuanced ing the global structural features of network traffic by analyzing the
information from the graph, enhancing its ability to learn complex overall graph structure, which makes it challenging for attackers to
patterns and relationships. (2) The parallel processing capability of evade detection by merely altering specific features of network traffic;
MHSA optimizes the computational efficiency by enabling simultaneous In addition, the stability and robustness of graph structures make it
processing of different parts of the graph, it means that the model can difficult for attackers to significantly alter the overall network traffic
handle diverse graph features concurrently, which potentially leads to structure without raising suspicion. The MHSA mechanism enhances
faster training times as well as more effective using of computational re- the model’s sensitivity and robustness by capturing the features of
sources, this advantage is particularly beneficial for large-scale datasets network traffic from multiple perspectives and scales. Even if attackand complex graph structures. ers attempt minor modifications to evade detection, the multi-head
 mechanism aggregates the information from various attention heads to
 find potential anomalies. Furthermore, the self-attention mechanism is
4.5.6. The application of GCN-MHSA
 dynamically adaptive, it adjusts the weights of features to capture the
 GCN-MHSA model is designed for deployment at the network gateevolving information of network traffic, this adaptability can ensure
way. GCN-MHSA detects the malicious traffic through analyzing the
 that the detection model maintains high detection capabilities in the
structured data of network traffic at the gateway. Firstly, GCN effecface of new or mutated attacks.
tively captures the relationships and dependencies between different
network entities, such as IP addresses, ports and protocols, and then 5. Conclusion
identifies the patterns indicative of malicious behavior. And then,
MHSA enhances the model’s ability to focus on various aspects of In this paper, we propose a malicious traffic detection method called
network traffic simultaneously. At the gateway, the proposed GCN- GCN-MHSA based on graph convolutional neural network and multi-
MHSA model can consider multiple features concurrently, such as the head self-attention mechanism. Firstly, the information contained in

 12
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

the network traffic is enriched by extending the flow-level features. References
And then, the algorithm of establishing traffic correlation relationship is optimized to better capture the features of malicious traffic Alshammari, R., Zincir-Heywood, A.N., 2009. Machine learning based encrypted
by accurately establishing the correlation relationship between traffic, traffic classification: Identifying ssh and skype. In: 2009 IEEE Symposium on
 Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications. IEEE, pp. 1–8.
thereby making the model to identify potential threats more accurately Anderson, B., McGrew, D., 2016. Identifying encrypted malware traffic with contextual
and detect malicious traffic effectively. Subsequently, the multi-head flow data. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence
self-attention mechanism is integrated into graph convolutional neural and Security. pp. 35–46.
network model to effectively capture the dependence between nodes Barradas, D., Santos, N., Rodrigues, L., Signorello, S., Ramos, F.M.V., Madeira, A., 2021.
and makes full use of local neighborhood information of nodes through FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for ML-based network security applications. In: 2021 Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium.
network structure, it also promotes the generation of multiple feature
 pp. 1–18.
combinations through stacked self-attention layers. With the use of Chen, J., Chen, Y., Cai, S., Yin, S., Zhao, L., Zhang, Z., 2023a. An optimized feature
attention mechanism, the feature combinations that are more important extraction algorithm for abnormal network traffic detection. Future Gener. Comput.
for malicious traffic detection are assigned larger weight to improve Syst. 149, 330–342.
the detection efficiency for malicious traffic. The proposed GCN-MHSA Chen, J., Lv, T., Cai, S., Song, L., Yin, S., 2023b. A novel detection model for abnormal
 network traffic based on bidirectional temporal convolutional network. Inf. Softw.
method provides an accurate and efficient method for malicious traffic
 Technol. 157, 107166.
detection by fusing graph convolutional neural network and multi- Chen, J., Song, L., Cai, S., Xie, H., Yin, S., Ahmad, B., 2023c. TLS-MHSA: An efficient
head self-attention mechanism and optimizing the traffic correlation detection model for encrypted malicious traffic based on multi-head self-attention
construction algorithm, which is expected to play an important role in mechanism. ACM Trans. Priv. Secur. 26 (4), 1–21.
the field of network security. Extensive experiments on four network Eswaran, D., Faloutsos, C., 2018. Sedanspot: Detecting anomalies in edge streams. In:
 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. ICDM, IEEE, pp. 953–958.
traffic show that the proposed GCN-MHSA method performs better than
 Fang, Y., Ergüt, S., Patras, P., 2022. SDGNet: A handover-aware spatiotemporal graph
E-minBatch GraphSAGE, GATrust, IARF, CNN-LSTM and GCN-ETA in neural network for mobile traffic forecasting. IEEE Commun. Lett. 26 (3), 582–586.
terms of accuracy, precision, recall and F1-measure, and it also has Fu, C., Li, Q., Shen, M., Xu, K., 2021. Realtime robust malicious traffic detection via
better stability. frequency domain analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference
 Although the proposed GCN-MHSA method achieves better detec- on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’21, pp. 3431–3446.
 Fu, C., Li, Q., Xu, K., 2023. Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic in real
tion results, it also has some shortcomings to be further improved in
 time via flow interaction graph analysis. In: 2023 Network and Distributed Systems
the future: Security (NDSS) Symposium. pp. 1–18.
 Guo, Y., Li, R., Zhangyan, Wang, G., 2020. Graph neural network based anomaly
 1. Although current flow-level features of network traffic have detection in dynamic networks. J. Softw. 31 (3), 748–762.
 been greatly expanded than original five-tuples, the process of Gupta, M., Gao, J., Sun, Y., Han, J., 2012. Integrating community matching and outlier
 extending flow-level features is a complex and long process, detection for mining evolutionary community outliers. In: Proceedings of the 18th
 it is necessary to study a more comprehensive and reliable ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
 pp. 859–867.
 framework to extract more effective flow-level features to further
 Holland, J., Schmitt, P., Feamster, N., Mittal, P., 2021. New directions in automated
 improve the detection efficiency of malicious traffic. traffic analysis. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
 2. In the multi-head self-attention model, it is possible to further and Communications Security. CCS ’21, pp. 3366–3383.
 optimize the weight learning ability of features. In the future, it Jiang, N., Jie, W., Li, J., Liu, X., Jin, D., 2022. Gatrust: A multi-aspect graph attention
 can be considered to introduce more levels of attention structure network model for trust assessment in osns. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 35 (6),
 5865–5878.
 to make the model can select and integrate more fine-grained King, I.J., Huang, H.H., 2022. Euler: Detecting network lateral movement via scalable
 features, thereby further improving the model’s ability to learn temporal graph link prediction. In: 2022 Network and Distributed Systems Security
 the correlation and importance between different features. (NDSS) Symposium. pp. 1–16.
 Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2017. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
CRediT authorship contribution statement networks. In: 2017 International Conference on Learning Representations. pp. 1–14.
 Lan, J., Lu, J.Z., Wan, G.G., Wang, Y.Y., Huang, C.Y., Zhang, S.B., Huang, Y.Y., Ma, J.N.,
 2022. E-minBatch GraphSAGE: An industrial internet attack detection model. Secur.
 Jinfu Chen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Commun. Netw. 2022, 1–12.
Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Data cu- Marín, G., Casas, P., Capdehourat, G., 2019. Deep in the dark-deep learning-based
ration. Haodi Xie: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, malware traffic detection without expert knowledge. In: 2019 IEEE Security and
Validation, Methodology, Investigation. Saihua Cai: Writing – review Privacy Workshops. SPW, IEEE, pp. 36–42.
& editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Mirsky, Y., Doitshman, T., Elovici, Y., Shabtai, A., 2018. Kitsune: an ensemble
 of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection. In: 2018 Network and
Data curation. Luo Song: Writing – review & editing, Data curation.
 Distributed Systems Security (NDSS) Symposium. pp. 1–15.
Bo Geng: Writing – review & editing. Wuhao Guo: Writing – review Moore, A.W., Zuev, D., 2005. Internet traffic classification using bayesian analysis
& editing. techniques. In: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference
 on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems. pp. 50–60.
Declaration of competing interest Niu, Z., Xue, J., Qu, D., Wang, Y., Zheng, J., Zhu, H., 2022. A novel approach based
 on adaptive online analysis of encrypted traffic for identifying malware in IIoT.
 Inform. Sci. 601, 162–174.
 The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
 Okada, Y., Ata, S., Nakamura, N., Nakahira, Y., Oka, I., 2011. Comparisons of machine
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to learning algorithms for application identification of encrypted traffic. In: 2011 10th
influence the work reported in this paper. International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications and Workshops.
 Vol. 2, IEEE, pp. 358–361.
Data availability Prasse, P., Machlica, L., Pevnỳ, T., Havelka, J., Scheffer, T., 2017. Malware detection by
 analysing network traffic with neural networks. In: 2017 IEEE Security and Privacy
 Workshops. SPW, IEEE, pp. 205–210.
 Data will be made available on request.
 Shams, E.A., Rizaner, A., 2018. A novel support vector machine based intrusion
 detection system for mobile ad hoc networks. Wirel. Netw. 24, 1821–1829.
Acknowledgments Sun, P., Liu, P., Li, Q., Liu, C., Lu, X., Hao, R., Chen, J., 2020. DL-IDS: Extracting
 features using CNN-LSTM hybrid network for intrusion detection system. Secur.
 This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Commun. Netw. 2020, 1–11.
Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant nos. 62172194, 62202206 and Wang, S., Yan, Q., Chen, Z., Yang, B., Zhao, C., Conti, M., 2017a. Detecting android
 malware leveraging text semantics of network flows. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
U1836116), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant no.
 Secur. 13 (5), 1096–1109.
2023T160275), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, Wang, W., Zhu, M., Zeng, X., Ye, X., Sheng, Y., 2017b. Malware traffic classification us-
China (Grant no. BK20220515), and Qinglan Project of Jiangsu Province, ing convolutional neural network for representation learning. In: 2017 International
China. Conference on Information Networking. ICOIN, IEEE, pp. 712–717.

 13
J. Chen et al. Computers & Security 147 (2024) 104083

Wu, Z., Li, H., Liuliang, Zhang, J., Yuemeng, Leijin, 2020. Detection of LDoS attacks Saihua Cai received his Ph.D. degree in Agricultural Engibased on wavelet energy entropy and hidden semi-Markov models. J. Softw. 31 neering from China Agricultural University, Beijing, China,
 (5), 1549–1562. in 2020. He is currently an associate professor in the
Wu, F., Li, T., Wu, Z., Wu, S., Xiao, C., 2021. Research on network intrusion detection School of Computer Science and Communication Engitechnology based on machine learning. Int. J. Wirel. Inf. Netw. 28 (3), 262–275. neering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. His major
Xiao, J., Yang, L., Zhong, F., Chen, H., Li, X., 2023. Robust anomaly-based intrusion research interests include malicious traffic detection, outlier
 detection system for in-vehicle network by graph neural network framework. Appl. detection and software testing. He has published more than
 Intell. 53 (3), 3183–3206. 70 papers in journals or conferences, including in ACM
Zhang, B., Liu, Z., Jia, Y., Ren, J., Zhao, X., 2018. Network intrusion detection method Transactions on Privacy and Security, IEEE Transactions on
 based on PCA and Bayes algorithm. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2018, 1–11. Reliability, Information Sciences, Computers & Security, The
Zheng, J., Zeng, Z., Feng, T., 2022. GCN-ETA: high-efficiency encrypted malicious traffic Computer Journal, Knowledge-Based Systems, ISSRE, and
 detection. Secur. Commun. Netw. 2022, 1–11. QRS, etc. He is a member of the IEEE and the ACM, and a
Zhou, G., Liu, Z., Fu, C., Li, Q., Xu, K., 2023. An efficient design of intelligent network member of the China Computer Federation.
 data plane. In: Proceedings of the 32nd USENIX Conference on Security Symposium.
 SEC ’23, USENIX Association, pp. 6203–6220.
Zola, F., Segurola-Gil, L., Bruse, J.L., Galar, M., Orduna-Urrutia, R., 2022. Network Luo Song received the B.E. degree in 2021 in Software
 traffic analysis through node behaviour classification: a graph-based approach with Engineering from Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. He
 temporal dissection and data-level preprocessing. Comput. Secur. 115, 102632. is currently working towards the Master’s degree in Computer Technology at Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.
 His research interest includes encrypted malicious traffic
 detection.
 Jinfu Chen received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from Huazhong University of Science
 and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2009. He is currently
 a full professor in the School of Computer Science and
 Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang,
 China. His major research interests include software testing,
 software security, and trusted software. He has published Bo Geng received the B.E. degree in 2020 in Material
 more than 80 papers in some famous journals or con- science and technology from Harbin institute of technolferences, including in ACM Transactions on Privacy and ogy, Harbin, China. He is currently working towards the
 Security, IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Information Sci- Master’s degree in Control Science and Engineering at
 ences, Journal of Systems and Software, Information and Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China. His research interest
 Software Technology, Software: Practice and Experience, includes malicious traffic detection and adversarial attacks
 IET Software, The Computer Journal, ISSTA, ASE, ISSRE, and defenses.
 and QRS. He is a member of the IEEE and the ACM, and a
 member of the China Computer Federation.

 Wuhao Guo received the Master degree from Nanjing
 University, he is currently working towards the Ph.D degree
 Haodi Xie received the B.E. degree in 2021 in Software at the School of Cyberspace Security, Southeast University.
 Engineering from Nantong Institute of Technology, Nan- He has joined in AsiaInfo Security in 2021, holding positions
 tong, China. He is currently working towards the Master’s as the Vice President, General Manager of the COO Office,
 degree in Computer Technology at Jiangsu University, Zhen- General Manager of the Solutions and Technical Support
 jiang, China. His research interest includes malicious traffic Department, and General Manager of the Digital Support
 detection and graph neural network. Department. His major research interests include malicious
 traffic detection, data security, and software security.

 14