IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024 2045

 GETRF: A General Framework for Encrypted
 Traffic Identification With Robust Representation
 Based on Datagram Structure
 Xiaojuan Wang , Zikui Lu , Xinlei Wang , Mingshu He , Member, IEEE, and Xiaojun Wang

 Abstract—Identifying encrypted traffic is essential for network randomness of payload data and statistic values makes finmanagement, but it becomes increasingly challenging as more gerprinting and feature-counting methods inadequate for the
and more users adopt encryption protocols and traffic defense current environment.
mechanisms for data privacy. Most existing methods heavily rely
on deep features and labeled samples, overlooking the oppor- Deep learning, through hierarchical mapping and
tunity to capture pattern information of datagram structure. weighted computations, enables automatic feature extraction,
As a consequence, these methods are unable to extract rule- thereby addressing the challenges posed by random
based knowledge from unlabeled data, limiting their ability to algorithms [9], [10]. As such, researchers employ end-to-end
identify unseen or feature-perturbed traffic. In this paper, we models to classify encrypted traffic. However, these end-topropose a new framework for encrypted traffic identification
named Generic Encrypted Traffic Representation Framework end methods heavily depend on the feature distribution of
(GETRF), which includes three pre-training tasks designed based samples and label quality, which can limit the generalization
on the datagram structure. By leveraging the advantages of ability of the models. To mitigate the impact of label
these tasks, GETRF can utilize unlabeled traffic to form generic quality on models, researchers begin to adopt pre-training
and robust representations, capturing the characteristics of approaches for identification. Works [11], [12] apply predatagrams at the byte, packet, and flow levels. After fine-tuning,
these representations can be applied to identification tasks across training techniques to encrypted traffic classification and
multiple scenarios. The results demonstrate that GETRF achieves achieve significant results in application classification and
state-of-the-art performance in multi-scenario and fine-grained attack detection tasks. Although reducing the amount of
identifications, and effectively handles feature-perturbed traffic. labeled data during the training, these works overlook the
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic identification, pre-training, effect of latent information of datagram structure on traffic
generic traffic representation, cyberspace management, datagram representation, resulting in poor performance in multi-scenario
structure, privacy-enhancing technology. and fine-grained classification.
 To better tackle the challenge of encrypted traffic identification, some practical issues that need to be discussed:
 1) The method for encrypted traffic identification should
 I. I NTRODUCTION minimize the use of specific field values and hand-craft
 DENTIFYING and categorizing traffic behaviors into features.
I their respective applications and services is crucial for
cyberspace management [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. They allow
 Encryption algorithms gradually cover plaintext, rendering the traffic behavior analysis based on specific values
Internet service providers to improve the quality of service ineffective. Manual feature extraction, which often relies on
as well as detect potential security threats [6]. However, with expert knowledge, faces challenges due to the rapid growth of
the growth of privacy-enhancing technologies [7], [8], tradi- applications and services on the network, making the manual
tional methods and machine learning models are encountering update of effective features increasingly complex.
two significant challenges. Firstly, the availability of plain- 2) The method for encrypted traffic identification should
text is decreasing, making methods based on port numbers be robust and not rely on label quality or specific feature
and protocol information unreliable. Secondly, the increasing distributions.
 Data labeling is a time-consuming task, and such a data col-
 Manuscript received 16 November 2023; revised 27 March 2024; accepted lection process not only results in long bootstrap times but also
7 May 2024. Date of publication 14 May 2024; date of current version poses additional challenges for identification. Furthermore,
6 December 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science traffic defense mechanisms aim to disrupt the feature distri-
Foundation of China under Grant 62227805 and Grant 62071056. The
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for bution, negatively impacting models that rely on the specific
publication was Y. Sagduyu. (Corresponding authors: Zikui Lu; Mingshu He.) feature distribution of sample data for traffic classification.
 Xiaojuan Wang, Zikui Lu, Xinlei Wang, and Mingshu He are with 3) The method for encrypted traffic identification should be
the School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: Luzikui@bupt.edu.cn; generalized and able to be quickly applied to multi-scenario
hemingshu@bupt.edu.cn). tasks as well as fine-grained classification.
 Xiaojun Wang is with the School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City Encrypted traffic identification includes application classi-
University, Dublin 9, Ireland.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3400825 fication, attack detection, anonymous detection, encapsulation
 2332-7731 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

detection, malware detection, and other tasks. An ideal method state-of-the-art performance across five tasks with an
should perform well across all of these tasks. Furthermore, average F1 score of 99.12%. Additionally, we further valin real network scenarios, there exists a significant amount of idate the ability of GETRF for fine-grained identification
background traffic. A method with strong generalization capa- and its capability to resist traffic defense mechanisms, and
bilities should be able to mitigate the impact of background our method shows effectiveness under these conditions.
traffic and complete fine-grained identification of target flows. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:
 To sum up, considering the application scenarios and Section II discusses the related work. Section III proposes
challenges faced in encrypted traffic identification, an ideal the framework architecture and pre-training tasks. Section IV
method needs to satisfy both generality and robustness. For presents the results and analysis of comparison experiments.
generality, employing pre-training models to generate traffic Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V.
representations is a natural idea. These models can leverage
large-scale unlabeled data and minimize the impact of specific
 II. R ELATED W ORK
feature distributions on generic representations by separating representation objectives from specific task objectives. A. Encrypted Traffic Identification
Compared to generality, robustness is a more challenging The research on traffic identification has been widely
issue. We consider that addressing this issue should focus applied across a variety of applications. For discussion puron the datagram structure itself. Due to the limitations of poses, we categorize the methods into three classes [6], with
current random algorithms and the cold-start policy followed the related works summarized in Table I.
by the traffic protection measures, privacy-enhanced tech- 1) Statistic Method: The earliest methods used for traffic
nologies cannot produce perfectly random encrypted traffic. classification were port-based methods and DPI [13]. However,
Therefore, similar patterns exist in datagrams of the same these methods heavily relied on unencrypted information, and
type. These similarities, observable in the traffic structure and random changes in it could lead to misleading results. In
padding characters, are influenced by the protocol, content, and contrast, our method learns the traffic representations from
encryption algorithm. By thoroughly leveraging this metadata, multiple perspectives, which helps to enhance its robustness.
we can uncover latent patterns behind the traffic. 2) Machine Learning Method: To reduce the impact of
 Based on the above considerations, in this paper, we propose random content on classification, researchers utilize sidea new framework with a pre-training model, named Generic channel information and machine learning to classify traffic.
Encrypted Traffic Representation Framework (GETRF), for Panchenko et al. [14] identified unknown traffic using features
building generic and robust traffic representations. The frame- like packet size, packet direction, and the volume of bytes.
work includes three pre-training tasks based on datagram AppScanner [15] trained classifiers using statistical features
structure: Mask Token Prediction (MTP), Same Packet such as packet sizes, while BIND [16] exploited temporal
Prediction (SPP), and Hidden State Feature Prediction (HSP). features to classify traffic. However, these methods rely on
Benefiting from these tasks, GETRF can utilize unlabeled expert knowledge and require appropriate feature design. The
traffic to form generic and robust representations by capturing evolving nature of network traffic makes solutions, based on
datagram characteristics at the byte, packet, and flow levels. manually- and expert-originated features, unable to keep pace.
Additionally, knowledge extraction from different aspects of 3) Deep Learning Method: Deep learning methods include
datagram structures can also help mitigate the impact of traffic end-to-end approaches, multimodal-based approaches, and
defense mechanisms. The main contributions of this paper are representation-based approaches.
summarized as follows: Wang et al. [17] first introduced the end-to-end method
 • We propose a novel pre-training learning framework for flow classification, transforming packet data into grayscale
 for encrypted traffic identification, which leverages images for CNN. Building on this, Sirinam et al. [18]
 large-scale unlabeled data to achieve high-performance employed CNN for deep fingerprinting, while Bhat et al. [19]
 and multi-scenario traffic classification without model designed Var-CNN for flow classification. However, these
 modification or extensive data training. Moreover, the schemes did not fully consider the characteristics of datagram
 framework can effectively mitigate interference of structure in their design, leading to unsatisfactory model
 privacy-enhancing technologies and background traffic. performance. Lotfollahi et al. [20] developed DeepPacket to
 • We design three pre-training tasks based on datagram characterize raw payloads. Luo et al. [21] utilized transcharacteristics, capturing byte, packet, and flow-level former models to capture semantic relationships between
 traffic information to generate generic and robust rep- characters for traffic classification. Shen et al. introduced
 resentations. Benefiting from the knowledge extraction GraphDApp [22], transforming application traffic into graphs
 from different aspects of datagram structures, representa- for GNN-based identification. Huoh et al. [23] analyzed the
 tions that are fine-tuned with a small amount of sample relationships between traffic bytes, metadata, and packet interdata can be applied to various tasks. Additionally, multi- actions for application classification. Although these methods
 perspective learning enhances the framework’s ability to do not require feature engineering, they require substantial
 resist feature perturbations. amounts of new, task-specific labeled data for retraining when
 • We conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the addressing new tasks. In contrast, our model can be easily
 framework using five public datasets and an experi- adapted to new scenarios with minimal fine-tuning on a small
 mental dataset. The results show that GETRF achieves dataset.
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2047

 TABLE I
 N OTABLE R ELATED W ORKS IN E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION TASKS

 To overcome the limitation of single-model approaches, have demonstrated that traffic patterns can be distorted through
which fail to generalize high-dimensional features, methods such as dummy packet padding or traffic regularresearchers adopt multimodal approaches to classify traffic. ization [29], [30]. These methods, which prevent accurate
MIMETIC [24], by assembling models that observe different traffic identification, are referred to as traffic defense mechafeatures, addresses the problem of multi-view capitalization nisms [31].
of traffic data. However, this method still requires a large During the transmission of traffic, datagrams pass through
number of labeled samples for training, resulting in a multiple relay nodes. By deploying defense models at these
long bootstrap time. Considering bursts and communication relay nodes, traffic can be manipulated, resulting in distorted
protocols separately, Mimetic-All [25] leveraged context traffic observations at these nodes.
inputs as an additional modality for application classification, The primary methods of traffic defense mechanisms include
while APP-Net [26] combined BiLSTM and CNN models for obfuscation, confusion, and regularization [29]. Among these,
identification. Both methods demonstrate high performance in both obfuscation and confusion methods involve dummy
application classification. Nevertheless, these approaches fail packet padding. This approach can significantly disrupt the
to take the influence of background traffic into account and feature distribution of traffic, making it difficult to distincannot be easily applied to other classification scenarios. guish between dummy packets and real packets. Moreover, it
 Representation-based approaches leverage pre-training to exploits the advantages of low overhead, making it feasible
utilize unlabeled data, which has been proven effective in for implementation in the real world. For instance, WTF-PAD
NLP [27]. Similar to the “paragraph-sentence-word” structure has been deployed in Tor circuits [30]. Regularization methods
in natural language, there is a “flow-packet-byte” hierarchy in restrict how nodes send and receive packets to strictly limit
network traffic. Therefore, researchers employ representation- the feature space, for example, by enforcing a fixed packet
based methods for traffic identification. He et al. [11] applied rate [31].
ALBERT to encrypted traffic classification and achieved Given the potential for distortion in the traffic, we further
93.27% accuracy in ISCX-VPN [28]. However, the method did evaluate the performance of GETRF on datasets processed
not design reasonable pre-training tasks, limiting the model’s by the traffic defense mechanism. It is worth noting that
performance. Observing the process of Web page rendering, regularization methods are challenging to implement in the
Lin et al. [12] designed a new structure named BURST for real world. Hence, we opt to manipulate the traffic by adding
the pre-training task and generated traffic representation for dummy packets for evaluation purposes.
identification. Nonetheless, this method did not consider the
basic structure of the traffic, leading to poor performance III. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
in fine-grained identification. Our method, however, improves
 In this section, we present the design details of GETRF.
performance by learning the context, structure, and hidden
 We start with an overview of GETRF before exploring its
state features of the flow, and maintains good performance
 individual components.
when faced with feature-perturbed traffic.
 As mentioned above, to achieve a generic and robust
 traffic representation, two key considerations are necessary:
B. Traffic Defense Mechanism 1) Designing pre-training tasks that separate representation
 The purpose of traffic identification is to classify traffic goals from identification objectives, thereby preventing the
and manage cyberspace effectively. However, some studies overfitting of representations to specific feature distributions.
2048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 1. Overview of the GETRF framework. The framework consists of three stages: preprocess, pre-training, and fine-tuning. In the preprocess stage, the
raw traffic is processed to form tokens and construct the model’s input sequence. In the pre-training stage, three pre-training tasks are utilized to contribute
to generating the traffic representations. In the fine-tuning stage, these representations are adjusted based on the task-specific data for fine-grained traffic
identification.

 captured by the model [23], and specific-function metadata
 often clusters within traffic segments, forming distinct patterns [32]. Secondly, leveraging data from multiple dimensions
 can enhance model robustness [24]. Therefore, with a focus
 on traffic metadata, we design pre-training tasks based on
 datagram structure, namely MTP, SPP, and HSP. These tasks
 are designed to learn traffic representations at the byte, packet,
 and flow levels, respectively. The description of these three
 methods is provided in Section III-B.
 We plot the architecture of GETRF in Fig. 1. At a high
 level, GETRF needs to analyze the correlation among three
 pre-training methods to generate representations. In particular,
 the transformer model with a self-attention mechanism is a
 reasonable choice. The self-attention mechanism establishes
 unique correlations between representations and patterns.
 Additionally, the multi-head mechanism further enables the
 framework to analyze comprehensive traffic patterns at three
 different levels. Therefore, we design the model as shown in
 Fig. 2 to capture traffic representations for subsequent training
 phases. Specifically, GETRF consists of an embedding layer, a
Fig. 2. The training process utilized during the pre-training and fine-tuning
phases of GETRF. During the pre-training phase, the input sequences are transformer encoder layer, and three linear layers (or one linear
processed by the embedding layer and the transformer encoder layer, resulting layer). The embedding layer includes three embedding funcin the traffic representations. These representations are then fed into the three tions, which embed token, position and segment information
linear layers to acquire knowledge at different levels respectively. During
the fine-tuning stage, the three networks associated with pre-training tasks of the input sequence, respectively. The transformer encoder
are removed. Instead, an additional linear layer is added to perform specific layer includes 12 transformer encoders, each of which includes
identification tasks. one multi-head attention model, one feed-forward model, two
 dropout functions, and two normalization functions. The multihead attention model consists of four linear functions and one
2) Minimizing the impact of feature perturbations on pre- dropout function, while the feed-forward model consists of two
training objectives. In other words, the representations should linear functions. The selection of hyperparameters is provided
be resilient to changes in encrypted traffic without significant in Table IV.
adjustments to their initial learning objective. GETRF is composed of three main components. First, pre-
 The design of pre-training tasks in GETRF is based on processing the raw data to form token sequences suitable for
two key observations: Firstly, the raw bytes, metadata, and the pre-training model, as detailed in Section III-A. Second,
packet relationships contain more information that can be based on three pre-training tasks outlined in Section III-B, the
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2049

 TABLE II
 N OTATIONS U SED IN THE PAPER byte to form the token. As shown in the preprocess part of
 Fig. 1, the raw hexadecimal sequence pim is transformed into a
 token sequence Sim using the bi-gram method. In addition, we
 introduce the special tokens [CLS], [MASK], [SEP], [SEG],
 [UNK], and [PAD] for pre-training. The maximum length L
 of the token sequence Sim is set to 256, with the token [PAD]
 used for padding shorter sequences.
 In this framework, we first preprocess the sequence Sim in
 two separate steps to produce two distinct sequences: the Byte-
 Flow-Level sequence Kbf mi and the Packet-Level sequence
 mi
 Kp . This dual-step preprocessing is designed to capture
 different aspects of the datagram’s structure at both the byteflow and packet levels. Subsequently, these two sequences
 are concatenated along with the token [SEG] to create a
 unified input sequence U mi . The inclusion of the [SEG]
 token facilitates the distinction between the different types of
 sequences within the model. By integrating data from both
 sequences in this manner, we aim to mitigate the potential
 dominance of information from a single pre-training task on
 the learning process of others.
 On the one hand, we add token [CLS] to the beginning of
 the sequence Sim and replace some right tokens with [MASK]
 or other tokens to form sequence Kbf mi . On the other hand,

 for creating Kpmi , we first divide the hexadecimal sequence
 pim into a header sequence phmi and a payload sequence ppmi ,
encoding models are pre-trained, allowing for the acquisition
 then generating token sequences Shmi and Spmi respectively.
of traffic representation using unlabeled data. Finally, for
specific downstream tasks, fine-tuning is conducted with a In general, the token sequences Shmi and Spmi are same-origin
small set of labeled data, as described in Section III-C. Table II packet sequence. We then randomly shuffle the corresponding
provides a list of all symbols used in this paper. relationship between the token sequences Shmi and Spmi . Using
 Figure 1. as an example, we keep the relationship between
 the token sequences Shmi and Spmi of packet0 unchanged, and
A. Preprocess
 we concatenate the token sequence Shmi of packet1 with the
 The preprocess step aims to generate an appropriate input token sequence Spmi of packet2, similarly, the token sequence
sequence for the execution of the pre-training tasks. Shmi of packet2 is concatenated with the token sequence Spmi
 We first split the raw traffic T r with the same 5-tuple of packet1. Finally, we insert the token [SEP] between the
(source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and token sequences Shmi and Spmi to connect them and replace
protocol), and then form the collection of session flow F. Each mi , forming the packet-level sequence K mi .
 tokens same to Kbf p
session flow fi represents a specific behavior and contains
 The preprocess and pre-training stages of Figure 1 provide a
multiple packets, with packet pim denoting the m-th packet of
 detailed demonstration of this process.
the i-th flow and bjmi denoting the j-th byte of the packet pim .
The relationship between flows, packets, and bytes is shown
as the following formulas: B. Pre-Training Tasks
 F = {f1 , f2 , . . . , fi , . . . , fN , N ∈ N+ } (1) We propose three pre-training tasks to obtain traffic patterns
 fi = {pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pim , . . . , piM , M ∈ N+ } (2) from different perspectives. The first task is aimed at predicting
 the hidden state features of flows to uncover traffic patterns
 pim = {b1mi , b2mi , . . . , bImi , I ∈ N+ } (3)
 at the flow level. The second task focuses on acquiring
 Even though both natural language and network traffic knowledge of protocol paradigms and constraints by predicting
share a structure comprising ‘words, sentences, paragraphs, the relationship of same-origin packets at the packet level. The
syntax’ (corresponding to bytes, packets, flows, and protocol third task captures the contextual relationships of traffic by
specifications), their difference lies in the fact that each predicting masked tokens at the byte level. The process of the
word has precise meanings, while a byte is formed by 8-bit pre-training tasks is shown in the pre-training stage of Fig. 1.
binary digits and hold no inherent meaning. Consequently, 1) Hidden State Feature Prediction: The goal of HSP is
we consider using bytes as basic tokens to form an input to explore pattern knowledge of datagram structure at the
sequence may lead to ambiguous representations. In this paper, flow level. However, the concept of “traffic patterns” is inherwe adopt the bi-gram method to generate tokens, where each ently abstract, making it challenging to define with precise
token is composed of two adjacent bytes, and the symbol ’##’ numerical values or boundaries. The study [33] highlights that
is added to the front of the sequence pim along with the first by examining the relationships between state features–which
2050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 The acquisition of hidden state features can contribute to
 extracting features at the flow level. Specifically, we train the
 model to infer the relationship between the input sequence
 U mi and the hidden state feature hi of the flow. Setting θ
 denotes the model parameters, and the loss function of the
 task is as below:
 N M  
 Lhsp = − log P hi |U mi , θ (7)
 i=1 m=1

 2) Same Packet Prediction: The purpose of SPP is to learn
 knowledge of datagrams by exploring the structure at the
 packet level. Here, we investigate the relationship between
 the headers and the payloads. Packets serve as the funda-
Fig. 3. Hidden state feature of the flows.
 mental units of network transmission, which include sufficient
 metadata information. Regardless of how privacy-enhanced
 technologies randomize or standardize packet attribute values,
encapsulate side-channel data from various flows–one can dis- packets can still independently route and be verified. Thus,
cern distinctive traffic fingerprinting. Inspired by this notion, we consider that this metadata information, which exists
we aim to acquire pattern knowledge at the flow level by within both the header and payload, reflects the organizational
analyzing the relationship between flows and their respective paradigm of the packet. On one hand, different protocols are
state features. Given that the side-channel information of flows selected and marked in the header based on different transat different times can constitute different state features, we mission content. On the other hand, metadata in the header is
assume that the average values of these time-varying data may directly related to the payload; for example, the length field
reflect the overall state feature of the flow. Corresponding to in the header is calculated by considering the length of the
the “state feature” proposed in the work [33], we consider the encrypted payload. Conversely, the payload, in turn, affects
states reflected by the average values as “hidden state feature”. the checksum for transmission verification. Thus, a reason-
 To obtain hidden state features, we utilize side-channel data able packet should satisfy the mutual relationship/constraint
such as packet size and inter-packet time. These are funda- between the header and payload.
mental packet attributes that dynamically vary in response to To visually demonstrate this constraint, we adopt the method
alterations in the content being transmitted and changes in proposed in [17], converting the hexadecimal bytes of headers
the network conditions. We calculate the average packet size and payloads into grayscale images to analyze their relationand the logarithm of the average inter-packet time for each ship. Specifically, for each packet, we convert the bytes of
flow fi to form observation values. Subsequently, these values the header and payload into distinct matrices. Each byte is
are clustered to form hidden state features. The formulas for mapped to a grayscale value between 0 and 255, mirroring the
computing the hidden state feature are as follows: pixel intensity range in a grayscale image. This process enables
   the transformation from packets to corresponding grayscale
 M j
 j =1 s pi images, as depicted in Fig. 4. For each type of packet, the
 Zi = (4) grayscale image of the header is displayed at the top, and
 ⎛M  ⎞ the payload is displayed at the bottom. Upon comparing these
 M −1  j j +1 
 j =1 t(p i ) − t(p i )  images, we notice subtle differences in the grayscale patterns
 Ti = log2 ⎝ ⎠ (5) of payloads corresponding to the same header type, evident in
 M
 Fig. 4(11) and (15), as well as Fig. 4(12) and (16). In contrast,
 Si = cluster (Zi , Ti ) (6) even within the same packet type, significant variations are
 observed in the payload grayscale images of different header
where Zi and Ti represent the average packet size and the types, as demonstrated in Fig. 4(2) and (3), and Fig. 4(7)
logarithm of the average inter-packet interval time of flow fi and (8).
respectively, s(·) represents packet size, t(·) is arriving time Therefore, we consider that there is a certain pattern
of a packet, M represents the total number of packets and between the header and payload that determines the validity
cluster means the K-means method, Si represents the hidden of the packet. Given a packet header, the payload is allowed to
state feature of fi . change within a certain range rather than randomly. This pre-
 To validate the assumption of hidden state features, we training task aims to discover this pattern, learn the constraint
cluster 2000 flows from the ISCX-VPN dataset using the rules between packet header and payload. Specifically, when
method according to equation (6), and the result is shown in constructing Kpmi , we randomly shuffle the header and pay-
Fig. 3. The result illustrated that the traffic is divided into 8 load from different packets, where 50% of the relationships are
categories, which have clear boundaries between them, i.e., correct, 30% of the payloads are replaced with payloads from
the results can be regarded as the hidden state features of eight other packets of the same flow, and the remaining 20% of the
different flows. payloads are replaced with payloads from packets of different
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2051

 TABLE III
 T HE D ETAILS OF DATASETS U SED IN M ULTI -TASK
 C OMPARATIVE E XPERIMENTS
 EMAIL

 (1) (2) (3) (4)

 CHAT

 (5) (6) (7) (8)

 AUDIO

 (9) (10) (11) (12)

 The final pre-training objective is defined as the sum of the
 FILE aforementioned three losses:

 (13) (14) (15) (16) LALL = Lhsp + Lspp + Lmtp (10)

Fig. 4. Grayscale images of packet headers and payloads for different types
of packets.
 C. Finetune
 After pre-training, the model can generate generic and
 robust representations for general encrypted traffic. However,
 in specific traffic identification tasks, the representations canflows. We train the model to predict whether the relationship
 not fully capture the particular task details, and fine-tuning
between the header and payload is of the same origin, where
 is necessary for more accurate results. The fine-tuning stage
the relationship is denoted as yim ∈ [0, 1], with 0 indicating
 involves a different model structure compared to the prethat the payload and header come from the same packet, and
 training stage. In the pre-training stage, the model adds three
1 indicating the opposite. The loss function for this task is as
 additional networks after the transformer encoder layer to
below:
 complete the pre-training tasks and adjust the parameters of
 N M the transformer to generate representations. However, these
 Lspp = − log P (yim |Kpmi , θ) (8) three networks are removed in the fine-tuning stage, and a
 i=1 m=1
 linear layer is added to execute specific identification. The
 first token [CLS] of the representation can be directly used for
 3) Masked Token Prediction: MTP aims to explore the classification, as shown in the fine-tuning stage of Fig. 1.
knowledge of datagram structure at the byte level. As mentioned previously, flow can be regarded as a language between IV. E XPERIMENT AND A NALYSIS
different applications in the network, and similar to natural In this section, we primarily focus on evaluating the
language, flow exhibits structure and specification. Therefore, performance of the proposed framework across different tasks
we adopt the Masked Language Model to construct the pre- as well as assessing its robustness in unbalanced scenarios
training task for discovering contextual relationships of traffic. and traffic defense mechanism scenarios. To achieve this, we
Specifically, in the pre-training process, each token in the input design experiments, including multi-task comparative experisequence is randomly masked with a 20% probability. For each ments, imbalanced encrypted traffic identification experiments,
selected token, we replace it with the special token [MASK] and traffic defense mechanism resistance experiments. To illuswith a probability of 80%, or choose another token (excluding trate the necessity of the three pre-training tasks, we conduct
the special tokens) to replace it with a probability of 10%, ablation experiments. Finally, we present the evaluation of
or leave it unchanged with a probability of 10%. The pre- complexity.
training model is trained to predict the masked tokens based
on context. In the implementation, we first design a dictionary
 A. Experimental Setup
containing all tokens involved in the pre-training process and
assign them numerical indices. Then, when replacing a token, 1) Dataset and Tasks: We conduct experiments on different
we simultaneously create a tuple containing the position and datasets, including ISCX-VPN, ISCX-Tor [34], ToN-IoT [35],
the index of the replaced token. During pre-training, this tuple USTC-TFC [36], and CSTNENT-TLS1.3 [12], with each
aids the model in predicting the token index. The loss function dataset is associated with a specific task, and the detailed
for this task is as follows: information of the datasets is shown in Table III.
 ISCX-VPN: The dataset includes popular VPN protocols
 N M such as OpenVPN and OpenConnect. Considering encapsula-
 Lmtp = − mi
 log P (maskjmi = tokenjmi |Kbf , θ) (9) tion and service types of the traffic [17], we categorize this
 i=1 m=1 dataset into 12 labels: Email, Chat, Streaming, Transfer, VoIP,
2052 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE IV
P2P, VPN-Email, VPN-Chat, VPN-Streaming, VPN-Transfer, H YPERPARAMETERS S ELECTION FOR GETRF
VPN-VoIP, and VPN-P2P. We use this dataset to assess the
approach’s performance in encapsulation detection tasks.
 ISCX-Tor: The dataset includes a large volume of traffic
captured from the Tor network, including Web browsers, Email
clients, and P2P file-sharing applications. Following the setting
in [12], we categorize this dataset into 14 labels: Browsing,
Chat, Email, Transfer, P2P, Streaming, VoIP, Tor-Browsing,
Tor-Chat, Tor-Email, Tor-Transfer, Tor-P2P, Tor-Streaming,
and Tor-VoIP. We utilize this dataset to validate the method’s
ability to perform anonymity detection tasks.
 USTC-TFC: The dataset includes encrypted traffic from
malware such as Tinba, Miuref, and Cridex, as well as benign
traffic from applications like Facetime and Gmail. We use this
dataset to test the method’s effectiveness in malware detection We set the proportions of the training, validation, and testing
tasks. sets to 1:1:2, and evaluate the framework using the ten-fold
 ToN-IoT: The dataset was collected from a realistic and cross-validation method.
large-scale network designed at the Cyber Range and IoT Labs
of SEIT and UNSW [37]. Here, we utilize the network dataset
for experiments, which includes nine types of attacks: back- B. Multi-Task Comparative Experiment
door, DDoS, DoS, Injection, MITM, Password, runsomware, In these experiments, we separately evaluate the
XSS, and scanning. performance of the proposed framework on five different tasks:
 CSTNET-TLS1.3: The dataset consists of traffic from malware detection, application classification, anonymous
120 applications, encrypted with TLS 1.3, collected by the detection, attack detection, and encapsulation detection.
University of Science and Technology of China. Moreover, we compare GETRF with various methods,
 2) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate and compare the including DF [18], DeepPacket [20], LeNet [38], Varperformance of the methods using four typical metrics, includ- CNN [19], AppScanner [15], App-Net [26], BIND [16],
ing accuracy (ACC), precision (PRE), recall (REC), and CUMUL [14], FlowPrint [40], GraphDApp [22], FS-Net [39],
F1 score, and the calculation methods of these metrics are as GCN_Transformer [21], and ET-BERT [12]. For details on
follows: the implementation of the baseline models, please refer to
 TP + TN Appendix C.
 ACC = (11) Table V presents the performance of different methods in
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP encapsulation detection, anonymous detection, and application
 PRE = (12) classification. GETRF performs best across all four metrics
 TP + FP
 TP in these three tasks. Compared to the current state-of-the-art
 REC = (13) method, GETRF achieves an average improvement of 0.512%
 TP + FN
 PRE ∗ REC in accuracy, 0.448% in precision, 0.488% in recall, and
 F1 = 2 ∗ (14) 0.464% in F1 score across the three tasks. In the application
 PRE + REC
 classification task, which has the most categories, GETRF
 3) Implementation: We remove the IP and port information outperforms ET-BERT by 0.78% in accuracy and 0.76% in
because they are irrelevant to the specific traffic of the F1 score. One possible reason for this improvement is that the
transmitted content and do not contribute to generating the CSTNETE-TLS.13 dataset contains 120 different categories,
representation. All experiments were conducted on the Ubuntu with many similar traffic patterns. GETRF mitigates the impact
system using PyTorch 1.8.0 and NVIDIA RTX 2080ti. In the of single patterns on the results by learning datagram structure
pre-training phase, we set the embedding size = 512, hidden knowledge across multiple levels and achieves fine-grained
size = 512, learning rate = 5 × 10−4 , batch size = 50, and application identification.
train the model for 8 × 105 steps. The hyperparameter search Table VI presents the performance of different methods in
ranges and the selected values are shown in Table IV. We malware detection and attack detection. Our model achieves
utilize 25GB of public dataset data (20GB from ToN-IoT, the best performance on F1 score at 99.85% and 98.80%
5GB from ISCX-VPN) to generate a total of 50GB of raw respectively. We notice that some traffic in USTC-TFC
corpus for pre-training. For each pcap file processed after the includes unencrypted data at the Application Layer. This
5-tuple method, we use all packets in the pcap file to construct aspect simplifies the task for other models, as they can readily
Kpmi according to the method mentioned in Section III-B2. utilize this plaintext for easier classification.
Since Kpmi and Kbf mi involve different processes for the same Overall, GETRF achieves the best performance in all five
metadata, we also utilize all hexadecimal bytes of the same tasks. Additionally, we find that representation-based methods
packet to make the token sequence (retaining only the 256 outperform other methods, indicating that pre-training can help
tokens). In the fine-tuning phase, for each flow, we only extract models learn faster and is suitable for identifying large-scale
one packet to generate the token sequence for identification. flow data with a small number of sample data.
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2053

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON R ESULT ON E NCAPSULATION D ETECTION , A NONYMOUS D ETECTION , AND A PPLICATION C LASSIFICATION TASKS

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON R ESULT ON M ALWARE D ETECTION AND ATTACK D ETECTION TASKS

 TABLE VII
C. Imbalanced Encrypted Traffic Identification Experiment T HE D ETAILS OF DATASETS U SED IN I MBALANCED E NCRYPTED
 Generally, datasets for specific tasks typically include T RAFFIC I DENTIFICATION E XPERIMENTS
only relevant protocols and applications, without other
traffic interference. However, in real-world environments,
a large amount of background traffic exists, and its
volume can be 100 times or more than that of the
task-relevant traffic [41]. Therefore, we design experiments
to verify the fine-grained identification performance of
GETRF.
 In these experiments, we select traffic from Facebook,
Netflix, ICQ, and Vimeo in the ISCX-VPN dataset as background traffic, and traffic from Virut, NSIS, Geodo, Cridex,
Miuref, Password, Backdoor, XSS, and DDoS in USTC-TFC
and ToN-IoT as the target malicious flows. We also set δ as
the threshold to control the volume of target malicious flows.
For example, δ = 0.005 means that the maximum number
for each type of target malicious flow is 0.005 times that of As shown in Fig. 5, most methods show improved
any background traffic. The specific details of the dataset are performance as δ increases, especially in terms of precision
shown in Table VII. and recall. This improvement indicates that the methods
2054 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 5. Comparison of the results of different methods under various δ scenarios.

learn more about the target flow from the labeled data D. Traffic Defense Mechanism Resistance Experiment
during training, thus enhancing their performance. However, a In this experiment, we adopt Front [29] to disturb the traffic
model with good generalization capabilities needs to maintain pattern. To directly demonstrate the impact of Front on traffic
high performance even under conditions of limited samples. patterns, we apply WeFDE [42] to measure the amount of
Fig. 5 (c) and (d) demonstrate that pre-training designs like information leakage of traffic features before and after the
GETRF and ET-BERT outperform other models. Particularly application of Front.
under the extreme condition of δ = 0.005, our method Firstly, we sample data from ToN-IoT and label it as D1 ,
surpasses ET-BERT, with precision and recall improvements of then we make the dataset as described in IV-C under the
4.96% and 4.85%, reaching 97.62% and 98.59% respectively. setting with δ equal to 0.005, and label it as D2 . Fig. 7
As δ increases, the gap narrows, indicating that imbalanced shows the information leakage of the features in both datasets
data affects model performance and highlighting our method’s before and after being processed by Front. Clearly, Front
effectiveness in generalizing representations of encrypted traf- successfully reduces the information leakage of the features,
fic. with an average reduction of 0.3956 bit and 0.5842 bit for 60
 Fig. 6 presents the precision and recall confusion matrices features in D1 and D2 respectively. On D1 and D2 , the total
for GETRF and ET-BERT with δ=0.005. In this scenario, amount of information provided by 60 features after Front
the proportion of malicious flows is very small compared interference accounts for 27.57% and 25.58% of the original,
to the background traffic, limiting the prior knowledge that respectively. For details about the calculation of information
the methods can acquire. The results show that GETRF leakage and the features selected for these experiments, please
outperforms ET-BERT in both precision and recall. GETRF refer to Appendix A.
improves the recall score of XSS and Geodo from 75% to Fig. 8 presents the performance of GETRF in D1 and D2 .
93% and from 83% to 100%, respectively, and the precision It can be observed that the accuracy, precision, recall, and
score of Miuref from 71% to 89%. These findings indicate that F1 score of the proposed framework have decreased by 4.80%,
our framework effectively learns the characteristics of traffic 4.89%, 4.40%, and 4.65% on D1 , and by 0.83%, 2.13%,
for identification, mitigating the impact of background traffic 4.8%, and 3.48% on D2 , respectively. In comparison, the total
to achieve fine-grained classification with a small number of amount of effective information decreased by 72.43% in D1
target samples. and by 74.42% in D2 . Additionally, GETRF still performs
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2055

Fig. 6. Confusion matrices of traffic identification for GETRF and ET-BERT (δ = 0.005).

 for identification, rather than using all metadata in the flow,
 which may mitigate some impacts of Front. Secondly, although
 Front can potentially affect feature distribution and lead to the
 misclassification of the model, GETRF includes pre-trained
 knowledge at both the flow and packet levels. This allows it
 to analyze the correlation among protocols, payload, and burst
 features of dummy packets, thereby reducing the impact.

Fig. 7. Information leakage for individual feature on D1(left) and D2(right).
 E. Ablation Study
 We present ablation results to validate each component’s
better than most methods in accuracy according to IV-B contribution to our method’s performance on the ToN-IoT
and IV-C under these conditions. dataset. We first evaluate the method’s performance when the
 We consider that the performance of GETRF may be specific pre-training task is omitted. As shown in Table IX,
attributed to two factors. For a given traffic, GETRF only compared to the complete framework, the F1 scores decrease
utilizes the first few bytes to generate a 256-token sequence by 7.56%, 14.45%, and 26.52%, respectively. This indicates
2056 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 8. Performance of GETRF under traffic defense mechanism.

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON R ESULT OF C OMPLEXITY

that the three pre-training tasks are complementary and choose ET-BERT, GCN_Transformer, APP-Net, DF, and Varprovide different levels of information for accurate traffic CNN as comparative objects because their performance
representation. Notably, the framework without MTP performs in Section IV-B closely matches GETRF’s. Additionally,
the worst, indicating that learning the traffic patterns at these methods involve architectures such as CNN, LSTM,
the byte-level is crucial for traffic representation. This also Transformer, and GCNs, which can provide a more compresupports the view presented in [43]. hensive analysis.
 Additionally, to further analyze the impact of different As shown in Table VIII, we present the parameters, training
pre-training tasks on the final traffic representations, in time, inference time, and performance of the methods. The
Appendix B, we generate the traffic representations using the preparation stage refers to knowledge extraction before the
MTP, SPP, and HSP tasks respectively, and then visualize the model is applied to specific tasks, while the deployment stage
results. means training and inference based on labeled data. Note that
 We also observe that the model without pre-training has the training time cost for GETRF is set to 1, serving as the
a significant drop in precision, recall, and F1 score by time cost baseline for other methods.
37.72%, 37.76%, and 37.74%, respectively. This demonstrates From Table VIII, it can be observed that in the deployment
that although transformer models have some advantages in stage, the parameters and time costs for Var-CNN, DF, and
capturing flow features, pre-training can further improve the APP-Net are less than those of other methods. However, these
model’s accuracy. three methods only exhibit high performance on a specific task,
 which may be attributed to an insufficient number of training
 samples and feature extractors. GCN_Transformer, ET-BERT,
F. Evaluation of Complexity and GETRF all contain multiple transformer encoders, result-
 In this section, we analyze the complexity of GETRF, ing in a larger number of parameters and more comprehensive
including trainable parameters and overall time costs. We feature extraction capabilities. Compared to ET-BERT, GETRF
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2057

 TABLE IX TABLE X
 A BLATION S TUDY OF GETRF F EATURE D ESCRIPTION

has fewer parameters and consumes less time. This is primarily
because the embedding sizes and the number of hidden units
of ET-BERT are both 768, leading to a larger space occupation
for each traffic mapping vector and increased computational
operations. However, in terms of performance, GETRF outperforms ET-BERT, further demonstrating the effectiveness of
the three proposed pre-training tasks.

 V. C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we proposed and implemented GETRF, a
novel framework for classifying encrypted network traffic.
This approach learns implicit patterns of the datagram structure at three distinct levels from large-scale unlabeled traffic
data, thereby generating generic and robust traffic representations. GETRF demonstrated superiority in multi-class
identification of encrypted network traffic. Additionally, in two
independent studies, we evaluated the performance of GETRF
in handling imbalanced data and traffic with disturbed features.
In terms of overall accuracy and F1 score metrics, the results
show that GETRF outperforms other reference methods. In
future work, we plan to collect a larger dataset encompassing a
wider range of protocols, features, and service types to further
validate our model. We aim to explore useful and meaningful
insights into the datagram structure and investigate metrics for =− p(x )pr (ci |x )log2 pr (ci |x )dx (16)
a comprehensive assessment of our approach in fine-grained φ ci ∈C
identification scenarios.
 H (C ) = − pr (ci )log2 pr (ci ) (17)
 ci ∈C
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 where, I (·)represents mutual information, H (·) represents
 The authors are very grateful to Professor Mei Song for
 entropy, C represents the category that traffic f belonging to,
her guidance and help with this article. They also thank
 pr (ci ) represents the probability of ci belonging to C, φ is
Professor Yinglei Teng for her invaluable guidance and
 the domain of feature v, x refers to specific value of v, and
insights throughout the development of this paper. Finally,
 p(·) represents the probability density function.
they thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
 As for features selection, we considered side-channel
comments, corrections, and inspiration to improve this paper.
 information related to the traffic, including packet count
 features, time statistics, packet ordering features, and burst
 A PPENDIX A features. With specific descriptions as shown in Table X
 I NFORMATION L EAKAGE M EASUREMENT
 In this section, we discuss the theoretical framework for A PPENDIX B
calculating information leakage from traffic features, and the V ISUALIZATION OF T RAFFIC R EPRESENTATIONS
selection of features for our experiments. Here, we separately pre-train models based on the MTP,
 The information leakage of a feature can be calculated using SPP, and HSP tasks. During the evaluation phase, we remove
mutual information, and the specific calculation method is as the last softmax layer of the framework and obtain the final
follows. representation vectors. We utilize the t-distributed stochastic
 I (C ; v ) = H (C ) − H (C |v ) (15) neighbor embedding approach to reduce the dimensionality of
 these vectors and plot them as two-dimensional images.
 H (C |v ) = p(x )H (C |x )dx In Fig. 9 (b), (c), and (d) represent the traffic representations
 φ generated based on the MTP, SPP, and HSP tasks respectively.
2058 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 9. Visualization of traffic representations with different pre-training tasks on the ToN-IoT dataset.

It can be observed that their performance is less than satisfac- considers a maximum of 6 features during splitting. We utilize
tory. Among them, (b) performs the best. However, (b) shows statistical features to train the model, including 26 features
disappointing results in classifying password, scanning, and that score over 2% according to the work [15].
injection traffic. One possible reason is that these flows exhibit deeppacket: We extract the first 1500 bytes of the packet
behaviors such as multiple login attempts and a large number and replace the IP address with 0, then divide all bytes by 255.
of connection attempts, showing consistency at the byte We adopt a CNN as the classifier, which is available in [44].
level, making them challenging to distinguish. So, additional CUMUL: This method uses an SVM as the classifier with
information is needed to assist in the task. an RBF kernel. For input features, we extract the number of
 The traffic representations in (d) are distributed into several incoming and outgoing packets, the total size of incoming
different clusters, which may related to the previously men- packets, and the total size of outgoing packets from pcap
tioned hidden state features. Specifically, the model learns flow files. Then we use 3 as the interval point to obtain equidistant
behavior from side-channel data. However, different types of values for 10 packets separately, resulting in 44 feature
flows may exhibit similar burst patterns during transmission, representations for training.
which can lead to similarities in the observed side-channel BIND: This approach uses an SVM as the classifier with an
data. Consequently, the model groups different classes into one RBF kernel. For input data, we extract packet size, uni-burst
cluster. size, uni-burst time, uni-burst count, bi-burst size, and bi-burst
 In summary, the traffic representations generated based on time for training.
individual pre-training tasks are not satisfactory, and only Lenet: We take the first 784 bytes of the first packet from
the representations produced by the complete framework can pcap files and convert them into a 28x28 grayscale image to
achieve optimal classification performance, as depicted in input into the Lenet model for training.
Fig. 9 (a). DF: We extract packet direction sequences from each pcap
 file and store them as pickle files according to the format
 A PPENDIX C requirements in [18], then we use the publicly available
 I MPLEMENTATION OF THE BASELINE M ODELS model [45] for training.
 In this section, we discuss the implementation details of the Var-CNN: We extract packet timestamp sequences and
baseline models and the data preparation. packet directions from pcap files and store them according to
 appscanner: This method uses a random forest as the the requirements in work [46]. Then we train with the available
classifier with the threshold set to 0.9, and each decision tree model [47].
WANG et al.: GETRF: A GENERAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC IDENTIFICATION 2059

 FS-Net: We extract packet length sequences from pcap files [12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
and train with the available model [39]. contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022,
 APP-Net: We extract sequences of packet lengths and pay- pp. 633–642.
load bytes from pcap files. Since no source code is available, [13] R. Antonello et al., “Deep packet inspection tools and techniques in
we implement the model according to the description in the commodity platforms: Challenges and trends,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
 vol. 35, pp. 1863–1878, Nov. 2012.
paper [26]. The model consists of two embedding layers, two [14] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc.
BiLSTM layers, and two 1D-CNN layers. We set the hidden NDSS, 2016, pp. 1–15.
size of the embedding to 10000, convolutional kernels to 256, [15] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
the filter size to 7, and the hidden size of BiLSTM to 128. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 63–78, 2018.
 GraphDapp: We extract the first 10 packets from each pcap [16] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bifile to build a TIG representation and corresponding adjacency directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
 Appl., 2016, pp. 177–188, doi: 10.1145/2991079.2991123.
matrix. For the model, we construct 3 MLP layers, each [17] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
containing linear, batch norm, and dropout functions, with encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
64 hidden units in the linear function and a 25% dropout in networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Security Informat. (ISI), 2017,
 pp. 43–48.
the dropout function. [18] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep Fingerprinting:
 Flowprint: We extract features from pcap files excluding Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learn-
TLS certificates as mentioned in the work [40], and train using ing,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (CCS),
 Toronto, Canada, 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
the publicly available model [48]. [19] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-
 GCN_Transformer: We extract the first 500 bytes from efficient Website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” in Proc.
pcap files and construct an adjacency matrix for the text Priv. Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, Jul. 2019.
 doi: 10.2478/popets-2019-0070.
semantic graph based on word co-occurrence frequency and [20] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
document-word frequency. Point mutual information is used to “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using
represent the association between words. The model includes deep learning,” 2017, arXiv:1709.02656.
 [21] Y. Luo, M. He, X. Wang, and L. Jin, “Network flow detection of
8 transformer encoders with hidden units set to 512. semantic relationship between flow and byte,” in Proc. IEEE 8th
 ET-BERT: We extract individual packets from flow and Int. Conf. Big Data Comput. Service Appl. (BigDataService), 2022,
adopt the bi-gram method to generate tokens. Then, we build pp. 179–180.
 [22] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decena dictionary to map the tokens into sequences and train using tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
the publicly available model [12]. graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2021.3050608.
 [23] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted
 R EFERENCES network traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans.
 Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023,
 [1] M. He, X. Wang, P. Wei, L. Yang, Y. Teng, and R. Lyu, “Reinforcement doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2022.3227500.
 learning meets network intrusion detection: A transferable and adapt- [24] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC:
 able framework for anomaly behavior identification,” IEEE Trans. Mobile encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learn-
 Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2477–2492, Apr. 2024, ing,” Comput. Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944,
 doi: 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3352586. doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2019.106944.
 [2] M. He, Y. Huang, X. Wang, P. Wei, and X. Wang, “A lightweight [25] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 and efficient IoT intrusion detection method based on feature group- A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning
 ing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 2935–2949, Jan. 2024, for activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2023.3294259. during COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput Netw, vol. 219, Dec. 2022,
 [3] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noise- Art. no. 109452, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109452.
 resistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, [26] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural network for
 no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019. encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 [4] M. D. Moizuddin and M. V. Jose, “A bio-inspired hybrid deep learning Commu. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 424–429,
 model for network intrusion detection,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 238, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOMWKSHPS50562.2020.9162891.
 Feb. 2022. Art. no. 107894. [27] X. Wang, H. Wang, and D. Yang, “Measure and improve robustness
 [5] H. Yan, L. Fu, Y. Qi, L. Cheng, Q. Ye, and D. J. Yu, “Learning a in NLP models: A survey,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc.
 robust classifier for short-term traffic state prediction,” Knowl. Based Comput. Linguist., Human Lang. Technol., 2022, pp. 4569–4586.
 Syst., vol. 242, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 108368. [28] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. Mamun, and A. Ghorbani,
 [6] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classifica- “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
 May 2019. pp. 407–414.
 [7] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network [29] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against Website
 traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM fingerprinting,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Conf. Security Symp., 2020,
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2022. pp. 1–18.
 [8] M. Macas, C. Wu, and W. Fuertes, “A survey on deep learning for [30] M. Juarez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Diaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an
 cybersecurity: Progress, challenges, and opportunities,” Comput. Netw., efficient Website fingerprinting defense,” 2016, arXiv:1512.00524.
 vol. 212, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 109032. [31] N. Mathews, J. K. Holland, S. E. Oh, M. S. Rahman, N. Hopper,
 [9] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches and M. Wright, “SoK: A critical evaluation of efficient Website fingerfor anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and printing defenses,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2023,
 open issues,” Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 189, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 105124. pp. 969–986, doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179289.
[10] C. Wang et al., “Addressing the train-test gap on traffic classification [32] X. Deng et al., “Robust multi-tab Website fingerprinting attacks in the
 combined subflow model with ensemble learning,” Knowl. Based Syst., wild,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2023, pp. 1005–1022,
 vol. 204, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 106192. doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179464.
[11] H. Y. He, Z. G. Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding repre- [33] Z. Yao, J. Ge, Y. Wu, X. Lin, R. He, and Y. Ma, “Encrypted traffic
 sentation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. classification based on Gaussian mixture models and hidden Markov
 ITU Kaleidosc., Ind.-Driv. Digit. Transf. (ITU K), 2020, pp. 1–8. models,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 166, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 102711.
2060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 6, DECEMBER 2024

[34] A. H. Lashkari, G. Draper-Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, Zikui Lu is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. electronic science and technology with the Beijing
 Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. University of Posts and Telecommunications. His
[35] N. Moustafa, M. Ahmed, and S. Ahmed, “Data analytics-enabled intru- research interests include deep learning and traffic
 sion detection: Evaluations of ToN_IoT Linux datasets,” in Proc. IEEE analysis.
 19th Int. Conf. Trust, Security Privacy Comput. Commun. (TrustCom),
 2020, pp. 727–735.
[36] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2017, pp. 712–717.
[37] “The TON_IoT datasets,” Datasets, UNSW Sydney. Accessed: Mar. 15,
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/toniotdatasets
[38] Y. Zeng, Z. Qi, W. Chen, and Y. Huang, “TEST: An end-to-end
 network traffic classification system with spatio-temporal features
 extraction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Cloud (SmartCloud), 2019,
 pp. 131–136.
[39] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow Xinlei Wang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 sequence network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE in electronic science and technology with the Beijing
 Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179. University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her
[40] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-App fingerprint- research interests include deep learning and coming on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. ISOC Netw. Distrib. Syst. puter network security.
 Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2020, pp. 1–18.
[41] Z. Wu, W. Li, L. Liu, and M. Yue, “Low-rate DoS attacks,
 detection, defense, and challenges: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
 pp. 43920–43943, 2020.
[42] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in
 Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1977–1992.
[43] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “EBSNN:
 Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
 pp. 3521–3538, Sep./Oct. 2022.
[44] “Deeppacket.” GitHub.com. Accessed: Apr. 15, 2023. [Online].
 Available: https://github.com/KimythAnly/deeppacket
[45] P. Sirinam et al. “df.” GitHub.com. Accessed: Apr. 26, 2023. [Online]. Mingshu He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 Available: https://github.com/deep-fingerprinting/df degree from the Beijing University of Posts and
[46] T. Wang et al. “Wangknn-dataset.” Accessed: May 7, 2023. [Online]. Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 2022, where
 Available: https://github.com/kdsec/wangknn-dataset he is currently doing research with the School of
[47] S. Bhat et al. “Var-CNN.” Accessed: May 8, 2023. [Online]. Available: Cyberspace Security. His research interests include
 https://github.com/sanjit-bhat/Var-CNN network security, anomaly detection, and machine
[48] T. van Ede et al. “FlowPrint.” Accessed: Apr. 15, 2023. [Online]. learning.
 Available: https://github.com/Thijsvanede/FlowPrint

 Xiaojun Wang received the B.Eng. degree in computer and communications and the M.Eng. degree in
 computer applications from the Beijing University
 Xiaojuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT) in 1984
 in electronic science and technology from the and 1987, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
 University of Beijing University of Posts and from Staffordshire University, England. He was
 Telecommunications, where she is currently an an Assistant Lecturer/Lecturer with BUPT from
 Associate Professor with the School of Electronic 1987 to 1989. He joined the School of Electronic
 Engineering. Her research interests include deep Engineering, Dublin City University in 1992, where
 learning, complex networks, and human gesture he is currently an Associate Professor. His research
 recognition. interests include network security, energy-efficient
 networking, and hardware acceleration of artificial intelligence and cryptography algorithms. He received a Sino-British Technical Co-operation Training
 Award in 1989.