IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024 5530422

 Global-to-Local Spatial–Spectral Awareness
 Transformer Network for Hyperspectral
 Anomaly Detection
 Xu He , Shilin Zhou, Qiang Ling , Miao Li , Zhaoxu Li , Yuyuan Zhang , and Zaiping Lin

 Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) is one of systems that use optical single channels such as visible light,
the momentous technologies in the field of Earth observation infrared, and ultraviolet, hyperspectral imagers can obtain
and remote sensing monitoring. Profiting from puissant deep spectral curves that reflect the “fingerprint” characteristics of
feature extraction abilities, deep convolutional networks (DCN)
perform excellently in the HAD domain. Nevertheless, limited targets to effectively identify target types without geometric
by the restriction of unique local receptive fields, DCN-based or textural features [1], [2], [3]. Hyperspectral images (HSIs)
detection methods struggle to catch the long-range dependence have higher spectral resolution and can reach the nanoscale,
from a global perspective. In contrast, vision transformers (ViTs) allowing for the detection and recognition of targets that could
perform better in global feature extraction but still disregard the not have been effectively detected in multispectral remote
local dependence properties. To this end, we proposed a novel
method entitled the global-to-local spatial–spectral awareness sensing images [4], [5], [6]. Among the numerous remote
transformer (G2LSSAT) network, in which the global trans- sensing image interpretation tasks based on hyperspectral
former block (GTB) and local transformer block (LTB) are imaging systems, the hyperspectral object detection task has
deployed in sequence to capture deep reconstruction character- attracted increasing attention from scholars and researchers
istics from the global view to the local view in a spatial–spectral owing to its great application value in civil and military
domain. In particular, the GTB is designed to explore the global
spatial–spectral characteristics that are dependent on a crossbar- fields, such as environmental monitoring [7], [8], resource
based global sparse attention module. Furthermore, the global exploration [9], [10], smart agriculture [11], [12], [13], and
glanced image is divided into multiple local patches and the LTB military reconnaissance and surveillance [14], [15], [16].
is devised to learn the local spatial–spectral features supported by In practical research, the object detection technology for HSIs
a patch-based local self-invisible attention module. In addition,
 can be divided into two categories: target detection pattern and
considering that the abnormal pixels always be unexpectedly
reconstructed with the conventional self-attention module in anomaly detection (AD) pattern. To be precise, hyperspectral
ViTs, we introduce a invisible diagonal mask (IDM), which is target detection (HTD) mainly compares the spatial–spectral
embedded into the LTB module, to overshadow each pixel itself features of each test pixel with the spectral clusters of the
in the receptive field and reconstruct itself based on global and background pixels and the prior target spectral clusters. Then,
local dependent spatial–spectral features. Extensive experimental
 these differences will be mapped into a certain kind of
results on six datasets illustrate the superiority of the proposed
G2LSSAT compared with other state-of-the-art detectors. characteristic parameter to reflect the abnormality degree of
 each test pixel. In contrast, hyperspectral AD (HAD) intends
 Index Terms— Invisible diagonal mask (IDM), global-to-local,
hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD), self-attention, vision
 to develop the spectral and spatial distribution differences
transformer (ViT). between the target and the surrounding background to locate
 the target whose prior spectrum is in an unknown state. HAD
 I. I NTRODUCTION task is more in line with practical needs and has greater

H YPERSPECTRAL remote sensing imaging technology
 is one of the cutting-edge technologies in the field of
remote sensing for Earth observation. Compared to detection
 application prospects because it has freed itself from dependence on the target prior information. Nevertheless, affected by
 the limitations in imaging conditions such as noise-jamming
 Manuscript received 2 July 2024; revised 6 August 2024;
 environments, long-distance imaging, low spatial resolution,
accepted 4 September 2024. Date of publication 10 September 2024; and so on, the distinguishability between abnormal targets and
date of current version 24 September 2024. This work was supported in part heterogeneous backgrounds significantly diminished, which
by the National University of Defense Technology Independent Innovation
Science Foundation under Grant 22ZZCX-042 and in part by the Foundation
 gradually increased the difficulty of background modeling
for Innovative Research Groups of the National Natural Science Foundation and anomaly abstraction. Thereupon, differentiating anomalies
of China under Grant 61921001 and Grant 62401591. (Corresponding from sophisticated backgrounds is still a hard nut to crack
author: Qiang Ling.)
 The authors are with the College of Electronic Science and Technolin HSI detection systems. In recent years, more and more
ogy, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China scholars have been involved in the research work of HAD,
(e-mail: hexu_710@nudt.edu.cn; slzhou@nudt.edu.cn; lq910131@163.com; and numerous outstanding algorithms have sprung up like
lm8866@nudt.edu.cn; lizhaoxu@nudt.edu.cn; zhangyuyuan22@nudt.edu.cn;
linzaiping@nudt.edu.cn).
 mushrooms. To the best of our knowledge, existing main-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3456799 stream HAD methods can be divided into four categories,
 1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

i.e., data statistics-based methods, data representation-based be represented by the spatial neighborhood pixels or backmethods, data factorization-based methods, and deep learning- ground dictionaries, but abnormal pixels cannot. In the light of
based methods. different constraint modes of the representation coefficient, the
 data representation-based models can be classified as sparse
A. Data Statistics-Based Model representation (SR)-based models [35], [36] and collaborative
 representation (CR)-based models [37], [38]. The SR-based
 The data statistics-based model was the most classic and
 model structures the overcomplete dictionary based on the
time-honored HAD fashion. This kind of method always
 background pixels and estimates the sparse coefficient, which
assumes that the background of HSIs follows an inherent stais constrained by the l1 norm. Then, the abnormal pixels will
tistical distribution pattern, while the distribution of anomalies
 be screened out due to significant errors in the reconstruction
significantly deviates from the background distribution, thus
 process. Based on the basic SR-based model proposed by
screening out anomalies based on this basic principle [17].
 Chen et al. [39], many improved HAD algorithms have been
Specifically, it will first initialize the statistical model of
 designed to boost detection performance. For example, Zhu
the assumed background, and then select a certain number
 and Wen [40] improved the performance of the SR-based
of pixels to estimate the parameters of the model. Finally,
 model by incorporating accurate background estimation and
this model will determine whether the tested pixel is abnoradaptive weighting strategy into the fundamental SR-based
mal based on the distance measurement results between the
 HAD framework. Ling et al. [36] applied the nonnegativity
tested pixel and the background distribution. For instance, the
 and sum-to-one constraints on the sparse coefficient matrix to
most representative method of the data statistics-based model
 endow with the practical physical significance of the SR-based
belongs to the Reed–Xiaoli (RX) [18] algorithm, which utilizes
 method. Moreover, Zhao et al. [41] designed a sparsity score
the Mahalanobis distance as distance measurement criteria and
 estimation detector to strengthen the discrepancy between the
postulates that the background distribution complies with the
 learned anomaly dictionary and the background dictionary.
multivariate Gaussian distribution. Based on this simple and
 Similar to the SR-based model, the CR-based model considers
efficient RX baseline model, many researchers [19], [20], [21],
 the spatial–spectral information between pixels and imposes
[22] proposed numerous improved and extended algorithms for
 the l2 norm on the representation coefficient. Based on this
complicated scenes. Specifically, Kown and Nasrabadi [23]
 fundamental principle, Vafadar and Ghassemian [42] further
introduced the kernel function and maps the original HSI
 considered the statistical distribution of background to remove
data into a high-dimensional feature space to enhance the
 the outliers before the CR operation for pollution-free backseparability of anomalous targets and backgrounds in highground dictionary construction. In addition, Hou et al. [43]
dimensional space. Then, Zhou et al. [24] proposed the cluster
 applied the least squares method to avoid interference from
kernel RX detector (CKRXD), which effectively reduced the
 anomalies in the background dictionary construction, and
computational complexity of the kernel RX method by replacthen the spatial saliency analysis was subsequently pering each pixel with the cluster centers of the background
 formed to improve the detection performance. Tan et al. [44]
pixels. Matteoli et al. [25] devised a local adaptive kernel
 combined the sliding dual-window scheme and CR strategy
density estimation to model the background distribution and
 mechanism to improve the detection accuracy and boost
reduce the interference of clusters. Guo et al. [26] proposed the
 the speed of operation. Chang and Ghamisi [45] devised
linear filter-RX detector (LFRXD) to filter the abnormal targets
 a novel CR-based model variant, in which the background
and noise for better background covariance matrix estimation
 and anomaly union dictionary are introduced to extract reliand higher detection accuracy. Tu et al. [27], [28] developed
 able representation samples and remove anomalies or noise
the density peak clustering method to eliminate the contamicontamination. Similarly, Wu et al. [46] presented a relaxed
nation of anomalies in the process of background modeling.
 CR-based model that combined the k-nearest neighbor method
Chang [29], [30], [31] implemented a novel dummy variable
 to construct more a practical nonglobal dictionary for more
trick to transform hyperspectral target detectors into anomaly
 reliable background representation solutions. Nevertheless,
detectors. Furthermore, Chang et al. [32], [33], [34] developed
 data representation-based methods still easily lose effectivethe versatile effective anomaly space (EAS) scheme to boost
 ness in real scenarios due to predetermined parameter selection
the anomaly detectability of anomaly detectors. However, the
 and tweaking, which reduces the generality of the methods.
bulk of data statistics-based models depend heavily on the
prior assumptions of data distribution, which restricts their C. Data Factorization-Based Model
applicability in sophisticated imaging scenarios.
 The data factorization-based model will implement AD by
 decomposing the hyperspectral cube in different dimensions,
B. Data Representation-Based Model which are mainly classified as matrix factorization-based
 The data representation-based model will construct the models and tensor factorization-based models. The matrix
background dictionary and corresponding sparse coefficient factorization-based model leverages the theoretical basis that
matrix of HSIs to determine whether the tested pixel belongs to the anomalies in HSIs often present low target-to-image pixel
an abnormal target according to the reconstruction error of the ratios and spatial sparsity, while the background in HSIs is
tested pixel without resorting to Gaussian assumptions about always monotonous and manifested as low-rank attributes.
the background distribution. Its core mechanism originates With that in mind, the low-rank and sparse matrix factorfrom a fundamental theory, that is, each background pixel can ization can be exploited in the HAD field. For example,
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Xu et al. [47] represented the background pixels by the mostly adopt the reconstruction-based self-supervised data
low-rank matrix of the background dictionary and excavated fitting pattern to precisely reconstruct the background and
the local difference characteristics of anomaly targets by suppress anomalies with large reconstruction errors [65], [66].
the sparsity constraint. Huyan et al. [48] proposed a poten- To the best of our knowledge, the mainstream DL-based
tial anomaly and background double dictionary construction HAD solutions include convolution neural network (CNN)-
method to better discriminate anomalies from background based models and generative adversarial network (GAN)-based
and noise interference. Considering that anomalies and noise models. The CNN-based model exploits the formidable feature
have analogous sparse characteristics, the detection results are extraction capability of CNNs to extract the spatial–spectral
always mixed with false alarms (FAs) of noise. To this end, features and reach effective reconstruction. As the inventors
Li et al. [49] incorporated the mixture of Gaussian (MoG) of CNN-based models, Li et al. [67] trained the network with
method into the matrix factorization-based model, which effec- differential pixel pairs and similar pixel pairs samples to detertively distinguished between anomalies and noise in a sparse mine whether the test sample is abnormal. Moreover, Fu et al.
matrix and improved the detection accuracy. Chen et al. [50] [68] solved the HAD problem with a plug-and-play denoising
presented a simple and effective data decomposition method, network model and employed CNN regularization to eliminate
called component decomposition analysis (CDA) which better background noise. Wang et al. [69] applied transfer learning to
separated anomalies from HSI data. In addition, Chang and obtain more training samples and effectively address the prior
Chen [51] also proposed a novel sparsity density peak (SDP) knowledge agnostic problem. In addition, the autonomous AD
trick to represent the HSI data and extract anomalies in the (Auto-AD) [70] implemented a fully convolutional autoensparse space. The tensor factorization-based models [52], [53], coder network with a skip connection structure to obtain a
[54], [55], [56], [57], [58], [59], [60], [61], [62] take advantage reconstruction error map with high contrast between anomalies
of the 3-D structure of the HSI data cube and achieve high and the background. Based on the autoencoder network frameperformance in consideration of the 2-D spatial features and work, Liu et al. [71] designed a dual-frequency autoencoder
1-D spectral features. Inspired by the mechanism of high-order model which converted the hyperspectral data into low- and
tensor decomposition, Wang et al. [52] exploited the classical high-frequency constituents and parallelly extracted anomalies
CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) factorization to reconstruct from these two constituents. Meanwhile, Jiang et al. [72]
the background based on the principle that the background developed an autoencoding density estimation network which
tensor can be decomposed into the sum of numerous rank-1 estimated the energy density of anomalies with an end-totensors. In addition, Zhang and Wen [53] implemented Tucker end unsupervised learning manner. Li et al. [73] employed
factorization to achieve the core tensor and corresponding an interpretable model-driven deep mixture network which
factor tensor, whose principal component can serve as a basis combined the autoencoder-based low-dimensional manifold
for judging anomalies and backgrounds. Furthermore, Xu et al. background learner and convex relaxation optimization with
[54] introduced tensor singular value decomposition (t-SVD) anomaly sparse constraints. The GAN-based methods effecto resolve the matricization problem of Tucker factorization. tively model the background distribution and reconstruct the
However, the tensor nuclear norm (TNN) used in [54] will background by means of the powerful data distribution learnresult in an over-shrinkage problem and deteriorate the detec- ing ability of GAN. For example, Jiang et al. [74] proposed an
tion performance. To solve this issue, He et al. [55] introduced unsupervised discriminative reconstruction constrained GAN
a novel ϵ-shrinkage TNN to obtain a more compact convex (DRCGAN), which employed an autoencoder to realize the
closure of the tensor tubal rank. Xiao et al. [63] introduced the discriminative reconstruction constraint for GAN and accuoptimal clustering framework-based enhanced tensor low-rank rate background pixel distribution learning. Based on the
(OCF-ETLR) factorization model to select effective bands and variational background inference strategy, Wang et al. [75]
reduce the interference from redundant bands. Besides that, achieved excellent background modeling and spectrum recon-
Feng et al. [56] employed the tensor ring factorization and struction effect in light of the GAN-based network framework.
total variation constraint to extract the low-rank and piecewise Furthermore, Jiang et al. [76] devised a spectral-constrained
smoothness attributes of the background in the spatial and GAN, called WeaklyAD, for the reconstruction task of HSIs,
spectral domains. Xiao et al. [64] also applied the total where the anomaly and the background can be better disvariation constraint and explored a multiscale entanglement criminated with a higher reconstruction error of the anomaly
renormalization ansatz (MERA) based tensor factorization target. Similarly, Li et al. [77] presented a novel sparse HAD
algorithm to decompose the HSI tensor into anomalies and network that integrated the sparse coding strategy into the
background parts. Notwithstanding, these methods only exploit GAN-based reconstruction network and improved the robusthandcrafted shallow features and image attributes such as ness of this weakly supervised HAD network. Jiang et al. [78]
low-rank and sparsity characteristics, lacking significant deep implemented an unsupervised, low-rank embedded network
context features devoted to discriminate anomalies from the (LREN), where the latent layer cooperated with the Gaussian
background. mixture model.

D. Deep Learning (DL)-Based Model
 Unlike the above three methods, DL-based models are prior E. Motivation and Contributions
knowledge agnostic and do not depend upon data distribu- Through an in-depth analysis of the above DL-based methtion assumptions. Actually, off-the-shelf DL-based methods ods, it can be perceived that the pivotal proposition of
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

the DL-based models rests on the construction of differential characteristics representation between backgrounds and
anomalies. Therefore, the employment of reconstruction error,
minimization can go along with this central foothold and
achieve exceptional detection performance in certain scenarios based on the basic assumption, where the background
part can be correctly reconstructed by the network while
anomaly targets cannot [79]. However, due to inevitable
abnormal sample contamination during network training, off- Fig. 1. Schematic of the visual attention mechanism of the HVS. This visual
the-shelf detection network mostly has the flaw of inevitable attention mechanism mainly adopts a global-to-local pattern. After observing
memory storage for anomalies [80]. Therefore, it is not an image, HVS will first scan the entire image through a global attention
 mechanism to obtain the global glanced image and key local regions of
always pledged that anomalies cause emphatically higher interest. Then, HVS will further refine the feature extraction and attention
reconstruction errors than the background in the existing of the key local regions in a local focused image.
DL-based methods [81], [82]. To this end, specific feature
guiding constraints should be applied for the background and
anomalies to enhance the background reconstruction while
weakening the anomalies reconstruction. In recent, several relevant DL-based literature about imposing specific constraints
on HSIs guiding reconstruction have emerged. For example,
Auto-AD [70] exploited a novel adaptive weighting loss that
dynamically utilized the reconstruction errors of anomalies to
determine the adaptive weighting loss for better anomalies
suppression during network training. Moreover, inspired by
representation-based methods, the deformable convolutional
autoencoder (DCAE) [83] designed a background guidance
module, which restrained the anomalies reconstruction by
 Fig. 2. Examples of the local and nonlocal spatial–spectral relationships
guiding the parameter updating of the decoder in light of the among pixels in HSIs. T1 and T2 represent the nonlocal relevant pixels with
elaborate background dictionary representation. However, the spatial–spectral similarity. B1, B2, B3, and B4 are the pixels surrounding
deployment of the above constraints only a trifle retards the the local neighborhood of T1. (a) and (b) Illustrate the spatial positional
 relationships and their respective spectral curves of corresponding pixels.
issue of anomalies reconstruction problem due to the neglect of The spectral curve of T1 is easily discriminated from its adjacent pixels
self-supervised memory learning for anomalies during network and determined as abnormal. Meanwhile, since T1 and T2 present extremely
training. In contrast, exploring the anomalies overshadowing similar spectral radiation and spatial morphological characteristics, long-range
 pixel T2 can also be judged as an outlier if T1 belongs to the anomaly part.
strategy can resolve the anomalies reconstruction issue during self-supervised learning. Specifically, Wang et al. [84],
[85], [86] proposed the invisible-spot self-supervised learning
network (BS3 LNet), which generated a high-quality recon- transformer, we first implement a global transformer block
struction error map owing to the employment of anomalies (GTB) that extracts the global glanced spatial–spectral feaovershadowing-based invisible-spot architecture. Nevertheless, tures based on a crossbar-based global sparse self-attention
restricted by the intrinsic local receptive fields of CNN frame- module. Then, similar to the global-to-local object detection
work, almost all existing DL-based AD methods, including mode of HVS, the global glanced image is divided into
BS3 LNet, were flawed in capturing the long-range depen- multiple local patches, followed by the employment of a local
dence and nonlocal content features from a global perspective. transformer block (LTB) to abstract the local spatial–spectral
In conclusion, the limitations of existing DL-based AD features supported by a patch-based local self-invisible attenmethods can be summarized as the inevitable anomalies tion module. Moreover, a novel anomalies overshadowing
reconstruction issue and intrinsic CNN local receptive fields self-supervised learning strategy is devised to alleviate the
restriction. To this end, the research in this article offers anomalies reconstruction problem. Specifically, we incorporate
a new perspective on leading transformers into HAD tasks. an elaborate invisible diagonal mask (IDM) into the self-
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, the target discovery pro- attention module, which overshadows each abnormal pixel
cess in the human vision system (HVS) actually adheres to or background pixel and implements reconstruction learning
the global-to-local attention pattern which combines global based on the dependent spatial–spectral features from the
glance attention with local refining attention. Meanwhile, global and local receptive fields. In our experiments, we conas expressed in Fig. 2, both local spatial–spectral differences duct extensive contrastive experiments and ablation studies on
and nonlocal similarity features are momentous clues for multiple datasets to verify the effectiveness of the proposed
reconstruction learning in the HAD task. Therefore, inspired G2LSSAT. To summarize, the major contributions of our
by this HVS attention mechanism, we propose a global- article are concluded as follows.
to-local spatial–spectral awareness transformer (G2LSSAT) 1) We develop a brand-new global-to-local HAD framenetwork paradigm for the HAD task. First, by means of work based on the choreographed GTB-to-LTB transthe exceptional long-range feature extraction capability of the former network structure, which effectively extracts deep
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Fig. 3. Overall network framework of G2LSSAT. The proposed method is devised based on a global-to-local transformer architecture. Conv and Trans are
abbreviations for convolution and transformer. Linear, LN, and MLP represent the LPL, LayerNorm layer, and multilayer perceptron, respectively.

 spatial–spectral reconstruction features from a global A. Overall Network Architecture
 perspective to a local perspective. The overall network structure diagram of the proposed
 2) We introduce the crossbar-based global sparse attention G2LSSAT is shown in Fig 3. Let the input HSI data cube
 module and patch-based local self-invisible attention be represented as H ∈ Rb×h×w , where h and w represent
 module and embed them into the GTB and LTB the height and width of the input HSI, and b is the numfor nonlocal and local spatial–spectral characteristics ber of spectral bands. For the input HSI, we first employ
 learning. a spatial–spectral features enhancement (SSFE) convolution
 3) We develop novel anomalies overshadowing-based self- block to enhance the spatial and spectral features represupervised network learning strategy to address the sentation. Specifically, the SSFE convolution block consists
 anomalies reconstruction issue based on a IDM. of 1 × 1 convolution layers, Gaussian error linear units
 4) We conduct copious comprehensive experiments on six (GELUs) layers, and depth-wise separable (DWS) convolution
 hyperspectral datasets to test and verify the superiority layers [87]. In addition, the DWS convolution layer includes
 of the proposed G2LSSAT for HAD. a 3 × 3 convolution layer (depth-wise convolution) and a
 The reminder of our article is organized as follows. First, 1 × 1 convolution layer (point-wise convolution). Actually,
we introduce the related work and motivation of our work in the DWS convolution layers can effectively strengthen spatial–
Section I. In Section II, we present the details of the proposed spectral features from spatial–spectral dimensions and increase
G2LSSAT. In Section III, the experimental results and analysis the generalization and trainability of the model. Therefore,
are provided. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section IV. after the input HSI H is fed into the SSFE convolution block,
 we can obtain the compact feature map F ∈ Rb×h×w as
 II. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY follows:
 Taking inspiration from the global-to-local vision attention
 F = C1×1 (G(DWS(G(C1×1 (H ))))) (1)
mechanism of HVS and the transcendent capability of the
transformer in extracting global dependent features, we present where C1×1 , G, and DWS represent the 1 × 1 convolution
a novel G2LSSAT. In this section, we illustrate the proposed layer, GELU layer, and DWS convolution layer, respectively.
G2LSSAT and explain the implementation details. Subsequently, the compact feature map F is fed into the
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of the G2LSSAT
 Input: (1) the input HSI data H ∈ Rb×h×w ;
 (2) maximum iteration Tmax ;
 (3) batch size n;
 (4) sliding windows stride k.
 Procedure:
 Initialize the network with random weights.
 for epoch in [1,2,. . . .,Tmax ] do
 Strengthen spatial-spectral features according to 1.
 Update non-local spatial-spectral features based on
 global transformer block.
 Construct the local blocks according to the sliding
 windows-based patch partition in 2.
 Shuffle the local blocks and select the batch of
 shuffled blocks as training samples.
 for each sample batch n do
 Update local spatial-spectral characteristics
 based on local transformer block.
 Strengthen spatial-spectral features based on 1.
 Train the network by minimizing loss in 3.
 Update network parameters with ADAM Fig. 4. Diagrammatic sketch of the global-to-local mechanism in our
 G2LSSAT. (a) Global and local information dependent relationship. The
 optimizer. local neighborhood pixels surrounding the central pixel and nonlocal related
 end pixels can be utilized for reconstruction. (b) Local neighborhood pixels
 Merge patches according to the position calibration reconstruction mechanism. The blue pixels denote the neighborhood pixels
 matrix of the shuffled blocks. which can be used to reconstruct the central pixel. (c) and (d) Represent the
 end relating pattern between spectral vector located in spatial coordinate (i, j) and
 spatial coordinate (m, k). It can be seen that the related spectral vector located
 Output: Network parameters. in spatial coordinate (i, k) and spatial coordinate (m, j) can be captured by
 the proposed crossbar-based global sparse attention. The pertinence relation
 between (i, j) and (m, k) can be indirectly represented by the aid of (i, k)
 and (m, j). Meanwhile, it can be easily deduced that the nonlocal information
GTB to extract the global features and obtain the glanced cannot be obtained by single row or column self-attention.
feature map G based on a pivotal crossbar-based global sparse
attention module. Subsequently, we implement a k 2 ×k 2 sliding
window to partition G into multiple sliding HSI local blocks the updated block feature map will be further enhanced by
 N
P = { pi }i=1 , with the sliding stride being k. In particular, the employing SSFE operation. For the loss optimization of the
spatial size of each local block is k 2 × k 2 and the total number network, our G2LSSAT network is trained using the mean
of local blocks n b is formulated as squared error (mse) loss function according to the practical
 experimental results in Section III-G
 Y  si + 2 pb − db (k 2 − 1) − 1 
 nb = nw × nh = +1 ψ̂ = arg min L (ψ)
 i∈(0,1)
 k ψ
 (3)
 (2) = arg min ∥F (H ; ψ) − H ∥22
 ψ

where si (i = 1, 2) represents the spatial size of the given where F (H ; ψ) represents the overall network optimization
HSI, i.e., the width and height of the HSI. Notably, pb and function and ψ refers to the learnable parameters in our
db denote the padding and dilation parameters which are set G2LSSAT. In the testing phase, the HAD result will be given
to 0 and 1 in the unfold operation. Therefore, we can obtain according to the reconstruction residual R between the input
 2 2
the local block feature map with a size of P ∈ Rn×k ×k ×b , HSI H and reconstructed HSI Ĥ as follows:
where n denotes the number of batch size. Then, the block
feature map P will be shuffled along the first dimension Ri, j = hi, j − ĥi, j 2 (4)
to enhance robustness during network training. In addition,
the block feature map will be divided into multiple local where hi, j ∈ Rb×1 and ĥi, j ∈ Rb×1 represent the pixels at
patches and reshaped as an embedded token with the size of location (i, j) of H and Ĥ , respectively. Specifically, Ri, j
E ∈ Rn×(k ×k )×b . The position calibration matrix C ∈ Rn w ×n h
 2 2
 denotes the anomaly scores of the corresponding pixel located
will storages the position information of the shuffled block at (i, j) of the final AD map R ∈ Rh×w . Note that all patches
feature map for the following patch merge process. Then, can be exploited to calculate the reconstruction error loss and
the embedded token will be normalized by the LayerNorm generate the final AD map in the training and testing stage.
operation and fed into the local transformer block to capture The critical processes of the proposed G2LSSAT are described
the local spatial–spectral reconstruction features supported by in Algorithm 1. Meanwhile, we record the feature dimensions
a patch-based local self-invisible attention module. Finally, of the input and output of each module in Table I.
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Fig. 5. Detailed network architecture of the crossbar-based global sparse self-attention and patch-based local self-invisible attention module. (a) Row sparse
self-attention module. (b) Column sparse self-attention module. (c) Patch-based local self-invisible attention module.

B. Global Transformer Block self-attention mechanism:
 Q r K rT
  
 As shown in Fig. 4(a), we can utilize the nonlocal content Arow = Softmax √ ∈ Rh×w×w (6)
similarity features, i.e., two planes with similar features at c
a long distance, to improve the ability of the network over where Softmax(·) denotes √ the softmax function along the
anomalies judgment. Therefore, as presented in Fig 3, for last axis of the data cube, c represents the scale factor.
the enhanced compact feature map F, we first fed it into Intuitively, as depicted in Fig. 6, we present the sparse row
a GTB to explore the nonlocal dependent spatial–spectral spatial–spectral self-attention mechanism in detail. Specififeatures. Specifically, the core composition of the GTB cally, for the spectral vectors located at spatial coordinates
focuses on a crossbar-based global sparse attention module. (i, j) in projected query Q r , all spectral vectors located on
In a conventional transformer, the multihead self-attention the same row, i.e., the same row matrix Q i ∈ Rw×c , will
layers serve as the prominent network architectural com- be included in the self-attention calculation. The same row
ponents that can extract long-range context information. Q i matrix will be multiplied by the transpose matrix K iT of
Nevertheless, multihead self-attention is of quadratic complex- the same row matrix K i in the projected key K r to generate
ity O(N 2 ) [88], which increases computational burden and the ith row self-attention map Ai ∈ Rw×w . By traversing
training difficulty. To tackle this issue, we develop a novel all rows, the final row self-attention map is given in (6).
crossbar-based global sparse attention, which is composed of Meanwhile, the projected value Vr will be weighted by mulhorizontal row self-attention and vertical column self-attention tiplying Vr and the row self-attention map, which models
module. The detailed network diagrammatic sketch of the the spatial–spectral correlation between the spectral vector
proposed crossbar-based global sparse attention is depicted in spatial coordinates (i, j) and all spectral vectors in the
in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Specifically, for the horizontal row self- same row. It can be noticed from Fig. 5(a) and (b) that the
attention, the given HSI data cube F ∈ Rh×w×b will be row self-attention map is updated by the dropout operation
projected into query Q r ∈ Rh×w×c , key K r ∈ Rh×w×c , and as Ârow = D(Arow ), where D denotes the dropout operation.
value Vr ∈ Rh×w×c by linear projection layers (LPLs) Then, the final output of the row self-attention module can
 be expressed as Ârow V . Except for the row self-attention,
 the column self-attention can be obtained by traversing all
 Q r = F W Qr , K r = F W Kr , Vr = F WVr (5)
 columns according to a similar principle. Note that the row
 and column self-attention must be iteratively spliced in series
where c = b/2 in our method. W Qr ∈ Rb×c , W Kr ∈ Rb×c , for nonlocal spatial–spectral feature extraction and generating
and WVr ∈ Rb×c represent the learnable weight matrix. Sub- global glanced features map G as indicated in Fig. 4(c)
sequently, the projected query Q r and key K r are rearranged and (d). In other words, a single row or column self-attention
to produce the following row attention map Arow by the row cannot capture long-range features. In light of the proposed
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE I
 F EATURE D IMENSIONS OF THE I NPUT AND O UTPUT OF E ACH M ODULE

 C. Local Transformer Block
 As described in Section II-A, we employ a sliding window
 to divide the global glanced feature map G into multiple local
 patches and introduce an LTB to extract local spatial–spectral
 deep features. In our method, the sliding stride p and window
 size w are set to k and k 2 , where k is a hyperparameter.
 According to the sliding stride and window size of the sliding
 window, we can obtain the number of patches r = w/ p in each
 local block. Subsequently, as shown in Fig. 3, the embedded
 tokens E ∈ Rn×(w×w)×b will be fed into the LayerNorm
 and reshaped as Ê ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b) , where each patch
 is straightened into a 1-D spectral vector with the size of
 ( p× p×b). Then, as shown in Fig. 5(c), the updated embedded
 tokens Ê will be imputed into the LPL to obtain the local patch
 query Q l ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×e) , key K l ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×e) , and
 value Vl ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b)

 Q l = Ê W Ql , K l = Ê W Kl , Vl = Ê WVl (7)

 where e = b/2 in our method. W Ql ∈ Rb×e , W Kl ∈ Rb×e , and
 WVl ∈ Rb×b represent the learnable weight matrix in LPLs.
 Correspondingly, the local patch-based attention map A can
 be obtained by multiplying the projected local patch query Q l
Fig. 6. Sketch map of the calculation process of the row self-attention. The by the transpose of key K l
yellow area represents the row matrix Oi where the spectral vector at spatial
coordinate (i, j) is located. The green arrow represents the traversal direction
 Q l K lT
  
of each column of Oi in the process of multiplying matrix Oi by the transpose Aloc = Softmax √ ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×(r ×r ) (8)
of K i . p× p×e

 where ( p × p × e)1/2 represents the corresponding scale
crossbar-based global sparse self-attention, the computational factor. Similar to the updating fashion of row and column
complexity of global self-attention has been reduced from self-attention module, we incorporate dropout and invisible
O(N 2 ) to O(N ) due to the serial iterative alternating imple- diagonal masking operations to generate the final patch-based
mentation of row and column self-attention with complexity local self-invisible attention map Âloc . The detailed mechanism
O(N ) [88]. of the IDM can be found in Section II-D. Finally, we can
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

 to reconstruct the background and suppress the anomalies to
 the maximum extent. Therefore, we hope that the network
 will overshadow each pixel itself in the receptive field and
 reconstruct itself by means of its relationship information with
 other pixels. In that case, the anomaly pixel that distinctly
 differs from the adjacent pixels cannot be dependably restored
 and generates a larger reconstruction error during network
 training. From this point of view, it is considered that the
 diagonal element which describes the data autocorrelation
 property in the attention weight matrix illustrates the receptive
 field of each pixel for itself during the network training stage.
 Therefore, as shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d), the diagonal element
 in the attention weight matrix A, which measures the degree of
 self-correlation must be set to 0. To this end, for the attention
 weight matrix A, we design a novel IDM, which √ is embedded
 before the Softmax operation. Let S = (Q K T )/ d ∈ Rm×m
 be represented as follows:
  
 s11 s12 · · · s1m
  s21 s22 · · · s2m 
 S= . . .. . (10)
  
Fig. 7. Diagrammatic sketch of self-attention and the proposed invis-  .. .. . 
ible diagonal masked self-attention in our G2LSSAT. The white regions
in attention weights represent zero-value regions. (a) Self-attention mech- sm1 sm2 · · · smm
anism. (b) Receptive fields of self-attention. (c) Invisible diagonal masked
self-attention mechanism. (d) Receptive fields of invisible diagonal masked Let m i denote the maximum value of ith row, the IDM can
self-attention. be represented as follows:
  
 m0 + ∞ m0 ··· m0
obtain the local-focused HSI data cube Hloc as follows:  m1 m1 + ∞ · · · m1 
 M = .. .. .. .. (11)
  
 Hloc = T + MLP(LN(T ))  . . . .
 
 
 T = Reshape( Âloc Vl ) + Ê (9) mm mm · · · mm + ∞
where MLP and LN represent the multilayer perceptron layer where ∞ represents a large positive value which is set to
and LayerNorm layer, respectively. Moreover, reshape denotes 300 in our method.
the operation of adjusting Âloc Vl ∈ Rn×(r ×r )×( p× p×b) as the Based on the IDM, the final attention weight matrix can
size of Reshape( Âloc Vl ) ∈ Rn×(r × p)×(r × p)×b . Then, the SSFE be described as Â = Softmax(S − M). On the one hand,
module will be embedded after the local focused feature map we subtract the maximum value of each row from each element
to strengthen the spatial–spectral reconstruction representation. in the attention weight matrix to prevent a data overflow
Finally, the local focused HSI data cube will be merged to form issue [89]. On the other hand, we subtract a large value from
the output reconstructed HSI with the size of Ĥ ∈ Rw×h×b each value on the diagonal and utilize the Softmax operation,
according to the position calibration matrix. i.e., limx→−∞ exp−x = 0, to zero the diagonal elements.

D. Invisible Diagonal Mask
 III. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSES
 In the architecture of the patch-based local self-invisible
attention module, we incorporate a IDM to suppress exces- In this section, numerous experiments are implemented to
sive anomalies reconstruction. This section explains the test and verify the effectiveness of our G2LSSAT for the HAD
detailed mechanism of the IDM. Specifically, as illustrated in task on six real HSI datasets. Note that all the comparison
Fig. 7(a) and (b), for conventional self-attention,
 √ the attention experiments were conducted on a workstation with Windows
weight A can be denoted as Softmax(Q K T / d) ∈ Rm×m 10, Intel1 Core2 i9-10980XE CPU@3.00 GHz, 16-GB RAM,
based on the linear projected query Q ∈ Rm×d and the linear and an NVIDIA 3090 GPU with 24-GB memory.
projected value K ∈ Rm×d . In a nutshell, this type of selfattention mechanism will learn the dependency relationship of
each query on all other keys and build the global receptive A. Datasets Introduction
field. In other words, each feature information is a combi- In the experiments, we compare our method with nine
nation of all other features within the group. In the field of well-developed detectors on six hyperspectral datasets. The
imaging, the self-attention mechanism can enable each patch detailed introduction of the six datasets is presented in Table II.
to contain not only its own subject information but also its
relationship information with other patches. Nevertheless, the 1 Registered trademark.

overall optimization purpose of the reconstruction network is 2 Trademarked.
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 8. HSI datasets used in our experiments. The first row and second row represent the pseudo-color image and ground truth of the corresponding dataset.
(a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat Island. (f) Salians.

 TABLE II
 I NTRODUCTION OF S IX HSI DATASETS . R ES . R EPRESENTS THE A BBREVIATION OF R ESOLUTION

 1) Pavia Dataset: The first dataset was captured by the 4) Gainesville Dataset: The fourth dataset was acquired by
Reflective Optics System Imaging Spectrometer-03 (ROSIS- the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS)
03) sensor over the Pavia city of Italy [90]. The spectral sensor over the region of Gainesville, Florida, USA [90].
wavelength range of the Pavia dataset involves 188 bands It has 191 spectral bands used for the experiments after
in the range from 430 to 680 nm. Meanwhile, the spatial erasing the low signal-to-cluster ratio (SCR) and water
resolution and spatial size of this dataset come to 1.3 m/pixel absorption bands from the incipient dataset. Moreover, the
and 150 × 150 pixels. As presented in Fig. 8(a), this dataset Gainesville dataset is comprised of 100 × 100 pixels,
is composed of the beach background and anomalous vehicle with a spatial resolution of 3.5 m/pixel. As presented in
targets with 68 pixels. The total abnormal target pixels account Fig. 8(d), this dataset includes 52 anomaly pixels with the ship
for 0.3% of the entire hyperspectral image. attribute to be detected, which accounts for 0.52% of all the
 2) Okavango Delta Dataset: The second dataset is an HSI pixels.
with a land scene collected by the Hyperion sensor [91] carried 5) Cat Island Dataset: The fifth dataset with a beach backby EO-1. It was captured over the area of the Okavango ground was collected by the AVIRIS sensor [90]. As described
Delta. The wavelengths of the bands in the Okavango Delta in Table II, the spatial size and number of spectral bands are
dataset range from 400 to 2500 nm. The background area 150 × 150 pixels and 188, respectively. The spatial resolution
in this dataset consists of observations from 14 different of this dataset reaches 17.2 m/pixel. As shown in Fig. 8(e),
types of land cover. In addition, this dataset is composed of there exists a ship target with 19 pixels that need to be
100 × 100 pixels with 30 m/pixel spatial resolution and 145 detected, making up 0.08% of the total amount of pixels in
spectral bands are preserved to hold discriminative information the dataset.
for each pixel. As shown in Fig. 8(b), 32 anomalous pixels are 6) Salians Dataset: The sixth dataset was shot by the
to be detected in the land background, making up 0.32% of AVIRIS airborne sensor from Salinas Valley, CA, USA [44].
the total amount of pixels in the dataset. At a spatial resolution of 3.7 m/pixel, a subimage with a size
 3) Indiana Dataset: The third dataset was collected by of 120 × 120 pixels was cropped from the 512 × 217 pixels
the Hyperion hyperspectral sensor over the zone of the State original image in the experiments. The 25 randomly selected
of Indiana, USA [92]. It contains 149 spectral bands in the anomalous pixels are synthetic data according to the identified
wavelength range of 357∼2576 nm. Under a 10 m/pixel spatial building spectral. After removing 20 atmospheric and water
resolution, this dataset has a spatial size of 150 × 150 pixels. vapor absorption bands (108–112, 154–167, and 224), there
As presented in Fig. 8(c), the 17 abnormal pixels mainly are 204 reserved spectral bands ranging from 400 to 2500 nm
consist of the storage silos and the roofs embedded in the in the dataset. The pseudo-color image of the Salians dataset
agricultural background region. is presented in Fig. 8(f).
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

B. Experimental Settings TABLE III
 PARAMETER S ETTINGS OF THE T EN C OMPARISON HAD A LGORITHMS
 1) Evaluation Indicators: To verify the performance of each ON THE C AT I SLAND DATASET
algorithm, we implement multiple evaluation indicators to test
the detection effectiveness and efficiency of the compared
HAD algorithms. First, the running time of each model
on six HSI datasets is selected as the evaluation indicator
for detection efficiency. In terms of detection effectiveness,
we employ multiple evaluation indicators to validate the detection performance from the
 perspective of qualitative and quantitative. With respect
to the qualitative indicators, we introduce the AD map,
background-anomaly separation map [93], and 3-D receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve [94] to compare multiple
state-of-the-art algorithms in our experiments. Specifically,
the AD map can directly display the impression of AD and
background suppression (BS) from the shade of the color map. where higher AUCad ∈ [0, 2], AUCbs ∈ [−1, 1], AUCadbs ∈
By outlining the box plot of the background and anomalies, the [−1, 1], AUCod ∈ [−1, 2], and AUCsnpr ∈ [0, +∞] values
background-anomaly separation map can intuitively illustrate represent better detection performance for AD and BS.
the distribution relationship between the background part 2) Comparison Methods: To investigate the effectiveness
and the anomaly part. The gap between the anomaly box and and superiority of G2LSSAT, we select four excellent tradithe background box reflect the separation degree between the tional algorithms, including OCF-ETLR [63], 2S-GLRT [17],
background and the anomaly component in the detection map. CRDBPSW [43], EAS-RX [33], and five DNN-based HAD
In addition, the 3-D ROC curve represents the variation curve methods, including LREN [78], GAED [65], WeaklyAD [76],
of detection probability rate Pd and FA Fa with the variation DCAE [83], and BockNet [86], to serve as comparison methof segmentation threshold τ ∈ (0, 1). Given a segmentation ods in the experiments. As expressed in Table III, we present
threshold, Pd and P f are denoted as follows: the key parameters and corresponding settings of these ten
 DT DF comparison methods on the Cat Island dataset. First, for
 Pd = , Fa = (12) the statistical theory-based method EAS-RX, the parameters
 AT AP
 of p and j are estimated in accordance with the NWHFC
where AT and DT denote the total number of true anomaly and MXSVD algorithms in [37]. Meanwhile, the parameters
pixels in the HSI and the true anomaly pixels detected by of the outer window size wout and inner window size win
the corresponding algorithm, respectively. AP and DF denote in 2S-GLRT are set in the range {5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19}
the number of all pixels in the HSI and the number of falsely and the range {3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17} to investigate the
detected pixels under a certain threshold τ . Moreover, the com- best performance on different datasets. Then, for the data
prehensive 3-D ROC curve evaluation indicator can describe representation-based algorithm CRDBPSW, the outer winthe capability of each method regarding AD and BS. Deriving dow size wout and inner window size win are selected from
from the 3-D ROC curve, we can obtain a more quantitative the same range as 2S-GLRT. Moreover, the parameter setevaluation indicators for algorithm testing experiments. For tings of the weighting factor λ is fixed at 10−6 . Moreover,
example, by pinning one of the three indicators PD , PD , or τ OCF-ETLR is an excellent data factorization-based method
in 3-D ROC curve, we can derive the 2-D ROC curves for which relies on low-rank and sparse tensor factorization.
(Pd , Fa ), (Pd , τ ), and (Fa , τ ), respectively. Therefore, by the In OCF-ETLR, the parameters λ, α, and β are tuned in
integral calculation of the corresponding area under the curve the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 , 1}. The number of
(AUC), the quantitative evaluation indicators AUC(Pd ,Fa ) ∈ bands m is investigated from 5 to 65. For GAED, the
(0, 1), AUC(Pd ,τ ) ∈ (0, 1), and AUC(Fa ,τ ) ∈ (0, 1), can be window size is varied from 3 to 13 for each dataset. Meannaturally obtained. while, the penalty coefficient β is selected from the range
 Combining these three evaluation indicators, we can further {1e−6 , 1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 , 1, 10}. For Auto-AD and
obtain the following indicators, which reflect the capability DCAE detectors, the tradeoff factor λ is elaborately selected
of AD, BS, joint AD and BS (ADBS), overall detection from the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 }. For WeaklyAD,
(OD), and the signal-to-noise probability ratio (SNPR). The the radius value Eps varies from 0.01 to 0.25 for optimal
mathematical formula of these indicators are expressed as performance, and the value MinPts is tuned from 1 to 25.
follows: For BockNet, the number of spots Bs is varied from 1 to 9 for
 AUCad = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) + AUC(Pd ,τ ) (13) the optimum performance in light of the algorithm literature.
 AUCbs = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) − AUC(Fa ,τ ) (14) For the proposed G2LSSAT, based on python 3.7.0 and the
 DL framework of PyTorch 1.12.1, we train the network model
 AUCadbs = AUC(Pd ,τ ) − AUC(Fa ,τ ) (15)
 with the adaptive moment estimation (ADAM) optimizer. The
 AUCod = AUC(Pd ,Fa ) + AUC(Pd ,τ ) − AUC(Fa ,τ ) (16) overall training procedure and basic parameter settings of the
 AUC(Pd ,Fa ) proposed G2LSSAT are presented in Algorithm 1. The training
 AUCsnpr = (17)
 AUC(Pd ,τ ) epoch and batch size are set to 150 and 256, respectively.
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 9. Analysis of the parameters on the six datasets. (a) Sliding window size k. (b) Number of stacking times n g of crossbar-based global sparse attention
in the GTB. (c) Number of multihead n h . (d) Learning rate lr .

In addition, the detailed parameter settings of k, n g , n h , and respectively. Therefore, the parameter settings of the sliding
lr of G2LSSAT on six datasets will be further discussed in size are determined according to the corresponding optimal
Section III-C. Except for LREN, which was implemented results. For the multiscale anomalies in these six datasets, the
based on TensorFlow 2.3.0, the remaining DNN-based models proposed G2LSSAT needs elaborate parameter tuning for the
were implemented using PyTorch 1.12.1. respective sliding windows size k which determines the size
 of the local receptive field.
 2) Impact of n g : The parameter n g represents the stacking
C. Model Parameter Tuning times of the crossbar-based global sparse attention module
 In this section, we investigate four momentous parameters in the GTB. We conduct a parameter tuning experiment
tuning in the G2LSSAT model, namely, k, n g , n h , and lr . to investigate whether more attention module stacking can
k represents the window size used in the patch partition. implicitly improve the detection performance of the G2LSSAT.
lr denotes the learning rate during the network training. As described in Fig. 9(b), we select the parameter n g from
n g and n h represents the stacking times and the number the range {1, 2, 3, 4}. It can be seen that the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values
of multihead in the crossbar-based global sparse attention gradually decrease when n g varies from 1 to 4 on all datasets.
module. This funding illustrates that larger n g cannot bring more vital
 1) Impact of k: k is a prominent parameter in the proposed information but instead the reduces the detection ability. Based
G2LSSAT model, which controls the size of the patch that on this phenomenon, the parameter n g is fixed at 1 for the
relates to local feature extraction and background reconstruc- proposed G2LSSAT.
tion. In the experiments, to investigate the effect of sliding 3) Impact of n h : The design of the multihead is aimed
size k on the AD performance, we preset k in the range of at increasing the flexibility and capability of the transformer
{2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and record the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values on six datasets. model, enabling it to capture more complex feature relation-
It can be seen from Fig. 9(a) that the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values ships. Therefore, we also attempt to incorporate multihead
are obtained when k = 4 on the Pavia and Cat Island datasets. self-attention into our method. The AUC(Pd ,Fa ) metrics for
Meanwhile, the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values are obtained when different n h are reported in Fig. 9(c). We select the optimal
k = 2 on the Indiana and Salians datasets. Meanwhile, parameter n g from the range {1, 2, 4, 8}. From Fig. 9(c), when
for the Okavango Delta and Gainesville, the optimal values n h = 1, AUC(Pd ,Fa ) is the highest. It indicates that this
of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) are generated when k = 3 and k = 5, multihead design cannot be adequately coupled with the GTB
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Fig. 10. Color anomaly response maps obtained by ten detectors on six datasets. (a) Pseudo-color image. (b) Ground truth. (c) OCF-ETLR. (d) 2S-GLRT.
(e) CRDBPSW. (f) EAS-RX. (g) LREN. (h) GAED. (i) WeaklyAD. (j) DCAE. (k) BockNet. (l) G2LSSAT.

structure. Therefore, in our article, we utilize only the single- targets can be highlighted from the response maps by the OCFhead self-attention structure and the parameter of n h is fixed ETLR, EAS-RX, 2S-GLRT, and DCAE algorithms.
at 1 during network training and testing. However, some pronounced FAs are produced due to defects
 4) Impact of lr : The learning rate lr is an important hyper- in the BS ability. In contrast, our G2LSSAT has the superiparameter that determines whether the objective loss function ority in both detecting anomalies and suppressing background
can converge to a local minimum and when it will converge elements. In addition, the small anomalies in the Cat Island
to the minimum. An appropriate learning rate can enable the and Salians datasets, the anomaly response maps of these ten
objective function to converge around a local minimum within algorithms are illustrated in the last two rows of Fig. 10.
an appropriate training time and then improve the detection It can be observed that the OCF-ETLR, EAS-RX, LREN,
performance of the network. The parameters of learning rate lr GAED, and WeaklyAD algorithms generate a series of FAs
are tuned in the range {1e−5 , 1e−4 , 1e−3 , 1e−2 , 1e−1 }. Fig. 9(d) pixels in these two scenes, which obviously contaminates the
lists the AUC(Pd ,Fa ) indicators for different learning rates on detection results. Moreover, the 2S-GLRT, DCAE, BockNet,
all datasets. From Fig. 9(d), we can observe that when lr = and CRDBPSW struggle to accurately detect all anomalies in
1e−3 , our G2LSSAT yields the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on the all the Salians dataset. Overall, the proposed G2LSSAT achieves
datasets. Consequently, in our experiment, we set lr as 1e−3 a more discriminative response to anomaly targets compared
to accurately detect anomalies. to the comparison algorithms.
 In addition, the ROC curve for (Pd , Fa ), (Pd , τ ), (Fa , τ ),
 and (Pd , Fa , τ ) of the nine HAD algorithms on six datasets
D. Model Detection Accuracy Comparison are illustrated in Fig. 11. First, it can be observed from the
 1) Qualitative Comparison Results: As presented in ROC curve for (Pd , Fa ) on the six datasets that the proposed
Fig. 10, we show the visual color anomaly response maps of the G2LSSAT model is closest to the upper left corner of the
the ten comparison methods on six HSI datasets. The anomaly curve, which indicates the superiority of its comprehensive
response map can clearly describe the response intensity of detection performance compared to that of the other methanomalies among the HAD methods. It is noticed that the ods. Then, as depicted in Fig. 11, the 2-D ROC curve of
response map in Fig. 10 varies from deep blue to deep (Pd , τ ) obtained by the proposed method is proximate to the
red, which corresponds to the color bar and demonstrates upper-right corner of the Pavia, Gainesville, and Cat Island
that the anomaly response intensity is growing. First, the datasets. The proximity of the 2-D (Pd , τ ) ROC curve to the
anomaly response maps of these ten detection algorithms on upper-right corner is the directive of the proposed G2LSSAT
the Pavia, Okavango Delta, Indiana, and Gainesville datasets obtaining superior anomaly discovery performance. Similarly,
are presented from the first row to the fourth row in Fig. 10. the 2-D ROC curve for (Fa , τ ) of the proposed G2LSSAT can
It can be observed that the CRDBPSW, GAED, WeaklyAD, quickly reach the lower-left corner of the coordinate axis on
LREN, and BockNet models demonstrate low responses to the Okavango Delta and Indiana datasets. This phenomenon
anomalies, resulting in a certain of missed detections (MDs) demonstrates that the background suppressing performance of
and incomplete target shape reconstruction. The anomaly G2LSSAT is satisfactory on these two datasets.
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 11. Three-dimensional (Pd , Fa , τ ) ROC curves, 2-D (Pd , τ ) ROC curves, 2-D (Fa , τ ) ROC curves, and 2-D (Pd , Fa , τ ) ROC curves of ten HAD
methods on six datasets. (I-a)–(I-d) Pavia. (II-a)–(II-d) Okavango Delta. (III-a)–(III-d) Indiana. (IV-a)–(IV-d) Gainesville. (V-a)–(V-d) Cat Island. (VI-a)–(VI-d)
Salians.

 Moreover, as depicted in Fig. 12, we utilize box-whisker intuitively reporting the distribution discrimination between
plots to represent anomaly-background separation maps for the anomalies and the background in the detection maps.
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Fig. 12. Anomaly-background separation maps of the ten detectors on the six datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat
Island. (f) Salians.

In Fig. 12, the red box and blue box denote the abnormal pixel comparison results comprehensively, it can be concluded that
distribution and background pixel distribution, respectively. our G2LSSAT achieves the most robust and second-to-none
Specifically, the larger gap between these two boxes represents HAD accuracy performance among the comparison detectors.
better anomalies and background separability of the algorithm. The proposed G2LSSAT model showcases clear superiority
It can be observed from Fig. 12 that the proposed G2LSSAT in detecting multiple types of anomalies spanning differgains pretty well performance in separation between the back- ent scenarios, as revealed by numerous evaluation indicators
ground and anomalies on the six HSI datasets especially on the results derived from the above qualitative and quantitative
Pavia and Gainesville datasets, which demonstrate the excel- comparison experiments. In comparison to the compared
lent capability of G2LSSAT for anomalies and background DNN-based models (LREN, GAED, WeaklyAD, DCAE, and
separation compared to other detectors. BockNet), the proposed G2LSSAT almost obtains optimal
 2) Quantitative Comparison Results: Except for the qualita- detection accuracy performance about evaluation indicators on
tive comparison results, we report the quantitative comparison all datasets. To our knowledge, this is mainly attributed to the
results of each algorithm to quantitatively evaluate the detec- fact that the proposed G2LSSAT incorporates a global-to-local
tion effect. As recorded in Table IV, we present the eight attention mechanism and invisible diagonal masking scheme,
evaluation indicators of the AUC according to the 3-D ROC which fully explores the global and local spatial–spectral
curve, with the optimal results highlighted in bold and the correlation features and overshadows the reconstruction of
second-best results are underlined. It can be observed from anomalies, making the reconstructed image further away from
Table IV that our G2LSSAT yields the highest values of anomalies while closer to the real background.
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , AUCadbs , and AUCod , on multiple datasets such
as the Pavia and Gainesville datasets, which demonstrates the
superiority of G2LSSSAT in terms of OD performance. Except E. Model Running Time Comparison
for the Gainesville dataset, the proposed G2LSSAT model As illustrated in Table V, we report the running time of
gains optimal AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on other datasets. Specifically, for ten detectors on all datasets to investigate the computational
the values of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , the proposed G2LSSAT yields an burden of each algorithm. The WeaklyAD, DCAE, BockNet,
essential improvement of 0.78%, 0.51%, 0.08%, 0.31%, and and G2LSSAT are implemented based on the PyTorch and
0.23% on the other five datasets compared to the second- trained by the accelerated computing of GPU. The LREN
best detector. Meanwhile, the proposed method also obtains is implemented based on the TensorFlow by means of the
the exceptional AUCsnpr on the Cat Island, Okavango Delta, accelerated computing of GPU. The GAED model and four
Indiana, and Pavia datasets, which directly proves the reason- traditional models are also implemented with the Python
able background suppressing performance of our G2LSSAT. environment. Among the four traditional detectors, EAS-RX
Consequently, considering these qualitative and quantitative expends the shortest running time in comparison to other
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE IV
 AUC VALUES OF T EN D ETECTORS THE S IX DATASETS

 TABLE V
RUNNING T IME (I N S ECONDS ) OF T EN A LGORITHMS ON THE S IX DATASETS . T R AND T E R EPRESENT THE RUNNING T IME FOR T RAINING AND T ESTING

methods, and it performs comparatively well in detection seen from Table V that the six DNN-based detectors require a
accuracy on the Okavango Delta and Indiana datasets. It can be certain amount of training time, among which DCAE expends
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDY OF THE P ROPOSED M ETHOD ON THE S IX DATASETS

the shortest training time on multiple datasets due to its TABLE VII
simpler network architecture and fewer network parameters. C OMPARATIVE P ERFORMANCE OF GTB AND MHGA OVER AUC(Pd ,Fa )
 AND RUNNING T IME ON THE S IX DATASETS . MHGA AND GTB R EP -
In addition, apart from LREN requiring more running time RESENT THE MHGA M ODULE AND THE GTB M ODULE
on dictionary construction and matrix factorization, the other IN O UR M ETHOD
five DNN-based models all present extremely few network
inference times on six HSI datasets, while our G2LSSAT
takes relatively less inference time on different datasets.
In summary, our G2LSSAT obtains a relatively reasonable
tradeoff between detection accuracy and efficiency. Note that,
since the proposed G2LSSAT adopts joint local patches-based
and global crossbar-based sampling methods in the training
stage, it undeniably consumes extra training and inference
time compared to other reconstruction-based detectors such
as DCAE and GAED.

F. Ablation Study increment of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) ] compared to the G2LSSAT model
 To evaluate the influences of three central modules, i.e., with MHGA, which further proves that the proposed GTB
GTB, LTB, and IDM, on the proposed G2LSSAT, we imple- has the ability of global correlation representation learning
ment some ablation studies on six datasets. The detailed similar to the MHGA while improving computing efficiency
experimental results are delineated in Table VI. by relying on the elaborate scheme of crossbar-based global
 1) Effectiveness of GTB: As shown in Table VI, we imple- sparse attention.
ment six experimental control groups to investigate the 2) Effectiveness of LTB: In the experiments, we foleffectiveness of GTB, LTB, and IDM. Note that the baseline low the global-to-local reconstruction network framework
in Table VI represents the basic model without the utilization and incorporate the local transformer which extracts the
of these three components. First, to evaluate the effect of the local reconstruction features based on the local patch-based
GTB on the proposed G2LSSAT, we compare the baseline self-attention module. To verify the effectiveness of LTB,
model with the baseline+GTB model and record the values we conduct an ablation study of LTB and present the experiof AUC(Pd ,Fa ) on the six datasets. It can be observed from mental results in Table VI. It can be seen that the AUC(Pd ,Fa )
Table VI that the improved model, which embeds the GTB values derived from the improved baseline+LTB model yield
into the baseline model, results in increments of 0.15%, 0.52%, considerable increases of 0.29%, 0.76%, 1%, 6.07%, 1.3%,
0.69%, 6.36%, 0.9%, and 1.18%, relative to the baseline model and 2.27% compared to the baseline model, which fully
for each respective dataset. This is mainly because the GTB indicates that the detection accuracy can be boosted by
module leverages a crossbar-based global sparse attention exploiting the spectral–spatial correlation features of the local
mechanism to capture and integrate global information, which background. Meanwhile, the improved baseline+LTB+GTB,
augments the learning of nonlocal representations. In addition, which combines the GTB module with the LTB module,
as presented in Table VII, we conduct an experimental com- can effectively bring about an average increase of 2.43% on
parison between the performances of basic multihead global AUC(Pd ,Fa ) . This shows that these two components can be well
self-attention (MHGA) [95] and the proposed GTB. Specifi- coupled and further improve the detection performance of the
cally, the MHGA will independently represent each pixel by proposed G2LSSAT.
the joint subspace of global spatial correlation information. 3) Effectiveness of IDM: In our method, we design a
It can be concluded from Table VII that upon utilization IDM to suppress the anomalies over-reconstruction issue
of GTB, the G2LSSAT results in a significant increase in during network training. To investigate the effectiveness
computational efficiency (31.32 s average reduction of running of the IDM on G2LSSAT, several ablation experiments
time) and approximate detection accuracy [0.07% average have been quantitatively and qualitatively devised. First, as
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 13. Ground truth and color anomaly response maps obtained by the proposed G2LSSAT model with IDM and without IDM. The second and third rows
in the figure present the original HSIs and reconstructed HSIs with our G2LSSAT. The yellow region and green region circled in the fourth and fifth rows
of the figure represent the MDs and FAs of the G2LSSAT model without IDM in comparison to those of the G2LSSAT model. The red regions denote the
corresponding regions in the anomaly response map of the G2LSSAT model with IDM. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat
Island. (f) Salians.

shown in Table VI, the baseline+GTB+LTB+IDM and the more, as elucidated in the fourth and fifth rows of Fig. 13,
baseline+GTB+LTB represents the complete the G2LSSAT we intuitively compare the detection effect of these two models
model and the G2LSSAT model without the IDM. From in light of the anomaly response maps. Compared to the
the quantitative results over AUC(Pd ,Fa ) , we can see that the complete G2LSSAT model, the absence of the IDM results in
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) values derived from the G2LSSAT model with the serious occurrences of FAs and MDs, which are triggered
IDM are higher than that of the G2LSSAT model with by the decrease in background reconstruction residuals and
IDM on six HSI datasets. Notably, relative to the controlled the increase in anomalies reconstruction residuals. This finding
baseline+LTB model, the evolved baseline+LTB+IDM model confirms that the IDM in the HAD task results in a notable
also boosts the detection accuracy performance due to the augmentation of anomalies reconstruction inhibition and backimplementation of the IDM. Then, we present the original ground reconstruction assistance from the opposite side.
HSI and reconstructed HSI with our G2LSSAT in the second
and third rows of Fig. 13. As presented in the reconstructed G. Model Complexity and Convergence
HSIs of Pavia and Cat Island datasets in Fig. 13, it can be 1) Complexity Analysis: In this section, we investigate the
visually observed that the anomalies in reconstructed HSI are complexity of our G2LSSAT model. In the spirit of equality,
indeed overwhelmed by the background, which proves the we mainly compare our method with the other two excellent
overall anomalies reconstruction suppression effect. Further- DNN-based reconstruction network, DCAE and BockNet,
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

Fig. 14. Comparative performance of the l1 , l1 , and smooth l1 loss functions over convergence characteristic curves on the six datasets. (a) Pavia. (b) Okavango
Delta. (c) Indiana. (d) Gainesville. (e) Cat Island. (f) Salians.

 TABLE VIII
 M ODEL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS OF THE T HREE DNN-BASED M ODELS

based on the same software and hardware implementation
platform. The comparison results of network parameter quantity, average training time, average testing time, and average
AUC(Pd ,Fa ) are listed in Table VIII. Compared to DCAE and
BockNet, G2LSSAT has the highest AUC(Pd ,Fa ) and a moderate level of running time and network parameters. Although
DCAE has less running time and network parameters than Fig. 15. AUC(Pd ,Fa ) of the three loss functions for the six datasets.
G2LSSAT, the detection accuracy of DCAE has no advantages compared with our method. In summary, the proposed
G2LSSAT exhibits promising detection accuracy performance terms of AUC(Pd ,Fa ) outcomes, as shown in Fig. 15. These
and competitive efficiency advantages. observations, together with the loss curves in Fig. 14, lead us
 2) Convergence Analysis: As described in Figs. 14 and 15, to conclude that the l2 loss is excellent in terms of detection
we conduct convergence characteristic analysis experiments accuracy and convergence stability for the proposed method.
of the proposed G2LSSAT on all datasets. In our experiments, we introduce three different loss functions, i.e., l1 , IV. C ONCLUSION
l2 , and smooth l1 , to observe the corresponding detection In this article, we devise a transformer-based G2LSSAT
and convergence performances. l2 loss function stands for network model to achieve robust AD in HSIs. The proposed
the mse loss function. From the loss curves of l1 , l2 , and model employs a global-to-local network structure in light
smooth l1 loss in Fig. 14, it can be seen that the loss curves of the visual attention mechanism in HVS. To be specific,
of l2 loss and smooth l1 loss decrease at a faster rate than that the GTB and LTB are introduced in sequence to extract
provided by the l1 loss function. Moreover, among these three the global and local spatial–spectral reconstruction features.
loss functions, the l2 loss function has distinct advantages in In addition, we embed the elaborate crossbar-based global
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

sparse attention and patch-based local self-invisible attention [18] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
into the GTB and LTB modules to explore the long-range and optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
 Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
local relation characteristics. Moreover, to avoid unexpected [19] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
anomalies reconstruction problem, we design a IDM to erase optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
abnormal pixels itself in the receptive field and effectuate anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
accurate reconstruction by means of the global and local [20] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
dependent features. Extensive comparison experiments and anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
ablation studies on six datasets demonstrate the superiority and Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
robustness of the proposed G2LSSAT compared with the state- [21] W. Liu et al., “Random selection-based adaptive saliency-weighted RXD
 anomaly detection for hyperspectral imagery,” Int. J. Remote Sens.,
of-the-art detectors. However, the proposed G2LSSAT also vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2139–2158, Apr. 2018.
inevitably suffers from the flaws of low computational effi- [22] L. Ren, L. Zhao, and Y. Wang, “A superpixel-based dual window RX
ciency and high computational costs during network training. for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
 vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1233–1237, Jul. 2020.
In future work, we will explore more strategies for reducing [23] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
the model complexity and design a more lightweight network anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
with real-time performance. Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
 [24] J. Zhou, C. Kwan, B. Ayhan, and M. T. Eismann, “A novel cluster
 R EFERENCES kernel RX algorithm for anomaly and change detection using hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 11,
 [1] A. Plaza et al., “Recent advances in techniques for hyperspectral image pp. 6497–6504, Nov. 2016.
 processing,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 113, pp. S110–S122, Sep. 2009. [25] S. Matteoli, T. Veracini, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A locally adaptive
 [2] M. E. Paoletti, J. M. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning background density estimator: An evolution for RX-based anomaly
 classifiers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. detectors,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 323–327,
 Remote Sens., vol. 158, pp. 279–317, Dec. 2019. Jan. 2014.
 [3] M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-Álvarez, Y. Xue, J. M. Haut, and A. Plaza, [26] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Weighted-
 “AAtt-CNN: Automatical attention-based convolutional neural networks RXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics
 for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel.
 Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511118. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366,
 [4] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection: Jun. 2014.
 A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90, [27] B. Tu, X. Yang, C. Zhou, D. He, and A. Plaza, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 Mar. 2022. detection using dual window density,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 [5] X. Tao, T. Cui, A. Plaza, and P. Ren, “Simultaneously counting and Sens., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 8503–8517, Dec. 2020.
 extracting endmembers in a hyperspectral image based on divergent sub- [28] B. Tu, X. Yang, N. Li, C. Zhou, and D. He, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 sets,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 8952–8966, detection via density peak clustering,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 129,
 Dec. 2020. pp. 144–149, Jan. 2020.
 [6] X. Tao et al., “Fast orthogonal projection for hyperspectral unmixing,” [29] Chein-I. Chang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection: A dual theory of
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523313. hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 [7] D. W. J. Stein, S. G. Beaven, L. E. Hoff, E. M. Winter, A. P. Schaum, vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511720.
 and A. D. Stocker, “Anomaly detection from hyperspectral imagery,” [30] C.-I. Chang, “Target-to-anomaly conversion for hyperspectral anomaly
 IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 58–69, Jan. 2002. detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 [8] S. M. Schweizer and J. M. F. Moura, “Hyperspectral imagery: Clutter Art. no. 5540428.
 adaptation in anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 5, [31] C.-I. Chang, “Constrained energy minimization anomaly detection for
 pp. 1855–1871, Aug. 2000. hyperspectral imagery via dummy variable trick,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 [9] Q. Hao et al., “Fusing multiple deep models for in vivo human brain Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5517119.
 hyperspectral image classification to identify glioblastoma tumor,” IEEE [32] C.-I. Chang, “Effective anomaly space for hyperspectral anomaly
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 4007314. detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
[10] S. Sudharsan, R. Hemalatha, and S. Radha, “A survey on hyperspectral Art. no. 5526624.
 imaging for mineral exploration using machine learning algorithms,” in [33] C.-I. Chang, S. Chen, S. Zhong, and Y. Shi, “Exploration of data scene
 Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process. Netw. (WiSPNET), characterization and 3D ROC evaluation for hyperspectral anomaly
 Mar. 2019, pp. 206–212. detection,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 1, p. 135, Dec. 2023.
[11] M. T. Eismann, A. D. Stocker, and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Automated [34] C.-I. Chang, C.-Y. Lin, and P. Fuming Hu, “Band sampling of hyperhyperspectral cueing for civilian search and rescue,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 97, spectral anomaly detection in effective anomaly space,” IEEE Trans.
 no. 6, pp. 1031–1055, Jun. 2009. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5502729.
[12] L. Fang, C. Wang, S. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyperspectral image [35] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
 classification via multiple-feature-based adaptive sparse representation,” by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel.
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 1646–1657, Jul. 2017. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533,
[13] Y. Ding, Y. Guo, Y. Chong, S. Pan, and J. Feng, “Global consistent Jun. 2015.
 graph convolutional network for hyperspectral image classification,” [36] Q. Ling, Y. Guo, Z. Lin, and W. An, “A constrained sparse representa-
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 5501516. tion model for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
[14] M. Shimoni, R. Haelterman, and C. Perneel, “Hypersectral imaging for Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2358–2371, Apr. 2019.
 military and security applications: Combining myriad processing and [37] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral
 sensing techniques,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 7, no. 2, anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3,
 pp. 101–117, Jun. 2019. pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015.
[15] B. Tu, X. Liao, C. Zhou, S. Chen, and W. He, “Feature extraction using [38] H. Su, Z. Wu, Q. Du, and P. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using
 multitask superpixel auxiliary learning for hyperspectral classification,” collaborative representation with outlier removal,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 5018216. Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 5029–5038,
[16] Y. Cai et al., “Superpixel contracted neighborhood contrastive subspace Dec. 2018.
 clustering network for hyperspectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. [39] Y. Chen, N. M. Nasrabadi, and T. D. Tran, “Sparse representation for
 Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5530113. target detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal
[17] J. Liu, Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, D. Orlando, and H. Li, “Multipixel Process., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 629–640, Jun. 2011.
 anomaly detection with unknown patterns for hyperspectral imagery,” [40] L. Zhu and G. Wen, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via background
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 5557–5567, estimation and adaptive weighted sparse representation,” Remote Sens.,
 Oct. 2022. vol. 10, no. 2, p. 272, Feb. 2018.
HE et al.: GLOBAL-TO-LOCAL SPATIAL–SPECTRAL AWARENESS TRANSFORMER NETWORK FOR HAD 5530422

[41] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via [62] L. Li, W. Li, Y. Qu, C. Zhao, R. Tao, and Q. Du, “Prior-based
 a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote tensor approximation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,”
 Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1037–1050,
[42] M. Vafadar and H. Ghassemian, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral Mar. 2022.
 imagery using modified collaborative representation,” IEEE Geosci. [63] Q. Xiao, L. Zhao, S. Chen, and X. Li, “Enhanced tensor low-rank
 Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 577–581, Apr. 2018. representation learning for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
[43] Z. Hou, W. Li, R. Tao, P. Ma, and W. Shi, “Collaborative representation Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 20, 2023, Art. no. 5512005.
 with background purification and saliency weight for hyperspectral [64] Q. Xiao, L. Zhao, S. Chen, and X. Li, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection
 anomaly detection,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 1–12, via MERA decomposition and enhanced total variation regularization,”
 Jan. 2022. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5514919.
[44] K. Tan, Z. Hou, F. Wu, Q. Du, and Y. Chen, “Anomaly detection for [65] P. Xiang, S. Ali, S. K. Jung, and H. Zhou, “Hyperspectral anomaly
 hyperspectral imagery based on the regularized subspace method and detection with guided autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 collaborative representation,” Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 11, p. 1318, vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5538818.
 Jun. 2019. [66] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
[45] S. Chang and P. Ghamisi, “Nonnegative-constrained joint collabora- anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 tive representation with union dictionary for hyperspectral anomaly Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, [67] W. Li, G. Wu, and Q. Du, “Transferred deep learning for anomaly
 Art. no. 5534913. detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
[46] Z. Wu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection with relaxed collabora- vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 597–601, May 2017.
 tive representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, [68] X. Fu, S. Jia, L. Zhuang, M. Xu, J. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Hyperspectral
 Art. no. 5533417. anomaly detection via deep plug-and-play denoising CNN regulariza-
[47] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in tion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9553–9568,
 hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,” Nov. 2021.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000, [69] Y. Wang, F. Wang, Q. Zhu, M. Song, and C. Yu, “Transferred
 Apr. 2016. tensor decomposition-based deep learning for hyperspectral anomaly
[48] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp. (IGARSS),
 detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construc- Jul. 2021, pp. 5279–5282.
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276, [70] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
 Apr. 2019. hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolu-
[49] L. Li, W. Li, Q. Du, and R. Tao, “Low-rank and sparse decomposition tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 with mixture of Gaussian for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Art. no. 5503314.
 Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4363–4372, Sep. 2020. [71] Y. Liu, W. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Li, and Q. Du, “Dual-frequency autoencoder for
[50] S. Chen, C.-I. Chang, and X. Li, “Component decomposition analysis anomaly detection in transformed hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans.
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5523613.
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5516222. [72] K. Jiang et al., “E2E-LIADE: End-to-end local invariant autoencoding
[51] C.-I. Chang and J. Chen, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection by data density estimation model for anomaly target detection in hyperspecsphering and sparsity density peaks,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., tral image,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 11385–11396,
 vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5526321. Nov. 2022.
[52] J. Wang, Y. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Anomaly detection of hyperspectral [73] Y. Li, K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, X. Zhang, and Q. Du, “A model-driven
 image via tensor completion,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, deep mixture network for robust hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE
 no. 6, pp. 1099–1103, Jun. 2021. Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5522916.
[53] X. Zhang and G. Wen, “A fast and adaptive method for determining [74] T. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Xie, and Q. Du, “Discriminative reconstruction
 K 1 , K 2 , and K 3 in the tensor decomposition-based anomaly detection constrained generative adversarial network for hyperspectral anomaly
 algorithm,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3–7, detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7,
 Jan. 2018. pp. 4666–4679, Jul. 2020.
[54] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Chanussot, and Z. Wei, “Joint reconstruction [75] Z. Wang, X. Wang, K. Tan, B. Han, J. Ding, and Z. Liu, “Hyperspecand anomaly detection from compressive hyperspectral images tral anomaly detection based on variational background inference and
 using Mahalanobis distance-regularized tensor RPCA,” IEEE generative adversarial network,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 143, Nov. 2023,
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2919–2930, Art. no. 109795.
 May 2018.
 [76] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised
[55] X. He, J. Wu, Q. Ling, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial
 detection for hyperspectral imagery via tensor low-rank approximation network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.
 with multiple subspace learning,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022.
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5509917.
 [77] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN
[56] M. Feng, W. Chen, Y. Yang, Q. Shu, H. Li, and Y. Huang, “Hyperspectral
 for hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,”
 anomaly detection based on tensor ring decomposition with factors
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811.
 TV regularization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
 Art. no. 5514114. [78] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank
 embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,” in
[57] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Graph and total variation regular-
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Feb. 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4139–4146.
 ized low-rank representation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 391–406, [79] D. Ma, Y. Hou, M. Chen, B. Li, Z. Wang, and M. Li, “S2G2HAD:
 Jan. 2020. A graph-guided Siamese reconstruction network for hyperspectral
[58] R. Feng, H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, and T. Zeng, “Local spatial anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023,
 constraint and total variation for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Art. no. 5526121.
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512216. [80] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for
[59] T. Guo, L. He, F. Luo, X. Gong, Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Anomaly detection hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
 of hyperspectral image with hierarchical antinoise mutual-incoherence- pp. 1–17, 2023, Art. no. 5001817.
 induced low-rank representation,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., [81] D. Ma, M. Chen, Y. Yang, B. Li, M. Li, and Y. Gao, “Coarse-to-fine mulvol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5510213. tiview anomaly coupling network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
[60] M. Wang, D. Hong, B. Zhang, L. Ren, J. Yao, and J. Chanussot, “Learn- IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5507715.
 ing double subspace representation for joint hyperspectral anomaly [82] P. Xiang, S. Ali, J. Zhang, S. Ki Jung, and H. Zhou, “Pixel-associated
 detection and noise removal,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, autoencoder for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” Int. J. Appl. Earth
 2023, Art. no. 5507517. Observ. Geoinf., vol. 129, May 2024, Art. no. 103816.
[61] W. Xie, T. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Jia, and J. Lei, “Structure tensor and guided [83] Z. Wu et al., “Background-guided deformable convolutional autoencoder
 filtering-based algorithm for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4218–4230, Jul. 2019. vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531816.
5530422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

[84] L. Gao, D. Wang, L. Zhuang, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, Qiang Ling received the B.E. degree in measure-
 “BS3LNet: A new blind-spot self-supervised learning network for hyper- ment engineering and the M.Eng. degree in control
 spectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, science and engineering from Air Force Engineering
 2023, Art. no. 5504218. University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, in 2013 and 2016,
[85] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. J. Plaza, “PDB- respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in information and
 SNet: Pixel-shuffle downsampling blind-spot reconstruction network for communication engineering from the National Unihyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., versity of Defense Technology (NUDT), Changsha,
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5511914. China, in 2019.
[86] D. Wang, L. Zhuang, L. Gao, X. Sun, M. Huang, and A. Plaza, He is currently a Lecturer with the College of
 “BockNet: Blind-block reconstruction network with a guard window for Electronic Science and Technology, NUDT. His
 hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., research interests include pattern recognition and
 vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5531916. hyperspectral image processing.
[87] F. Chollet, “Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jul. 2017, pp. 1251–1258.
[88] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[89] W. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Yu, and M. Yang, “Large-margin softmax loss
 Miao Li received the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees
 for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 from the National University of Defense Technol-
 Jun. 2016, pp. 507–516.
 ogy (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2012 and 2017,
[90] X. Kang, X. Zhang, S. Li, K. Li, J. Li, and J. A. Benediktsson, “Hyper- respectively.
 spectral anomaly detection with attribute and edge-preserving filters,” He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 5600–5611, College of Electronic Science and Technology,
 Oct. 2017. NUDT. His research interests include infrared dim
[91] S. Yu, X. Li, L. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection and small target detection.
 based on low-rank representation using local outlier factor,” IEEE
 Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1279–1283, Jul. 2021.
[92] T. Cheng and B. Wang, “Total variation and sparsity regularized
 decomposition model with union dictionary for hyperspectral anomaly
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 2,
 pp. 1472–1486, Feb. 2021.
[93] D. F. Williamson, R. A. Parker, and J. S. Kendrick, “The box plot: A
 simple visual method to interpret data,” Ann. Internal Med., vol. 110,
 no. 11, pp. 916–921, 1989. Zhaoxu Li received the B.E. degree in com-
[94] C.-I. Chang, “An effective evaluation tool for hyperspectral target munication engineering and the M.E. degree in
 detection: 3D receiver operating characteristic curve analysis,” IEEE information and communication engineering from
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 5131–5153, Jun. 2020. the National University of Defense Technology
[95] D. Shen, X. Ma, W. Kong, J. Liu, J. Wang, and H. Wang, “Hyperspectral (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2018 and 2020,
 target detection based on interpretable representation network,” IEEE respectively, where he is currently pursuing the
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5519416. Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic Science.
 His research interests include pattern recognition, machine learning, and hyperspectral image
 processing.

 Xu He received the B.E. degree in electronic
 engineering and the M.E. degree in information
 and communication engineering from Air Force Yuyuan Zhang received the B.E. and M.E. degrees
 Engineering University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China, in in electronics and communication engineering from
 2019 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursu- Naval Aeronautical University, Yantai, China, in
 ing the Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic 2019 and 2021, respectively. He is currently pursu-
 Science, National University of Defense Technology, ing the Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic
 Changsha, China. Science, National University of Defense Technology,
 His research interests include hyperspectral image Changsha, China.
 processing, infrared small target detection, and pat- His research interests include semantic communitern recognition. cation and signal processing.

 Shilin Zhou received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. Zaiping Lin received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
 degrees in electrical engineering from Hunan Uni- from the National University of Defense Technolversity, Changsha, China, in 1994, 1996, and 2000, ogy (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2007 and 2012,
 respectively. respectively.
 He is currently a Full Professor with the Col- He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 lege of Electrical Science, National University of College of Electronic Science and Technology,
 Defense Technology, Changsha. He has authored or NUDT. His research interests include infrared image
 co-authored more than 100 refereed articles. His processing and signal processing.
 research interests include image processing and pattern recognition.