IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024 6623

 Graph Anomaly Detection via Multi-View
 Discriminative Awareness Learning
 Jie Lian, Xuzheng Wang, Xincan Lin , Zhihao Wu , Shiping Wang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Wenzhong Guo

 Abstract—With the deeper research on attributed networks,
graph anomaly detection is becoming an increasingly important
topic. It aims to identify patterns deviating from a majority of
nodes. Currently, graph anomaly detection algorithms based on
reconstruction-based learning and contrastive-based learning have
gained significant attention. To harness diverse supervised signals,
an intuitive approach is to find an elegant strategy to fuse these
two paradigms, forming the hybrid learning paradigm. Despite
the success of the hybrid learning paradigm, due to its subgraph
sampling based approach, it still grapples with issues related to
unreliable neighborhood information and the neglect of topological
details. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a new
hybrid learning paradigm via multi-view discriminative awareness learning for graph anomaly detection. Unlike the previous
hybrid learning paradigm, the graph reconstruction module fully
incorporates attribute and topology information, enhancing the
comprehensiveness of data reconstruction. Moreover, the multiview discrimination module employs a view-level contrast method
based on the complete graph, which helps to comprehensively
extract the information in the attributed network and mitigates the Fig. 1. An example illustrates two typical anomalies in the attributed networks:
neighborhood unreliability without increasing the complexity. The 1) Topology anomaly: incorrectly linked unrelated nodes; 2) Attribute anomaly:
experimental results, obtained from a rigorous evaluation on six nodes with disturbed attributes. Nodes with the same color represent that they
 have similar attributes.
benchmark datasets, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method compared to existing baseline methods.
 Index Terms—Attributed networks, graph anomaly detection, attributed networks, notable progress has been made across varigraph neural networks, self-supervised learning. ous tasks within these networks, such as node classification, link
 prediction, and graph classification. Among these tasks, graph
 anomaly detection is a fundamental data mining task [4]. It has
 I. INTRODUCTION practical significance in various fields [5], including social spam
 ITH the development of information technology, nu- detection [6], telecommunication fraud detection [7], network
W merous fields have generated complex, interdependent,
and interrelated data represented in the form of graphs [1], [2],
 malware attack [8], and financial fraud detection [9].
 Graph anomaly detection aims to identify patterns that devi-
[3]. These data are commonly known as attributed networks or ate from the majority of node specifications in the attributed
attributed graphs. In attributed networks, nodes and edges rep- networks [10]. Based on previous studies, anomalies can be
resent multivariate information about entities and their complex categorized into two types: attribute anomaly and topology
relationships. With the extensive attention given to the study of anomaly. As shown in Fig. 1, attribute anomaly occurs when
 node attributes are contaminated by factors like noise, while
 Received 23 April 2024; revised 5 August 2024; accepted 8 September topology anomaly arises due to incorrect links between nodes.
2024. Date of publication 17 September 2024; date of current version 15 Despite the clear definition of graph anomalies, it is still a tough
November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural challenge to solve graph anomaly detection problems due to the
Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20472 and Grant 62276065,
and in part by the National Key Research and Development Plan of China under complexity of graph data, the absence of labeled information,
Grant 2021YFB3600503. Recommended for acceptance by Dr. Yuedong Xu. and the diversity of anomaly patterns.
(Corresponding author: Wenzhong Guo.) Considering these challenges, extensive studies have been
 The authors are with the College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou
University, Fuzhou 350108, China, and also with the Fujian Provincial Key Lab- conducted in the domain of anomaly detection on attributed
oratory of Network Computing and Intelligent Information Processing, Fuzhou networks. Numerous traditional methods [11], [12], [13], [14],
University, Fuzhou 350108, China (e-mail: linj2680157@gmail.com; wang [15] have been widely explored. Nonetheless, limited to relying
xuzheng@126.com; xincanlinms@gmail.com; zhihaowu1999@gmail.com;
shipingwangphd@163.com; guowenzhong@fzu.edu.cn). on domain-specific knowledge, they can not effectively capture
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2024.3462462 deep nonlinear information. Fortunately, aided by deep learning,

 2327-4697 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 2. The proposed framework consists of three parts: graph reconstruction module, multi-view discrimination module, and graph anomaly scoring module.
Graph reconstruction module aims to identify anomalies by performing attribute regression and adjacency matrix regression on the original view through a graph
encoding-decoding structure. Multi-view discrimination module aims to identify anomalies from potential patterns of anomalies by generating positive and negative
views that are discriminated against the original view at the view level. Finally, the final anomaly score is computed through the graph anomaly scoring module.

recent advancements in graph anomaly detection have led to To overcome the above weakness, in this paper, we propose
impressive results. Currently, graph anomaly detection mod- a new hybrid paradigm via Multi-view Discriminative Awareels using reconstruction-based learning and contrastive-based ness learning for Graph Anomaly Detection (MDA-GAD). The
learning have garnered considerable interest. In specific, the framework of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 2. Specifreconstruction-based learning paradigm [16], [17], [18] aims ically, a graph anomaly detection model is designed, which
to measure the abnormality by calculating the reconstruction includes a graph reconstruction module and a multi-view diserrors of the nodes using the graph autoencoder. Nevertheless, crimination module that work in parallel. Unlike existing hybrid
due to the sparseness of the anomaly samples, this approach learning methods, which are limited to attribute reconstruction,
is vulnerable to the class imbalance problem. In contrast, the the graph reconstruction module simultaneously reconstructs
contrastive-based learning paradigm [19], [20] utilizes a fixed- both attribute and topology, enhancing the ability to detect
size subgraph sampling strategy for each node to design a proxy various anomalies. The multi-view discrimination module emtask that predicts the relationship between a node and a subgraph. ploys a sampling-free view generation method that generates
This method utilizes node-subgraph pairing to establish an equal positive and negative views directly from the original view for
number of positive and negative instance pairs for node-level view-level discrimination learning. Finally, a graph anomaly
contrastive learning, effectively alleviating the class imbalance scoring module is designed for the anomaly evaluation of each
problem. However, fixed-size subgraph sampling may lead to the node. The proposed method utilizes complete graph informaloss of neighborhood information of nodes with higher degrees, tion to ensure a comprehensive representation on the attributed
thus degrading the effectiveness of contrastive learning. networks, effectively reducing the neighborhood unreliability
 To leverage diverse supervised signals, prior studies [21], without increasing complexity. Overall, the main contributions
[22] have enhanced the contrastive-based learning paradigm by are summarised as follows:
incorporating reconstruction learning, a method referred to as r Present a novel hybrid learning approach that effectively inthe hybrid learning paradigm. Nevertheless, by revisiting this tegrates contrastive-based and reconstruction-based learnparadigm, it is found that most methods still rely on fixed-size ing paradigms for anomaly detection on attributed netsubgraph sampling, which focuses only on local information works.
rather than global information. In particular, the incomplete r Introduce a new method to generate views and shift the focapture of subgraphs and the presence of abnormal nodes re- cus from node-level to view-level contrast, overcoming the
sult in the unreliability of neighborhoods. This undermines drawbacks of previous hybrid learning methods regarding
the completeness of reconstruction learning and fundamentally neighborhood unreliability and high complexity.
fails to address the limitations inherent in the contrastive-based r The experimental results illustrate the effectiveness of the
learning paradigm. Additionally, the current hybrid learning proposed method, showing its superiority over existing
paradigm only considers attribute reconstruction while ignoring baselines and its high time efficiency.
topological information, making it difficult to identify topolog- The rest parts of this paper are organized as follows. In
ical anomalies. Section II, most relative approaches to the proposed method
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6625

are introduced. Then, problem definitions and notations are mechanism that includes both original and diffuse perspectives.
introduced in Section III. Section IV discusses the proposed Nonetheless, these methods still rely on fixed-size subgraph
framework in detail, and comprehensive experiments are con- sampling and focus solely on attribute reconstruction, neglecting
ducted in Section V. Finally, Section VI presents the conclusions the combined reconstruction of both attribute and topology. To
of this work. address this issue, the proposed method introduces a samplingfree contrastive strategy and considers the integrity of the recon-
 II. RELATED WORK struction.
 In this section, we provide a brief overview of related
works, encompassing graph anomaly detection and graph self- B. Graph Self-Supervised Learning
supervised learning.
 The emergence of self-supervised learning brings a new
 paradigm for graph learning. It focuses on extracting graph
A. Graph Anomaly Detection representations by designing suitable tasks that no longer require
 As the rise of attributed networks, graph anomaly detection manually labeled data. Generation-based models and contrastalgorithm has garnered attention from many researchers. Nu- based models are the two dominant graph self-supervised
merous machine learning algorithms have been widely explored types [30].
in the field of anomaly detection. Perozzi et al. [12] uses the ego- Generation-based models use a graph autoencoder to obtain a
network information of nodes to detect anomalous neighbors. Li representation by reconstructing graph information. The earliest
et al. [14] analyzes the attribute information residuals and their models, including GAE and VGAE [31], concentrate on reconconsistent representation. Further, Peng et al. [15] combines structing the adjacency matrix to acquire graph embeddings.
residual analysis and CUR decomposition for anomaly detec- Building upon the effective masking strategy in computer vition. All of the mentioned methods demonstrate excellent per- sion [32], Tan et al. [33] improves GAE by incorporating edge
formance in low-dimensional attributed networks. Nonetheless, masking. Furthermore, Li et al. [34] introduces a novel path
due to their shallow learning mechanism, these algorithms may masking strategy that enhances the graph mask autoencoder.
struggle to effectively detect anomalies with high dimensions. Hou et al. [35] adapts the graph mask autoencoder by utilizing a
 In recent years, deep learning-based anomaly detection algo- double-masking strategy and scaled cosine error. Wang et al. [36]
rithms have been increasingly explored with impressive achieve- introduces an easy-to-hard adversarial masking strategy to enments. Ding et al. [16] employs a graph convolutional network hance alignment performance by generating challenging sam-
(GCN) [23] based autoencoder to quantify the anomaly degree ples.
of a node by calculating the reconstruction loss of both the Contrast-based models are designed with suitable pretext
adjacency matrix and the attribute matrix. Fan et al. [24] inte- tasks that maximize the mutual information of positive samples.
grates graph attention networks (GAT) [25] into the autoencoder Velivckovic et al. [37] pioneers graph self-supervised contrastive
framework. Pei et al. [17] improves GAT by adding residual learning by maximizing mutual information at both node and
information. Luo et al. [18] offers a community-aware tailored graph levels to capture the global structure. On this basis, Has-
GCN to mitigate the over-smoothing of anomalous node repre- sani et al. [38] proposes contrastive learning through original and
sentations. Roy et al. [26] develops a method by reconstructing diffuse graphs. Lin et al. [39] proposes a spectral augmentation
the self-feature, degree, and neighborhood node distribution scheme to generate topological augmentation through perturrepresentations. Nevertheless, the reconstruction-based learning bation mapping to improve the performance. Shen et al. [40]
paradigm is susceptible to class imbalance. To overcome this utilizes a multi-head attention mechanism to learn graph auglimitation, Liu et al. [19] first employs a contrastive-based mented views with adaptive topology for conrtastive learning.
learning approach that utilizes metric instance pairs to achieve These works have shown desirable performance in downnode-subgraph contrast. Jin et al. [20] and Duan et al. [27] stream tasks, such as node classification and link prediction.
enhance the contrastive-based learning paradigm by incorpo- Nevertheless, there have been very limited attempts for anomaly
rating node-node contrast and subgraph-subgraph contrast into detection tasks. Motivated by the above methods, an anomaly
node-subgraph contrast gradually, enabling anomaly detection detection framework is designed from both generative and conthrough multi-scale contrastive learning. Duan et al. [28] in- trastive perspectives.
troduces normality learning in the contrastive-based learning
paradigm to mitigate the damage of abnormal nodes. Pan
et al. [29] designs a ego-neighbor comparison learning method III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
to efficiently detect graph anomalies. It is noteworthy that the In this section, we define the problems associated with node
aforementioned methods are confined to the contrastive-based anomaly detection on attributed networks. For better understandlearning paradigm and might not fully exploit the model’s ing, Table I presents the notations along with their descriptions.
learning capacity with respect to supervised signals. Zheng Accordingly, the definition of attributed networks is given as
et al. [21] proposes a hybrid learning paradigm from the joint below.
perspective of the contrastive-based learning paradigm and the For a given attributed network G = (V, E, X), where V and
reconstruction-based learning paradigm. Zhang et al. [22] im- E represent the set of nodes and edges, which can be formalized
proves the hybrid learning approach by utilizing a multi-view by the adjacency matrix A ∈ RN ×N , X ∈ RN ×F denotes the
6626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I existing anomaly detection methods, deep autoencoders are con-
 NOTATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS
 sidered to have strong potential. The degree of node abnormality
 can be quantified by the reconstruction loss. To reconstruct
 the graph information efficiently, a graph autoencoder structure
 is employed. Empowered by the autoencoder, the proposed
 framework effectively captures and reproduces the complex
 relationships within the graph, facilitating the identification of
 anomalies through disparities in both topology and attribute
 information.
 View Encoder: A generalized approach is adopted to encode the original view by GCN. Utilizing the inherent efficient
 modeling and information aggregation capabilities of GCN, the
 encoder adeptly acquires a comprehensive representation of the
 network. The representation of each graph convolutional layer
 is formulated as follows:
  1 1
 
 H(+1) = σ D̃− 2 ÃD̃− 2 H() W() , (1)

 where H() and H(+1) are the inputs and outputs of the -th
 1 1
 convolutional layer respectively, D̃− 2 ÃD̃− 2 denotes a symmetric normalization of the adjacency matrix, Ã represents the
 adjacency matrix with self-loop, and W() represents the shared
 weight matrix of all nodes in the network. σ(·) represents a
 non-linear activation function. Then, the view encoder is defined
 as:
attribute matrix of all nodes. Thus, the attributed network is also Zraw = GCNenc (Xraw , A; Wenc ) , (2)
expressed as G = (A, X).
 The focus of this paper is the unsupervised node-level where Zraw , Xraw , A, Wenc denote the node embedding
anomaly detection problem on attributed networks, which is matrix, feature matrix, the adjacency matrix, and the weight
formalized as follows: matrix of the encoder, respectively.
 For a given attributed network G = (V, E, X), the objective of Topology Reconstruction Decoder: The topology reconstructhis task is to compute a score and rank the abnormality degree tion decoder aims to restore node structure information and
of each node vi by defining a valid anomaly function, which can can effectively detect structural anomalies in the graph. The
be formalized as g(·) : RN ×F → RN ×1 . Typically, nodes with GCN acts as a topology decoder, reconstructing node topology
high scores are considered as abnormal nodes. information from latent node representations. The topology
 reconstruction decoder can be represented as:
 IV. THE PROPOSED METHOD H = GCNT dec (Zraw , A; WT dec ) , (3)
 In this section, we outline the overall framework of the  = HHT ,
 A (4)
algorithm for detecting node-level graph anomalies in a selfwhere H, WT dec denote the potential node embedding matrix
supervised manner. The proposed method has three distinct
 after the decoder and the weight matrix of the topology decoder.
components, including graph reconstruction module, multi-view  denotes the reconstructed adjacency matrix obtained from the
 A
discrimination module, and graph anomaly scoring module.
 inner product of H.
First, the graph reconstruction module is designed to identify
 Attribute Reconstruction Decoder: The attribute reconstrucnode anomalies by measuring the degree of mismatch between
 tion decoder is designed to regress node attributes and serves as
the reconstructed and the original views using the regression
 a powerful tool for detecting contextual anomalies on graphs.
loss generated by the reconstruction. Second, the multi-view
 Similarly, the GCN is employed as an attribute decoder. If
discrimination module is designed to generate high-quality posthe node attributes can be effectively approximated using the
itive and negative views to detect anomalies through a view-level
 decoder, which suggests that the node is less likely to be abcontrastive learning task. Finally, the anomaly score for all
 normal. Conversely, if the attribute pattern cannot be accurately
nodes is computed by aggregating the scores from the first two
 reconstructed, it is indicated that the node attributes diverges
modules. Multiple rounds of anomaly scores are averaged to
 from the pattern observed in most normal nodes. The attribute
mitigate the randomness associated with view generation.
 reconstruction decoder can be represented by:
  raw = GCNAdec (Zraw , A; WAdec ) ,
 X (5)
A. Graph Reconstruction Module
 Abnormal nodes exhibit patterns that differ from the typical  raw , WAdec denote the reconstructed attribute matrix
 where X
behaviors observed in the majority of normal nodes. Among and weight matrix of the attribute decoder.
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6627

 Topology and attribute regression are two crucial tasks per- relationships and patterns between features, the bilinear layer
formed by the graph reconstruction module. The reconstruction enables effective discrimination between original and generated
errors from both types of information are combined, and the views. The similarity between the original view and the positive
objective function can be formulated as follows: (negative) view is computed as follows:
  raw 2 .
  2 + αXraw − X
 Lrec = (1 − α)A − A (6) spos = Bilinear (Zraw , Zpos ; Wdis ) , (9)
 F F

where α is a parameter employed to balance the reconstruction sneg = Bilinear (Zraw , Zneg ; Wdis ) , (10)
of topology and attributes.
 where spos represents the similarity between the original view
B. Multi-View Discrimination Module and the positive view, sneg represents the similarity between the
 original view and the negative view, and Wdis represents the
 Contrastive learning has proven to be a successful approach weight matrix of the discriminator. If a node is deemed normal,
in detecting anomalies on graphs, effectively mitigating the the discriminator easily distinguishes between the positives
challenges posed by the extreme imbalance between normal and and negatives of the generated view. Conversely, if a node is
abnormal nodes [19]. In this module, a view-level contrastive- classified as abnormal, the discriminator struggles to accurately
based learning paradigm is designed. By employing this ap- determine the positives and negatives of the generated view.
proach, the model efficiently learns the inherent patterns within To promote the discrimination of the learned representation,
the graph, thereby augmenting its capability to identify abnormal the binary cross-entropy loss is employed as the objective funcnodes. tion:
 View Generator: Existing node-level contrast approaches re-
 1 
 N
lying on subgraph sampling inadequately consider the global Ldis = − (yi log si + (1 − yi ) log (1 − si )) , (11)
structure, resulting in the omission of high-order information. 2N i=1
To overcome this limitation, a method for generating positive
and negative views is introduced. To enhance the view discrimi- where yi represents labels 1 and 0 for positive and negative views
nation ability, inspired by the effectiveness of data augmentation respectively, and si represents the similarity score between the
methods in graph self-supervised learning, feature masking is original view and the generated view of each node vi . Finally,
utilized to augment the original features for the positive view. the loss function of the two modules can be expressed as follows:
Specifically, the positive view involves randomly masking node L = (1 − β)Ldis + βLrec . (12)
attributes by setting the attributes of the masked nodes to zero.
This feature masking helps the model to implicitly perform where β is a parameter used to balance the reconstruction module
attribute regression, thereby boosting its discriminative capa- and the discrimination module.
bilities. For the negative view, randomized row transformations
are employed on the node features from the original view. It C. Graph Anomaly Scoring Module
aims to simulate the representation of nodes post-injection with After introducing the graph reconstruction module and the
anomalies simply. By completely altering the graph structure, multi-view discrimination module, the calculation of anomaly
this approach effectively models anomalies in node attributes scores for each module is defined.
and topology. To maintain consistency, the feature masking Graph Reconstruction Score: The graph reconstruction score
applied to negative views is the same as that used to positive consists of attribute and topology reconstruction errors. The
views. score srec,i for each node vi is calculated as follows:
 View Generation Encoder: This sub-module aims to extract
feature embeddings from the positive and negative views to i 22 ,
 stop,i = ai − a (13)
facilitate the discriminative task within the original features.
 i 22 ,
 satt,i = xi − x (14)
To maintain consistency, the view generation encoder shares
weights with the original view encoder. The view generation srec,i = (1 − α)stop,i + αsatt,i , (15)
encoder can be defined as follows:
 where ai denotes the i-th row vector of A, and xi denotes the i-th
 Zpos = GCNenc (Xpos , A; Wenc ) , (7) row vector of Xraw , satt,i denotes the attribute reconstruction
 Zneg = GCNenc (Xneg , A; Wenc ) , (8) score of vi and stop,i denotes the topology reconstruction score
 of vi . The parameter α is the same as (6) to balance reconstrucwhere Xpos , Zpos denote the attribute matrix and node embed- tion module. The higher the reconstruction score is, the more
ding matrix corresponding to the positive views, and Xneg and abnormal the node is.
Zneg represent the attribute matrix and node embedding matrix Graph Discrimination Score: Given the nature of similarity
for the negative views, respectively. scores, normal nodes are expected to have a score close to 1 for
 View Discriminator: The discriminator takes both original positive views and close to 0 for negative views in an ideal case.
and generated view features as inputs. It employs a shared For each node vi , the anomaly degree is defined as the difference
bilinear layer to compute the similarity between these views, between positive and negative scores:
which generates a score for discriminating between the positive
and negative instances. Facilitating the extraction of intricate sdis,i = sneg,i − spos,i , (16)
6628 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

where spos,i represents the positive view score of vi and sneg,i
 Algorithm 1: The Algorithmic Process of MDA-GAD.
represents the negative view score of vi .
 Graph Anomaly Score: The scores of the reconstruction mod- Input: An attributed network G = (V, E, X); Number of
ule and the discrimination module are weighted to produce the training epoch T , Number of test epoch R.
composite score ai , and the formula is as follows: Output: Anomaly score function score(·).
 1: Initialize trainable parameters Wenc , WT dec , WAdec ,
 ai = (1 − β)sdis,i + βsrec,i , (17) and Wdis .
 2: // Training Stage
where β balances the scores of the two modules, consistent
 3: for t = 1 → T do
with (12). However, the single-round score calculation does
 4: Generate the positive view Xpos by randomly
not adequately capture the diverse patterns of anomalies and
 masking the original feature Xraw .
randomness generated by the negative view. To tackle these chal-
 5: Generate the negative view Xneg by randomly
lenges, multiple rounds of score averaging are incorporated to
 masking and row transforming the original feature
obtain the final result. Specifically, the anomaly score calculation
 Xraw .
for vi is expressed as:
 6: Calculate the reconstruction score for all nodes by
 1  (r) (13), (14), and (15).
 R
 score (vi ) = a . (18) 7: Calculate the discrimination score for all nodes by
 R r=1 i
 (16).
where score(vi ) represents the anomaly score of vi , and R is the 8: Calculate the overall loss L by (12).
number of test rounds. Ideally, increasing the number of rounds 9: Back propagate and update the trainable parameters
for computing the score leads to better stability. Wenc , WT dec , WAdec , and Wdis .
 The algorithmic process of the proposed method is presented 10: end for
in Algorithm 1. This algorithm is comprised of two phases: 11: // Testing Stage
training and testing. During the training phase, the model is 12: for r = 1 → R do
trained on two self-supervised tasks: reconstructing the original 13: Calculate the composite anomaly score for all nodes
view and generating positive and negative view contrasts. During by (17).
the testing phase, iterative rounds of inference computation are 14: end for
employed to derive the final anomaly scores for all nodes. 15: Calculate the average of the composite scores for
 multiple rounds by (18).
D. Complexity Analysis
 TABLE II
 The time complexity of the proposed method comes mainly COMPARISON OF TIME COMPLEXITY (P AND Q REPRESENT THE NUMBER OF
from its graph reconstruction and multi-view discrimina- NODES AND EDGES OF THE SUBGRAPH, AND δ IS THE MEAN DEGREE OF
tion modules. The graph reconstruction module utilizes a NETWORK)
GCN-based encoder and decoder with complexity O(LM D +
LN D2 )), and the complexity of the matrix reconstruction is
O(N 2 D), and the total complexity is O(LM D + LN D2 +
N 2 D). The multi-view discrimination module includes a
GCN-based encoder and a discriminator with complexities of
O(LM D + LN D2 ) and O(N D2 ) respectively, summing to
O(LM D + LN D2 + N D2 ). Therefore, the total time complexity is O((LM D + LN D2 + N 2 D)(T + R)), where L is
the number of GCN layers, M is the number of edges, N is the
number of nodes, D is the hidden dimension, and T and R are
the number of training and inference epochs.
 Table II presents a comparison of time complexities between A. Dataset Description
the proposed method and the baseline methods. It is evident that Experiments are conducted on six benchmark datasets, conmethods employing subgraph sampling exhibit higher complex- sisting of three citation networks, one web citation network and
ities, where the complexity of sampling subgraphs is as high as two social networks, as described below.
O(N P δ). In contrast, the proposed method demonstrates lower r Citation Network: Cora, Citeseer,1 and ACM2 datasets repcomplexity while enhancing performance. resent citation networks of scientific publications, where
 nodes represent papers and edges represent citation rela-
 V. EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS tionships between papers.
 In this section, we describe the datasets used for the experiments and the parameter settings. Then the experimental results are presented, including performance comparison, ablation 1 https://github.com/kimiyoung/planetoid

study, and parameter sensitivity. 2 https://github.com/kaize0409/GCN_AnomalyDetection
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6629

 TABLE III between nodes and neighboring subgraphs using a GNN-
 THE STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS
 based encoder.
 r ANEMONE [20] introduces a multi-scale contrastive learning objective for anomaly detection, where the encoder
 learns consistency between instances at patch and context
 levels simultaneously.
 r SL-GAD [21] is a framework designed to construct various
 contextual subgraphs centered around target nodes and
 facilitate anomaly detection through generative attribute
 regression and multi-view contrast.
 r Web Citation Network: UAI3 dataset pertains to a web r Sub-CR [22] is a contrastive learning-based anomaly decitation network, where nodes represent pages and edges tection framework that uses graph diffusion to augment the
 represent hyperlinks. original graph for both inner and outer views.
 r Social Network: BlogCatalog and Flickr4 datasets are r GRADATE [27] enhances anomaly detection by incorposocial networks, where nodes represent users and edges rating subgraph-subgraph and node-node contrasts alongrepresent their relationships. side node-subgraph contrasts within a multi-scale contrast
 In the mentioned attributed network datasets, inherent learning framework.
 r NLGAD [28] is a multi-scale contrastive learning network
anomaly nodes are not present. To facilitate experimentation
with the anomaly detection framework, the common practice of that incorporates high-confidence nodes into the normality
introducing anomaly nodes is followed. pool, achieving superior results through training based on
 Topology Anomaly Injection: The injection of topological these nodes.
anomalies aims to disrupt the relationships between nodes on Evaluation Metric: The anomaly detection performance of all
graphs [41], [42]. This is achieved by randomly selecting t nodes the methods is evaluated using the widely adopted ROC-AUC
and establishing fully connected links between them. Based on metric. The ROC curve illustrates the relationship between the
the experience of previous work [19], [20], [21], this process is true-positive rate and the false-positive rate, and the area under
repeated a total of n times. t is fixed at 15, and n is set to [5, 5, the ROC curve is denoted as AUC. To eliminate the impact
5, 10, 15, 20] for Cora, Citeseer, UAI, BlogCatalog, Flickr, and of randomness, all experiments are repeated 10 times, and the
ACM, respectively. mean and standard deviation of the results are recorded for
 Contextual Anomaly Injection: The injection of context ex- comparison.
ceptions is to disorder the properties of nodes [43]. We randomly Parameter Settings: In all experiments, the mask rate p is uniselect a node vi , a subset S, find the node vf ar in the subset S formly set to 0.2. In the basic framework, the encoder employs
that has the largest distance to the attribute valued by the node a two-layer GCN, the attribute decoder employs a two-layer
vi , and assign the attribute of vf ar to vi . To be consistent with GCN, and the topology decoder employs a one-layer GCN. The
the ratio of topology anomaly injection, contextual anomalies hidden dimension is set to 64, and the number of test rounds
are injected for t × n nodes. is fixed to 50. For the learning rate, we use a value of 0.001
 Finally, an equal proportion of topological and contextual for Cora, Citeseer, BlogCatalog, and ACM datasets, 0.0005
anomalies are introduced into all datasets. By the above injection for Flickr dataset, and 0.002 for UAI dataset. The number of
method, we obtain the perturbed datasets, as shown in Table III. training epochs is set to 250 for Cora, Citeseer, UAI, Flickr, and
 ACM datasets, and 300 for BlogCatalog dataset. The α and β
B. Experimental Settings parameters perform a grid search between 0.1 and 0.9.
 Computing Infrastructures: The experiments for all models
 In this subsection, we describe the experimental setup, includ- are conducted on the PyTorch 1.8.1 platform. The hardware
ing baseline methods, evaluation metrics, parameter settings, configuration includes an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4210R CPU
and computing infrastructures. operating at a frequency of 2.40 GHz, 56 GB of RAM, and an
 Baselines: As presented in Table IV, the proposed method NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU with 24 GB of memory.
considers the strategies more comprehensively than other baseline methods. A brief description of the baseline methods is
given as follows: C. Experimental Results
 r DOMINANT [16] is an unsupervised anomaly detection
 In this subsection, we present a performance comparison
 framework leveraging deep learning, employing a GCN- between the proposed method and seven baseline methods. The
 based encoder to jointly reconstruct the adjacency and ROC curves of all methods on six benchmark datasets are shown
 attribute matrix. in Fig. 3. According to the results, the following conclusions can
 r CoLA [19] captures anomalous patterns through conbe drawn:
 trastive self-supervised learning, evaluating consistency r Compared to all the baseline methods, the proposed method
 offers optimal performance across most datasets. As shown
 3 https://github.com/zhumeiqiBUPT/AM-GCN in Table V, the proposed method outperforms the current
 4 http://socialcomputing.asu.edu/pages/datasets best baseline by 2.81%, 4.06%, 1.49%, 2.12%, 1.23% in
6630 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE IV
 ARCHITECTURE COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND BASELINES

Fig. 3. ROC curves on six benchmark datasets. A larger area under the AUC curve indicates better anomaly detection performance. The black dotted lines refers
to the “random line”, indicating the performance under random guessing.

 TABLE V
 COMPARATIVE RESULTS OF GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION WITH AUC (RUNNING MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF TEN TRIALS)
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6631

Fig. 4. Visualization of the anomaly score distribution for eight methods on the Citeseer dataset. The scores are normalized to a range of 0 to 1.

Fig. 5. Runtime and maximum memory usage comparison between the proposed method and baselines on six benchmark datasets.

 Cora, Citeseer, UAI, Flickr, and ACM respectively. Fig. 4 Although batch training reduces memory consumption, it
 shows the distribution of anomaly scores for different significantly increases the time overhead due to its inherent
 comparison methods on Citeseer. It is noticed that the complexity.
 anomaly score distribution for the proposed method is more r Compared to models that solely rely on contrastive selfcentralized, and the distinction in the score distribution supervised learning methods like CoLA, ANEMONE,
 between normal and abnormal nodes is more prominent. GRADATE, and NLGAD, and models that exclusively
 r The experiments comparing the runtime and maximum utilize reconstruction methods like DOMINANT, the promemory usage of all methods are shown in Fig. 5. The posed method demonstrates superior anomaly detection
 proposed method excels in time efficiency, second only and generalization capabilities. A pivotal factor contributto DOMINANT. Compared to the suboptimal model, the ing to this advantage lies in the integration of two selfproposed method has a runtime 53 times faster than SL- supervised methods, which harnesses a more diverse set of
 GAD and 49 times faster than NLGAD. Besides, the supervised signals.
 proposed method has a higher memory usage compared r Compared to hybrid learning paradigms like SL-GAD
 to baseline methods, mainly because it utilizes the full and Sub-CR, the proposed method also exhibits strong
 graph input, whereas most methods employ batch training. performance. Research has demonstrated that hybrid
6632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE VI
 RESULTS OF ABLATION EXPERIMENTS (RUNNING MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF TEN TRIALS)

 learning approaches can produce both suboptimal and Citeseer, its adaptability to a broader range of scenarios reoptimal outcomes, underscoring the effectiveness of this mains limited. The success of the proposed method across
 strategy. Nonetheless, SL-GAD and Sub-CR rely on sub- most datasets underlines the effectiveness and importance
 graph sampling, limiting their ability to estimate attributes of integrating the multi-view discrimination module. This
 solely based on sampled neighbors. This constraint may component enhances the its capacity to capture and leverlead to information loss and an inability to fully exploit age information from diverse perspectives, leading to an
 the potential of the reconstruction module. In contrast, overall performance enhancement. Therefore, the joint
 the proposed method, utilizing complete graph training, learning of both modules is crucial for achieving robust
 avoids these drawbacks and maintains the effectiveness of anomaly detection.
 the reconstruction module. r Across all datasets, the multi-view discrimination module
 r The proposed method has exhibited exceptional perfor- that utilizes only positive view scores consistently has
 mance in citation networks. However, there is still potential higher AUC values compared to modules that rely solely
 for further improvements to augment its effectiveness in on negative view scores. Nevertheless, the failure of the
 the context of social networks. This is because social positive view-only scoring approach to take advantage
 networks typically have a significantly higher average node of the variable anomaly patterns present in the negative
 degree compared to citation networks, resulting in more views leads to sub-optimal results. Similarly, due to the
 node relationships that pose a greater challenge for graph uncertainty associated with these patterns, relying solely
 anomaly detection. on the negative view score may lead to model instability.
 Therefore, a more effective approach is to combine the
D. Ablation Study two views, leveraging their respective strengths to achieve
 better performance.
 In this subsection, we perform an ablation study to assess
the effectiveness of the graph reconstruction module and the
multi-view discrimination module. Specifically, four scenarios E. Parameters Sensitivity
are evaluated: w/o Res, w/o Dis, w/o Pos, and w/o Neg. In the In this subsection, we conduct experiments to assess the
w/o Res scenario, the graph reconstruction module is excluded, impacts of various hyperparameters. These hyperparameters
leading the model to rely solely on the multi-view discrimination include the balancing parameters α and β, the mask rate p, the
module during training. In the w/o Dis scenario, the multi-view hidden dimension D, and the number of test rounds R.
discrimination module is entirely removed, resulting in no dis- Influence of the balancing parameters: Fig. 6 shows a demoncriminant scores being utilized in the training process. In the w/o stration of the effect of the balancing parameter under different
Pos scenario, only the scores of the generated negative views are datasets. The balancing parameter α is responsible for controlused as discriminant scores, while in the w/o Neg scenario, only ling the weighting between attribute reconstruction and topology
the scores of the generated positive views are employed. The reconstruction. After analyzing the obtained parameters, it is eviconclusions drawn from the results in Table VI are as follows: dent that attribute reconstruction is typically assigned to a higher
 r After removing the graph reconstruction module, the per- weight proportion in the proposed method. Similarly, the balance
 formance of using only the multi-view discrimination mod- parameter β governs the weights of the reconstruction module
 ule significantly declines. This is likely because, without and the view discrimination module. For Cora and Citeseer
 joint learning, the original views containing anomalies datasets, both the reconstruction module and the discrimination
 cannot be effectively distinguished at the view level by module play equally important roles. On the contrary, for UAI
 contrastive learning alone. In other words, the absence and Flickr datasets, the discrimination module proves to be more
 of the graph reconstruction module prevents the model advantageous, while for BlogCatalog and ACM datasets, the
 from capturing and reconstructing node topology and node reconstruction module demonstrates greater utility.
 attributes of the graph, which consequently affects the dis- Influence of the mask rate: To further investigate the impact of
 criminative ability of the multi-view discrimination mod- mask rate size on the generated views across different datasets,
 ule. a detailed analysis is conducted. Fig. 7(a) shows the AUC
 r Although the graph reconstruction module has shown per- values corresponding to different mask rates. It indicates a slight
 formance improvements on specific datasets like Cora and increase in the AUC value as the mask rate reaches 0.2. However,
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6633

Fig. 6. The experimental results for the investigation of α and β parameters. These subfigures show the effect of the α and β parameters on the AUC value.

Fig. 7. The experimental results of the parametric study are presented. These subfigures show the effectiveness of the masking rate, embedding dimension, and
number of test rounds on the AUC values, respectively.

it starts to decrease after exceeding this threshold. The decline dimension increases from 1 to 64. Nonetheless, surpassing this
observed in this case can be attributed to an excessively high threshold results in a decline of performance. This decline may
mask rate. High rate disrupts the inherent pattern of the original be due to the increased risk of overfitting associated with the
view, which hampers the effective differentiation between pos- increase in model parameters. Therefore, it is concluded that a
itive and negative views. Based on the analysis, a mask rate of 64-dimensional hidden embedding suffices to provide adequate
0.2 is a suitable choice for generating views. information for subsequent anomaly detection tasks across most
 Influence of the hidden dimension: In this experiment, we datasets.
investigate the effect of hidden dimensions on the framework’s Influence of the number of test rounds: In this experiment, we
performance, as illustrated in Fig. 7(b). Notably, an enhancement further explore the influence of test rounds on the model across
in anomaly detection performance is observed as the hidden different R values. Fig. 7(c) illustrates the variation of AUC
6634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

values. As the R value increases, the AUC stabilizes and shows [11] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
some improvement. Based on the experimental findings, only density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
50 tests are necessary to stabilize the results. This enhancement [12] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
can be attributed to the increased number of rounds, which helps neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2016,
mitigate the impact of randomness generated in the multi-view pp. 207–215.
 [13] X. Xu, N. Yuruk, Z. Feng, and T. A. Schweiger, “SCAN: A structural
discrimination module and allows for the capture of a broader clustering algorithm for networks,” in Proc. 13th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
range of negative pattern information. However, excessively Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2007, pp. 824–833.
high numbers of rounds can lead to an escalation in the com- [14] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
 detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. 26th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
putational overhead of the model. Nevertheless, compared to 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
methods relying on subgraph sampling, the proposed method [15] Z. Peng et al., “ANOMALOUS: A joint modeling approach for anomaly
exhibits superior performance with fewer rounds. detection on attributed networks,” in Proc. 27th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 2018, pp. 3513–3519.
 [16] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection on
 attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 594–
 VI. CONCLUSION 602.
 [17] Y. Pei, T. Huang, W. van Ipenburg, and M. Pechenizkiy, “ResGCN:
 In this paper, we proposed a novel hybrid method via multi- Attention-based deep residual modeling for anomaly detection on atview discriminative awareness learning for graph anomaly de- tributed networks,” in 2021 IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Adv. Analytics,
 2021, pp. 1–2.
tection. The anomaly detection task was completed through two [18] X. Luo et al., “ComGA: Community-aware attributed graph anomaly
distinct self-supervised modules, namely the graph reconstruc- detection,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2022,
tion module and the multi-view discrimination module. The pp. 657–665.
 [19] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
graph reconstruction module effectively identified the degree detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
of anomalies of a node by leveraging reconstruction errors. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
The multi-view discrimination module provided more diverse Jun. 2022.
 [20] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
supervised signals by generating positive and negative views for Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
view-level contrast. The experimental results on six benchmark 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
datasets demonstrated that the proposed method outperformed [21] Y. Zheng, M. Jin, Y. Liu, L. Chi, K. T. Phan, and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Generative and contrastive self-supervised learning for graph anomaly detecexisting state-of-the-art models in terms of AUC when solv- tion,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12220–12233,
ing graph anomaly detection problems. Despite the superior Dec. 2023.
performance gained by the proposed method, a drawback is [22] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in Proc.
the intensive memory utilization, particularly when processing 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2376–2382.
large-scale datasets. Consequently, our future work will concen- [23] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
trate on the memory optimization to address this concern. convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2016,
 pp. 1–14.
 [24] H. Fan, F. Zhang, and Z. Li, “AnomalyDAE: Dual autoencoder for anomaly
 detection on attributed networks,” in 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech
 REFERENCES Signal Process., 2020, pp. 5685–5689.
 [1] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A com- [25] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
 prehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021. 2018, pp. 1–12.
 [2] K. Berahmand, M. Mohammadi, F. Saberi-Movahed, Y. Li, and Y. Xu, [26] A. Roy et al., “GAD-NR: Graph anomaly detection via neighborhood
 “Graph regularized nonnegative matrix factorization for community de- reconstruction,” in Proc. 17th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining,
 tection in attributed networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, 2024, pp. 576–585.
 pp. 372–385, Jan./Feb. 2023. [27] J. Duan et al., “Graph anomaly detection via multi-scale contrastive
 [3] Z. Chen, Z. Wu, S. Wang, and W. Guo, “Dual low-rank graph autoencoder learning networks with augmented view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 for semantic and topological networks,” in Proc. 37th AAAI Conf. Artif. 2023, pp. 7459–7467.
 Intell., 2023, pp. 4191–4198. [28] J. Duan et al., “Normality learning-based graph anomaly detection via
 [4] Y. Huang, L. Wang, F. Zhang, and X. Lin, “Unsupervised graph outlier multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 detection: Problem revisit, new insight, and superior method,” in 2023 2023, pp. 7502–7511.
 IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 2565–2578. [29] J. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, and S. Pan, “PREM: A simple yet effective
 [5] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection approach for node-level graph anomaly detection,” in 2023 IEEE Int. Conf.
 with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1253–1258.
 pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023. [30] Y. Liu et al., “Graph self-supervised learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
 [6] S. Rao, A. K. Verma, and T. Bhatia, “A review on social spam detec- Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5879–5900, Jun. 2023.
 tion: Challenges, open issues, and future directions,” Expert Syst. Appl., [31] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,” 2016,
 vol. 186, pp. 1–31, 2021. arXiv:1611.07308.
 [7] X. Hu, H. Chen, S. Liu, H. Jiang, G. Chu, and R. Li, “BTG: A bridge to [32] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 graph machine learning in telecommunications fraud detection,” Future autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 137, pp. 274–287, 2022. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
 [8] S. Xu, Y. Qian, and R. Q. Hu, “Data-driven edge intelligence for robust [33] Q. Tan et al., “MGAE: Masked autoencoders for self-supervised learning
 network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, on graphs,” 2022, arXiv:2201.02534.
 pp. 1481–1492, Third Quarter 2020. [34] J. Li et al., “What’s behind the mask: Understanding masked graph
 [9] G. Zhang et al., “eFraudCom: An e-commerce fraud detection system via modeling for graph autoencoders,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
 competitive graph neural networks,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 40, no. 3, Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1268–1279.
 pp. 1–29, 2022. [35] Z. Hou et al., “GraphMAE: Self-supervised masked graph autoencoders,”
[10] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022,
 detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021. pp. 594–604.
LIAN et al.: GRAPH ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW DISCRIMINATIVE AWARENESS LEARNING 6635

[36] L. Wang, X. Tao, Q. Liu, and S. Wu, “Rethinking graph masked au- Zhihao Wu received the B.S. degree in 2021 from
 toencoders through alignment and uniformity,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. the College of Mathematics and Computer Science,
 Intell., 2024, pp. 15528–15536. Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China, where he is cur-
[37] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R. D. rently working toward the M.S. degree with the Col-
 Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, lege of Computer and Data Science. His research in-
 2019, pp. 1–17. terests include machine learning, multiview learning,
[38] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view representation and graph neural networks.
 learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 4116–
 4126.
[39] L. Lin and J. Chen, “Spectral augmentation for self-supervised learning on
 graphs,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, pp. 1–27.
[40] X. Shen, D. Sun, S. Pan, X. Zhou, and L. T. Yang, “Neighbor contrastive
 learning on learnable graph augmentation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Intell., 2023, pp. 9782–9791.
[41] D. B. Skillicorn, “Detecting anomalies in graphs,” in 2007 IEEE Intell. Shiping Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Secur. Informat., 2007, pp. 209–216. Ph.D. degree from the University of Electronic Sci-
[42] K. Ding, J. Li, and H. Liu, “Interactive anomaly detection on attributed ence and Technology of China, Chengdu, China,
 networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, 2019, in 2014. From 2013 to 2014, he was a Visiting
 pp. 357–365. Scholar with the University of Alberta, Edmonton,
[43] X. Song, M. Wu, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka, “Conditional anomaly AB, Canada. He was a Research Assistant with the
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 631–645, National University of Singapore, Singapore, from
 May 2007. January 2014 to August 2014, and a Research Fellow
 with Nanyang Technological University of Singapore, Singapore, from 2015 to 2016. From 2019 to
 Jie Lian received the B.S. degree from the School 2020, he was also a Visiting Researcher with Peking
 of Cyber Security and Computer, Hebei University, University, Beijing, China. He is currently a Professor with the College of
 Baoding, China in 2023. He is currently working Computer and Data Science, and the Director of the Fujian Provincial Key
 toward the M.S. degree with the College of Computer Laboratory of Intelligent Metro, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China. His research
 and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China. interests include machine learning, deep learning, feature representation, and
 His research interests include machine learning, multimodal fusion.
 graph representation learning, and graph anomaly
 detection.

 Xuzheng Wang received the master’s degree from
 the Department of Computer Science, University of
 Wenzhong Guo received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 Leicester, Leicester, U.K., in 2016. He is currently
 in computer science and technology and the Ph.D. deworking toward the D.Eng. degree with the College
 gree in communication and information system from
 of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University,
 Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China, in 2000, 2003, and
 Fuzhou, China. His research interests include ma-
 2010, respectively. He completed the Postdoctoral
 chine learning, multi-view learning, and anomaly de-
 Fellow with the Institute of Computer Science, Natection. tional University of Defense and Technology, Changsha, China, in 2013, and a Senior Visiting Scholar
 with the Faculty of Engineering, Information and
 System, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan, in
 Xincan Lin received the B.S. degree from the Col- 2013. He is currently a Professor with the College
 lege of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, and leads the Network
 University, Fuzhou, China, in 2021. He is currently Computing and Intelligent Information Processing Laboratory, which is a key
 working toward the M.S. degree with the College laboratory of Fujian Province, China. He is also the Deputy Director of the
 of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Laboratory of Spatial Data Mining and Information Sharing, which is a key
 Fuzhou, China. His research interests include ma- laboratory of ministry of education, China. He has authored or coauthored more
 chine learning, multiview learning, and graph neural than 130 technical articles in scientific journals and conference proceedings. His
 networks. research interests include VLSI physical design, wireless sensor networks, Big
 Data, and image processing. He is also a Member of ACM and Senior Member
 of the China Computer Federation (CCF).