IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 1623

 Graph Autoencoder Anomaly Detection for
E-Commerce Application by Contextual Integrating
Contrast With Reconstruction and Complementarity
 Jinjie Wu, Zhipeng Qiu, Zhixia Zeng, Ruliang Xiao , Imad Rida , and Shi Zhang

 Abstract—Considering the personalized characteristics and the attribute network graph not only encompasses complex
behavior patterns of users, quickly and accurately identifying connection (structural) information and node attribute details
abnormal users is crucial in the realm of E-commerce applica- but also typically harbors various types of anomalies, making
tions. However, existing methods fall short in integrating local and
global structural information. Meanwhile, contextual information anomaly detection based on attribute networks a challenging
can serve effectively as a supervisory signal for anomaly task [2], [3].
detection. This paper proposes a Graph Autoencoder Anomaly Currently, considerable research is dedicated to anomaly
Detection model, GAAD, that leverages context-integrated con- detection utilizing attribute networks, and numerous solution
trast and reconstruction complementarity. This model utilizes strategies have emerged. Shallow anomaly detection methods
local information of target nodes and adopts a contrastive
learning module based on graph neural networks to capture include techniques like AMEN and Radar. However, shalanomalies in the structure space; simultaneously, a context sub- low networks cannot model complex interdependent graph
graph of the global information of the target node is constructed relationships. With the significant progress made by deep
and anomalies in the attribute space are captured through the neural networks, researchers have also been exploring the
autoencoder-based reconstruction module. The GAAD model use of deep learning techniques for anomaly detection [4]
integrates two complementary modules, contrast and reconstruction, to enhance the accuracy of anomaly node detection. and abnormal behavior analysis [5]. Deep anomaly detection
The experimental results showcase the superior performance of methods, like Xiao et al. [6], achieve anomaly detection in
the proposed model over existing baseline methods across all various environments by learning causal relationships and
seven benchmark datasets, thereby highlighting its efficiency in generalizing them to new scenarios. Jin et al. [7] proposed
anomaly detection within E-commerce applications. Our code is a model for graph anomaly detection that detects anomalies
available at https://github.com/jinjiewu2000/GAAD.
 based on the relationship between nodes and their subgraphs.
 Index Terms—Autoencoder, graph neural network, contextual Zhang et al. [8] detects anomalies by comparing nodes and
integrating, anomaly detection. subgraphs. These methods overlook the contextual information
 of nodes, and anomalies based on this context can disrupt
 I. I NTRODUCTION personalized features. Even if the supervised classification
 HE APPLICATION of anomaly detection in E-commerce method is used, it is not applicable. Therefore, there remains
T activities is of great significance. For example, in
E-commerce financial activities, it is necessary to identify
 a deficiency in effective anomaly detection methods capable
 of handling multiple anomaly patterns in complex scenarfraudulent accounts; and it’s crucial to quickly and accurately ios [9], [10].
identify anomalous users [1] in order to warn about or Deep anomaly detection in attribute networks is commonly
halt abnormal user behavior. Attribute networks are adept at conducted using the graph neural network model, GNN [11].
effectively modeling such application scenarios. In attribute GNN encompasses several models, such as graph autoencoders
networks, nodes with attributes represent real-world entities, (GAEs) and graph convolutional networks (GCNs), among
and links represent relationships between entities. However, others. In the field of deep graph representation learning,
 the DGI [12] method learns the representation of nodes
 Manuscript received 29 October 2023; revised 9 December 2023 in the graph by maximizing mutual information. Following
and 31 December 2023; accepted 5 January 2024. Date of publication
10 January 2024; date of current version 26 April 2024. This work was DGI, Ren et al. [13] proposed heterogeneous DGI (HDGI),
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under which learns node representations in the graph by maxi-
Grant 62172097, and in part by the Fujian Provincial Department of Science mizing local-global mutual information. Graph autoencoders
and Technology under Grant 2020H6011. (Corresponding author: Ruliang
Xiao.) learn latent representations by reconstructing the structural
 Jinjie Wu, Zhipeng Qiu, Zhixia Zeng, Ruliang Xiao, and Shi information of graphs [14]. BLoG [15] utilizes local and
Zhang are with the College of Computer and Cyber Security, Fujian global regularization for recommended guided graph repre-
Normal University, Fuzhou 350117, China (e-mail: jinjiewu2000@
sina.com; qbx20230179@yjs.fjnu.edu.cn; QBX20220156@yjs.fjnu.edu.cn; sentation learning. Although GNNs have made significant
xiaoruliang@fjnu.edu.cn; shi@fjnu.edu.cn). progress in areas such as biomedicine, material science, and
 Imad Rida is with the Laboratoire Biomécanique et Bioingénierie UMR mechanics, and even extended to applications such as social
7338, Centre de Recherches de Royallieu, Université de Technologie de
Compiégne, 60200 Compiégne, France (e-mail: imad.rida@utc.fr). network analysis and drug discovery [16], advances in graph
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3352186 anomaly detection by existing methods [2] rely mainly on
 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Overall framework.

purely unsupervised approaches, and still suffer from three 2) A self-supervised learning method is designed to solve
shortcomings: the anomaly detection problem in attribute networks.
 First, local and global contextual information lacks effec- This method can effectively utilize context integration to
tive utilization and integration. Using instance pairs derived integrate methods based on attribute reconstruction and
from node subgraph construction and contrast can enhance contrastive learning.
anomaly detection by effectively attending to local node 3) Extensive experiments are conducted on seven real-life
information. However, this method extracts only the local datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of GAAD.
structural information of the target node, failing to capture and Experimental results show that the performance of this
apply its global structure effectively. GAAD is better than the current algorithm, and its
 Second, existing autoencoder methods based on graph data anomaly detection effect is superior in the field of
fail to fully utilize contextual information (e.g., subgraphs E-commerce.
or neighboring nodes), which is crucial for anomaly detec- The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II
tion. Typically, these autoencoder methods aim to reconstruct describes the problem definition; Section III introduces the
attributes or the entire graph structure for each node, disre- proposed anomaly detection model in detail; Section IV
garding contextual information. discusses the experimental results; and Section V concludes
 Third, existing methods have inconsistent detection effects with a summary.
on anomalies in the E-commerce field, and there is still room
for improvement. II. P ROBLEM D EFINITION
 To address these issues, it is imperative to transcend the In this article, lowercase letters represent vectors and upperconstraints of current studies, enhance the characterization case letters represent matrices. The attribute network is defined
quality of network structural features, and adopt a more as described below:
effective, decoupled approach for extracting and integrat- Definition 1 (Attribute Network): Given a graph G=(X, A)
ing local and global structural information. Consequently, to represent an attribute network. In this paper, X ∈ Rn×d
this study introduces a model, termed GAAD, that con- represents the attribute matrix of the attribute network, where
structs the local and global contexts of target nodes by V = (v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ) is the set of nodes (|V| = n), d represents
modeling their respective information and utilizes a self- the feature dimension of the attribute matrix X, A ∈ Rn×n
supervised learning strategy to allow the complementary represents the adjacency matrix of the attribute network if there
modules of contrast learning and attribute reconstruction to is a link between node i and node j, then Aij = 1, otherwise
fully discover and utilize the features and structures in the Aij = 0.
data to compute each node’s anomaly score. To verify the Definition 2 (Anomaly Detection of Attribute Networks):
method’s efficacy, this study conducts thorough experiments Given a graph G=(X, A), the goal is to learn an anomaly scoron seven datasets. The workflow of the model is illustrated in ing function score(-), computing the score that the anomaly
Figure 1. for each node within G. The anomaly score characterizes the
 The method described above establishes a new self- degree of anomaly of a node. By ordering the anomaly scores
supervised graph anomaly detection model by integrating two of all nodes in the graph, anomalous nodes can be detected
complementary modules, distinct from existing methods. The based on their location.
primary contributions of this study are as follows:
 1) A new graph anomaly detection model is proposed to
 III. M ETHODOLOGY
 fully utilize the context information of graph data and
 achieve a more comprehensive capture of anomaly pat- A. Overall Framework
 terns by modeling local and global context information The overall framework of the GAAD method proposed in
 separately. this article is shown in Figure 1. The framework comprises
WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST 1625

three components: graph view sampling, the complementary information of nodes, but cannot consider the underlying
modules of contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction, topology of the nodes, which is not conducive to anomaly
and anomaly score computation. The first component, graph detection of graph nodes. To overcome this constraint, as
view sampling, employs subgraph sampling and graph diffu- depicted in the central portion of Figure 1, this paper designs
sion to capture local and global view subgraphs of the target a graph autoencoder (GAE) consisting of two components:
node. The second component constructs the complementary an encoder and a decoder based on a graph neural network
modules of contrastive learning and attribute reconstruction (GNN).
to fully exploit node and subgraph contextual information GNN-based encoder. Given a graph view Gi of a target node
for anomaly detection. Within this component, the attribute vi , use a GNN encoder to convert its high-dimensional node
reconstruction module utilizes the target node’s local and features into a low-dimensional representation, the formula is:
global contextual information to reconstruct its feature vector.
 Hi = GNNenc (Xi , Ai ) (1)
If the selected node is anomalous, its features will not align
with those of the surrounding environment, resulting in a where Ai , Xi , and Hi Respectively represent the adjacency
significant disparity between the reconstructed and original matrix, feature matrix, and embedding matrix of Gi . GNNenc
feature vectors. The contrastive learning module directly com- is a graphical encoder consisting of multiple layers of GNNs.
pares the target node with its surrounding context to ascertain To improve the efficiency and avoid the overfitting problem,
any incorrect links with neighboring nodes. This module this paper adopts a single-layer GCN with random weights
captures anomalies within the structural space. The third as the main graph encoder. Therefore, Equation (1) can be
component integrates the two complementary modules to com- specifically expressed as:
pute the anomaly score through contrast and reconstruction  
methodologies for reliable anomaly detection in E-commerce Hi = GNNenc (Xi , Ai ) = σ Xi , Âi , W1 (2)
applications. The subsequent sections of this chapter, from
 where Âi = (D)− 2  Ai (D)− 2 , 
 1 1
Sections III-B–III-E, will delve into the three core components Ai = Ai + I. Specifically, σ (·)
of GAAD, with Section III-F outlining the algorithm. represents a nonlinear activation function, and W1 is the matrix
 of trainable parameters in the graph encoder.
B. Generation of Multiple Views GNN-based decoder. In the same way, a single-layer GCN
 This study introduces two self-supervised learning objec- with random weights is used to construct the graph data
tives to leverage the target node’s extensive global contextual decoder. During the attribute reconstruction process, this paper
information and form significant connections with its con- takes the node embedding matrix as input to reconstruct the
textual surroundings, with each objective stemming from node features:
  
distinct scales and dimensions. Initially, node-level identifi- Xir = GNNdec (Hi , Ai ) = σ Xi , Âi , W2 (3)
cation employs GAE to reconstruct the target node’s feature
representation, which is then contrasted with the actual values where W2 is the matrix of trainable parameters in the graph
present within the attribute network. Throughout the construc- decoder, GNNdec has the same structure as the GNNenc and Xir
tion phase, the sampling of multiple perspectives allows the represents the reconstructed node feature matrix.
contrast module to investigate a variety of contextual data Attribute reconstruction anomaly detection. The attribute
during recognition. The general view is the network structure reconstruction of view Gi is mainly based on the attribute
obtained by reading from the dataset. information of the local and global subgraphs centered on node
 As depicted in Figure 1’s leftmost section, select the target vi . To achieve attribute reconstruction based on contextual
node in the initial view, select the pair of nodes and their information, this paper anonymizes the graph view of the
adjacent edges and nodes to form the local view subgraph, and target node vi . As mentioned in this paper, this module can
then use graph diffusion to obtain the global view. In the global better capture node-level exceptions in the attribute space. This
Select the target node in the view, select the pair of nodes paper detects anomalies by minimizing the mean square error
and their adjacent edges and nodes to form the global view (MSE) between the original and reconstructed features of the
subgraph. In the generation target, the identification objects target node in the graph view, as shown in Figure 1.
are the original and reconstructed target nodes. Next, we will
 1  r
 N
introduce the method of generating two views: 2
 Lrec = xi [−1, :], xi (4)
 1) Graph diffusion. The method involves graph diffusion, N
 i=1
employing PageRank (PPR), to capture global structural
information and obtain a global view. where xir [−1, :] is the reconstructed feature vector for the
 2) Subgraph sampling. Random walk with restart (RWR) is anonymous target node vi , and xi is the feature vector of the
used to sample the view to obtain the view subgraph, which target node vi , where xir can be obtained from Equation (2)
ensures the preservation of the semantic information of the and Equation (3).
underlying graph data.
 D. Contrastive Learning Based on Autoencoders
C. Attribute Reconstruction Based on Local and Global To fully exploit the structural information of the nodes, this
Graphs paper proposes a contrastive learning module that consists of
 In the context of graph data anomaly detection, traditional three different components, and uses an encoder and a readout
deep autoencoders (DAE) can only reconstruct the attribute module to extract the low-dimensional embedding of the target
1626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

node and local subgraph and then compares the consistency of (i.e., neighboring) and global contextual information, where
the target node with its surrounding environment. This module the degree of disparity between the reconstructed feature
distinguishes the representation of target nodes and their local vector and the original one serves as a metric for detecting
subgraph representations within the embedding and structure anomalies in the node. This paper uses L2-norm distance as the
spaces, thereby placing greater emphasis on the surrounding scoring function for reconstructed anomalies. For node vi ∈ V,
contextual information. The components of the module are as the following function is defined:
follows:  
 GNN-based encoder. The contrastive learning module in this frec (vi ) = γ ||xir [−1, :] − xi ||22 (9)
paper selects the node feature vector and matrix of the target Among them, frec (vi ) is the attribute reconstruction anomaly
node vi , along with the relevant graph view, as inputs. The score of vi . The score is proportional to the degree of node
encoding of the graph view is depicted as in Equation (2), anomaly. In the above equation, xir [ − 1, :] is the reconstructed
whereas a different formula is employed for the transformation eigenvector of vi , provided by Equation (3), where is γ a
of the target node’s feature vector: scalar, to ultimately limit the attribute reconstruction anomaly
 ei = σ (xi W2 ) (5) score to the range of [0, 1].
 The attribute reconstruction module in this paper only
where ei is the embedding vectors of the target node vi , and xi focuses on node discrimination in the attribute space without
is the feature vectors of the target node vi . Due to the absence directly utilizing the topological information of the graph.
of a lower-level graph structure for individual target nodes, To overcome this constraint, the contrastive learning modthe graph adjacency matrix from Equation (3) is omitted in ule directly distinguishes between the target node and the
Equation (5), and W2 is the same as in Equation (3). neighboring subgraphs within the embedding space, with the
 Readout module. The goal of this module is to allow contrast scores from Equation (7) naturally merging into a
embedding vectors ei to be directly compared to subgraphs, unified score one. For node vi ∈ V, the contrast anomaly
with a variety of readout functions, such as average and scoring function is defined as:
micropooling. This paper uses average pooling, which can be  
expressed as: fcon (vi ) = δ 
 Si − Si (10)

 1  
 M among fcon (vi ) is the contrast abnormality score of vi , where
 gi = Hi j, : (6) Si and Si are the positive and negative contrast discrimination
 M
 j=1 scores respectively. If the node vi is normal, then Si should be
where gi represents the graph-level embedding vector of the close to 1, while 
 Si is likely to be close to 0. Otherwise, if node
view Gi , Hi [j, :] represents The embedding vector of vj in Hi , vi is anomalous, Si and  Si should be close to 0.5. Therefore,
M is the number of nodes in the graph view. the range of Si −Si is [–1, 0], but this paper introduces a scalar
 Contrast modules. This module is the central element of δ to ultimately limit the contrast learning anomaly score to the
the contrastive learning module. It can obtain the degree of range of [0, 1].
difference between two vectors by comparing their embed- Finally, the above two functions are combined to obtain the
dings in an instance pair. For contrast ei and gi , a contrast final anomaly scoring function for the graph data to estimate
module based on bilinear transformation is designed, where a node vi ∈ V of the anomaly:
the contrast score is defined as follows: f (vi ) = αfcon (vi ) + βfrec (vi ) (11)
  
 Si = σ ei W3 gTi (7) Among them, α and β are two balancing factors to weigh
where W3 is a learnable scoring matrix. A sigmoid function is the importance of the contrastive learning module and the
used as a nonlinear transformation σ (·) of the above equation attribute reconstruction module. In practice, this calculation is
to ensure that the discrimination score is within the range repeated R times to obtain statistically stable anomaly scores
[0, 1]. and finally the final anomaly score function.
 Anomaly detection with contrastive learning. Detection aims 1
 score(vi ) = f (vi ) (12)
to minimize the difference between the predicted Si and the R
true label yi . Therefore, in this section, the binary crossentropy loss with Logits is used as the objective function, F. GAAD Algorithm
which combines the Logits activation of the Sigmoid function Combining Equations (5) and (9), the final optimization goal
and the binary cross-entropy loss and can be a good measure of this paper is:
of the difference between the model’s prediction and the real
label. L = αLcon + βLrec (13)

 1
 N where L is the final training loss. α and β are two balancing
 Lcon = − yi log(Si ) + (1 − yi )log(1 − Si ) (8) factors identical to those in Equation (11).
 N
 i=1 The complete procedure of the proposed GAAD algorithm
 is outlined in Algorithm 1. The time complexity of the
E. Anomaly Score Computation algorithm is O(Rnc(λ + c)), where c represents the number of
 In the module of attribute reconstruction, the reconstruc- nodes on which the graph view is based, and λ represents the
tion of the target node’s attributes relies on both its local average node degree in the graph.
WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST 1627

Algorithm 1 The Proposed GAAD Algorithm 1) Citation Network. CORA, Citeseer, and ACM are three
Input: Attribute graph G; Training rounds T; Subgraph size citation datasets, which consist of scientific publications.
 S; Test round R. 2) Social Network. BlogCatalog, Flickr, and Twitter are
Output: Anomaly score function of the graph: score(·) three social network datasets, and their data come from
 1: Randomly initialize trainable parameters W1 ,W2 ,W3 ; three social network platforms respectively.
 2: for t ∈ 1, 2, . . . , T do 3) E-commerce. Amazon is a product sales dataset, which
 3: S ←− Randomly divide V into batches of size S; comes from Amazon, the largest online E-commerce
 4: for batch s = (v1 , . . . , vB ) ∈ S do company in the United States. In this dataset, the nodes
 5: Sample local view subgraph and global view sub- are products, and the edges represent whether the two
 graphs for each node in s; products are purchased together. The characteristics of
 6: Calculate node and its associated graph view embed- each item are processed as node characteristics.
 dings via Eq. (2) and (5); Since the above dataset does not contain ground truth
 7: Calculate the reconstructed feature vector of the node anomalies, the synthetic anomalies need to be injected into
 in s via Eq. (3); the clean attribute network for evaluation. Table II also
 8: Calculate the loss L via Eq. (4), (8), and (13); summarizes the total number of anomalies as well as the
 9: Back propagate and update the trainable parameters dataset statistics. The dataset is composed of nodes and their
 W1 ,W2 ,W3 ; connected edges, and its context information is the sampled
10: end for target node and its adjacent edges and nodes.
11: end for
12: for vi ∈ V do
13: for r ∈ 1, 2, . . . , R do B. Experimental Setup
14: Calculate f(vi ) for each round through Eq. (9), (10), In this section, this paper will describe the experimental
 and (11); setup, including the baseline methods for comparison, evalu-
15: end for ation metrics, and fundamental parameter configurations.
16: The final anomaly score(vi ) is calculated by Eq. (12); This paper compares the proposed GAAD model with
17: end for seven different anomaly detection methods. The paper briefly
 introduces these methods as follows:
 TABLE I AMEN [17] utilizes information from the target node
 I NFORMATION OF THE DATASET. T HE F IRST T HREE DATASETS A RE with its self-network to detect anomalies. Radar [18] detects
 C ITATION N ETWORK DATASETS , THE L AST T HREE A RE S OCIAL
 N ETWORK DATASETS , AND THE L AST O NE I S anomalies by assessing the consistency between residual
 AN E-C OMMERCE DATASET attributes and graphical information. ANOMALOUS [19]
 detects anomalies by combining CUR decomposition and
 residual analysis. DOMINANT [2] utilizes a graph autoencoder to combine the reconstructed adjacency matrix and
 the attribute matrix, and calculates the reconstruction error
 of nodes to detect anomalies. DGI [12] uses a bilinear
 discriminator to score node anomalies by comparing nodes and
 subgraphs. COLA [3] detects anomalies by using an encoder
 model of GNN to learn node embeddings and determine the
 consistency between the embedding and its neighboring subgraphs. Sub-CR [8] detects anomalies by learning embedded
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S TUDY representations of subgraphs and target nodes, followed by
 In this section, this paper assesses the effectiveness of the multi-view contrast learning, and finally by attribute recon-
GAAD model proposed in this study through extensive exper- struction errors in both views.
iments conducted on seven real-world benchmark datasets. Evaluation metrics. This paper evaluates the anomaly detec-
First, the datasets and experimental setups used for the tion performance of GAAD and its competitors using a
experiments are presented, second, a performance comparison common benchmark AUC metric. AUC stands for the area
was conducted by evaluating our model against state-of-the-art under the ROC curve, with values ranging from 0 to 1. A
anomaly detection methods, and finally, ablation experiments higher AUC value indicates better detection performance.
and parameter analyses are also performed in this paper. Basic parameter settings. To improve performance while
 ensuring efficiency, this paper sets the size of the subgraph
 to 4, and a single-layer GCN model is employed as the GNN
A. Dataset encoder, with an embedding dimension set to 64. During the
 To evaluate the performance of GAAD and its comparison training process, for the dataset, α is fixed at 0.8 or 1, then
algorithm, seven real-world graph datasets are used as bench- β values are selected from {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1}, and the
marks, including three social network datasets, three citation ADAM optimizer is used for model training. In terms of
network datasets, and one E-commerce dataset. A description learning rate, it is set according to the characteristics of the
of these datasets is as follows: dataset. Specifically, Cora, CiteSeer, and Flickr use 0.001,
1628 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE II
 T HE AUC VALUES C OMPARISON ON S EVEN B ENCHMARK DATASETS

 TABLE III
 E FFECT OF D IFFERENT R EADOUT F UNCTIONS ON AUC VALUE

 TABLE IV
 E FFECT OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS ON AUC VALUES . S PECIFICALLY, GAAD-CON, GAAD-REC, AND GAAD-U NWEIGHTED
 A RE R ESPECTIVELY U SED TO I NDICATE T HAT GAAD H AS N O ATTRIBUTE R ECONSTRUCTION M ODULE ,
 C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING M ODULE , AND A NOMALY S CORE W EIGHTING

BlogCatalog, Twitter and Amazon use 0.003, while ACM The method proposed in this article demonstrates exceluses 0.0005. For different datasets, 400 Epochs (BlogCatalog, lent detection performance and generalization ability. This
Flickr, Twitter, and ACM) and 100 Epochs (Cora, CiteSeer, achievement is partly due to the GAAD method combining
and Amazon) were trained. During the test phase, 256 is used two distinct self-supervised learning strategies, which work
as the sampling parameter R to obtain an accurate evaluation together to achieve higher learning efficiency. The joint
of the model performance. application of this strategy can provide more comprehensive
 information and help the model more effectively capture
 abnormal patterns in the data, thereby significantly improving
C. Results and Analysis detection performance.
 The GAAD proposed in this paper is compared with the This article repeatedly calculates the abnormality score of
seven baseline methods in this subsection. The results for AUC each node multiple times to ensure that the final abnormality
values are presented in Table II. The best-performing method score is statistically stable and finally detects abnormal nodes
in each dataset is indicated in bold and the second best score based on the abnormality score. In summary, GAAD’s compreis underlined. Based on these results, this paper draws the hensive performance and generalization capabilities make it a
following conclusions: compelling innovative work in the field of graph data anomaly
 In all datasets, the GAAD approach presented in this paper detection.
surpasses the performance of all baseline methods. In the seven
datasets, the average AUC value of GAAD is 0.2375 and
0.1498 higher than the shallow methods AMEN and Radar D. Ablation Experiment
respectively. The average AUC value in the seven datasets In this subsection, the paper studies the impact of varying
is higher than that of AMEN and Radar. It is 0.051 higher different readout functions and the impact of various compothan the best deep detection method in the baseline, demon- nents of the proposed approach.
strating its ability to detect anomalies with high-dimensional 1) In the experiment, this paper examines the impact on
node features and complex structure graphs and its superior the model by altering the selection of various types of
detection effect in the e-commerce field. The main reason is readout functions. The readout functions here are min
that GAAD captures abnormal patterns by jointly using self- pooling, max pooling, and weighted average pooling.
supervised methods of reconstruction learning and contrastive The experimental results are shown in Table IV. The
learning. average pooling used in this paper has the best readout
WU et al.: GAAD FOR E-COMMERCE APPLICATION BY CONTEXTUAL INTEGRATING CONTRAST 1629

Fig. 2. AUC values of GAAD with different weights of Alpha and Beta on Cora, Citeseer, and Twitter.

 effect on the seven datasets compared with other readout and β influences anomaly detection performance. This paper
 functions. separately adjusts these two factors within the range of {0.2,
 2) This paper considers the influence of different compo- 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}, as shown in Figure 2. The results on the
 nents in the model it designs. First consider two variants selected dataset are shown here. The results can be obtained
 of GAAD, where GAAD-REC only uses the attribute to show that the AUC value tends to increase with α when β
 reconstruction module to identify abnormal nodes and is constant, and the to reach its peak AUC varies for different
 GAAD-CON exclusively employs a contrastive learn- datasets. Furthermore, the choice of β is highly dependent on
 ing module for the identification of anomalous nodes. the specific dataset. For example, Citeseer requires a larger
 Finally, to evaluate the effectiveness of the designed value (β ≥ 0.6), while Twitter requires a smaller value (β ≤
 anomaly scoring function, this paper further constructs 0.6). Depending on the nature of the dataset and the results
 GAAD-Unweighted, which means to obtain attribute show that, in practice, this article sets α = 0.8 for the Cora
 reconstruction and comparative learning anomaly scores dataset and BlogCatalog dataset, α = 1.0 for other datasets,
 in an unweighted manner, that is, α = β = 1 in and sets the value of β to 0.6 for each dataset.
 Equation (13). The experimental results are shown in 2) The Impact of Test Rounds: In this experiment, this
 Table IV and the following points were observed: paper studies its effectiveness in the inference phase of GAAD
 First, the complete GAAD algorithm achieves the best by modifying the test rounds. The value of R is chosen from
 performance, demonstrating that the two learning strate- the set = {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 400}. The results can
 gies in this paper’s method are complementary and be observed in Figure 3(a). As depicted in the figure, it is
 effective. Second, the weighting of the anomaly scoring evident that inadequate rounds of evaluation result in subpar
 function is also helpful in detecting anomalies on the detection performance. As the number of test rounds increases,
 seven datasets. Removing fractional weights results in the AUC for all datasets steadily increases, indicating the
 poor anomaly detection performance. The possible rea- need for an adequate number of rounds to mitigate bias
 son is that different components play different effects in resulting from random sampling. However, when it is greater
 detecting anomalies, and α = β = 1 will lead to poor than 256, there is no obvious increasing trend in AUC.
 final detection results. Through ablation experiments, Therefore, maintaining the evaluation rounds at 256 for stable
 we can first conclude that the readout function used in performance.
 this article has the best readout effect and has better 3) The Impact of Subgraph Size Factors: This paper then
 generalization ability, which is beneficial to subsequent further explores the impact of subgraph size on AUC. GAAD
 anomaly detection work. Secondly, the effectiveness of was run on seven datasets to test the anomaly detection
 the combined method of attribute reconstruction and performance under the condition of subgraph size = {1, 2,
 contrastive learning used in this article in graph anomaly 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}. The results are reported in Figure 3(b).
 detection is obtained. The combination of these two From the figure, it can be seen from the figure that when
 learning strategies can better identify abnormal patterns the subgraph size is small, the performance of GAAD sharply
 in the graph, and finally obtain the effectiveness of the increases with the increase of K and quickly reaches the
 designed anomaly scoring function. peak. However, when the subgraph size > 5, the performance
 decreases as the subgraph size increases. The results indicate
 that ensuring dependable detection performance hinges on
E. Parametric Study the critical decision of subgraph size. When the subgraph
 In this subsection, this paper studies the impact of four size is small, it is difficult for the model to obtain enough
main parameters on the performance of the GAAD model: the neighborhood information to detect anomalies, while when
algorithm’s balancing factors α and β, test rounds, subgraph the subgraph size is large, the subgraph samples unarsize, and the embedding dimension. ticulated points around the target node into the subgraph
 1) Algorithm Balance Factor: In this experiment, this causing it to contain redundant information and affecting the
paper explores how the adjustment of balancing factor α performance.
1630 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 3. Parameter sensitivity analysis of GAAD on seven benchmark datasets.

 4) The Impact of Embedding Dimensions: The paper con- R EFERENCES
cludes by exploring the impact of embedding dimensions on [1] Y. Li and P. Yi, “A contrastive learning framework for detecting
the encoder. How it affects the performance of the method anomalous behavior in commodity trading platforms,” Appl. Sci., vol. 13,
in this paper is obtained by varying the value of the embed- no. 9, p. 5709, 2023.
 [2] K. Ding, J. Li, R. Bhanushali, and H. Liu, “Deep anomaly detection
ding dimension, and the results are shown in Fig. 3(c). For on attributed networks,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2019,
most datasets, when D ≤ 32, performance improves as the pp. 594–602.
embedding dimension increases. When D is larger, the AUC [3] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learnof each dataset has a peak, Then as the embedding dimension ing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
increases, the performance starts to decrease slightly. So for pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
most datasets, choosing 64 as the potential embedding is best. [4] J. Liu, F. Xia, X. Feng, J. Ren, and H. Liu, “Deep graph learning for
 anomalous citation detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2543–2557, Jun. 2022.
 [5] Y. Zhang, W. Liang, X. Yuan, S. Zhang, G. Yang, and Z. Zeng, “Deep
 learning based abnormal behavior detection for elderly healthcare using
 V. C ONCLUSION consumer network cameras,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early
 access, Aug. 29, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3309852.
 This paper introduces a novel self-supervised graph autoen- [6] C. Xiao, X. Xu, Y. Lei, K. Zhang, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Counterfactual
coder learning model, GAAD, for graph anomaly detection, graph learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” IEEE
generating global and local subgraphs of target nodes to Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 10540–10553, Oct. 2023.
 [7] M. Jin, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Chi, Y.-F. Li, and S. Pan, “ANEMONE:
more effectively capture the structural patterns associated with Graph anomaly detection with multi-scale contrastive learning,” in Proc.
anomalies. It processes local and global contextual information 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 3122–3126.
and then models the structure and attributes of nodes to obtain [8] J. Zhang, S. Wang, and S. Chen, “Reconstruction enhanced multi-view
 contrastive learning for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” 2022,
two key components, the attribute reconstruction module arXiv:2205.04816.
identifies and reconstructs nodes with significant discrepan- [9] H. Zhao, M. Liu, S. Qiu, and X. Cao, “Satellite unsupervised anomaly
cies, capturing anomalies in the attribute space, while the detection based on deconvolution-reconstructed temporal convolutional
 autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., early access, Aug. 18,
contrastive learning module detects structural space anoma- 2023, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2023.3306428.
lies. Ultimately, the integration of these two complementary [10] X. Tang, S. Zeng, F. Yu, W. Yu, Z. Sheng, and Z. Kang,
modules seeks to bolster the effectiveness of anomaly detec- “Self-supervised anomaly pattern detection for large scale industrial
 data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 515, pp. 1–12, Jan. 2023.
tion. Extensive experiments across seven real-world datasets [11] M. Gori, G. Monfardini, and F. Scarselli, “A new model for learning
demonstrate that our method can swiftly and accurately in graph domains,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2005,
detect anomalies, enabling efficient anomaly detection in pp. 729–734.
 [12] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
E-commerce applications.However, the method is unable to R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” 2018, arXiv:1809.10341.
detect complex networks such as heterogeneous graphs and [13] Y. Ren, B. Liu, C. Huang, P. Dai, L. Bo, and J. Zhang, “Heterogeneous
dynamic graphs, etc. In the future, we will improve the method deep graph infomax,” 2020, arXiv:1911.08538.
 [14] J. Li, G. Lu, Z. Wu, and F. Ling, “Multi-view representation model based
to allow it to be applied to more complex network/graph data. on graph autoencoder,” Inf. Sci., vol. 632, pp. 439–453, Jun. 2023.
 [15] M. Li, L. Zhang, L. Cui, L. Bai, Z. Li, and X. Wu, “BLoG:
 Bootstrapped graph representation learning with local and global regularization for recommendation,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 144, Dec. 2023,
 CR EDI T AUTHORSHIP C ONTRIBUTION S TATEMENT Art. no. 109874.
 [16] Y. Pan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, and M. Lu, “CSDTI: An interpretable
 Jinjie Wu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, cross-attention network with GNN-based drug molecule aggrega-
Investigation, Experiment, Writing-original draft. Zhipeng tion for drug-target interaction prediction,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53,
Qiu: Methodology, Writing-review & editing. Zhixia Zeng: pp. 27177–27190, Sep. 2023.
 [17] B. Perozzi and L. Akoglu, “Scalable anomaly ranking of attributed
data collection, Writing-review & editing. Ruliang Xiao: neighborhoods,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Min., 2016, pp. 207–215.
Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing-review [18] J. Li, H. Dani, X. Hu, and H. Liu, “Radar: Residual analysis for anomaly
& editing, Project administration. Imad Rida: Methodology, detection in attributed networks,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2017, pp. 2152–2158.
 [19] Z. Peng, M. Luo, J. Li, H. Liu, and Q. Zheng, “ANOMALOUS: A joint
Investigation, Writing-Review. Shi Zhang: Writing-review & modeling approach for anomaly detection on attributed networks,” in
editing. Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3513–3519.