IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024 6457

 Graph Structure Change-Based Anomaly
 Detection in Multivariate Time Series of
 Industrial Processes
 Zhen Zhang , Zhiqiang Geng , and Yongming Han , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Multivariate time series anomaly detection I. INTRODUCTION
plays an important role for the safe operation of indus-
 ITH the development of Industry 4.0, the number of
trial devices and systems. At present, many effective methods have the major limitation that the changes in information propagation between variables are not considered
 W industrial devices (entities) and systems is growing
 rapidly. In addition to their own mechanical abnormalities [1]
when anomalies occur. Therefore, this article proposes due to aging, these devices and systems in the industrial Internet
a novel graph structure change-based anomaly detection
on multivariate time series (GSC-MAD). First, a stable may also be subject to external attacks [2], which can cause huge
graph structure under normal conditions is obtained and a losses if not be detected and dealt with in time. Therefore, it is
single-step prediction for all variables is achieved from a important to achieve timely and accurate anomaly monitoring for
high-dimensional time-series embedding representation industrial devices or systems to ensure safe industrial operation
learned from the normal data. Then, anomaly detection is and avoid economic losses. Moreover, the industrial internet
achieved by combining the variable behavior deviation reflected by prediction errors and the information propaga- also brings a huge amount of data from different monitoring
tion deviation between variables reflected by GSC. Exten- instruments, which well reflects the operation status of industrial
sive experiments on five real-world benchmarks are con- devices or systems. Therefore, the automatic implementation of
ducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed anomaly monitoring using the industrial data through anomaly
method and compared with current state-of-the-art (SOTA) detection algorithms has become an active research topic [3].
baselines, a relative improvement of 6.64% on the average
F1 is achieved. Moreover, an actual chemical industrial case The monitoring data in the industry are usually presented
is provided to verify the effect of the GSC-MAD and a rel- in time series data, and anomaly detection tends to focus on
ative improvement of 4.03% is achieved on the F1 metric devices and systems than individual sensors [4], [5]. Moreover,
compared with SOTA baselines. Comparison experiment anomaly detection usually takes an unsupervised approach beresults show that the proposed method achieves the SOTA cause anomalies in actual industries are rare and labeling the
results in terms of current baselines. Further experiment
analysis shows the good interpretability of the proposed data is costly [6].
method for detected anomalies. At present, many unsupervised multivariate time series
 anomaly detection methods have been proposed, which can be
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, graph neural network
 broadly classified into traditional methods and deep learning-
(GNN), industrial systems, interpretability analysis, multivariate time series. based methods [7]. Traditional methods focus more on mining
 information in dimensional space [8] or projection space [9]
 to achieve anomaly detection by means of density [10] or
 distance [11], [12], but do not consider the inherent temporal
 dependence of time series, which makes it difficult to make full
 use of data information. The powerful feature extraction and
 Manuscript received 24 May 2023; revised 16 October 2023 and 3 series representation capabilities in the deep learning have
December 2023; accepted 14 December 2023. Date of publication 11 brought promising developments in series modeling and
January 2024; date of current version 4 April 2024. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China anomaly detection. Recently, prediction [4] or reconstructionunder Grant 62373035 and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds based [5] multivariate time series anomaly detection methods usfor the Central in China under Grant XK1802-4. Paper no. TII-23-1837. ing deep learning have emerged, but these methods tend to ignore
(Corresponding authors: Yongming Han; Zhiqiang Geng.)
 The authors are with the College of Information Science and Tech- the relationships between variables. To address this limitation,
nology, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, the graph neural network-based (GNN) methods capture the re-
China, and also with the Engineering Research Center of Intelli- lationships between variables in time series modeling, combines
gent PSE, Ministry of Education in China, Beijing 100029, China
(e-mail: zhang_zhen@buct.edu.cn; gengzhiqiang@mail.buct.edu.cn; the attention mechanism to achieve automatic graph structure
hanym@mail.buct.edu.cn). learning, and then realizes the anomaly inference by prediction
 This article has supplementary material provided by the au- error [2], [13] or reconstruction probability [14]. However, the
thors and color versions of one or more figures available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3347000. GNN-based methods still do not consider the changes of data
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3347000 information propagation between variables when an anomaly

 1551-3203 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

occurs, which provides an idea to further improve the perfor- calculating the LOF of data at each timestamp, and identified
mance of anomaly detection. For example, for an actual chemical the samples in the region with small local density as anomalies.
industry process, under normal conditions, increasing the valve Isolation forest (IF) [8] determined the local density by continuwill cause the flow rate to increase, which will cause the tank ously dividing the space iteratively, and recognized that samples
level to increase. However, when the valve fails, the valve fails with few divisions were in low-density space and performed as
are adjusted to achieve the desired changes in flow and level. It is anomalies. And, similar to the IF, the isolation-based nearestclear that the relationship between the valve, flow rate, and level neighbor ensembles (INNE) [16] utilizes the nearest neighbor
will change when anomaly occurs, and this change reflected in method to perform isolation and achieve anomaly detection.
the graph is the change of the information propagation between The one-class support vector machine (OCSVM) [11] and the
the nodes. support vector data description (SVDD) [12] achieved the seg-
 Fully considering the changes in the information propagation mentation of normal and abnormal data by constructing the
between variables, this article proposes a new multivariate time optimal classification hyperplane or hypersphere. The principal
series anomaly detection method using the novel graph struc- component analysis (PCA) [9] and the kernel PCA (KPCA) [17]
ture change-based multivariate times series anomaly detection projected the data into a low-dimension space and calculated its
(GSC-MAD). The hidden layer embedding representation of the statistics at each timestamp to determine whether it is abnormal
high-dimensional time series of normal data is learned by GNNs. or not. The histogram-based outlier score (HBOS) [18] as-
Then, a single-step prediction of each variable is implemented sumed independence of the features and achieved a fast anomaly
using the hidden layer representation while learning a stable detection method based on the histogram. Recently, both the
graph structure. Moreover, an end-to-end training is achieved copula-based outlier detection (COPOD) [19] and the empiricalby joint optimization. Finally, the information deviation of each cumulative-distribution-based outlier detection (ECOD) [20]
variable is calculated by combining the variable behavior devi- assumed that anomalies are often the rare events that appear in
ation reflected by the prediction deviation and the information the tails of a distribution and estimated the tail probabilities per
propagation deviation reflected by GSC, which is used to achieve dimension of the data to achieve anomaly detection. However,
anomaly inference as well as interpretation. The contributions all these methods ignore the inherent temporal dependence of
of this article are summarized as follows: time series and only use features in spatial dimension to achieve
 1) A novel GSC-MAD is proposed. Anomaly inference is anomaly detection.
 achieved using the information propagation deviation
 between variables and prediction deviation of variables.
 2) Extensive experiments show that the proposed method B. Deep Learning Methods for Time Series Anomaly
 achieves the state-of-the-art (SOTA) results across multi- Detection
 ple domains on five real-world benchmarks and an actual Based on deep learning and density-based anomaly detection
 chemical industrial case compared to current baselines. approach, Zong et al. [21] proposed the deep autoencoding
 3) An anomaly interpretability analysis matrix is provided gaussian mixture model (DAGMM) by combining deep autoento help explain the detected anomalies by visualization. coder and Gaussian mixture model to achieve anomaly detection
 The interpretability of the GSC-MAD is demonstrated through density estimation. Goodge et al. [22] proposed the
 through an actual real-world water treatment process case learnable unified neighborhood-based anomaly ranking method
 study and analysis. (LUNAR), which learns to use information from the nearest
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II neighbors of each node in a trainable way to find anomalies. Both
reviews the related work on multivariate time series anomaly de- methods still did not consider the temporal dependence. More
tection. Section III introduces the proposed GSC-MAD method. generally, considering the inherent temporal dependence of time
Section IV analyzes the performance of the GSC-MAD through series, deep learning-based anomaly detection methods were
extensive experiments and gives anomaly interpretability anal- implemented based on prediction or reconstruction methods [7].
ysis. Finally, Section V concludes this article. A prediction-based method built a time series prediction model
 from the history data and achieved anomaly inference based on
 II. RELATED WORK the prediction error [23]. And a reconstruction-based method
 achieved anomaly inference through the reconstruction error or
 Recently, a large number of unsupervised multivariate time
 probability [24]. Hundman et al. [4] used the long short term
series anomaly detection methods has been proposed. This secmemory (LSTM) network to implement telemetry data pretion reviews these methods from the perspective of traditional
 diction for spacecraft devices, and achieved anomaly detection
and deep learning methods.
 based on the prediction error and the nonparametric threshold.
 The generative adversarial network (MAD-GAN) [25] and the
A. Traditional Methods for Time Series Anomaly
 autoencoder (AE) [26] were used to model normal time series
Detection
 and achieve the unsupervised anomaly detection (USAD) by re-
 Traditional multivariate time series anomaly detection meth- construction errors. The Transformer-based anomaly detection
ods achieve anomaly detection based on the local density and dis- method (TranAD) [27] made full use of the temporal dependence
tance information of data points in high-dimensional space [15]. of time series by attention mechanism and achieved anomaly
The local outlier factor (LOF) [10] reflected the local density by inference by series reconstruction. Although the prediction and
ZHANG et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE CHANGE-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION IN MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 6459

reconstruction methods solve the problem in traditional methods edge from node u to node v can be denoted as eu,v ∈ E. For
with the powerful series modelling ability of deep learning, it convenience, a graph is usually represented by the adjacency
does not effectively exploit the relationship of variables. matrix A ∈ R|V |×|V | , and Au,v ∈ R denotes the weight of the
 To address the above limitation, researchers have conducted edge eu,v . Au,v = 0 means there is no edge between the nodes.
research on the GNN and verified the ability of the GNN In GNN-based multivariate time series anomaly detection methto extract the relationship between variables [28], [29]. Zhao ods, each variable is considered as a node. And the data for each
et al. [14] first proposed the multivariate time-series anomaly node is a time series within a window.
detection via the graph attention network method (MTAD-GAT),
which extracted features in 2-D directions through temporal B. Overview
and spatial graph attention mechanisms, and designed anomaly
 The overview architecture of the GSC-MAD is shown in
inference scores by combining prediction error and reconstruc-
 Fig. 1. The key to the GSC-MAD is to obtain a stable graph
tion probability. Deng et al. [13] proposed the graph deviation
 structure and achieve anomaly inference by combining the
net (GDN) and designed graph deviation scoring to achieve
 information propagation change in test time series. First, the
anomaly inference through sensor embedding, graph structure
 node embedding representation in the hidden space is learned
learning, and prediction based on the graph attention mechausing a spatial domain GNN, based on which the single-step
nism. In addition, Chen et al. [2] used the designed information
 prediction of all nodes is performed using a full connection
propagation graph convolution and the transformer architecture
 neural network. Meanwhile, a new graph structure is obtained
to learn graph structures, implemented prediction of the series
 by cosine similarity calculation of the embedding representation,
and realized the anomaly inference by the prediction error.
 edge pruning and weighting with the initial graph, which is used
 Most of GNN-based methods utilize the graph attention mechfor next computation of node embedding representation. After
anism to achieve automatic graph structure learning. However,
 repeated iterations, a stable graph structure reflecting the normal
the assumption of full connectivity of a graph [30] or the top-k
 data can be obtained. In anomaly inference, the anomaly score
strategy used for selecting neighborhood nodes [2], random iniis obtained by combining the prediction deviation, which retialization of attention weights [31], and downstream task-based
 flects the behavior discrepancy and the discrepancy between the
optimization approach may lead to a graph structure that is not
 new and stable graph structure, which reflects the information
practically meaningful or does not have a stable structure. Morepropagation change between nodes. Finally, anomaly inference
over, although the relationship between variables is effectively
 is achieved by the anomaly score and a fixed threshold.
utilized in multivariate time series modeling, the way of anomaly
inference still utilizes the single prediction or reconstruction in-
 C. GNN-Based Node Embedding and Forecasting
formation, and does not fully utilize the information of the graph
structure reflecting the relationship of variables. Therefore, for For multivariate time series, the variables are interdependent
graph structure learning, a way of combining similarity metric and information is propagated to each other. For example, for
and graph regularization metric optimizing is used to obtain a an actual industrial process, increasing the pressure of the pump
stable structure [30], [31]. In anomaly inference, the variable will lead to an increase in flow rate, while the level of the tank
prediction deviation and the information propagation deviation gradually rises, and under the regulation of the control system,
between variables are combined to achieve full utilization of the pump will be counteracted to reduce the pressure approinformation and anomaly inference. priately for ensuring the stability of the system. Therefore, it is
 Moreover, a summary of the related works in form of the table critical to capture the dependencies and information propagation
is provided in Appendix A of the Supplementary Material. relationships between variables.
 Gilmer et al. [32] proposed a unified framework for the spatial
 III. PROPOSED METHOD domain GNN. In the GSC-MAD, the information propagation
 relationships of multivariate time series are extracted using the
 In this work, the GNN-based multivariate time series anomaly spatial domain GNN [33], [34] message propagation mechanism
detection is focused. To facilitate description and understanding, to achieve the node embedding in the hidden space. And a nonthis section first presents the definition of the multivariate time linear function is used to perform an activation transformation
series anomaly detection task and the graph. Then, a detailed on the computed results of the network to enhance the nonlinear
description of the proposed GSC-MAD is given. representation of the network. For each node μ, its embedding
 representation is calculated by
A. Problem Definition ⎛ ⎞
 Definition 1 (Multivariate time series anomaly detection): 
 zu = f ⎝w1 · xu + W2 · ev,u · xv ⎠ (1)
Given a multivariate time series X ∈ RN ×M , where N denotes
 v∈N (u)
the length of the series and M denotes the number of features.
Anomaly detection task is to algorithmically predict a label where xu ∈ RN ×1 denotes the vector of the node u and zu ∈
at ∈ {0, 1} for xt ∈ RM ×1 at each timestamp, where 0 and 1 Rd×1 is the embedding representation of xu and d is the emdenotes normal and abnormal, respectively. bedding dimension. v ∈ N (u) denotes the set of first-order
 Definition 2 (Graph): A graph consists of a set of nodes neighbor nodes of node u, ev,u denotes the edge weight from
V and a set of edges E, denoted G = (V, E). Usually, an node v to node u, and f (·) is the nonlinear transformation,
6460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed GSC-MAD method. The thickness of the connection line indicates the relationship degree of the variables in the
graph structure learning module.

and the ReLU function is used here. The above computation A KNN graph A0 is initially established with Euclidean
approach captures the relationships between each variable and distance, where the edge weight from node u to node v is
its directly related variables. Thus, by stacking the above layer,
each variable can capture the relationships between itself and A0u,v = xu − xv 2 . (3)
multiple-order neighboring nodes (i.e., directly and indirectly The node embedding representation obtained through the GNN
related variables). reflects the implicit information of the variables in the hidden
 In addition, combining the inherent temporal dependence of space, and the similarity metric in the hidden space can be
time series (i.e., the future value at each timestamp is based on calculated by cosine similarity for updating the graph structure
its history data), a single-step prediction for all nodes is achieved zu · zv
by a full connection neural network using the node embedding, su,v = cos (zu , zv ) = (4)
 zu  · zv 
which facilitates anomaly inference and interpretation
 where zu and zv denote the node embedding representation
 of node u and node v, respectively, cos(·) denotes the cosine
 ŷ = Z × W + bT
 (2)
 calculation, and su,v denotes the similarity in hidden space
 between nodes. Furthermore, the similarity values should be
where ŷ ∈ RM ×1 and Z ∈ RM ×d denote prediction values and non-negative and nodes with minimal similarity do not have
embedding representation of all nodes, respectively. ability to influence each other. Therefore, edge pruning is used to
 prune off the non-significant edges to obtain a similarity matrix
 for updating the graph structure
D. Graph Structure Learning 
 s ,s > ε
 Both the MTAD-GAT and the GDN use the graph attention Su,v = u,v u,v (5)
 0, otherwise.
mechanism to achieve graph structure learning. However, the
attention-based graph structure learning approach may have Moreover, the initial graph structure reflects the information
some limitations: 1) The assumption of full connection of a between nodes in the original space [32]. Thus, both the initial
graph may affect the graph construction between nodes with graph structure and the similarity matrix in the hidden space are
real relationships, along with high computation complexity [30]. considered when updating the graph structure
2) Random initialization of attention weights may result in a
 Aiter = λ · Aiter−1 + (1 − λ) · S (6)
learned graph structure that is not practically meaningful [31].
 iter−1
3) The downstream task-based optimization approach may not where A denotes the graph structure at the previous ityield a stable graph structure. Therefore, the similarity metric eration, and when iter = 1 is the initial graph structure A0 .
combined with optimizing the graph regularization metric is Therefore, the information of the initial and each learned graph
used to achieve graph structure learning. structure is included in every subsequent iteration. λ is used to
ZHANG et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE CHANGE-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION IN MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 6461

control the proportion of information retained about the previous of two modules
graph at each iteration.
 L = LF + L G . (11)
E. Joint Optimization
 F. Anomaly Inference
 As mentioned previously, the proposed GSC-MAD performs
 For the normal data, the relationships between variables
both prediction task and graph structure learning task using the
 are stable and do not change significantly, but when the test
node embedding representation in the hidden space, so the node
 time series contains anomaly, the relationships will change
embedding needs to contain the information required by both
 significantly, and the edges that change significantly indicate
modules. Therefore, joint optimization is used here.
 that the connected nodes may have anomalies. In addition, the
 Node Forecasting Module: The task of the prediction module
 GDN points out that variables with large prediction deviations
is to predict the value of the next timestamp for all nodes. Theretend to have anomalies [13]. Therefore, the two deviations are
fore, the optimization objective is to minimize the discrepancy
 combined by multiplying to obtain the information deviation
between the ground truth and predicted values, which is achieved
 ErrInformation ∈ RM ×1 for each node
by minimizing the mean square error (MSE)
 T
 ErrInformation (t) = Atest (t) − Asteady
 1 
 M
 2
 LF = u (t))
 (yu (t) − y (7) × |ŷ(t) − y(t)| (12)
 M u=1

where yu (t) and y where Asteady and Atest (t) denote the stable graph and the graph
 u (t) denote the predicted value and ground
truth of node u at timestamp t, respectively. learned from test series, respectively. ŷ(t) and y(t) denote
 Graph Structure Learning Module: A stable graph structure ground truth and predicted values of all variables, respectively.
can be obtained more efficiently by direct optimization. Based on And | · | denotes the absolute error.
the target that a good graph structure tends to be low-rank, sparse, Theoretically, ErrInformation calculates the weighted sum of the
and smooth, the graph regularization theory is used to construct neighboring edge weight deviations of nodes on their own prethe objective function [35]. According to the assumption of dicted deviations, and contains both the information propagation
graph homogeneity, similar nodes are inclined to build edges, deviation between variables and the behavior deviation of the
while the variation between similar nodes is smooth. Therefore, variables themselves, which can better reflect the status of the
a smoothness constraint [36] is imposed as follows: variables. More specifically, on the one hand, if anomalies exist,
 the target node deviation can be further amplified by weight-
 1 
 M ing; on the other hand, if no anomalies exist, the target node
 Lsm (Z, A) = α Au,v (zu − zv )2 deviation can be smoothed by neighboring nodes weighting,
 2 u,v=1
 so as to increase the discrepancy between normal and anomaly.
 = α · tr Z T LZ (8) Furthermore, the max value in ErrInformation at timestamp t reflects
 the device or system status, because if the anomaly exists, the
where Z is the hidden embedding representation, A is the ad- deviation is smaller for unrelated nodes and larger for nodes
jacency matrix, L = D − A denotes the graph Laplace matrix, with anomalies, so the max value is used. Therefore, the anomaly
where D = A · 1 denotes the degree matrix of A, tr(·) denotes score at timestamp t is obtained using the maximization function
the trace of the matrix, and α is hyperparameter. Furthermore,
since a full connection graph usually has noisy and irrelevantly Anomaly_Score(t) = max ErrInformation (t). (13)
connection, a sparsity constraint [37] is imposed to force it to Finally, anomaly inference is achieved by the Anomaly_
become sparse, while avoiding optimizing the graph to 0 Score(t) and a predefined threshold. Iif the Anomaly_Score(t)
 Lsp (A) = −β1T log(D) + γAF (9) at timestamp t exceeds a predefined threshold, the state is marked
 as anomaly
where β and γ are hyperparameters, and  · F denotes the 
 1, Anomaly_Score(t) > Threshold
Frobenius norm. The logarithmic barrier forces a graph to a(t) = (14)
become sparse, but does not prevent A from converging to 0, Anomaly_Score(t) ≤ Threshold
0, so the second term is used to balance the first term to The algorithm flow of the overall method is detailed in
avoid the graph from becoming too sparse. The optimization Algorithm 1 in Appendix B of the Supplementary Material.
objective of the graph structure learning module is shown as
follows: IV. EXPERIMENTS
 LG = Lsm (Z, A) + Lsp (A). (10) A. Benchmarks and Evaluation Metrics
 Since both the graph structure learning and the prediction The main experiments are conducted on five real-world multimodules are based on the results of node embedding, and the variate time-series anomaly detection benchmarks: 1) Mars scilearned graph structure is used in the next iteration of the node ence laboratory (MSL) and soil moisture active passive (SMAP)
embedding calculation, the optimization objective of the GSC- released by NASA [4]; 2) server machine dataset (SMD) pub-
MAD can be obtained by summing the optimization objectives lished by Tsinghua University [5] and pooled server metrics
6462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

 TABLE I F 1best are more meaningful, and the results are analyzed here
 THE DETAILS OF BENCHMARK DATASETS
 mainly for F 1best . The results show that the GSC-MAD outperforms the current baselines in general and achieves 6.64% improvement on the average F 1best . Specifically, it outperforms the
 current SOTA results by relative 6.32% (93.01→98.89), 2.77%
 (91.11→93.63), 3.71% (90.41→93.76), 4.19% (89.57→93.32)
 and 5.00% (91.34→95.91) on five benchmarks of the PSM, the
 MSL, the SMAP, the SMD, and the SWaT, respectively.
(PSM) published by eBay [1]; 3) Secure Water Treatment For the OCSVM, the IF, the HBOS, the INNE, the
(SWaT) published by Singapore University of Technology and COPOD, the ECOD, the DeepSVDD, the DAGMM and the
Design. The details of these datasets are shown in Table I. LUNAR, these methods implement modeling in dimensional
 Standard evaluation metrics in anomaly detection task are space, but do not fully utilize the inherent temporal dependence
used: Precision (P), Recall (R) and F1 score (F1), which can be of time series, which is not conducive to multivariate time series
calculated by anomaly detection in the absence of partial data information.
 For the LSTM, the MAD-GAN, the OmniAnomaly, the USAD,
 TP the TranAD, the CAE-M, and the BeatGAN-CNN, although the
 P = (15)
 TP + FP temporal dependence is considered, there are some limitations
 TP in capturing the relationships between variables.
 R= (16)
 TP + FN For the same GNN-based anomaly detection methods, the
 2×P ×R MTAD-GAT, the GDN, and the GTA fully capture the relation-
 F1 = (17) ships between variables. However, in the design of anomaly
 P +R
 inference, the GDN and the GTA utilizes variable prediction
where TP, FP denote correctly and incorrectly detected anoma- deviation, and the MTAD-GAT chooses to utilize both reconlies, respectively. And TN, FN denote correctly and incorrectly struction and prediction deviation, but all ignore the information
labeled normal, respectively. For the anomaly detection task with propagation deviation between variables, i.e., the graph structure
highly unbalanced labels, F 1 is more suitable for evaluating the change. The GSC-MAD method utilizes the prediction deviation
performance of a detection model. In addition, the performance while considering the effect from the graph structure change,
evaluation metrics are calculated using the currently commonly and the experiment results show that utilizing both deviations is
used point adjustment strategy [4]: for a real-world anomaly beneficial to improve the anomaly detection performance.
detection task, each alarm needs to be treated carefully, so In addition, the feasibility study with the parameter sensionce a consecutive anomaly is detected that overlaps with the tivity, the computation time and the threshold selection on the
ground truth, the entire segment of anomalies is considered to benchmarks is detailed in Appendix D of the Supplementary
be detected. False alarms are counted and treated in a usual way. Material, the convergence analysis of the GSL module is detailed
And for a fair comparison, the best F 1 score which is searched in Appendix E of the Supplementary Material and the similarity
for by a grid search on all possible anomaly thresholds is used metric analysis in the GSL module is detailed in Appendix F of
to analyze the performance of the GSC-MAD and the baselines. the Supplementary Material.

B. Baselines
 D. The Real-World Chemical Industrial Case
 Extensive comparison experiments are conducted between the
 Fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) is a key technology for secproposed GSC-MAD and 20 different types of baselines for mulondary processing of crude oil and consists of three systems:
tivariate time series anomaly detection: 1) Traditional methods:
 reaction regeneration system (RRS), fractionation system, and
the KPCA [17], the OCSVM [11], the IF [8], the HBOS [18],
 absorption stabilization system. Among them, the RRS is the
the INNE [16], the COPOD [19] and the ECOD [20]; 2) deep
 core of the FCC, which contains the reaction process and the
learning and density-based methods: the DAGMM [21], the
 regeneration process, both of which operate continuously. Its
DeepSVDD [38] and the LUNAR [22]; 3) Prediction-based
 topology is shown in Fig. 2.
method: the LSTM [4]; 4) Reconstruction-based methods: the
 The preheated high-boiling petroleum feedstock is mixed
MAD-GAN [25], the OmniAnomaly [5], the USAD [26], the
 with recycle oil slurry, and injected into the riser and reactor
TranAD [27], the CAE-M [3] and the BeatGAN [6]; 5) GNNto contact and mix with the catalyst from the regenerator,
based methods: the MTAD-GAT [14], the GDN [13], and the
 where a catalytic cracking reaction occurs to generate small
GTA [2]. The GTA is the latest SOTA GNN-based method.
 molecule mixed gases. These produced gasses are discharged
 from the top of the reactor, while the catalyst particles settle
C. Comparisons on Benchmarks
 to the bottom through the settler at the top of the reactor. The
 The implementation details are described in Appendix C of catalyst coke located at the bottom of the reactor is blown to the
the Supplementary Material. And the performance metrics of the regenerator through the pending generation pipe for combustion,
GSC-MAD and other baselines on the five benchmark datasets regeneration, and recovery of activity. Most of the heat generated
are shown in Table II. For an unbalanced dataset, the results of by combustion is taken to the external heater to heat the feedstock
ZHANG et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE CHANGE-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION IN MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 6463

 TABLE II
 PERFORMANCE (F 1BEST% ) OF THE GSC-MAD AND BASELINES

 coke tank middle temperature, regenerator bottom temperature,
 regenerator outlet flue gas temperature, and main blower flow.
 The FCC-RRS consists of a training set with the normal data
 and a test set with anomalies, where the length of the training
 set is 30 000, which is divided into training (80%) and validation
 set (20%) following standard protocol [2], and the length of the
 test set is 297522, and the anomaly ratio is 0.027.
 From the FCC-RRS anomaly detection results shown in
 Table III, compared with the existing time series anomaly detection methods, the GSC-MAD improved by relatively 394.44%,
 5.59%, 4.30%, 6.30%, 722.38%, 4.89%, 5.59%, 5.63%, 5.62%,
 5.74%, 5.74%, 6.70%, 6.68%, 6.69%, 5.73%, 6.68%, 9.49%,
 4.03%, 5.88%, and 7.03% than that of the OCSVM, the
 KPCA, the IF, the HBOS, the INNE, the COPOD, the ECOD,
 the DeepSVDD, the DAGMM, the LUNAR, the LSTM, the
 MAD_GAN, the OmniAnomaly, the USAD, the TranAD, the
Fig. 2. RRS topology of the FCC. CAE_M, the BeatGAN, the MTAD_GAT, the GDN, and the
 GTA. Meanwhile, the GSC-MAD is the only method that can derequired for the regenerator and the air blown by the main tect all anomalies while ensuring a low false alarm rate and a high
blower. The above processes are cycled through the reactor and precision, which is crucial for the actual chemical production
regenerator, constituting the reaction regeneration process of the process. The experimental results of the actual catalytic cracking
FCC. RRS show that the proposed method has practical significance
 In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed method for in ensuring production safety and avoiding economic losses.
the practical application, anomaly monitoring was implemented
using the GSC-MAD for an actual chemical process with the
RRS. The experiment dataset (FCC-RRS) was collected from the E. Ablation Study
DCS of an actual chemical industrial production process from In order to illustrate the necessity of each component of the
2019 to 2021 (with a sampling period of 3 min) and contains 14 GSC-MAD, the anomaly detection performance variation on
key variables of the RRS: reactor top pressure, regenerator top five datasets is analyzed by stepwise excluding its components.
pressure, external heater ladle pressure, circulating slide valve First, the importance of Errinformation for anomaly inference is
pressure drop, pending generation slide valve level, recycle slide investigated by directly using the prediction deviation. And the
valve level, reactor material level, regenerator material level, lift significant of the graph regularization constrain is studied by
pipe outlet temperature, reactor collector chamber temperature, removing the LG , and the Errinformation is reserved in this study.
6464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE (F 1BEST% ) OF THE GSC-MAD AND BASELINES ON THE FCC-RRS

 TABLE IV of stable graph structure, it is more favorable to achieve
ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED GSC-MAD AND
 ITS VARIANTS (F 1BEST %)
 anomaly detection by using Errinformation .
 The above analysis shows that each component of the GSC-
 MAD is important and has positive effect that can explain the
 powerful anomaly detection performance.

 F. Interpretation of Anomaly Detection
 Another important significance of an anomaly detection
 method in the real industry is to provide good interpretation for
 detected anomalies [39]. The interpretability of the GSC-MAD
 is introduced and analyzed based on several key points: 1)
 The variable with the max ErrInfromation is usually the source
Then, based on the model without LG , only the prediction
 of the anomaly or with a large anomaly impact, and variables
deviation is used to further investigate the contribution of the
 connected to it are noteworthy variables. 2) The graph learned
Errinformation . Furthermore, the importance of graph structure
 from the test series reflects the relationships between variables.
learning is investigated by removing the graph structure learning
 3) The prediction deviations of variables also have implications
module, utilizing the initial KNN graph to achieve the modeling
 for the interpretation of anomalies. Combining the above points,
and prediction, and also using the prediction deviation.
 the anomaly interpretability (graph) matrix can be calculated
 The experiment results are shown in Table IV, and the following analysis and conclusions can be drawn as follows: GraphAnoInter (t) = ATtest (t)  |ŷ(t) − y(t)| (18)
 1) Without using Errinformation , the performance decreases
 by relatively 4.2%, 11.4%, 1.4%, 2.1%, and 3.5% for where Atest (t) denotes the graph learned by GSC-MAD at timesdatasets including the MSL, the SMAP, the PSM, the tamp t, |ŷ(t) − y(t)| denotes the absolute error of the prediction,
 SMD, and the SWaT, respectively. This indicates that  denotes the element-by-element multiplication. GraphAnoInter
 the information propagation deviation between variables is the anomaly interpretability matrix, which reflects the influhas a positive effect on the performance improvement ence of each node affected by the neighboring nodes weighted
 for anomaly inference. Moreover, the GSC-MAD is also by prediction deviations. By visualizing GraphAnoInter using a
 superior to the GDN with the same use of prediction force-directed layout [40], the relationships between nodes with
 deviation, which further demonstrates advantages of the anomalies and neighboring nodes will be represented in a radial
 GSC-MAD and the necessity of graph structure learning form, which can provide an intuitive explanation of anomalies.
 strategy adopted by the GSC-MAD. The SWaT dataset is a water treatment process dataset with
 2) Without using LG , the performance decreases by rela- a detailed report of each anomaly. Therefore, an actual case
 tively 5.0%, 9.4%, 3.4%, 3.8%, and 0.5%, respectively. study of attack 30 with a known cause on the SWaT dataset is
 This sheds light on that besides the GSL module, the graph used to illustrate the interpretability of anomalies. The details
 regularization constrain is also necessary for anomaly of the attack are described as follows. The system’s P-101, MVdetection performance of the GSC-MAD. And a further 101 is off and LIT-101 is set in normal range. The attack sets
 small decrease in anomaly detection performance occurs P-101 and MV-101 to be continuously open and LIT-101 is set to
 with further use of prediction deviation, suggesting that surpass the high limit. The attack finally caused the tank T-101
 the graph regularization constraint is critical for obtaining to overflow. The above attack targets process 1, and the piping
 a graph structure to further detect anomalies. and instrumentation diagram (P&ID) for process 1 is shown in
 3) With further removal of the GSL module, the perfor- Fig. 3.
 mance decreases significantly by relatively 8.8%, 22.1%, The variable with the max information deviation is LIT101,
 4.5%, 15.3%, and 13.2%, respectively. This implies that which is indeed one of the attack sources according to atthe graph structure considering only the explicit original tack details. In addition, Fig. 4(a) shows the visualization of
 multivariate space can hardly express the relationships GraphAnoInter for this anomaly. It can be seen that all the variables
 between variables adequately, and further combining the are distributed in a radial form around LIT101, and the variables
 information of the implicit space is positive to realize re- with large connection weights are in the same process (P1) and
 lationship representation. Moreover, under the condition next process (P2), while the other two anomaly sources MV101,
ZHANG et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE CHANGE-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION IN MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES OF INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 6465

 illustrating the reasonable interpretability of anomalies through
 a real-world case.
 Finally, although the GSC-MAD achieves excellent anomaly
 detection performance, in the same way as the current extensive
 researches, it still requires a pre-defined threshold for anomaly
 detection, which is a threat to practical applications. Therefore,
 in future work, we will investigate the work related to adaptive
 threshold setting.

Fig. 3. P&ID of the water treatment process 1.
 REFERENCES
 [1] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
 pp. 2485–2494.
 [2] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph
 structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
 in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
 [3] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 [4] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic
Fig. 4. Anomaly interpretability analysis. SWaT consists of six prothresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov., New York,
cesses, and nodes of different colors are used to indicate different pro-
 NY, USA, 2018, pp. 387–395.
cesses. The thickness of the connection line indicates the relationship
 [5] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
degree of the variables, and the distance between the nodes is deterdetection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
mined by the relationship degree which is represented by connection
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov., New York, NY,
weight.
 USA, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [6] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial reconstruction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4,
 pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023.
P101 both have strong connection weights with LIT101, which [7] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT timecan give good explanations and suggestions to the operator. series data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494,
 Jul. 2020.
 In addition, a relationship graph of all variables (except P102) [8] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
of process 1 in Atest is visualized for this anomaly. As shown in Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
Fig. 4(b), LIT101 affects the states of P101 and MV101, FIT101, [9] M.-L. Shyu, S.-C. Chen, K. Sarinnapakorn, and L. Chang, “A novel
 anomaly detection scheme based on principal component classifier,” in
and LIT101 jointly affect MV101, and FIT101 has an effect on Proc. IEEE Found. Directions Data Mining Workshop, 2003, pp. 172–179.
LIT101. According to the details of the attack and Fig. 3, the [10] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “Lof: Identifying
LIT101 setting value exceeds the high limit, and the control density-based local outliers,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 93–104,
 May 2000.
system will increase the flow rate of FIT101 to achieve the [11] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and R. C.
setting condition of LIT101. At the same time, the pump P101 Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,”
will be adjusted appropriately to safeguard the level LIT101 of Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, 2001.
 [12] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn.,
the tank T101. MV101 is located between T101 and FIT101 vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004.
and is subject to both LIT101 and FIT101 in the control system. [13] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
Therefore, the GSC-MAD effectively learns the relationships multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35,
 no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
between variables. In summary, the GSC-MAD can provide [14] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph attengood anomaly interpretation. tion network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850.
 [15] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
 series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 15, no. 9,
 V. CONCLUSION pp. 1779–1797, May 2022.
 [16] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
 In this article, a novel multivariate time series anomaly de- J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
tection method for industrial processes with the GSC-MAD is ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 968–998, 2018.
proposed. The graph structure learning is suggested to imple- [17] H. Hoffmann, “Kernel PCA for novelty detection,” Pattern Recognit.,
 vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 863–874, 2007.
mented by similarity metric and optimizing graph regularization [18] M. Goldstein and A. Dengel, “Histogram-based outlier score (Hbos): A
metrics. In addition, the information propagation deviations be- fast unsupervised anomaly detection algorithm,” KI-2012: Poster Demo
tween variables is fully considered to achieve anomaly inference Track, vol. 1, pp. 59–63, 2012.
 [19] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “Copod: Copula-based
combining the prediction deviations. Extensive experiments on outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 1118–
five real-world datasets and an actual chemical industrial case 1123.
demonstrate that the anomaly detection performance of the [20] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. Chen, “Ecod: Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution func-
GSC-MAD outperforms the current SOTA baselines in terms tions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12181–12193,
of F1-score metric. And a way to explain anomalies is provided, Dec. 2023.
6466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

[21] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- [38] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 2018. [39] G. Srivastava et al., “Xai for cybersecurity: State of the art, challenges,
[22] A. Goodge, B. Hooi, S.-K. Ng, and W. S. Ng, “Lunar: Unifying local open issues and future directions,” 2022, arXiv:2206.03585.
 outlier detection methods via graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [40] S. G. Kobourov, “Spring embedders and force directed graph drawing
 Artif. Intell., 2022 vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 6737–6745. algorithms,” 2012, arXiv:1201.3011.
[23] Y. Wang, X. Du, Z. Lu, Q. Duan, and J. Wu, “Improved LSTM-based
 time-series anomaly detection in rail transit operation environments,” IEEE
 Trans. Ind. Inf., vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 9027–9036, Dec. 2022.
[24] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time series with
 smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,” IEEE Trans.
 Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1177–1191, Mar. 2021. Zhen Zhang received the B.E. degree in mea-
[25] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-GAN: surement and control technology and instru-
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adver- mentation, in 2018, and the M.S degree in consarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Springer, 2019, trol science and engineering, in 2021, from Beipp. 703–716. jing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing,
[26] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, “USAD: where he is currently woorking toward the Ph.D.
 Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in Proc. 26th degree in control science and engineering.
 ACM Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 3395–3404. His research interests include time series
[27] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer networks anomaly detection, forecasting, and industrial
 for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc. VLDB process monitoring.
 Endow., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
[28] X. Pan, X. Cai, K. Song, T. Baker, T. R. Gadekallu, and X. Yuan, “Location
 recommendation based on mobility graph with individual and group influences,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8409–8420,
 Aug. 2023. Zhiqiang Geng received the B.E degree in pro-
[29] Y. Qi, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, X. Lin, W. Yang, and M. D. Alshehri, “Privacy- cess equipment and control engineering and
 preserving cross-area traffic forecasting in ITS: A transferable spatial- the M.E degree in chemical process machintemporal graph neural network approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. ery from Zhengzhou University, China, in 1997
 Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15499–15512, Dec. 2023. and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
[30] Y. Chen, L. Wu, and M. J. Zaki, “Deep iterative and adaptive learning for in control science and engineering from Beijing
 graph neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:1912.07832. University of Chemical Technology, China, in
[31] B. Fatemi, L. El Asri, and S. M. Kazemi, “Slaps: Self-supervision improves 2005.
 structure learning for graph neural networks,” in Advances in Neural He is currently a Professor with the College
 Information Processing Systems, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, of Information Science & Technology. Beijing
 P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, Eds., vol. 34, Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran University of Chemical Technology. His research
 Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 22667–22681. interests include neural networks, intelligent computing, data mining,
[32] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, “Neural knowledge management and process modeling.
 message passing for quantum chemistry,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach.
 Learn. Ser. Mach. Learn. Res., 2017, pp. 1263–1272.
[33] C. Morris et al., “Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph
 neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, no. 01,
 pp. 4602–4609. Yongming Han (Member, IEEE) received the
[34] Y. Wang et al., “Contrastive GNN-based traffic anomaly analysis against B.E degree in computer science and technology
 imbalanced dataset in IoT-based its,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., and the Ph.D. degree in control science and
 2022, pp. 3557–3562. engineering from Beijing University of Chemical
[35] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and oppor- Technology, China, in 2009 and 2014, respectunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036. tively.
[36] M. Belkin and P. Niyogi, “Laplacian eigenmaps and spectral techniques for He is currently a Professor with the College
 embedding and clustering,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing of Information Science and Technology, Beijing
 Systems, T. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani, Eds., vol. 14, University of Chemical Technology. His current
 Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2001. research interests include power system model-
[37] V. Kalofolias, “How to learn a graph from smooth signals,” in Proc. 19th ing, neural networks, intelligent computing, data
 Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist. ser. Mach. Learn. Res., 2016, pp. 920–929. mining and intrusion detection.