IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024 5419

 Graph Structure Learning-Based Multivariate Time
 Series Anomaly Detection in Internet of Things for
 Human-Centric Consumer Applications
 Shiming He , Genxin Li , Tongzhijian Yi, Osama Alfarraj , Amr Tolba , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Arun Kumar Sangaiah , and R. Simon Sherratt , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—As the Internet of Things system becomes more pop- performed on four public real-world datasets demonstrate that
ular and ubiquitous, it has also gradually entered the consumer the F1 score improved by an average of 5% with less training
electronics field. For example, smart home systems have numer- time compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.
ous sensors that monitor the environment and interact with the
Internet to provide smart services. A large amount of multivariate Index Terms—Graph attention neural network, graph structime series data generated using sensors can provide services ture learning, multivariate time series.
for consumers and identify faulty systems through multivariate
time series anomaly detection (MTSAD), which is crucial for
maintaining system stability. However, representing the complex
relationships among multivariate time series is challenging. I. I NTRODUCTION
Recently, graph neural networks and graph structure learning, UMAN-CENTRIC is at the heart of consumer electronwhich can excellently learn complex time series relationships,
have been applied to multivariate time series. However, existing
research on graph structure learning only constructs k-Nearest
 H ics. In recent years, the development of the Internet of
 Things, 5G, and cloud computing technologies has brought
Neighbor (kNN) graphs based on the pair-wise similarity between about innovations in consumer electronics and generated secutime series. This generates a quadratic cost and only considers rity risks. As the functions provided by consumer electronics
partial relationships among sensors. Accordingly, we propose become more intelligent, more related devices are included
a lightweight graph structure learning-based multivariate time
series anomaly detection (GSLAD), which exploits full graph in the system. For example, in a smart home system, the
parameterization to learn the graph structure without pair- router serves as the core device. It is equipped with a
wise similarity to overcome the quadratic cost and the limited central processing unit (CPU), memory, and ports, and is
neighbor relationship. GSLAD exploits diffusion convolutional responsible for receiving and sending data packets. When
recurrent neural network (DCRNN) to extract temporal and the router fails, it may affect the smart home system’s
spatial features. The results from the extensive simulations
 functions, leading to security risks [1], [2]. There are two
 Manuscript received 17 January 2024; revised 12 March 2024; accepted distinct methodologies for detecting faults and safety risks in
30 May 2024. Date of publication 4 June 2024; date of current version smart devices: hardware-based safety strategies [3] and data-
11 December 2024. This work was supported in part by the National based approaches. Hardware-based security strategies rely on
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272062; in part by
the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province under specialized hardware support, whereas data-based approaches
Grant 2023RC3139; in part by the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan involve identifying faults or attacks by analyzing anomalies
Provincial Transportation Department under Grant 202143; in part by the in the data generated by smart devices. In comparison to
Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Safety Control of Bridge Engineering,
Ministry of Education (Changsha University of Science Technology) under hardware-based solutions, data-based approaches offer a more
Grant 21KB07; in part by the Open Research Fund of the Hunan practical alternative.
Provincial Key Laboratory of Network Investigational Technology under In practice, smart home devices generate multivariate indi-
Grant 2018WLZC003; and in part by the Researchers Supporting Project,
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Grant RSP2024R102. cators1 and form multivariate time series (MTS) [5], [6].
(Corresponding author: Arun Kumar Sangaiah.) Fig. 1 shows an example multivariate time series with two
 Shiming He, Genxin Li, and Tongzhijian Yi are with the School of anomalous regions [4]. The MTS can reflect different aspects
Computer and Communication Engineering and the Hunan Provincial
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Processing of Big Data on Transportation, of a physical device or system and retain information more
Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha 410114, effectively than univariate time series data.
China (e-mail: smhe_cs@csust.edu.cn; mapleleavesli@stu.csust.edu.cn; Multivariate time series anomaly detection (MTSAD) is an
yitong@stu.csust.edu.cn).
 Osama Alfarraj and Amr Tolba are with the Computer Science Department, important and rapidly developing time series and anomaly
Community College, King Saud University, Riyadh 11437, Saudi Arabia detection sector. Existing MTSAD techniques [4], [7], [8], [9],
(e-mail: oalfarraj@ksu.edu.sa; atolba@ksu.edu.sa). [10], [11] focus primarily on identifying the timestamps where
 Arun Kumar Sangaiah is with the International Graduate School of AI,
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu 64002, Taiwan, system errors, attacks, and behavior deviations occur.
and also with the School of Engineering and Technology, Sunway University, MTS includes complex temporal and spatial correlations.
Petaling Jaya 47500, Malaysia (e-mail: aksangaiah@ieee.org). MTSAD should consider each indicator’s temporal relation-
 R. Simon Sherratt is with the Department of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Reading, RG6 6AY Reading, U.K. (e-mail: ship and the inter-correlations between indicators or sensors.
r.s.sherratt@reading.ac.uk).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2024.3409391 1 Here, “indicator” refers to the time series of a particular variable.

 1558-4127 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5420 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 • Long-term historical data is required when the
 Transformer model is used for prediction and anomaly
 detection. Even though Graph Learning with Transformer
 for Anomaly detection (GTA) [15] directly learns a
 global graph structure, it utilizes the Transformer model
 for prediction. These Transformer models, with their
 self-attention and multi-head attention mechanisms,
 effectively enrich the extracted features. In addition,
 the complexity of the model’s attention mechanisms
 increases the model training costs. The Transformer
 model also requires long-term historical data to improve
 its performance. In contrast, GTA requires 60 timestamps
 as input data, while only 5 timestamps are needed in
 Graph Deviation Network (GDN) [14]. Shortening the
 length of the input historical data for the Transformer
 results in a significant reduction in detection accuracy.
 To overcome these three issues, we design a multivariate
 time series anomaly detection based on lightweight graph
Fig. 1. An illustration of anomalies in multivariate time series. Two
anomalous regions are highlighted in pink [4].
 structure learning and recurrent graph convolution neural
 network (GSLAD). Our major contributions can be summarized as follows:
 • We employ full graph parameterization to learn the graph
As a result, Graph Neural Networks (GNN) models are structure without pair-wise similarity to overcome the
incorporated into MTSAD to extract spatial features [12], [13]. quadratic cost and the limited neighbor relationship.
GNNs are particularly effective in capturing the structural • We utilize diffusion convolutional recurrent neural
information and relationships within graphs. Moreover, the network (DCRNN) instead of the traditional graph convorelationships among sensors have been exploited to improve lution network (GCN) to extract the temporal and spatial
forecasting and anomaly detection accuracy. Hence, most features. DCRNN is a powerful spatio-temporal graph
GNNs rely on a known graph structure. However, the graph convolutional neural network that accurately predicts
structure is not always available, that is, the sensor rela- future time series with low complexity and reduced input
tionships are hidden or costly to access. Therefore, graph data requirements.
structure learning (GSL), a system that can learn the unknown • Extensive simulations on four public real-world datasets
or hidden graph structure joint using the downstream GNN demonstrate that our algorithm can achieve a higher
task, is proposed [14], [15]. However, multivariate time series F1 score and lower training costs than existing methods.
anomaly detection based on graph structure learning and This shows that our method is useful for rapidly and accu-
GNNs still faces many challenges. rately monitoring electronic consumer product health.
 • Most existing methods learn a k-Nearest Neighbor The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First,
 (kNN) graph based on pair-wise similarity, introducing the related work is reviewed in Section II, and the problem
 a quadratic cost, and only considering the partial rela- description is presented in Section III. Then, the overview
 tionships among sensors. They randomly initialize the and detailed GSLAD steps are outlined in Section IV. Next,
 learnable node embeddings [14] or acquire them from Section V discusses the performance evaluation via experithe input data, measure pair-wise similarity among the ments. Finally, we conclude our research and discuss future
 node embeddings, and count the top-k closest nodes work in Section VI.
 as the neighbors. In addition, node embeddings or
 acquired weights are learned with the downstream task. II. R ELATED W ORK
 Consequently, a quadratic cost is generated to obtain the
 We classify the related works into three types according
 pair-wise similarity among nodes. The node only has k
 to the features: temporal feature, temporal-spatial feature, and
 neighbors in the learned graph, ignoring the correlation
 learnable spatial feature.
 with the remaining nodes. As a result, the correlation
 between the sensors is not extracted effectively.
 • Existing methods utilize static GNNs, which cannot cap- A. Temporal Feature-Based Methods
 ture the temporal feature. Based on the known graph [12] Several temporal feature-based methods exist that can be
 or learned graph structure [14], these methods exploit the applied in MTSAD. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) is
 graph convolution or attention neural network to extract first used in MTSAD due to its ability to process sequence
 features for anomaly detection, where GNN treats the data. LSTM-NDT [7] uses LSTM to achieve high prediction
 time series as static feature and ignore the order in each performance and provides a nonparametric, dynamic, and
 indicator. Thus, these methods cannot extract temporal unsupervised anomaly thresholding approach to detect
 features with static GNN effectively. anomalies.
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5421

 Recurrent neural network joints with generative models are However, the pair-wise similarity generates a quadratic cost
widely applied in time series anomaly detection to recon- and the kNN graph only considers partial relationships among
struct the time series. For instance, LSTM-VAE [8] projects sensors. In addition, Transformers require long-term historical
multimodal observations and temporal dependencies into a data. Therefore, lightweight GSL is necessary for accurate
latent space and reconstructs the expected distribution. In MTSAD.
doing so, it regards the reconstruction error as an anomaly
score. DAGMM [9] trains a deep autoencoding and Gaussian
mixture model simultaneously to produce a low-dimensional III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND P RELIMINARIES
representation and reconstruction error in order to detect A. Problem Description
anomalies. Omnianomaly [4] utilizes a stochastic recurrent MTS contains a large number of equally-spaced sampling
neural network to capture the robust representations of normal and continuous observation points with K indicators and N
patterns and reconstruct the observations. In addition, MAD- timestamps, denoted by X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xK )T ∈ RK×N .
GAN [10] exploits LSTM as the base model in the GAN Likewise, the i-th indicator can be represented by xi =
framework to capture the temporal correlation of time series i ). The t-th timestamp contains the indicators’
 (x1i , x2i , . . . , xN
distributions, extract the latent interactions, and detect anoma- K values denoted by xt = (xt1 , xt2 , . . . , xtK )T . Anomaly ground
lies through discrimination and reconstruction. truths are available at all timestamps. When the label yt is 1,
 LSTM can model the temporal dependence of time series it means that the value of t-th timestamp xt is abnormal.
data well. Due to the heterogeneity between data indica- Definition 1 (Anomaly Detection): Given the continuous w+
tors [16], the correlation between metrics also needs to be 1 observations xt−w , . . . , xt , the MTSAD task aims to identify
considered when performing multivariate time series anomaly whether the last observation xt is anomalous.
detection.

 B. Graph Structure Learning
B. Temporal-Spatial Feature-Based Methods GSL is a promising solution that learns the unknown or
 Graph Neural Networks are specifically designed to process hidden graph topology joint with the downstream GNN task.
and analyze graph-structured data. They excel at capturing Definition 2 (Graph Structure Learning): Given the time
correlations between indicators, enabling accurate behavior series X ∈ RK×N , the graph structure learner’s purpose
prediction. For instance, MTAD-TF [12] exploits multi- is to obtain a graph G = (V, E) and its topology or
scale convolution and graph attention networks to capture adjacency matrix A ∈ RK×K . The node v in the graph
information in temporal patterns, and regards the root means represents a sensor that produces an indicator, while the
square between the predicted value and the ground truth as hidden relationship between the sensors is represented by
the anomaly score. MTAD-GAT [13] attempts to mine the the edges E. Furthermore, the adjacency matrix A stores
correlations between different univariate time series and the the edge information in the graph, reflecting the underlying
temporal dependencies within each of them using a graph dependencies among indicators. In this instance, the adjacency
attention network. It integrates prediction and reconstruction- matrix’s elements are composed of 0 and 1. If Ai,j is 1, it
based approaches to detect anomalies. Moreover, Arvalus and represents an edge between nodes i and j. On the contrary, if
its variant D-Arvalus [17] treat system components as nodes, Ai,j = 0, there is no edge between nodes i and j.
and their dependencies and positions as edges to improve There are three types of GSL methodologies: metric-based,
anomaly identification and location. The above mentioned neural network and direct approaches [18].
methods make assumptions about the known graph structure • Metric-based approaches utilize a metric function to
(e.g., Arvalus and D-Arvalus), or they treat the MTS as a calculate the similarity between the features or embedcomplete graph (e.g., MTAD-TF and MTAD-GAT). As a dings of node pairs, which is then used as the edge
result, the computational cost for a complete graph rises with weight. Edges tend to connect similar nodes, assuman increase in dimension. ing that network homogeneity is present. For example,
 AGCN [19] utilizes the generalized Mahalanobis distance
 of the node pair features with a Gaussian kernel to
C. Learnable Spatial Feature-Based Methods construct the adjacency matrix. Similarly, GRCN [20]
 To process the MTS without a ground truth graph struc- uses the inner product of node embeddings to obtain the
ture at a low cost, GSL is incorporated into MTSAD. For edge weights.
instance, GDN [14] learns a node embedding and constructs • Neural network approaches utilize deep neural networks
a kNN graph using the learned embedding’s similarities. to model edge weights based on node features or rep-
Then, an attention-based GNN predicts behavior by extracting resentations. For example, GLN [21] iteratively learns
the dependence relationships between the nodes, and the graph structures from local and global node embeddings
prediction error is used for the anomaly score. Furthermore, by a simple single-layer neural network. PTDNet [22]
GTA [15] directly treats the adjacency matrix’s elements as obtains the adjacency matrix by a multilayer perceptron.
learnable parameters to automatically learn a graph structure. • Direct approaches treat the target graph’s adjacency
It models temporal dependency using a Transformer-based matrix as independent variables and jointly optimize
architecture. the downstream task’s model parameters, independent
5422 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE I
 of the node representation. However, jointly optimiz- L IST OF N OTATIONS
 ing the adjacency matrix and model parameters often
 involves non-differentiable operations, making gradientbased optimization methods infeasible. To address this,
 LDS [23] models the edges between each node pair by
 sampling Bernoulli distributions with learnable parameters and approximates the solution using hypergradient
 estimation. In contrast, GLNN [24] employs an alternating optimization scheme, iteratively updating the
 adjacency matrix and model parameters.
 On the one hand, metric-based and neural network
approaches have the advantage of end-to-end training but come
with quadratic computation costs. On the other hand, direct
approaches offer flexibility but require addressing the nondifferentiability issue. Nonetheless, GSL is a thriving research
field applied in MTSAD and in various time series prediction
and classification tasks. Therefore, it is crucial to select an A with independent parameters. Furthermore, to handle
appropriate GSL approach that can be flexibly adapted to the non-differentiability issue, we employ the Gumbel–
different downstream tasks. Softmax reparameterization technique. This approach offers a
 more computationally efficient alternative than methods with
 IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY quadratic costs.
 (2) DCRNN-based predictor. It predicts the future value.
A. Overview
 DCRNN captures spatial relationships through diffusion con-
 In most real-world scenarios, there are complex topological volution and temporal dependencies using an encoder–decoder
relationships among indicators, and these relationships can be architecture, enabling the simultaneous modeling of temporal
presented as a graph. Each indicator is regarded as a node and spatial features. Consequently, we opt to utilize DCRNN
and relationships between the indicators are treated as edges instead of GCN for prediction. According to the sliding winbetween nodes in the graph. The previous method [14], [25] dow, a MTS is divided into multiple subsequences. Based on
calculates the similarity between each node pair based on the adjacency matrix obtained by the graph structure learner,
the indicator features and connects the top-k most similar the recurrent graph convolution neural network predicts the
indicators as neighbors. This approach results in a kNN graph, following value x̂t of the subsequence xt−w , . . . , xt−1 .
which only considers the k nearest neighbor relationships. (3) Anomaly score calculation. The anomaly score is derived
Therefore, to fully capture the relationships, we leverage the from the normalized prediction error between the predicted
direct approaches in graph structure learning and propose a value x̂t and the ground truth xt . High anomaly scores indicate
multivariate time series anomaly detection method based on that the ground truth may deviate from the normal pattern,
lightweight graph structure learning and recurrent graph con- suggesting that anomalies are more likely to occur.
volution neural networks. This allows us to comprehensively (4) Threshold selection. When the anomaly score exceeds
consider the relationships within the graph structure. the selected threshold, this indicates that an anomaly has
 The process of GSLAD can be summarized as follows: occured. The threshold should be selected carefully. Therefore,
firstly, the graph structure learner learns the adjacency matrix we employ a grid search algorithm to determine the threshold
A. Secondly, based on the adjacency matrix A, a DCRNN- that yields the best detection accuracy.
based predicts the value x̂t of the t-th timestamp from the The notations in this paper are shown in Table I. The
historical observations xt−w , . . . , xt−1 . Then, the adjacency following subsection describes each part in detail.
matrix is jointly trained with the prediction task, and the
normalized prediction error between the predicted value x̂t and
the ground truth xt is treated as the anomaly score. Finally, B. Graph Structure Learner
a grid search algorithm is used to select a threshold for best To address the quadratic cost issue associated with pair-wise
detection accuracy. Once the anomaly score at timestamp t similarity in graph structure learning, we employ a full graph
exceeds the threshold, timestamp t is taken as an anomaly. parameterization learner. This approach treats each element of
 To support the above process, GSLAD involves four main the adjacency matrix as a learnable parameter, enabling joint
components: the graph structure learner, a DCRNN-based optimization with the downstream task’s model parameters.
predictor, the anomaly score calculation, and the threshold However, jointly optimizing the adjacency matrix and model
selection. parameters presents challenges. For instance, the adjacency
 (1) Graph structure learner. It learns the relationship matrix A consists of binary and discrete variables, rendering it
between indicators. Hence, we employ a full graph param- non-differentiable. As a result, the backpropagation algorithm
eterization learner due to the quadratic costs generated by cannot accurately compute the parameter gradients.
metric-based and neural network approaches. This learner Therefore, we apply a reparameterization technique (i.e.,
directly models each element of the adjacency matrix the Gumbel—Softmax method) [26], which is a continuous
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5423

Fig. 2. In the GSLAD framework, the graph structure learner is used to construct the topological relationships among indicators, the DCRNN-based predictor
obtains the indicators’ predictions, the anomaly score calculation is used to calculate the errors between ground truths and predictions, and threshold selection
is employed to determine whether anomalies are present based on the anomaly scores.

 i,j
distribution sampled approximately from a class distribution. where gi,j is the gumbel distribution, and π1 shows the value
As a result, the discrete parameters can be represented by of row i and column j of a probability matrix π1 ∈ RK×K . This
continuous parameters and parameter gradients can be easily represents the probability that node i is connected to node j
 i,j
computed using the Gumbel–Softmax approach. in the graph. The probability matrix π1 leads to π0 (π0 =
 i,j
 First, the Gumbel-Max trick is a simple and effective 1−π1 ), which represents the probability that there is no edge
method for sampling from a class distribution, and its formula connecting nodes i and j. τ is the temperature parameter, which
is defined by Eq. (1). Gumbel-Max samples the i-th class using controls the smoothness of the sampling process. When τ
the class probability πi . approaches zero, the softmax tends to the argmax, and samples
 (z0 , z1 ) from the Gumbel-Softmax distribution tend to be onez = argmax (gi + log πi )
 i hot vectors, i.e., one element is 1 and another is 0. Finally,
 gi = − log(− log(u)), u ∼ Uniform(0, 1) (1) the row i and column j in the adjacency matrix Ai,j is set to
 i,j i,j
 z1 , which is set to 1 with probability π1 .
where u represents samples drawn from the Uniform(0,1) dis- In our graph structure learner, we begin by randomly
tribution, gi is the Gumbel distribution obtained by computing initializing the probability matrix π1 . The adjacency matrix
u, πi denotes the probability of the i-th class, and z shows is then generated by performing Gumbel–Softmax sampling
the sampled class. The argmax function is not differentiable. on the probability matrix. This adjacency matrix represents
Thus, we search for a smooth argmax approximation (i.e., whether or not there are connections between sensors and
the softmax function). The softmax function is used as a is used in the downstream prediction task. Afterward, the
continuously differentiable approximation to the parameter’s probability matrix is updated by loss backpropagation for the
maximum value, as shown below: downstream task, as shown in Fig. 3. As the probability matrix
 is updated, the connections between sensors, i.e., the adjacency
 z = softmax (gi + log πi ) (2)
 matrix, are also updated. Eventually, we obtain an adjacency
 For the GSL sampling problem, there are n ∗ n discrete matrix that is most suitable for the current downstream task.
variables in the adjacency matrix A and only two classes.
Therefore, the Gumbel—Softmax for the adjacency matrix is
finally defined as Eq. (3): C. DCRNN-Based Predictor
    The DCRNN-based predictor predicts future values based
 i,j
 exp log π1 + gi,j /τ
 i,j on past values and facilitates anomaly detection according to
 z1 =     (3)
 i,j
 exp log πv + gi,j /τ the prediction errors. At timestamp t, we define subsequence
 v∈{0,1} Xt according to a sliding window size w over the historical
5424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 3. The graph structure learning process.

time series data as follows:
  
 Xt = xt−w , . . . , xt−1 ∈ RK×w . (4)
The adjacency matrix A and the subsequence Xt are fed into
 Fig. 4. The structure of a DCRNN unit.
the predictor to predict the value x̂t of the next timestamp.
 Moreover, DCRNN captures spatial dependency using diffusion convolution, and the temporal dependency using the the GRU, where the diffusion convolution is the frequency
encoder–decoder architecture. This unique combination allows domain graph convolution. The specific formula of DCRNN
DCRNN to simultaneously model and capture both temporal is as follows:
and spatial features. Therefore, we utilize DCRNN instead of  
GCN in our approach. Rt = sigmoid WR ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + bR (7)
  
 For capturing spatial dependency, DCRNN exploits a L- Ct = tanh WC ◦ xt || Rt  H(t−1) + bC (8)
step diffusion process based on a random walk to model  
 Ut = sigmoid WU ◦ xt ||H(t−1) + bU (9)
the proximity between nodes and perform feature aggregation
based on the L-hop neighbor node proximity. It also utilizes H(t) = Ut  H(t−1) + (1 − Ut )  Ct (10)
an L-step diffusion convolutional layer to replace L-graph where || is the concatenation operation of two features, ◦ is
convolutional layers. The diffusion convolution ◦ is defined as the diffusion convolution operation, Ut is the update gate, Rt
follows: is the reset gate, and Ct is the candidate hidden state. An unit
 L   l  l in DCRNN takes the node feature H(t−1) at timestamp t − 1
 wl,1 D−1 −1 T
 Q Q
 WQ ◦ Y = O A + w l,2 DI A Y (5) and the value xt at timestamp t as inputs. The update gate,
 l=0 reset gate, and the candidate hidden state are generated by
 Q diffusion convolution operation. These inputs are processed to
where DO and DI are the out- and in-degree matrices, wl,1
 Q
 obtain the node feature H(t) at the timestamp t. The structure
and wl,2 denote the model parameters, and L is the diffusion of a DCRNN unit is given in Fig. 4.
degree. Eq. (6) gives the expansion term of Eq. (5) when L=2. Addtionally, DCRNN uses a sequence-to-sequence architec-
 Q Q
The first term (w0,1 Y + w0,2 Y) is the node’s own information. ture to predict the value of the next timestamp. Its process can
(D−1 −1 T
 O A) and (DI A ) obtain the first-order input and output be summarized as follows.
neighbors, respectively. Therefore, the second line in Eq. (6) In the encoder part of the model, the node feature H(·) is
is used to aggregate the first-order neighbor information. updated from timestamp t − w to timestamp t − 1, where w
Similarly, (D−1 −1 T 2
 O A) and (DI A ) obtain the second-order
 2
 denotes the length of the subsequence. This updating process
input and output neighbors, respectively. The third line is accumulates the information from multiple past timestamps,
used to aggregate the second-order neighbor information. L resulting in the total node feature H(t−1) of the subsequence,
adjusts the information about the neighbor nodes which can as shown in Fig. 2.
be aggregated. Regarding the decoder model, the total node feature H(t−1)
 Q Q is used as the input. After passing through a layer in the
 WQ ◦ Y = w0,1 Y + w0,2 Y
     decoder model, a hidden feature is obtained along with the
 + w1,1 D−1 −1 T
 Q Q
 O A Y + w1,2 DI A Y
 predicted value x̂t at timestamp t.
  2  2
 + w2,1 D−1 −1 T
 Q Q
 O A Y + w2,2 D I A Y (6) D. Loss Function
 There are two tasks: prediction task and graph structure
 For each node, the diffusion convolutional layer aggregates
 learning task. For prediction task, we use the mean absolute
information from neighboring nodes up to L steps away in
 error as the loss function lossp to ensure that the predictions
both the outward and inward directions. This allows the model
 are as close as possible to the ground truth value, as shown
to capture the influence of distant nodes in the graph structure,
 below:
providing a more comprehensive understanding of the spatial
 1 i
 K
dependencies in the data.
 For capturing temporal dependency, DCRNN uses the Gated lossp = |x̂t − xti | (11)
 K
 i=1
Recurrent Unit (GRU) which is a simple yet powerful variant
of recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Specifically, DCRNN where x̂ti and xti are respectively the prediction and the ground
uses diffusion convolution instead of matrix multiplication in truth of i-th indicator value in timestamp t.
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5425

 TABLE II
 For graph structure learning task, to improve the quality DATASET D ESCRIPTION
of the learned graph, some prior knowledge can be added
to the model training process. When the graph structure
is unknown, some properties of the kNN graph are still
reasonable knowledge. Therefore, we utilize the kNN graph,
denoted as A , to incorporate prior knowledge. This graph
represents the similarity between indicator values. By adding
a regularization term lossg to the model training process, we
ensure that the learned graph structure A is consistent with
our prior knowledge. The regularization term lossg is defined
as the cross-entropy loss between the prior knowledge graph V. P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS
A and the learned graph structure A. This regularization loss
 This section describes the experiments we conducted to
helps enforce the desired graph structure during the training
 answer the following research questions (RQs):
process.
 • RQ1: How effective and efficient is GSLAD?
 
 lossg = −A i,j log Ai,j − 1 − A i,j log 1 − Ai,j (12) • RQ2: How effective is GSLAD with different compoij nents?
 • RQ3: How robust is GSLAD with different parameters?
 xi • xj
 A i,j = (13) • RQ4: How does the GSLAD graph learning work during
 ||xi || • ||xj ||
 anomaly detection? What is the relationship between the
 To balance two loss functions, we introduce the balancing learned graph and the predictions?
parameter λ. The total loss function of the model is defined • RQ5: How proficient is GSLAD in detecting anomalies
as Eq. (14). in the filed of consumer electronics products (CEP)?
 loss = lossp + λlossg (14)
 A. Datasets
E. Anomaly Score and Threshold Selection In our experiments, we use four datasets widely used in the
 field of anomaly detection in IoT systems to evaluate the model
 1) Anomaly Score: Firstly, the comparison between the
 performance [11], [15]. Table II presents datasets’ statistics,
ground truth value and the predicted value is conducted
 including the number of features, the training and testing
at timestamp t, and the resulting prediction error Erri (t) is
 time series length, the number of anomalies, and the anomaly
calculated for sensor i as follows:
 ratio. It is important to note that all the training time series
 Erri (t) = |xti − x̂ti | (15) exclusively consist of normal instances, while the anomalies
 are present only in the testing time series. Given that the
 Subsequently, we performed a standard normalization of anomalies in these datasets represent actual occurrences and
the prediction error and determined the anomaly score at cannot be artificially injected, the anomaly ratio remains static
timestamp t by determining the highest value among all throughout the evaluation. Furthermore, the sample number
sensors as follows: can be calculated as the time series length minus the window
 Erri (t) − μi size. The four datasets are described below:
 s(t) = max si (t) = max (16) 1) The Safe Water Treatment (SWAT) dataset2 comes from
 i i σi
 a water treatment testbed coordinated by the Public Utilities
where μi and σi are the mean and standard deviation of Erri (t) Authority of Singapore. The collection process lasts 11 days
respectively. and the system operates 24 hours a day, recording the network
 Finally, if the anomaly score at timestamp t exceeds the traffic and values obtained by all 51 sensors and actuators.
threshold, timestamp t is marked as an anomaly. 2) The Water Distribution (WADI) dataset3 is a distribution
 2) Threshold Selection: To determine the optimal thresh- system consisting of a large number of water distribution
old, we employ a grid search methodology. This involves pipelines. WADI, as an extension of the SWAT testbed, forms
iteratively adjusting the threshold within a predefined range a more complete and realistic water treatment, storage, and
and measuring the performance metric for each threshold set- distribution network. The dataset includes a total of 16 days of
ting. The threshold that yields the best performance metric is continuous operations, of which 14 days are regular operations
then selected as the final threshold. To conduct the grid search, and 2 days are attack scenarios. The entire testbed contains
we set the upper and lower limits of the threshold range as the 127 sensors and actuators.
maximum and minimum values of s(t), respectively. Then, we 3) The Mars Science Laboratory rover (MSL) dataset
use a step size of 0.01 to ensure thorough threshold evaluation contains sensor and actuator data collected from the Mars
within this range. By exhaustively evaluating every threshold, rover by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
we aim to identify the threshold value that achieves the highest (NASA). MSL includes a total of 55 metrics for 27 entities.
F1 score. This serves as the threshold for optimal performance.
Furthermore, we implement a point-adjust strategy to fine-tune 2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs-home/itrust-labs_swat/
the anomaly score [4]. 3 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs-home/itrust-labs_wadi/
5426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE III
 T HE C OMPARISON OF E XISTING MTSAD M ETHODS

 4) The Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite (SMAP) is 64, and the epoch number is 30. For DCRNN, the diffusion
dataset is a collection of soil samples and telemetry gathered degree L is 3, the hidden dimensions of one DCRNN unit are
by NASA using the Mars rover. SMAP contains a total of 64, and the dimensions of node feature Ht are 3264.
25 metrics for 55 entities. For GDN and GTA, we use their default experimental
 Among the four datasets, SWAT and WADI are both parameters, where the window sizes of GDN and GTA are 5
generated from industrial water treatment IoT system sensor and 60, respectively.
monitoring, while MSL and SMAP are both from spacecraft We run each experiment five times and report the mean
IoT systems. To handle the large amount of raw data in value. All the experiments are conducted on the Google
the SWAT and WADI datasets, a down-sampling technique Colab with NVIDIA Tesla T4 Graphics Processing Units
is applied. It takes the median value within each 10-second (GPUs).
window. Once an anomaly occurs within a 10-second window, 2) Baselines: We compare GSLAD with 11 machine and
it is marked as abnormal. deep learning methods, IF, AE, DAGMM, LSTM-NDT,
 LSTM-VAE, MAD-GAN, OmniAnomaly, USAD, MTAD-
B. Evaluation Metrics GAT, GDN, and GTA. Table III presents a comprehensive
 comparison of the various methods’ characteristics, including
 We consider the detection accuracy and training time method type, features, data requirements, application field, and
as evaluation metrics. Precision (Prec), recall (Rec), and complexity.
F1 score (F1) are often used as evaluation metrics for • AE: Autoencoder is utilized to reconstruct the input data,
anomaly detection accuracy, as shown in Eqs. (17), (18) and the resulting reconstruction error is used as the
and (19). F1 score effectively balances precision and recall, anomaly score.
providing a comprehensive evaluation in anomaly detection • IF [27]: The isolation forest method is a tree-based
scenarios where imbalanced datasets are commom. Therefore, anomaly detection algorithm. It effectively identifies
F1 scores are widely used as the metric of detection anomalous samples by gaining insight into the distribuperformance [13], [14], [15]. tion of the input data.
 TP • DAGMM [9]: It simultaneously trains a deep autoencod-
 Prec = (17) ing and Gaussian mixture model, with the objective of
 TP + FP
 TP generating a low-dimensional representation and identi-
 Rec = (18)
 TP + FN fying anomalies based on reconstruction errors.
 2 × Prec × Rec • LSTM-NDT [7]: It uses LSTM to achieve high prediction
 F1 = . (19)
 Prec + Rec performance and provides a nonparametric, dynamic,
 and unsupervised anomaly thresholding method to detect
where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the numbers of true positives,
 anomalies.
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively.
 • LSTM-VAE [8]: It projects multimodal observation and
Furthermore, the training time is the running time of each
 temporal dependencies into a latent space and reconepoch during training.
 structs the expected distribution through LSTM-based
 VAE.
C. Settings • MAD-GAN [10]: It exploits LSTM as the base model in
 1) Parameters: For GSLAD, the window size w is 12, the the GAN framework to capture the temporal correlation
temperature parameter τ is 0.1, and the loss balance weight λ of time series distributions.
is 1 according to the experiment result in Section V-F2. The • OmniAnomaly [4]: It is a prior-driven stochastic model
number of neighbors k in the prior kNN graph is 10. We take for timestamp anomaly detection that directly returns the
the Adam optimizer, the learning rate is 0.001, the batch size reconstruction probability.
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5427

 TABLE IV
 P RECISION , R ECALL AND F1 S CORE ON SWAT AND WADI

 • USAD [11]: It adversarially trains an encoder-decoder
 framework to achieve rapid and efficient training.
 • MTAD-GAT [13]: It treats the relationship between indicators as a complete graph and utilizes graph attention
 neural networks for anomaly detection.
 • GDN [14]: It uses pair-wise cosine similarity between
 nodes to construct graph structures and utilizes attentional
 GNNs to learn the dependencies between time series and
 predict behavior.
 • GTA [15]: It involves automatically learning a
 graph structure and utilizes graph convolution and
 Transformer-based architecture to model temporal
 dependency.

 Fig. 5. The F1 scores of GSLAD on four datasets.
D. RQ1. The GSLAD Performance
 1) Accuracy: The anomaly detection results in terms of
 TABLE V
precision, recall, F1 score, and percent delta between GSLAD T RAINING T IME OF E ACH E POCH ( S )
and the second-best method for all datasets are shown in
Table X. The GSLAD performance is significantly better than
that of the other methods. For the SWAT and WADI datasets,
GSLAD achieves the best F1 scores of 95.13 and 83.8,
respectively. Similarly, GSLAD outperforms the baselines on
the SMAP and MSL datasets; it achieves F1 scores of 97.2
and 98.7, respectively.
 In contrast, the performance of WADI with all the methods
is lower than other datasets, because the WADI dataset has the
lowest anomaly rate, as shown in Table II. However, GSLAD 2) Training Time: We select all the existing GSL-based
still shows the best performance on the WADI dataset due methods (i.e., GDN and GTA) for training time comparison
to the full graph structure learning. Although GSLAD only due to their superior performance compared to other models.
improves the F1 score by 2-3% compared with GTS on the The results are shown in Table V. our method’s training time
WADI dataset, GSLAD greatly reduces the computational is less than that of GTA and more than that of GDN for all
complexity and thus the training time as shown in Table V. datasets. GSLAD exploits DCRNN for time series prediction,
Therefore, GSLAD is more suitable for consumer electronics while GDN utilizes a static GNN. Although GSLAD has more
and IoT products. training time, it outperforms GDN significantly. Moreover,
 Fig. 5 shows the distribution of F1 scores for the four GTA utilizes the Transformer to make predictions, and its
datasets over multiple experiments. GSLAD has stable complexity far exceeds that of DCRNN and the static GNN.
anomaly detection accuracy. Therefore, it displays improved Thus, GTA’s training time is the longest. GSLAD improves
effectiveness compared to existing methods even under high- the F1 score and greatly reduces the training cost.
dimensional time series and imbalanced sample scenarios, As the number of nodes in the graph increases, the training
which is very important in practical applications. time of the model also increases. When G is sparse, Eq. (5)
5428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE VI
 P RECISION , R ECALL , AND F1 S CORE W ITH D IFFERENT A NOMALY S CORES AND T HRESHOLD S ELECTION

can be calculated efficiently using O(L) recursive sparse-dense To avoid anomaly scores in univariate time series being
matrix multiplication with total time complexity O(L|E|) dominated by a single significant spike, it uses the anomaly
O(K 2 ) [28]. Based on prior knowledge, the WADI dataset with scores’ harmonic mean:
127 indicators has the largest nodes among all the datasets  K 
in the anomaly detection field. The training time of GSLAD  1
 s(t) = K/ (23)
is still less than that of GTA. Notably, data collection and di
 i=1 t
anomaly detection tasks for smart home and IoT systems are
typically handled by their gateways or data centers. As a The results are summarized in the last four rows of
result, it is necessary to employ anomaly detection methods Table VI. The standard anomaly score method outperforms
with low computational complexity and training time to reduce the other three anomaly score methods for all the datasets.
the computing capability requirements and deployment costs. The standard method can make the normal and anomaly more
Therefore, GSLAD is more suitable for smart home and IoT obvious.
systems than other methods. 2) Threshold Selection: We compare the peak over threshold (POT) [29] technique with grid search in the GSLAD.
E. RQ2. Ablation Studies The POT technique is a statistical theory that aims to find the
 extreme value law, and the extreme value is usually located in
 We compare the effects of different anomaly score methods
 the probability distribution’s tail. This technique’s advantage
and threshold selection methods on experimental performance
 is that it does not require making assumptions about the data
to demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.
 distribution when searching for extreme values.
 1) Anomaly Score: We select three anomaly score methods
 The results are summarized in Table VI. All the anomaly
to compare with that of GSLAD, which is named by standard
 score methods with POT display poorer performance than
method.
 those with grid search for the SWAT and WADI datasets. In
 Me-IQR is similar to the standard method, where the median
 addition, 2-Norm with POT is better than that with grid search
and inter-quartile range (IQR) are used to normalize the
 for the MSL and SMAP datasets. Me-IQR with POT is better
anomaly score instead of the mean and variance, as shown
 than with grid search for the MSL dataset. This suggests that
below:
 using grid search with the standard anomaly score can identify
 anomaly data more effectively than other methods.
 Erri (t) = |xti − x̂ti |
 Erri (t) − μi
 si (t) =
 σi F. RQ3. Impact of Parameters
 s(t) = max si (t) (20) We consider the impact of the window sizes, loss function
 i
 weight, and sampling interval.
where μi and σi are the median and IQR of the Erri (·), 1) Window Size: We analyze the effect of the window size
respectively. on detection accuracy and training time. We set the windows w
 2-Norm compares the ground truth xti and the prediction x̂ti . to lengths of 5, 12, 20, 30, and 40. The results are summarized
The anomaly score is obtained by squaring the second norm in Fig. 6 (left) and Table VII. The window size has little
of the deviation between the xti and the x̂ti . impact on the model’s detection performance. Our method’s
 performance is stable for the SWAT, SMAP, and MSL datasets.
 
 K
 2 The performance on WADI on the WADI dataset slightly
 s(t) = |xti − x̂ti |2 (21)
 reduces with a 5 window size, because WADI has more time
 i=1
 series and a lower anomaly rate. Table VII shows that the
 Harmonic-Mean uses Euclidean distance to measure the larger th window size, the longer the training time. In general,
difference between the ground truth xti and the prediction x̂ti . when the window size is 12, all the datasets can achieve a high
 detection accuracy with an adequate training time. Therefore,
 dti = xti − x̂ti (22) we set the window size to 12.
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5429

 TABLE VII
 T RAINING T IME FOR D IFFERENT W INDOW S IZES

 Fig. 7. Graph structure learned by different methods on SWAT dataset.

 TABLE IX
 T HE T OTAL N UMBER OF E DGES AND N ODE AVERAGE
 D EGREE IN THE L EARNED G RAPH

Fig. 6. The impact of parameter λ and window size.

 TABLE VIII
 T HE I MPACT OF THE S AMPLING I NTERVAL

 2) λ Parameter: In the previous sections, to improve the Fig. 8. Left: Understand the relationship between sensors with ground truth
learned graph’s quality, we add some prior knowledge to the and prediction, in which abnormal segments are marked by red. Right: Partial
 graph structure learned on SWAT dataset.
graph and use the parameter λ to balance out the prediction
and graph learning loss. In this subsection, we use the kNN
graph as prior knowledge to show the effect of the parameter
λ on the anomaly detection results for the four datasets. We graph structures of the SWAT dataset. Table IX shows the
set λ to 0, 1, 5, 10, and 20. The results are shown in Fig. 6 number of edges and the average node degree of the four
(right). When λ is 1, the F1 scores are the best, indicating that datasets. Notably, the graph learned from GDN is the sparsest
GSLAD has excellent anomaly detection performance when and the number of edges in GDN is the smallest. GDN
the prediction and graph learning loss are balanced. When λ learns the node embeddings and constructs a kNN graph based
is set to 0, GSLAD’s detection accuracy without the graph on the top-k most similar node. Moreover, the number of
learning loss decreases significantly for the MSL and WADI neighbors or edges depends on the superparameter k. GDN
datasets. This indicates that the graph learning loss improves ignores the relationship among nodes out of top-k. In contrast,
the detection accuracy. GTA and GLSAD learn dense graphs because they regard the
 3) Impact of Sampling Interval: Due to a large amount of adjacency matrix as independent variables without the number
raw data, the SWAT and WADI datasets are down-sampled. of neighbors limitation. GLSAD learned more edges without
We analyze the impact of different sampling intervals on self-loop edges and has a higher average node degree than
the SWAT and WADI datasets. We down-sample the original GTA. This is because the downstream prediction task model
data every 5, 10, and 20 seconds. The results are summa- in GLSAD is a recurrent graph convolution neural network
rized in Table VIII. When the sampling interval is 5 and that accounts for the dynamic temporal and spatial features.
10 seconds, the detection performance is similar. When the Since the nodes in the graph represent indicators or features,
sampling interval is 20 seconds, the performance decreases. the relationship among nodes is also the relationship among
The main reason is that average down-sampling enhances the the indicators or features.
data’s smoothness. Additionally, it smoothes out anomalies, We conduct a case study, as shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8 (left)
rendering them more challenging to detect. is a partial graph structure learned by GSLAD, and Fig. 8
 (right) shows our model’s predictions for the relevant sensors.
 In this case, sensor AIT-202 is compromised between the 100
G. RQ4: Graph Learning and Case Study and 210 timestamps. Hence, GSLAD detected an attack due
 To illustrate GSL’s impact, we visualize the learned graph to the large difference between the predictions and ground
structure of GDN, GTA, and GLSAD. Fig. 7 shows the learned truth on AIT-202 during these two timestamps. Due to the
5430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE X
 P RECISION , R ECALL , F1 S CORE , AND T RAINING T IME ON ICR exploit multiple graph structure learners to learn multiple
 graph structures to characterize the relationships between
 sensors, obtain the hidden information from different graph
 structures by multiple GNNs, and finally fuse the hidden
 information by concatenation or on average for prediction.
 Besides, our method does not consider the presence of noisy
 data. To improve the robustness of the model to noise, we can
 use the autoencoder to extract the hidden features and detect
correlation between the sensors in the water treatment process, anomalies on the hidden features instead of the original data.
the attack on AIT-202 causes the dosing pump P-203 to shut
down and affects the permeate conductivity analyzer AIT-
504. Furthermore, GSLAD accurately predicts the changes
 R EFERENCES
occured in P-203 from the 100 to 210 timestamps and AIT-504
from the 500 timestamps. The values of P-203 and AIT-504 [1] M. Yamauchi, Y. Ohsita, M. Murata, K. Ueda, and Y. Kato, “Anomaly
 detection in smart home operation from user behaviors and home
follow the changes in the ground truth and are not regarded as conditions,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 183–192,
anomalies, as shown in Fig. 8 (right). This is because GSLAD May 2020.
learns the correlation among the three sensors correctly, as [2] J.-Y. Son, J.-H. Park, K.-D. Moon, and Y.-H. Lee, “Resource-aware
shown in Fig. 8 (left). smart home management system by constructing resource relation
 graph,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 1112–1119,
 Aug. 2011.
H. RQ5: Anomaly Detection in Monitoring Data of CEP [3] G. Fragkos, C. Minwalla, J. Plusquellic, and E. E. Tsiropoulou,
 “Artificially intelligent electronic money,” IEEE Consum. Electron.
 To evaluate GSLAD’s efficiency in monitoring data of Mag., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 81–89, Jul. 2021.
CEP, we conduct an experiment on the Identifying Age- [4] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
Related Diseases (ICR)4 dataset. ICR, which originates from detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
the Kaggle competition, is a dataset that encompasses health- Min., 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
related information about individual patients or subjects. [5] S. He et al., “A joint matrix factorization and clustering scheme for
Generally, health-related information can be collected by irregular time series data,” Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119220.
wearable consumer electronics such as electronic bracelets [6] S. He, Z. Li, J. Wang, and N. Xiong, “Intelligent detection for
 key performance indicators in industrial-based cyber-physical systems,”
and electronic watches. ICR consists of 56 anonymized health IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5799–5809, Aug. 2021.
features or variables for each subject, along with a labeled [7] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and
list indicating whether or not the subject has been diagnosed T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and
 nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int.
with certain diseases. Due to the small size of this dataset, Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min., 2018, pp. 387–395.
we employ the TimeGAN [30] model with default parameters [8] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
for data generation. In total, we generate 10000 instances robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
of data with an anomaly rate of 4.2%. Previous experiments IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 [9] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsuperhave demonstrated the superiority of GSL-based methods over vised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
other approaches. Hence, in our evaluation, we solely compare pp. 1–19.
GSLAD with various GSL-based methods, using the same [10] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
metrics. As shown in Table V, GSALD outperforms other adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019,
methods in terms of F1 score while requiring less training pp. 703–716.
time. [11] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min.,
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
 In this paper, we propose a multivariate time series anomaly [12] Q. He, Y. Zheng, C. Zhang, and H. Wang, “MTAD-TF: Multivariate
 time series anomaly detection using the combination of temporal pattern
detection framework using lightweight and full graph structure and feature pattern,” Complexity, 2020, to be published.
learning. In this framework, we implement a simpler and more [13] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
effective graph structure learning approach and prediction attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min. (ICDM), 2020,
 pp. 841–850.
model by a recurrent graph convolution. Compared with [14] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
the baseline methods for four public real-world datasets, in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
our proposed GLSAD achieves the best performance with pp. 4027–4035.
short-term data while reducing the training overhead. In [15] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning
 graph structures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly
the next generation of consumer electronics products, such detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189,
as autonomous driving or wearable devices, sensors exhibit Jun. 2022.
various interrelationships (e.g., sensor’s distance and data [16] J. Pei, Z. Yu, J. Li, M. A. Jan, and K. Lakshmanna, “TKAGFL: A
 federated communication framework under data heterogeneity,” IEEE
similarity relationship) and the data contains noise. To take Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2651–2661, Oct. 2023.
full advantage of various interrelationships, we can try to [17] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao,
 “Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and
 4 https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/icr-identify-age-related-conditions/ localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell.
data (CloudIntelligence), 2021, pp. 7–12.
HE et al.: GRAPH STRUCTURE LEARNING-BASED MTSAD IN INTERNET OF THINGS 5431

[18] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and [25] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang,
 opportunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036. “Connecting the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph
[19] R. Levie, M. M. Bronstein, and G. Kutyniok, “Transferability of spectral neural networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 graph convolutional neural networks,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 22, Discovery Data Min., 2020, pp. 753–763.
 no. 272, pp. 1–59, 2021. [26] E. Jang, S. S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
[20] D. Yu, R. Zhang, Z. Jiang, Y. Wu, and Y. Yang, “Graph-revised Gumbel-Softmax,” 2017, arXiv:1611.01144.
 convolutional network,” in Proc. ECML/PKDD, 2020, pp. 378–393. [27] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th
[21] D. D. S. Pilco and A. R. Rivera, “Graph learning network: A structure IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., 2008, pp. 413–422.
 learning algorithm,” 2019, arXiv:1905.12665. [28] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
[22] D. Luo et al., “Learning to drop: Robust graph neural network via neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf.
 topological denoising,” in Proc. 14th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Learn. Represent., (ICLR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2018, pp. 1–16.
 Min., 2021, pp. 779–787. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJiHXGWAZ
[23] L. Franceschi, M. Niepert, M. Pontil, and X. He, “Learning dis- [29] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouët, “Anomaly
 crete structures for graph neural networks,” in Proc. ICML, 2019, detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM
 pp. 1–11. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Min., 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
[24] X. Gao, W. Hu, and Z. Guo, “Exploring structure-adaptive graph [30] J. Yoon, D. Jarrett, and M. Van der Schaar, “Time-series generative
 learning for robust semi-supervised classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. adversarial networks,” in Proc. 33rd Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Conf. Multimedia Expo. (ICME), 2020, pp. 1–6. 2019, pp. 1–11.