2332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

 Guest Editorial
 Introduction to the Special Section on
 Next-Generation Traffic Measurement With
Network-Wide Perspective and Artificial Intelligence
 RAFFIC measurement is the bedrock of the next- most per-flow spread estimation inherits a similar design from
T generation network systems. While it plays a crucial role
in bringing fundamental data and support to core network funca flow size estimation solution - CountMin that conducts minimum estimation, which indeed restricts the estimation accuracy.
tions, it also confronts the challenge of meeting the diverse The authors further exploit the internal structure of plug-ins and
demands of new network traffic characteristics and emerging replace the min operation with new position-aware operations
applications. The network-wide measurement has received more to achieve better estimation accuracy. After that, super kJoin
and more attention. Given that big network data is distributed sketches are proposed to achieve more accurate removal of
in nature, it is essential to aggregate the views of multiple mea- inter-flow noise and reduce the worst-case errors.
surement points to build a network-wide perception of traffic. In “Unbiased Real-time Traffic Sketching” [A3], Wu et al.
Another latest trend involves artificial intelligence technologies proposed Unbiased Cleaning Sketch (UC sketch), enabling unthat allow seamless aggregation of multifaceted network traffic biased per-flow size measurements within a sliding window
data to advance traffic data analysis and support related appli- model. First, the paper partitions the time window into d time
cations. Nonetheless, a gap remains in existing methodologies, segments and deploys d+1 counters within each estimator in
which often fail to fully address the diverse demands of network the UC sketch. These counters are allocated to record the flow
traffic measurement in this evolving landscape. size in the preceding d time segments and the current time
 This special section focuses on the network-wide and AI- segment, respectively. Then, the authors introduce the linear
powered traffic measurement and related applications. Thanks scaling technique, facilitating median-unbiased flow size esto the extensive efforts of the reviewers and the great support timation and significantly reducing the estimation variance of
from the Editor-in-Chief, Dr. Jianwei Huang, we were able to the UC sketch. Lastly, they employ the Column Randomizing
accept 18 contributed articles covering several important topics, technique to mitigate errors resulting from hash collisions.
from the sketch-based passive measurement [A1], [A2], [A3], In “Micro-burst Aware ECN in Multi-Queue Data Cen-
[A4], [A5] to the INT-based active measurement [A6], [A7], ters: Algorithm and Implementation” [A4], Kang et al. proto task offload and privacy protection regarding network-wide posed Micro-Burst aware Explicit Congestion Notification
measurement [A8], [A9], [A10], to AI-powered traffic analysis (MBECN+) to cope with the mismarking problem raised by
[A11], [A12], [A13], [A14] and other related applications [A15], micro-burst traffic. MBECN+ first adopts an ECN threshold
[A16], [A17], [A18]. A brief review follows: setting mechanism that can find appropriate lower bounds for
 Li et al., in “CS-Sketch: Compressive Sensing Enhanced each queue based on steady-state analysis. Next, Dequeue with
Sketch for Full Traffic Measurement” [A1], proposed a Slope ECN Marking (DSEM), an ECN marking scheme, is delightweight framework CS-Sketch to perform accurate measure- signed to eliminate the influence of backlog. It uses two K values
ments of the elephant and mouse flows. Based on compressive to determine whether the growth of backlog causes congestion
sensing, CS-Sketch views the flow size vector of all flows as and avoids spurious congestion caused by micro-burst flows.
a signal vector and compresses it to a measurement vector Xiao et al., in “Multi-resolution Odd Sketch for Mining Exthrough a sensing matrix. The measurement system consists of tended Jaccard Similarity of Dynamic Streaming Sets” [A5],
multiple switch nodes and a data center side, where the switch proposed a multi-resolution odd sketch (MROS) that combines
node constructs a sparse 0–1 sensing matrix to track the flow the odd sketch with a multi-resolution sampling structure to comsize with lightweight update operations, and the data center press a dynamic streaming set. The MROS summary allows for
side accurately estimates the flow size of each flow through the both the insertion and deletion of elements, and it is mergeable
measurement vector at high speed. for estimating the Jaccard similarity of two users’ itemsets with
 Ma et al., in their paper “From CountMin to Super kJoin equal memory size and the same hash functions. After that, the
Sketches for Flow Spread Estimation” [A2], pointed out that authors extend their algorithm to the scenario with more users
 by using the set expression cardinalities as unknown variables
 Date of current version 30 April 2024. to establish a linear equation system.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2024.3389428

 2327-4697 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024 2333

 Liu et al., in “SFANTL: A SRv6-based flexible and ac- the flows of each client as a sparse vector, they first present a
tive network telemetry scheme in programming data plane” high-utility LDP traffic aggregation scheme based on Hyper-
[A6], proposed an active network telemetry scheme based on LogLog. Further, they utilize multi-iteration approximation to
P4, introducing the SRv6 mechanism with custom probes. reduce the computation cost to find the top-k flows.
By dynamically generating probe packets with both INT and To leverage the advantages of serverless platforms, Zhao
SRv6 headers, SFANTL enables the flexible specification of et al., in “faaShark: an End-to-End Network Traffic Analysis
monitoring targets, ranges, and information categories, effec- System atop Serverless Computing” [A11], proposed faaShark,
tively covering telemetry requirements with minimal path cost an end-to-end traffic network analysis system based on the
and bandwidth usage. The evaluation results demonstrate that serverless computing platform. FaaShark employed distributed
SFANTL can provide efficient and accurate network telemetry training to leverage the lightweight virtualized runtime and fair
and suggest future directions to explore the sending rate of scalability of serverless platforms over PaaS (Platform as a
probes, optimizing the balance between real-time monitoring Service) platforms and provides cloud-native, cost-effective, and
and resource consumption. convenient training and deployment services for network traffic
 Zhang et al., in “An AI-Augmented Kalman Filter Approach analysis models. Additionally, they proposed a gradient-based
to Monitoring Network Traffic Matrix” [A7], proposed an AI- cold start optimization algorithm to minimize cold start hit rates
augmented Kalman filter to address the problem of network when serving pre-trained models to handle network analysis
traffic matrix estimation. The filter leverages the ConvGRU requests.
recurrent neural network to learn and model the underlying Wang et al. adopted a federated learning framework to capture
characteristics of the traffic matrix, capturing features such as the unique properties of real-time traffic with higher efficiency
spatiotemporal correlations and traffic dynamics to establish in “FedStream: A Federated Learning Framework on Heteromapping relationships for state transition and state difference geneous Streaming Data for Next-generation Traffic Analysis”
reasoning. Subsequently, indirect traffic measurements (i.e., link [A12]. The authors consider the heterogeneity in data distribuloads) are collected to estimate the missing knowledge of the tion and arrival patterns of traffic and propose H_strSAGA for
traffic matrix. The proposed approach effectively combines the local optimization and FedStream to tackle the dual heterogeneadvantages of both direct and indirect measurements to achieve ity challenge. Also, they introduce an asynchronous aggregation
superior traffic matrix estimation accuracy. algorithm to deal with increasing device heterogeneity. This
 Fan et al., in “Joint Optimization of Measurement Point In- work mitigates the negative impact of dual heterogeneity on
telligent Selection and End-to-End Network Traffic Calculation global model performance and enhances straggler tolerance.
in Datacenters” [A8], proposed an innovative end-to-end traffic Yang et al., in “Transforms-based Bayesian Tensor Compleinference algorithm named LLS-TC for data center networks, tion Method for Network Traffic Measurement Data Recovwhich leverages network tomography and Simple Network ery” [A13], introduced the transforms-based Bayesian tensor
Management Protocol (SNMP) data to rapidly and accurately completion (TBTC) method to infer network-wide traffic from
calculate network traffic. LLS-TC addresses the challenges of incomplete data. They represent heterogeneous traffic measurehigh software and hardware costs by employing an intelligent ments as observation tensors, preserving data structure and
selection of measurement points based on node weighting and correlation. By diagonalizing the block matrix, they devise an
a network tomography method tailored for cloud computing. efficient variational Bayesian inference algorithm in arbitrary
By modeling the algorithm problem into a linear state space invertible linear transforms domain, reducing complexity and
model, LLS-TC can significantly improve the accuracy of traffic enhancing missing data recovery. TBTC is adaptable to various
calculation while maintaining computational efficiency. linear transforms, enhancing network traffic data quality for
 To avoid measurement redundancy, Yao et al., in “Dis- monitoring, analysis, and intrusion detection, ensuring network
tributed Strategy for Collaborative Traffic Measurement in a traffic data integrity.
Multi-controller SDN” [A9], proposed a novel distributed it- Existing tensor-based anomaly pursuit methods are hindered
erative strategy for collaborative traffic measurement in a multi- by overly ideological assumptions, failing to address structured
controller SDN. The strategy enables each controller to get the anomalies and sparse corruption. In “Structured-Anomaly Purproper sampling probability of any flow at any switch by local suit of Network Traffic via Corruption-Robust Low-Rank Tensor
flow information and a little message exchange with neighboring Decomposition” [A14], Zeng et al. proposed the Corruptioncontroller(s). Moreover, a dedicated packet processing mecha- Robust Low-Rank Tensor Decomposition (Cr-LTD) method.
nism is designed in the data plane to support the multi-controller This novel approach incorporates l{2,1} and l1 -norms to characscenarios. The extensive simulations demonstrate that the pro- terize structured anomalies and robustness to sparse corruption
posed strategy achieves a near-optimal performance in terms of effectively. Cr-LTD introduces the tensor tubal rank to capmeasurement load and communication load. ture the low-rank property of network traffic and employs a
 In “Differentially Private Top-k Flows Estimation Mechanism novel tensor nuclear norm to relax it, circumventing NP-hard
in Network Traffic” [A10], Zhu et al. considered the privacy problems. By leveraging the alternating direction method of
leakage problem in aggregating traffic data to find top-k flows multipliers and acceleration mechanism, Cr-LTD achieves an
and proposed a local differential privacy (LDP) method to efficient structured-anomaly pursuit of network traffic.
protect sensitive information. Their method utilizes the sparsity Tang et al. introduced FTOP, an effective system to counter
property of network flow; namely, the number of flows met by all flow table overflow issues, in “FTOP: An Efficient Flow Table
clients is much less than the flow domain size. By representing Overflow Preventing System for Switches in SDN” [A15]. It
2334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

tackles Low-rate Flow Table Overflow (LFTO) attacks and SHIGANG CHEN, Guest Editor
Flash Crowds (FCs) with an eviction-based online approach. Department of Computer and Information
FTOP comprises Predictor, Detector, Mitigator, and Preventer of Science and Engineering
modules, minimizing evictions to prevent overflow. It integrates University of Florida
Kalman filtering for flow count prediction and Random Forest Gainesville, FL 32611 USA
classifiers for attack detection. This system promptly responds to sgchen@cise.ufl.edu
overflow risks, enhancing SDN network security and reliability
by mitigating associated risks. FTOP effectively safeguards
 RAN BEN BASAT, Guest Editor
SDN networks from attack impacts by preventing flow table
overflow. Department of Computer Science
 University College London
 Xiao et al. examined traffic-aware resource allocation for
 London, NW1 2AE U.K.
UAV communications using RSMA in “Traffic-Aware Energy-
Efficient Resource Allocation for RSMA Based UAV Commu- r.benbasat@cs.ucl.ac.uk
nications” [A16]. They maximize UAV energy efficiency by
jointly optimizing UAV deployment, beamforming, rate allo- HAIPENG DAI, Guest Editor
cation, and subcarrier allocation based on user needs. To ad- State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
dress non-convexity, they propose a joint optimization approach, Nanjing University
including a heuristic UAV 3D location method and RSMA Nanjing 210023, China
parameter optimization using the successive convex approxi- haipengdai@nju.edu.cn
mation method. Moreover, this paper formulates the subcarrier
allocation problem as a many-to-one and two-sided matching
game. AMIRHOSEIN TAHERKORDI
 Hu et al. proposed a privacy-preserving few-shot traffic detec- Department of Informatics
tion (PFTD) method against Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) University of Oslo
in “Privacy-preserving Few-shot Traffic Detection against Ad- Oslo 0316, Norway
vanced Persistent Threats via Federated Meta Learning” [A17]. amirhost@ifi.uio.no
They introduced federated meta-learning (FML) into the algorithm design and treated APT detection as a model generalization JUN XU, Guest Editor
optimization process, transferring learned knowledge to identify College of Computing
local unknown samples. On the client side, Model-Agnostic Georgia Institute of Technology
Meta-Learning (MAML) enables personalized adjustments for Atlanta, GA 30332-0280 USA
quick adaptation and accurate classification. On the server side, jx@cc.gatech.edu
aggregation of global knowledge through federated learning
ensures information security and privacy of edge devices.
 Santos et al., in “Random Access based on LSTM for Mixed
Traffic IoT Networks” [A18], focused on the co-existence of APPENDIX
massive machine-type communication (mMTC) packets and RELATED ARTICLES
mission-critical ultra-reliable low latency (URLLC) packets in [A1] L. Li, K. Xie, S. Pei, J. Wen, W. Liang, and G. Xie,
IoT traffic, which require different network coordination and “CS-sketch: Compressive sensing enhanced sketch for
resource allocation strategies. The authors proposed a hybrid full traffic measurement,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
random access protocol designed for mixed URLLC-mMTC vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2338–2352, May/Jun. 2024.
scenarios, utilizing a long short-term memory neural network for [A2] C. Ma, O. O. Odegbile, D. Melissourgos, H. Wang, and
traffic forecasting. Also, a resource slicing scheme is developed S. Chen, “From CountMin to super kJoin sketches for
to assign channels to the upcoming traffic at every frame. flow spread estimation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
 In summary, the collected articles offer innovative traffic mea- vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2353–2370, May/Jun. 2024.
surement scenarios and shed light on the underlying principles [A3] Y. Wu et al., “Unbiased real-time traffic sketching,”
of traffic measurement design for next-generation networks. We IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2371–
hope this special section will trigger more future work in the 2383, May/Jun. 2024.
emerging area. [A4] J. Zhang et al., “Micro-burst aware ECN in multiqueue data centers: Algorithm and implementation,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2384–
 HE HUANG, Guest Editor 2398, May/Jun. 2024.
 School of Computer Science and Technology [A5] Q. Xiao, S. Yang, P. Li, K. Li, and L. Wen, “Multi-
 Soochow University resolution odd sketch for mining extended jaccard
 Suzhou 215123, China similarity of dynamic streaming sets,” IEEE Trans.
 huangh@suda.edu.cn Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2399–2414,
 May/Jun. 2024.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024 2335

 [A6] Y. Liu, Y. Xia, W. Zhang, W. Jia, and J. Wu, “SFANT: [A13] Z. Yang, L. T. Yang, L. Yi, X. Deng, C. Zhu, and
 A SRv6-based flexible and active network telemetry Y. Ruan, “Transforms-based Bayesian tensor comscheme in programming Data plane,” IEEE Trans. pletion method for network traffic measurement data
 Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2415–2425, recovery,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3,
 May/Jun. 2024. pp. 2497–2509, May/Jun. 2024.
 [A7] Q. Zhang and S. Pan, “An AI-augmented Kalman filter [A14] J. Zeng, L. T. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Ruan, and C.
 approach to monitoring network traffic matrix,” IEEE Zhu, “Structured-anomaly pursuit of network traf-
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2426–2437, fic via corruption-robust low-rank tensor decompo-
 May/Jun. 2024. sition,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3,
 [A8] W. Fan, F. Xiao, L. Han, X. He, and J. Wang, “Joint pp. 2510–2523, May/Jun. 2024.
 optimization of measurement point intelligent selec- [A15] D. Tang, Z. Zheng, K. Li, C. Yin, W. Liang, and
 tion and end-to-end network traffic calculation in dat- J. Zhang, “FTOP: An efficient flow table overflow
 acenters,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, preventing system for switches in SDN,” IEEE Trans.
 pp. 2438–2449, May/Jun. 2024. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2524–2536,
 [A9] D. Yao, Q. Ma, H. Wang, M. Chen, and H. Xu, “Dis- May/Jun. 2024.
 tributed strategy for collaborative traffic measurement [A16] M. Xiao, H. Cui, D. Huang, Z. Zhao, X. Cao, and D.
 in a multi-controller SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. O. Wu, “Traffic-aware energy-efficient resource allo-
 Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2450–2461, May/Jun. 2024. cation for RSMA based UAV communications,” IEEE
 [A10] Y. Zhu, Q. Song, and Y. Luo, “Differentially private Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2537–2548,
 top-k flows estimation mechanism in network traffic,” May/Jun. 2024.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2462– [A17] Y. Hu, J. Wu, G. Li, J. Li, and J. Cheng, “Privacy-
 2472, May/Jun. 2024. preserving few-shot traffic detection against advanced
 [A11] H. Zhao et al., “faaShark: An end-to-end network traf- persistent threats via Federated Meta Learning,” IEEE
 fic analysis system atop Serverless Computing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2549–2560,
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2473–2484, May/Jun. 2024.
 May/Jun. 2024. [A18] H. L. d. Santos, J. C. Marinello, C. M. Panazio, and
 [A12] N. Wang, X. Li, Z. Guan, and S. Yuan, “FedStream: T. Abrão, “Random access based on LSTM for mixed
 A federated learning framework on heterogeneous traffic IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng.,
 streaming data for next-generation traffic analysis,” vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2561–2573, May/Jun. 2024.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2485–
 2496, May/Jun. 2024.

He Huang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer Science and Technology, University
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. His advisor is Prof. Guoliang Chen. From 2019 to 2020, he was a Visiting
Research Scholar with Florida University, Gainesville, FL, USA. He is currently a Professor and an Associate Dean of the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China, where he also directs the Institutes of Network Science
and Engineering. He has authored or coauthored more than 100 peer-reviewed journal/conference papers and has 13 Chinese
patents. His research interests include traffic measurement for high-speed Internet, software defined networks, mobile computing,
privacy and security, cyber-physical systems, and algorithms. He was the recipient of the Changjiang (Yangtze River) Youth Scholar
Award in 2021. He is a member of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). His students and he was the recipient of three
best paper awards (Bigcom 2016, IEEE MSN 2018, IEEE Bigcom 2018). He is currently an Associate Editor for two international
journals, including INTERNET OF THINGS and Cyber-Physical Systems Journal, and Frontiers in the Internet of Things. He was
with various capacities (publicity chair, publication chair, and technical program committee) in a number of conferences, such as,
Publicity Co-Chair of ACM MobiHoc-MSCC 2016, Publication Chair of the Second IEEE INFOCOM Workshop on Networking
Algorithms (WNA) in conjunction with IEEE INFOCOM 2022, TPC member of IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE MASS, IEEE ICC, and
IEEE Globecom.
2336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

Shigang Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from the University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, China, in 1993, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC), Champaign–Urbana, IL, USA, in 1996 and 1999, respectively. After graduating from UIUC, he was with Cisco Systems
on network security for three years and helped start a network security company, Protego Networks. He joined the University
of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, as an Assistant Professor in 2002, and was promoted to an Associate Professor in 2008 and
to a Professor in 2013. He has authored or coauthored more than 200 peer-reviewed journal/conference papers and has 13 U.S.
patents. He held the University of Florida Research Foundation Professorship during 2017–2020 and University of Florida Term
Professorship during 2017–2020. He was the recipient of IEEE Communications Society Best Tutorial Paper Award in 1999, NSF
CAREER Award in 2007, and Cisco University Research Award in 2007, 2012. He is an ACM Distinguished Member. He is
currently an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING and was an Editor of IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS
ON NETWORKING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY , and CN. He was also with various capacities in a number
of conferences, such as, Area TPC Chair for IEEE INFOCOM 2014–2022, General Chair of IEEE BIGCOM 2019, and Co-Chair
of NSF Workshop on Edge Networking 2018.

Ran Ben Basat received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees from the Computer Science Department, Technion, Haifa, Israel. He
was a Postdoctoral Fellow with Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, working with Minlan Yu and Michael Mitzenmacher.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Computer Science Department, University College London, London, U.K. Before
Harvard, he was the Ph.D. Candidate, under the supervision of Roy Friedman. His research focuses on algorithms for networking
systems and measurement. He is currently a Reviewer of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING,
IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING , ACM Transactions on Storage (Distinguished Reviewer), IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, IEEE COMMUNICATION LETTERS, AND
IEEE NETWORKING LETTERS. He was also a TPC Member of a number of conferences, such as, ACM SIGMETRICS, APNET,
ACM CoNEXT, ACM/IEEE ANCS, USENIX ATC, IEEE INFOCOM Workshop on Networking Algorithms, ACM SOSR, and
EuroP4.

Haipeng Dai (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China, in 2014. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University. His research interests include data mining, mobile computing, wireless power transfer technology, wireless
sensor networks, and wireless networks , convex optimization, combinatorial optimization, probability analysis, coding theory,
network security, game theory, and computational geometry. He is the Young Chang Jiang Scholar. He was the recipient of the
Jiangsu Computer Society Youth Science and Technology Award in 2020, and IEEE SAGC 2021 Best Paper Award in 2021. He is
currently the Section Editor of Sensors, an Associate Editor for Hans Journal of Data Mining, and an Associate Editor for Frontiers
in Communications and Networks. He was also with various capacities in a number of conferences, such as, TPC Vice-Chair for
IEEE HPCC 2021, TPC Chair of iThing 2021, Track Chair of IEEE ICPADS 2021, and TPC member of IEEE INFOCOM, VLDB,
IJCAI, IEEE ICNP, and IEEE ICDCS.

Amirhosein Taherkordi (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the Informatics Department, University of Oslo (UiO),
Oslo, Norway, in 2011. After completing the Ph.D. studies, he joined Sonitor Technologies as a Senior Embedded Software Engineer.
From 2013 to 2018, he was a Researcher with the Networks and Distributed Systems (ND) Group, Department of Informatics, UiO.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Informatics, UiO. He has authored or coauthored several articles in
high-ranked conferences and journals, and he has experience in several national (Norwegian Research Council) and international
(European Research Funding Agencies) research projects. His research interests include broadly on resource-efficiency, scalability,
adaptability, dependability, mobility, and data-intensiveness of distributed systems designed for emerging computing technologies,
such as IoT, fog/edge/cloud computing, and cyber-physical systems. He is currently an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024 2337

Jun Xu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science from the Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL,
USA, in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree in computer and information science from The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA, in
2000. He is currently a Professor with the School of Computer Science at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He has authored or
coauthored more than 800 peer-reviewed journal/conference papers. His research interests include designing high-speed Internet
routers, firewalls, and measurement devices. He was the recipient of 2006 and 2008 IBM Faculty Awards for making fundamental
contributions to the development of system/network performance evaluation methodologies, such as new data streaming algorithms
and large deviation techniques, the NSF CAREER Award in 2003, and ACM Sigmetrics 2004 Best Student Paper Award, and
Ameritech fellowship for outstanding research in telecommunications. He has been an ACM Distinguished Scientist since 2010. He
was a Guest Editor of “Special Issue on Quality-of-Service” in IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT.
He was also a TPC Member of a number of conferences, such as, ACM SIGMETRICS, ACM IMC, IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE ICNP,
IEEE ICDCS, and IEEE ICC.