IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024 9221

 Guest Editorial
 Introduction to the Special Section on Open Radio
 Access Networks: Architecture, Challenges,
 Opportunities, and Use Cases in Vehicular Networks
 ELLULAR vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X) was intro- proposed to secure communication in IoV networks using Open
C duced to support autonomous driving through 5G and beyond networks. C-V2X leverages cellular network infrastructure
 RANs. STIoV addresses challenges like unverified transactions
 and data tampering through mutual authentication, reputation
to integrate vehicle-to-network, vehicle-to-pedestrian, vehicle- scoring, digital twins, and intrusion detection. Evaluations show
to-infrastructure, and vehicle-to-vehicle communications. It STIoV’s effectiveness compared to existing solutions..
has been suggested that Open RAN can be used to achieve the The research proposed a framework for managing UAVs in
latency requirements essential to realize C-V2X as it achieves WSNs for smart agriculture. The framework uses multi-agent
real-time optimization through the use of AI in Near real-time deep reinforcement learning to schedule tasks, plan trajectories,
RAN Intelligence Controller (Near-RT RIC). The Open RAN and share resources among UAVs. This approach aims to miniwill allow the access to historical traffic data or acquisition of mize energy consumption and network latency while collecting
data from vehicles. The data will then be transferred to Near-RT data from sensor nodes. Simulation results show significant im-
RIC for detecting network anomalies while maintaining reliable provement over existing methods, the study by Betalo et al. uncommunication, which is essential for realizing autonomous der the title, “Multi-agent Deep Reinforcement Learning-based
driving. Open RAN also supports non-real-time RAN intelligent Task Scheduling and Resource Sharing for O-RAN-empowered
controller (Non-RT RIC) that allows more complex ML work- Multi-UAV-assisted Wireless Sensor Networks”.
flows such as policy-based feature extraction and optimization The study by Sun et al. proposed a a new framework called
to guide vehicles when real-time acquisition is not available. Distilling for Sparse-Meta-transfer Learning (DSML) to address
Open RAN provides support for edge cloud, i.e. Open Cloud the challenge of limited labeled data in Open RAN-based Celthat helps to interface the Near-RT RIC with Open RAN central lular Vehicle-to-Everything (CV2x) systems. DSML combines
unit’s user and control plane. Together, the Open RAN and meta-transfer learning with knowledge distillation and sparse-
C-V2X are considered to be the key-enabling technologies for MAML techniques to improve generalization capability and reachieving low-latency in autonomous vehicular communication duce catastrophic forgetting. The proposed method outperforms
networks. The issue attracted over 100 high-quality submissions existing approaches in univariate time series classification tasks,
from all over the world, among which 12 original contributions making it suitable for CV2x applications.
were eventually selected for publication. The novelty and key The study by Cui et al. under the title, “O-RAN Slicing for
contributions of these articles are summarized as follows. Multi-Service Resource Allocation in Vehicular Networks”, dis-
 The study by Houran et al. under the title, “Intelligent Re- cussed traditional resource allocation struggles with the growing
flecting Surfaces Assisted Cellular V2X based Open RAN variety of V2X applications with different needs. This paper
Communications”, proposed a method to improve data trans- proposes a new multi-service strategy for Open RAN-based
mission in cellular vehicle-to-everything communication using V2X. It splits resource allocation into two steps: allocating
Open RAN and intelligent reflecting surfaces (IRS). The sys- resources between service types and scheduling resources within
tem utilizes clustering and a trellis search algorithm to select each type. This allows for specialized scheduling for real-time
the optimal IRS configuration to maximize signal strength be- and non-real-time services, improving both service quality and
tween the base station and vehicles. Simulation results show data transmission rates compared to existing methods.
this method outperforms existing techniques in multi-hop IRS The study by Cao et al. under the title, “Efficient Resource
communication. Allocation of Slicing Services in Softwarized Space-Aerial-
 The study by Kumar et al., under the title, “Secure Data Dis- Ground Integrated Networks for Seamless and Open Access
semination Scheme for Digital Twin Empowered Vehicular Net- Services”, proposes a framework called Slice-Soft-SAGIN for
works in Open RAN”, presnted a new framework called STIoV is managing resources in future 6 G networks that integrate
 space, aerial, and ground networks. Traditional networks offer
 limited 2D coverage. 6 G with network softwarization (Net-
 Date of current version 16 July 2024.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2024.3399470 Soft) allows flexible resource allocation and service creation.

 0018-9545 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
9222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Slice-Soft-SAGIN allocates resources across different network The research work presented by Sroka et al. addresses chaltypes (ground, aerial, satellite) and considers both wireless and lenges in communication between vehicles (V2X) due to varying
wired resources to optimize service delivery for various net- service needs and network changes. It proposes Open Radio
work slices. The framework’s effectiveness is verified through Access Network (O-RAN) as a solution. O-RAN uses RAN
evaluations. Intelligent Controllers (RICs) to intelligently manage resources
 The study by Raja et al. under the title, “UGEN: UAV for V2X. By leveraging O-RAN’s flexibility and special traffic
and GAN-aided Ensemble Network for Post-Disaster Sur- information, the study shows optimized traffic management and
vivor Detection through ORAN”, proposed a deep-learning and resource allocation in V2X scenarios, making O-RAN a good
blockchain enabled secure data processing framework for an fit for future V2X communication.
edge-enabled green and connected autonomous vehicles. In
the proposed scheme, the blockchain ensures the reliability
of the vehicles added into the network and the deep learning KAPAL DEV, Guest Editor
model is used to detect the intruders in the edge computing Department of Computer Science
environment. Munster Technological University, Bishopstown
 The study by Dalgitsis et al.. under the title, “Cloud-native T12P928, Ireland
orchestration framework for network slice federation across kapal.dev@ieee.org
administrative domains in 5 G/6 G mobile networks” proposes
with advancements in C-V2X and edge computing, network
slicing is crucial for guaranteeing performance in connected CHIH-LIN I, Guest Editor
vehicles. However, maintaining network slices as vehicles move China Mobile Research Institute
between operators is a challenge. This paper proposes a new China
framework for network slice federation that allows operators icl@chinamobile.com
to share resources and maintain consistent slice service for
vehicles. The approach is validated through a cloud-native experimental platform showing successful federation and the impact VUK MAROJEVIC, Guest Editor
of operator strategies on performance. Electrical and Computer Engineering
 The proposed work by Amponis et al. discuss improvements Starkville, MS 39762 USA
to the QUIC protocol for better data transfer in C-V2X commu- vuk.marojevic@ece.msstate.edu
nication using aerial drones. Standard QUIC struggles with frequent network changes in these scenarios. The proposed method
adjusts data transfer based on real-time channel conditions,
improving performance for C-V2X applications in Open RAN. SUNDER ALI KHOWAJA, Guest Editor
This paves the way for reliable low-latency communication for Faculty of Engineering and Technology
autonomous vehicles and future vehicular services. University of Sindh, Jamshoro 76080
 El Houda et al. proposes a new framework that combines fed- Pakistan
erated learning and deep reinforcement learning to address these sandar.ali@usindh.edu.pk
limitations. The approach enables distributed training on local
data while achieving high accuracy and efficiency in jamming
attack detection for Open RAN SHAO-YU LIEN, Guest Editor
 Linsalata et al. proposes a new architecture to improve com- National Chung Cheng University
munication between vehicles (V2X) using Open RAN (O- Chiayi 621301, Taiwan
RAN). Traditional RANs lack the flexibility for V2X, but sylien@ccu.edu.tw
O-RAN offers a solution. The challenge is integrating them
seamlessly. This architecture uses a separate low-frequency
O-RAN control plane to manage high-frequency V2X com- YUE WANG, Guest Editor
munication between autonomous vehicles. Simulations show Samsung Electronics R&D Institute
this approach improves reliability by up to 60% for V2X Staines TW18 4QE, U.K.
communication. yue2.wang@samsung.com
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024 9223

 Kapal Dev (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from Politecnico di Milano, Milan,
 Italy, in 2019. He is currently an Assistant Lecturer with the Department of Computer Science,
 Munster Technological University (MTU), Ireland, and formerly he was Senior Researcher with
 the same University. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the CONNECT Centre, School
 of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. He was a 5G Junior
 Consultant and Engineer with Altran Italia S.p.A, Milan, Italy on 5G use cases. He worked
 for OCEANS Network as Head of Projects funded by the European Commission. His research
 interests include wireless communication networks, blockchain, and artificial intelligence. He
 was awarded the Ph.D. degree by Politecnico di Milano, in 2019 under the prestigious fellowship
 of Erasmus Mundus funded by the European Commission. He was the recipient of IEEE ComSoc
 EMEA Outstanding Young Researcher 2022 for promising research activities for the benefit of
 the Society. He was the recipient of The Tom Brazil Excellence in Research Award 2023 from
 SFI Funded CONNECT Research centre. He was the recipient of 2022 Irish Research Council
Research Ally Prize for his mentoring/supervison services. He is among the top 45 researchers/scientist selected as a member of the
Global Young Academy (GYA) 2024 in the world. He was also the recipient of the Best workshop Paper Award at the prestigious
IEEE WCNC 2024 conference, IEEE ComSoc Excellent Reviewer Award from IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING journal in 2022. He recently delivered invited talk on Unlocking the Future: Exploring the Enchanting Possibilities
of 6 G under IEEE ComSoc Distinguish Speaker Program at MUET, Jamshoro, Pakistan. He is very active in leading successful
projects as Principal Investigator under Horizon Europe MSCA Staff exchange, Erasmus + International Credit Mobility (ICM),
Capacity Building for Higher Education, and H2020 CO-FUND projects and won over 1.2 million Euros funding in total. He is a
Funded Investigator at one of top European research centres– CONNECT, Trinity College Dublin funded by Science Foundation.

 Chih-Lin I (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Stanford
 University, Stanford, CA, USA. She is currently the CMCC Chief Scientist of wireless technologies. She has authored or coauthored more than 200 papers in scientific journals, book
 chapters, and conferences and holds more than 100 patents. She is the co-author of the book
 Green and Software-defined Wireless Networks: From Theory to Practice and has also co-edited
 two books: Ultra-Dense Networks–Principles and Applications and 5G Networks–Fundamental
 Requirements, Enabling Technologies, and Operations Management. Her research focuses on
 ICDT deep convergence: From green & soft to open & smart. She was the recipient of the
 2005 IEEE ComSoc Stephen Rice Prize, 2018 IEEE ComSoc Fred W. Ellersick Prize, the 7th
 IEEE Asia-Pacific Outstanding Paper Award, and 2015 IEEE Industrial Innovation Award for
 Leadership and Innovation in Next-Generation Cellular Wireless Networks. She is the Chair of
 O-RAN Technical Steering Committee and an O-RAN Executive Committee Member, the Chair
 of FuTURE 5G/6G SIG, the Chair of WAIA (Wireless AI Alliance) Executive Committee, an
Executive Board Member of GreenTouch, a Network Operator Council Founding Member of ETSI NFV, a Steering Board Member
and Vice Chair of WWRF, a Steering Committee Member and the Publication Chair of IEEE 5G and Future Networks Initiatives, the
Founding Chair of IEEE WCNC Steering Committee, the Director of IEEE ComSoc Meetings and Conferences Board, the Senior
Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, an Area Editor for IEEE/ACM TRANSACTIONS
ON NETWORKING, Executive Co-chair of IEEE Globecom 2020, IEEE WCNC 2007, IEEE WOCC 2004 and 2000, a member of
IEEE ComSoc SDB, SPC, and CSCN-SC, and a Scientific Advisory Board Member of Singapore NRF. She is a Fellow of WWRF.
9224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 Vuk Marojevic (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from
 the University of Hannover, Hanover, Germany, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
 from Barcelona Tech (UPC), Spain. He is currently an Associate Professor with Electrical and
 Computer Engineering, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS, USA. He is a Principal
 Investigator of the U.S. National Science Foundation projects AERPAW and Open Artificial
 Intelligence Cellular (OAIC). His research interests include mobile communications, software
 radios, spectrum sharing, wireless testbeds and testing, and wireless security with application to
 mission-critical communications, open radio access network (O-RAN), and unmanned aircraft
 systems. He is an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY and
 the IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine. Dr. Marojevic is an expert in open-source software for
 software radios, radios built in software. He was one of the first to undertake the complex endeavor
 to implement the 4G cellular protocol in software and make the software open and operational
 with commercial off-the-shelf software radio hardware. This was the foundation of srsRAN.
He has managed large-scale wireless research testbeds and co-designed AERPAW. He is currently leading a multi-university
U.S. NSF Project that is developing OAIC: Prototyping Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Control and Testing Systems for Cellular
Communications Research.

 Sunder Ali Khowaja received the Ph.D. degree in industrial and information systems engineering
 from the Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Seoul, South Korea. He was a Postdoctoral
 Research Fellow with the Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Korea Polytechnic University, Siheung, South Korea. He is currently an Assistant Professor and the Founding Chairman
 with the Department of Telecommunication Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Technology,
 University of Sindh, Jamshoro, Pakistan. He has more than 14 years of academic and industrial
 experience in different multi-national companies and educational institutions. He has been
 included in the top ten spots for two of the competitions announced at CVPR 2022, while he
 secure top 3rd position in UG+ Atmospheric Turbulence Mitigation Challenge at CVPR 2022.
 His research interests include deep learning, artificial intelligence, data analytics, and process
 mining for emerging communication and computer vision technologies.

 Shao-Yu Lien (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from National Taiwan Ocean
 University, Keelung, Taiwan, in 2004, the M.S. degree from National Cheng Kung University,
 Tainan City, Taiwan, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from National Taiwan University, Taipei,
 Taiwan, in 2011. He was with National Formosa University, Huwei, Taiwan, as an Assistant
 Professor and Associate Professor from 2013 to 2017, and he is currently with National Chung
 Cheng University, Chiayi, Taiwan, as an Associate Professor. Dr. Lien is also the technical
 Director of the Smart System Institute, Institute for Information Industry, since 2020. His research
 interests include configurable networks, cyber-physical systems, radio access networks and robotic
 networks. Dr. Lien was the recipient of a number of prestigious research recognitions, including
 IEEE Tainan Section Best Young Professional Member Award 2019, IEEE Communications
 Society Asia-Pacific Outstanding Paper Award 2014, Scopus Young Researcher Award (issued
 by Elsevier) 2014, URSI AP-RASC 2013 Young Scientist Award, and IEEE ICC 2010 Best Paper
 Award. Dr. Lien is the Guest Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS
AND NETWORKING in 2019, and the Guest Editor of Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (WCMC) in 2017. In the
meantime, Dr. Lien was also the leading organizer of several technical workshops in IEEE VTC-Spring 2015, IEEE GLOBECOM
2015, Qshine 2015 and 2016, and IEEE PIMRC 2017, IEEE GLOBECOM 2019, and IEEE ICC 2020. He has also been a 3GPP
standardization delegate since 2009 for LTE, LTE-A, LTE Pro, and 5GNR. In this role, he has contributed to more than 70 technical
documents and patents in collaboration with HTC Corporation, Institute for Information Industry (III), Industrial Technology
Research Institute (ITRI), and Huawei.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 73, NO. 7, JULY 2024 9225

 Yue Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Victoria,
 Victoria, BC, Canada. She is currently a Principal 5G Researcher with Samsung Electronics
 R&D Institute U.K. Prior to joining Samsung, she worked in the U.S. and U.K. on a number of
 technical subjects in wireless communications research and standards. She has coauthored more
 than 40 papers and is a Co-Inventor of more than 20 patents. Her current research focuses on
 AI for 5G, with topics spanning extensively on the application of AI in communications systems
 and networks for 5G and beyond. She is the Samsung delegate to ETSI ISG ENI (Experiential
 Networked Intelligence), and the Secretary and Rapporteur of ENI. She also sits on the Industry
 Advisory Board of two universities and is the Industry Supervisor of a five-year research program,
 all in the area of AI for 5G and beyond. She has been a Senior Member of IEEE since 2012.