866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 HybridAD: A Hybrid Model-Driven Anomaly
 Detection Approach for Multivariate Time Series
 Weiwei Lin , Member, IEEE, Songbo Wang , Wentai Wu , Member, IEEE, Dongdong Li,
 and Albert Y. Zomaya , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection, in recent years, has gained increasing attention in the research and practice of time series processing. However, the task is particularly challenging with multivariate time series which complicates the temporal dependency
between observations and introduces complex inter-channel correlation. Meanwhile, in order to fit a broader range of applications, robustness during both training and detection is also a
critical aspect. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised, hybrid
model-driven anomaly detection scheme capable of (1) transforming sequences into a fused representation of temporal dependency
embeddings and inter-channel correlation embeddings, and (2)
achieving robust anomaly detection using a temporal prediction
network for sample-wise posterior estimation combined with a
data reconstruction network to assess the source of prediction. On Fig. 1. Example of multivariate time series as a collection of server perforthis basis, we develop a probability density-based anomaly scoring mance indicators (from SMD dataset [5]) that vary over 300 time steps.
mechanism for online detection in multivariate time series, where
the anomaly score for each observation is rectified by the reliability
of the prediction source. The results of extensive experiments on including finance, cybersecurity, and industrial process control.
five publicly available datasets show that our proposed solution It also involves a broad range of critical applications such as
outperforms various state-of-the-art anomaly detection algorithms
(including DL-based and non-DL-based), achieving a performance
 credit card fraud detection, intrusion detection, fault diagnosis,
improvement (in F1-Score) by up to 10.42%. etc [1]. The application of deep learning in anomaly detection
 tasks is becoming increasingly widespread [2]. Unlike other
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, multivariate time series, types of anomaly detection tasks, anomaly detection for time
unsupervised learning, deep learning.
 series data often requires consideration of temporal dependencies between the objects being detected [3], making it a
 I. INTRODUCTION challenging task and a significant research topic. Depending
 on the dimension of the data, time series can be classified as
 N RECENT years, automated anomaly detection has been
I widely employed in production systems concerning domains
 either univariate time series (UTS) or multivariate time series
 (MTS) [4]. In comparison to UTS, the presence of MTS extends
 the dimensionality and is more common in real-world systems
 Manuscript received 9 December 2022; revised 10 May 2023; accepted where any critical changes are reflected by the dynamics of
18 May 2023. Date of publication 10 July 2023; date of current version 23
January 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science multiple variables that may correlate with each other. (Fig. 1
Foundation of China under Grant 62072187, in part by Guangdong Marine shows the trace of server performance indicators as an example).
Economic Development Special Fund Project under Grant GDNRC[2022]17, Aside from the intrinsic patterns exhibited along the temporal
in part by Guangdong Major Project of Basic and Applied Basic Research
under Grant 2019B030302002, in part by the Major Key Project of PCL under dimension, the interplay of multiple channels brings additional
Grant PCL2021A09, and in part by Guangzhou Development Zone Science and challenges to the anomaly detection for MTS especially when
Technology under Grants 2021GH10 and 2020GH10. (Corresponding author: no prior knowledge or reliable data sources are available.
Wentai Wu.)
 Weiwei Lin is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Intuitively, an anomaly detection system works by distin-
South China University of Technology, Guangdong 510641, China, and guishing normal data from anomalous data in a similar way
also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Guangdong 518000, China (e-mail: to the binary classification problem. However, it is usually
nnwtwu@pcl.ac.cn).
 Songbo Wang and Dongdong Li are with the School of Computer Science not practical in the context of Big Data for many reasons [6].
and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangdong 510641, Specifically, classification-based approaches are greatly affected
China (e-mail: songbo1998@foxmail.com; dongdonglee1994@foxmail.com). by (i) severe data imbalance, which means that the proportion
 Wentai Wu is with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Guangdong 518000, China
(e-mail: wentai_wu@outlook.com). of anomalous data is much smaller than that of normal data in a
 Albert Y. Zomaya is with the School of Computer Science, The University of time series; and (ii) high cost of manual labeling, which means
Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia (e-mail: albert.zomaya@sydney.edu.au). that labeling each data point is cost-prohibitive and thus we
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TETCI.2023.3290027, provided by the authors. have to deal with unlabeled data in most cases. In this regard,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TETCI.2023.3290027 unsupervised methods are frequently adopted as a promising
 2471-285X © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 867

alternative to supervised or semi-supervised methods for r We present an anomaly scoring mechanism that focuses
anomaly detection [7], [8], [9], [10]. Despite the way of training on prediction probability density. By taking the reliability
and the model to be used, it is always essential to capture of the prediction source into account, the effectiveness of
the temporal dependency between observations within different anomaly detection is further improved.
ranges of a time series. For MTS, inter-channel correlation, r Our experimental results on five real-world datasets show
characterized as a complicated linear or non-linear relation- that the proposed HybridAD outperforms several stateship between different variables within the same time period, of-the-art models for MTS anomaly detection, achieving
should also be considered particularly in anomaly detection a maximum performance improvement of 10.42% in F1-
systems [3]. However, traditional unsupervised anomaly detec- Score.
tion methods, such as local outlier factor (LOF) [11], principal The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section II
component analysis (PCA) [12], one-class SVM (OCSVM) [13], discusses the studies related to DL-based anomaly detection
and Isolation Forest (IF) [14], are unable to extract the temporal models. In Section III, we introduce in detail the proposed unsudependency and inter-channel correlation of MTS effectively pervised anomaly detection scheme. In Section IV, we present
and therefore fail to meet the requirements of the majority and analyze the experimental results, and finally conclude the
of anomaly detection systems. DL-based approaches, such as article in Section V.
the variants of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and onedimensional convolutional neural networks, have been proven
effective in terms of time series feature extraction [10], [15], II. RELATED WORK
[16], [17]. Studies on DL-based unsupervised anomaly detection Due to the fact that DL-based anomaly detection models are
usually make the following assumptions: (i) the training data typically trained on anomaly-free datasets to learn the normal
contains no or a negligible number of anomalous samples; (ii) data patterns, greater detection error will be produced in case that
the data patterns that anomalous data display differ significantly the anomalies exist. Based on the different techniques, DL-based
from those of normal data [6]. These assumptions encourage anomaly detection models can be categorized as follows.
prediction-driven and reconstruction-based anomaly detection Temporal prediction-based models: On the basis of normal
where a deep model is trained to learn normal series patterns. pattern derived from the historical data, the model could de-
 Following this rationale, a number of practical DL-based tect the anomaly through the difference between the predicted
algorithms have been developed for time series anomaly detec- and real value of the incoming observation. RNN-based modtion [7], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. However, there are still sev- els [10], [15], [23] were proposed for temporal prediction and
eral limitations. First, existing networks often struggle in simul- usually determined the anomalies utilizing the prediction errors.
taneously learning the temporal dependency and inter-channel Specially, Hundman et al. [23] built an LSTM-based model
correlation of MTS. Second, the majority of existing anomaly for each channel of MTS. However, simplistically combining
detection models are either based on temporal prediction or the anomaly detection results of multiple UTS may neglect
data reconstruction, resulting in reduced effectiveness during the anomalies of inter-channel correlation. Incorporating lowtraining or prediction in the presence of anomalies. Finally, the dimensional embeddings to capture temporal dependencies [24],
performance improvement of anomaly detection model is hin- [25] and leveraging graph structures to capture inter-channel
dered by the absence of an efficient anomaly scoring mechanism, correlation in time series [21], can further improve the efficiency
resulting in anomalies being easily overlooked. of anomaly detection models. However, these approaches do
 In this work, we propose HybridAD (Hybrid Model-driven not simultaneously consider both types of feature factors during
Anomaly Detection Approach for MTS), a hybrid anomaly de- the time series modeling process. Meanwhile, to the best of our
tection approach based on deep learning. For the first limitation, knowledge, there are very few studies on anomaly detection that
we design a feature extraction module mainly consisting a Gated consider the reliability of the prediction source. Similar to [10],
Recurrent Unit (GRU) and a one-dimensional convolutional our work also takes into account the reliability of the prediction
neural network to extract the inter-channel correlation and tem- source.
poral dependency feature of MTS, respectively. Then we build a Data reconstruction-based models: When an input sequence
hybrid anomaly detection model that is jointly optimized based deviates from the normal pattern due to the existence of anomaon temporal prediction and data reconstruction to address the lies, a well-trained reconstruction model will struggle to recover
second limitation. A novel anomaly scoring mechanism that the input sequence and output greater reconstruction errors.
focuses on prediction probability density is presented to enhance The Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE)-based models [22], [26],
the anomaly detection performance. [27] were proposed to reconstruct the sequences’ expected dis-
 To summarize, the main contributions of our work are as tribution and used the reconstruction probability as anomaly
follows: score. Zong et al. [20] used a deep autoencoder to generate a
 r We design a feature extraction module that combines a low-dimensional representations from both the reduced space
 GRU network and a one-dimensional convolutional neural and the reconstruction error features, which were then fed to a
 network to simultaneously learn the temporal dependency Gaussian mixture model to estimate their likelihood. However,
 and inter-channel correlation of MTS. the robustness of the model in anomaly detection using only
 r We propose a hybrid model-driven framework empowered data reconstruction needs further improvement. Some works
 by a temporal prediction network and a data reconstruction conducted an anomaly detection scheme based on the paradigm
 network for robust anomaly detection. of hybrid models [6], [19], but the error-based methods for
868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I details in Section III-B), allowing the model to learn the temporal
 LIST OF SYMBOLS
 dependency and inter-channel correlation features of MTS in a
 normal pattern. After training, the model will provide anomaly
 score for each observation in the training set and employ an
 adaptive threshold selection strategy to generate the anomaly
 threshold TS for the online anomaly detection.
 Online anomaly detection: After training, the model is able
 to detect the MTS input in real-time and assign a score to
 each observation. Observations with scores over the threshold
 determined in offline training are considered anomalous.

 B. Design of HybridAD
 As shown in Fig. 3, this article proposes a probability densitybased anomaly detection model combined with temporal prediction and data reconstruction to address the challenges in MTS
 anomaly detection. The data pre-processing module divides the
 MTS into a set of sequences based on the specified window size.
 The feature extraction network permits the efficient extraction of
 temporal dependency and inter-channel correlation. Finally, the
 joint optimization of the anomaly detection model is achieved by
 feeding the fused embeddings to the data reconstruction network
 and the temporal prediction network, respectively.
 Feature Extraction Network: To extract the inter-channel
 correlation and temporal dependency of MTS simultaneously,
 the feature extraction network employs a GRU module and
 a one-dimensional convolutional neural module. In particular,
 the GRU module is used to obtain inter-channel embedding, and
 the length L of the compressed series remains constant while the
Fig. 2. Overall process of unsupervised anomaly detection for MTS. It consists
of an offline training phase and an online detection phase. number of dimensions decreases to M  (M  < M ). The onedimensional convolutional module is used to obtain temporal
 embedding with a fixed number of dimensions, and the length
anomaly detection faced challenges in distinguishing anomalies
 of the series decreases to L (L < L). With the inter-channel
of different scales. Inspired by GAN [28] that enables the model
 embedding hch and temporal embedding htp as input to the fully
to fit the target distribution of any dataset through adversarial
 connected layer, the embedding fusion is performed. Then the
training, [18], [29], [30] proposed a GAN-based model to perfused embedding ht is fed to the temporal prediction network
form anomaly detection for time series. However, the instability
 and data reconstruction network to achieve joint optimization.
of the adversarial training may hinder the efficiency and effec-
 Temporal Prediction Network: One of the typical ways used in
tiveness of anomaly detection in practice.
 temporal prediction-based anomaly detection model updating is
 based on the prediction error. In contrast to the majority of tem-
 III. METHODOLOGY
 poral prediction-based anomaly detection models, HybridAD
 In this section, we present the overall process of unsupervised employs maximum likelihood estimation to fit the probability
anomaly detection for MTS and introduce the design of the pro- distribution of future observations, and the model’s output is the
posed anomaly detection model HybridAD in detail. In addition, probability density of the observation under that distribution.
we also provide an anomaly scoring mechanism and a threshold Similar to other works on probability prediction by assuming
selection strategy, which make significant influence on model’s an underlying distribution of the time series [31], [32], in our
performance. For clarity, Table I lists all the symbols frequently work, we assume that each feature of the future observation
used in this article. xt+1 = [x1t+1 , x2t+1 , . . . , xM
 t+1 ] follows a Gaussian distribution
 N (μxit+1 , σxit+1 ), where i represents the ith feature of xt+1
A. Overview and i ≤ M . The loss function of the temporal prediction-based
 The workflow of our anomaly detection system involves two model is defined as the negative logarithm of the likelihood
phases: offline model training and online anomaly detection function:
(as depicted in Fig. 2). 
 M  
 Offline model training: During this phase, the data pre- Losspre = − log p xit+1 | μxit+1 , σxit+1 , (1)
 i=0
processing module receives a MTS and outputs a set of sequences (after window slicing and data normalization), each where μxit+1 and σxit+1 are the mean and standard deviation of
of which is formatted as Wt = {xt−L+1 , . . . , xt }(t ≥ L). The the distribution, obtained from a liner layer and a Softplus layer,
sequences are loaded into the model training module (which respectively.
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 869

Fig. 3. Design of hybrid anomaly detection model.

 Data reconstruction network: The data reconstruction net- that the prior distribution of the latent variable zt is a standard
work is designed based on the idea of Variational Autoen- Gaussian distribution, the KL divergence of the two distributions
coder [33]. In this work, the feature extraction network and data above is calculated as (where ‘ ∼ ‘ denotes qφ (zt | Wt )pθ (zt )):
reconstruction network are combined to form a complete vari-
 1  
 D
ational autoencoder structure. The main component of the data
reconstruction network is a multilayer, fully-connected neural KL (∼) = − 1 + 2 log σzti − μ2zi − σz2i , (3)
 2 i=0 t t

network. Assume the prior pθ (zt ) follows a normal distribution
N (0, I), where zt is a latent representation with a reduced where D is the size of the latent variable zt . The second term in
dimension in VAE, representing a high-dimensional input Wt . (2) represents the degree of similarity between the given input
The posterior distributions of Wt and zt are described by the Wt and the reconstructed sequence, which can be calculated
 2
diagonal Gaussian distributions pθ (Wt | zt ) = N (μWt , σW t
 I) using the maximum likelihood estimation as follows (where ‘ ∼
 2
and qφ (zt | Wt ) = N (μzt , σzt I), respectively, where the pa- ‘ denotes log pθ (Wt | zt )):
rameters μ and σ 2 of the Gaussian diagonal distributions are
 ⎛ ⎞
obtained from a linear layer and a Softplus layer, respectively. t M  
 1  ⎝ 
The Softplus layer ensures that the standard deviation σ of the Ezt ∼qφ [∼] = − log p xji | μxj , σxj ⎠ . (4)
output is consistently greater than 0. A constant  is added to L j=0
 i i
 i=t−L
the Softplus layer to address the issue that the parameter σ
may be too small for training the model [26]. As input to the Based on the parameters output by the data reconstruction
decoder, the hidden state distribution is sampled to produce the network, the reconstruction probability density of the input
vector zt , which is then used to reconstruct the distribution of sample Wt can be inferred. Wt is used as a prediction source
the sequence Wt . It should be noted that the output of the VAE in for future observation xt+1 in the temporal prediction network.
this work is not the reconstructed sequence but rather the mean In this work, the reconstruction probability density of the input
and standard deviation of the distribution that the reconstructed Wt is utilized to assess the reliability of the prediction source.
sequence follows. The loss function of the data reconstruction When the prediction source Wt contains anomalies (i.e., the
network can be defined as: reconstruction probability density is below a normal level), the
 prediction result xt+1 based on the input Wt will be considered
 Lossrec = KL (qφ (zt | Wt ) pθ (zt )) unreliable. The anomaly score (to be introduced in Section II-
 + Ezt ∼qφ [log pθ (Wt | zt )] , (2) I-C) can be amplified further by integrating the reliability of
 the prediction source, thereby making the distinction between
where the first term represents the degree of similarity between anomalous and normal data more obvious and improving the
the approximate posterior distribution qφ (zt | Wt ) of the latent accuracy of anomaly detection.
variable zt and the prior distribution pθ (zt ), which can be By the joint optimization by the temporal prediction and data
calculated by using the KL divergence. Under the assumption reconstruction network, the loss of the hybrid anomaly detection
870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 the reliability of the prediction result for xt+1 is significantly de-
 Algorithm 1: HybridAD Training Algorithm.
 pendent on the proportion of normal data points in the sequence
 Input: training set Xtrain = {(Wt , xt+1 )}(t ≥ L), Wt (as the prediction source). As a result, we rectify the anomaly
 iteration epoch number N , feature extraction network score by using the reconstruction probability to measure the
 f N et, temporal prediction network pN et, data reliability of the prediction source. Moreover, we believe that
 reconstruction network reN et. data closer to the predicted point xt+1 is more crucial, so we
 Output: trained f N et, pN et, reN et employ an exponentially decaying weights approach that assigns
 1: f N et, pN et, reN et ← initialize parameters a weight di = αi−(t−L+1) to each observation in sequence Wt .
 2: n ← 1 The final reconstruction probability after weighting rectification
 3: repeat is:
 4: for (Wt , xt+1 ) in Xtrain do   
 5: ht ← f N et(Wt ) t M j
 i=t−L+1 di × j=0 p xi | μxji , σxji
 6: μxt+1 , σxt+1 ← pN et(ht ) pr = , (7)
 7: zt , μWt , σWt ← reN et(ht ) DL
 8: compute Losspre via (1)
 9: compute Lossrec via (2) where DL = ti=t−L+1 di .
 10: Loss ← Losspre + Lossrec In summary, this work provides an anomaly score mechanism
 11: f N et, pN et, reN et ← model parameters that focuses on prediction probability density while also incoroptimization according to the Loss porating the reliability of the prediction source, which allows
 12: end for the model to distinguish normal data from anomalous data more
 13: n←n+1 accurately. The anomaly score Sxt+1 for the observation xt+1
 14: until n = N is defined in this study as the negative logarithm of the product
 15: return trained f N et, pN et, reN et of the prediction source’s reconstruction probability density and
 the prediction probability density, as given in (8).

 Sxt+1 = − log (pp × pr ) . (8)
model can be calculated as:
 Loss = Losspre + Lossrec . (5) D. Threshold Selection Strategy
The training process of HybridAD model can be described in In practice, using the manual selection of score threshold in
Algorithm 1. complex anomaly detection systems not only requires expert
 knowledge but also compromises the robustness of the solution.
C. Anomaly Scoring Extreme Value Theory (EVT), a statistical theory that explores
 the extreme value law, has been applied in some anomaly
 On the basis of HybridAD, we propose an anomaly scoring
 detection work [12], [34]. Peaks Over Threshold (POT) is the
mechanism as a mixture of the prediction probability density
 second theory of EVT, which is used to fit the tail distribution of
and reconstruction probability density.
 the data probability distribution. This work uses a POT method
 Prediction probability density: For the sequence Wt =
 to concentrate on the high end of the distribution which the
{xt−L+1 , . . . , xt } with a given window size L, the temporal
 extreme values (i.e., the scores of anomalies) in the set of scores
prediction network fits the probability distribution p(xt+1 | Wt )
 follows [5], [19]. Algorithm 2 depicts the anomaly detection
of the future observation xt+1 via maximum likelihood estimaflow of the HybridAD model combined with the POT-based
tion. The anomaly score is then calculated as the probability
 threshold selection strategy. Note that applying POT to achieve
density of the observation under the distribution p(xt+1 | Wt ).
 anomaly threshold selection is not the main contribution in this
The lower the probability density, the more likely the observation
 work.
is an anomaly. Consequently, the score of the observations for
the temporal prediction model can be calculated as:
 IV. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION
 pp = p xt+1 | μxt+1 , σxt+1
 In this section, we first introduce the datasets and the evalua-
 M  
   tion metric used in our experiment (Section IV-A). We compare
 = p xit+1 | μxit+1 , σxit+1 . (6) the performance of HybridAD to that of state-of-the-art anomaly
 i=0
 detection algorithms using the F1-Score on five publicly avail-
 Reconstruction probability density: For the sequence Wt = able datasets (Section IV-B). Then, the effectiveness of the
{xt−L+1 , . . . , xt }, the data reconstruction network outputs the feature extraction network and the probability density-based
mean and standard deviation of the distribution pθ (Wt | zt ) of model are validated through a series of ablation experiments
the reconstructed sequence. Therefore, the reconstruction prob- (Section IV-C). Finally, we discuss the effect of the POT-based
ability refers to the probability density of the sequence Wt under threshold selection strategy and the hyperparameter on model’s
the distribution pθ (Wt | zt ). In the temporal prediction network, performance (Section IV-D).
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 871

 TABLE II
 OVERVIEW OF THE FIVE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATASETS

 Algorithm 2: Anomaly Detection Algorithm Based on
 HybridAD.
 Input: window length L, trained f N et, pN et and reN et, Fig. 4. Performance (with standard deviation) of HybridAD and other baseline
 methods measured in F1-Score.
 hyperparameters q and level associated with POT,
 training set Xtrain = {(Wt , xt+1 )}(t ≥ L), test set
 Xtest = {(Wt , xt+1 )}(t ≥ L). B. Performance Analysis
 Output: anomaly detection results Y = {yt+1 }(t ≥ L)
 1: Strain ← ∅ In this experiment, we compare HybridAD’s performance
 2: for (Wt , xt+1 ) in Xtrain do with both DL-based and non-DL-based methods, including
 3: ht ← cN et(Wt ) OCSVM [13], Isolation Forest (IF) [14], DAGMM [20], LSTM-
 4: μxt+1 , σxt+1 ← pN et(ht ) VAE [22], BeatGAN [18], MTAD-GAT [19], USAD [7],
 5: z, μWt , σWt ← reN et(ht ) GDN [21] algorithms, and adopt the optimal threshold for each
 6: compute Sxt+1 via (8) method when calculating the corresponding F1-Score. Table III
 7: add Sxt+1 to Strain shows the performance of all models on five datasets. Note that
 8: end for the symbol P, R and F1 in Table III denote precision, recall,
 9: th ← P OT _threshold_selection(Strain , q, level) and F1-Score, respectively, where the bold denotes the best
 10: Y ← ∅ performance and the italic denotes the second-best performance.
 11: for (Wt , xt+1 ) in Xtest do It can be seen that the proposed hybrid model-driven method
 12: ht ← f N et(Wt ) achieves the best performance on all the datasets. In addition, we
 13: μxt+1 , σxt+1 ← pN et(ht ) find that the majority of deep learning-based models (other than
 OCSVM and IF) performed well on SMD, SMAP, and MSL, as
 14: zt , μWt , σWt ← reN et(ht )
 the anomaly patterns of the sequences in these three datasets are
 15: compute Sxt+1 via (8)
 relatively simple, consisting primarily of temporal dependency
 16: if Sxt+1 > th then
 
 anomalies with substantial numerical variations in some of
 17: yt+1 ←1 dimensions. Even when the anomaly pattern is straightforward,
 18: else HybridAD outperforms the other models in terms of F1-Score.
 
 19: yt+1 ←0 For SWaT and WADI with more complex anomaly patterns,
 20: end if the performance advantage of HybridAD is more significant.
 
 21: add yt+1 to Y Especially on the WADI, only MTAD-GAT obtains better per-
 22: end for formance among all baseline models with F1-Score of 0.8811,
 23: return Y while HybridAD achieves a 10.42% performance improvement
 with an F1-Score of 0.9729. In Appendix B-D, we further
 provide significance test results for reference. As shown in
A. Datasets and Evaluation Metric
 Fig. 4, when the performance of all models is averaged across all
 In our experiments, the performance of the HybridAD model datasets, HybridAD achieves the highest average performance
is evaluated on five publicly available datasets: Secure Wa- and more excellent stability.
ter Treatment (SWaT) [35], Water Distribution (WADI) [29],
Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [5], Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite and Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) C. Ablation Study
rover [23]. The overview of each dataset is shown in Table II. 1) Effectiveness of the Feature Extraction Network: Effec-
To demonstrate the performance of the models, we mainly use tive extraction of feature information from time series is of great
F1-Score. In practice, anomalies in time series are typically importance for improving the performance of the model. In this
exhibited as successive segments of anomalous data rather than article, we designed a feature extraction network composed of a
as a single anomaly. Similar to [26], we consider an anomalous GRU network and a one-dimensional convolutional network to
sequence to be correctly detected if the model detects at least extract the inter-channel correlation and temporal dependency
one anomalous observation in the sequence, which implies that information of the time series. To verify the effectiveness of
all other anomalies in the anomalous sequence are also deemed these components, we designed three model variants. In the first
to be correctly detected. More details are in Appendix A. variant (HybridAD_Wo_T), we removed the one-dimensional
872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE OF EACH MODEL ON THE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATASETS

 Fig. 6. Variant models in ablation studies. The variant model of the network
 for data reconstruction is shown on the left, and the variant model of the network
Fig. 5. Results of ablation experiments on the effectiveness of the feature for temporal prediction is shown on the right.
extraction network.

convolutional network to make the module not explicitly extract
temporal dependency information. In the second variant (HybridAD_Wo_C), we removed the GRU network to make the
module not explicitly extract channel correlation information. In
the third variant (HybridAD_Wo_TC), we removed the entire
feature extraction module and directly input the preprocessed sequence into the prediction network and reconstruction network.
Fig. 5 shows the results of the experiment.
 The results in Fig. 5 indicate that in time series anomaly
detection tasks, extracting temporal features and using them as
 Fig. 7. Results of ablation experiments on the effectiveness of the probability
inputs to downstream models (which are temporal prediction density-based model.
and data reconstruction networks in this article) is effective
for improving model performance. As temporal dependency
 Following the modified model variants, the anomaly scoring
and inter-channel correlation are important features of MTS,
 is calculated in accordance with the Euclidean distance (ED).
considering a single feature in the model cannot achieve optimal
 This experiment takes into account only the prediction error
performance.
 (ED-Only Prediction), the reconstruction error (ED-Only Re-
 2) Effectiveness of the Probability Density-Based Model: To
 construct), and the combination of both in anomaly scoring
validate the effectiveness of probability density-based model in
 mechanism (ED-Composite), respectively. Meanwhile, the ex-
HybridAD, the probability-based prediction model is replaced
 periments additionally consider only the prediction probability
by a value-based prediction model, and its loss function is moddensity (PD-Only Prediction) and the reconstruction probabilified to (9). As shown in (10), the likelihood of the reconstructed
 ity density (PD-Only Reconstruct), respectively. More details
sequence in the data reconstruction model is modified to be
 will be presented in Appendix B-E.
accounted for by the mean square error. The structure of the
 As depicted in Fig. 7, the anomaly detection model proposed
modified model variants of data reconstruction network and
 in this article achieves superior performance on each dataset
temporal prediction network is given in Fig. 6.
 when compared to any model variant. We discover that the
 detection performance of the probability density-based temporal
 Losspre = xt+1 − x̂t+1 22 , (9)
 prediction model (PD-Only Prediction) is improved on the five
  2
   datasets when the prediction source reliability is taken into
 Lossrec = Wt − Ŵt  , (10)
 2 account. The ED-Composite model variant still performs poorly,
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 873

 Fig. 9. Sensitivity analysis of HybridAD to the number of iteration epochs.
Fig. 8. Comparison of the performance of HybridAD using the optimal threshold and the POT-based threshold, respectively. ‘PD‘ specifies the percentage of
performance degradation.
 To explore the performance of HybridAD model under different training iteration epochs, we evaluate the model pereven though taking the reliability of the prediction source into formance using F1-Score. Note that this experiment is conaccount. It can be observed that utilizing the probability-based ducted under a window size of 30. Fig. 9 demonstrates that
anomaly scoring mechanism is superior to using the error-based the HybridAD model performs well on both datasets within
one in the majority of cases, and the combination of the reliability a limited number of iteration epochs, which is indicative of
of the prediction source can improve the detection performance the inexpensive training cost of the model. However, the perof the model to some extent. formance of HybridAD on WADI fluctuates dramatically more
 than on SWaT. We analyze that this is due to the WADI’s more
 complex inter-channel features (which we know has the highest
D. Parameter Study
 number of dimensions among the five publicly available datasets
 1) Performance Degradation With POT: Without labels, it with 127 according to Table II). Consequently, improving the
is theoretically challenging for the anomaly detection model performance stability of the model on datasets with complex
to obtain the anomaly threshold when the optimal F1-Score is inter-channel features is one of the objectives in our future
achieved. As introduced in Section III-D, we apply the POT work.
method to HybridAD to implement the automatic selection Sliding Window Length: One of the most frequently addressed
of anomaly thresholds. Fig. 8 illustrates the performance of issues in time series research is how to select an appropriate
HybridAD after applying the POT-based threshold selection sliding window size under keeping the balance between model
strategy. It can be seen that the performance of the model performance and training cost. We examine the performance
on various datasets decreases in comparison to its theoreti- (i.e., precision, recall and F1-Score) of the HybridAD model
cally optimal F1-Score. Nevertheless, the performance degra- with different sliding window size settings. For each window size
dation of the model is within a tolerable range (5.81% ∼ setting, we demonstrate the performance of HybridAD across 30
8.56%), indicating that HybridAD still achieves a superior iteration epochs.
performance that is acceptable in practical anomaly detection As depicted in Fig. 10, the HybridAD model performs well
systems. on both SWaT and WADI despite varying window size settings.
 2) Hyperparameter Sensitivity: We study the sensitivity of Similar to the results of the training epoch sensitivity analysis
our HybridAD with respect to two hyperparameters, namely experiments, the performance on WADI exhibits greater varithe number of iteration epochs during training and the win- ation than on SWaT. Specifically, HybridAD performs better
dow size set during the pre-processing for MTS. Note that on WADI than on SWaT in terms of average recall but is less
the hyperparameter sensitivity analysis experiments for Hy- impressive in terms of average precision and F1-Score. This
bridAD in this article are conducted on SWaT and WADI. indicates that HybridAD has a significant capacity for learning
On the basis of the significant performance differences among complex anomaly patterns of MTS and identifying anomalies
the models on SWaT and WADI in Table III, we believe that with a higher recall. It is a satisfactory outcome for some dethe hyperparameter sensitivity analysis experiments on these tection cases where missing anomalies are prohibited. However,
two datasets can reflect the worst performance of the Hybri- the existence of the complex time series anomaly pattern may
dAD on hyperparameter sensitivity to some extent and more cause the model to incorrectly classify the normal data. Overall,
closely match the performance in complex anomaly detection the performance of the HybridAD model is still acceptable even
systems. though performance fluctuation exists. Due to the fact that real-
 Multiple Iteration Epochs: During model training, the training world anomaly detection systems place a greater emphasis on
cost increases as the greater iteration epochs required to improve model recall, the recommended settings for the sliding window
the performance of the model. This article focuses on whether on SWaT and WADI are 60 and 30, respectively, considering
or not HybridAD can achieve satisfactory performance and multiple performance metrics including recall. Although the
stability with fewer iteration epochs. performance of the proposed HybridAD on SWaT and WADI is
874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 10. Performance of HybridAD with varying sliding window sizes. Specifically, (a)∼(c) and (d)∼(f) denote the precision, recall and F1-Score of HybridAD
on SWaT and WADI, respectively, with different sliding window sizes.

comparable to that of the model in the article [29], our model an attack scenario (i.e., the test set), containing anomaly labels.
still achieves an improvement in terms of precision, recall, and Details obtained from https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/secure-
F1-Score. water-treatment-swat/.
 WADI [29], as an extended dataset of SWaT, records a total
 V. CONCLUSION of 16 days of operation data, with the first 14 days for normal
 operation and the last two days for abnormal operation under
 In this article, we propose an unsupervised, hybrid modelthe attack scenarios. Details obtained from https://itrust.sutd.
driven anomaly detection scheme targeting at complex muledu.sg/testbeds/water-distribution-wadi/.
tivariate time series. First, a feature extraction module that
 SMD [5] is a server machine dataset that records monitoremploys a GRU network and a one-dimensional convolutional
 ing data for 28 servers with a total of 33 metrics over the
neural network is designed to extract the inter-channel corcourse of 5 weeks. Details obtained from https://github.com/
relation and temporal dependency of multivariate time series
 NetManAIOps/OmniAnomaly.
for enhanced sequence embedding. To improve the robustness
 SMAP and MSL [23] are both expert labeled datasets from
of the model, we propose a hybrid anomaly detection model
 NASA containing data for 55 and 27 entities, with 25 monitored
that is jointly optimized by learning the posterior probabilmetrics per entity for SMAP and 55 monitored metrics per entity
ity distribution of incoming observations and the probability
 for MSL. Details obtained from https://github.com/khundman/
distribution of the input sequences. In addition, an anomaly
 telemanom.
scoring mechanism focused on prediction probability density
 To evaluate the performance of the models, the precision,
takes into account prediction source’s reliability which is calrecall, and F1-Score (F1 for short) are utilized and can be
culated as reconstruction probability density, thereby enhancing
 calculated as follows:
the anomaly detection performance. We evaluate our proposed
anomaly detection algorithm on five publicly available datasets, TP
 precision = , (11a)
and the experimental results show that our scheme outperforms TP + FP
the baseline models chosen in this article in terms of F1-Score, TP
with a maximum performance improvement of 10.42%. We recall = , (11b)
 TP + FN
also empirically demonstrate that HybridAD only experiences
minor performance loss given a sub-optimal threshold and that 2 × precision × recall
 F1 = , (11c)
our model still provides satisfactory performance given smaller precision + recall
training budgets that concern the number of training epochs and
 where TP denotes the number of correctly detected anomalous
the input sequence length.
 data, and FP denotes the number of normal data identified as
 anomalous, and FN denotes the number of anomalous data
 APPENDIX A
 identified as normal. In practice, anomalies in time series are
 DETAILS OF DATASETS AND EVALUATION METRICS typically exhibited as successive segments of anomalous data
 SWaT [35] records a total of 11 days of operational data from rather than as a single anomaly. The schematic diagram of
the industrial water treatment plant, with the first 7 days in nor- prediction adjustment strategy mentioned in Section IV-A is
mal operation mode (i.e., the training set) and the last 4 days in depicted in Fig. 11.
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 875

 TABLE VI
 RESOURCE COST OF HYBRIDAD

Fig. 11. Demonstration of prediction adjustment strategy.

 TABLE IV
 MODEL PARAMETERS TABLE

 the total number of epochs for model training is set to 30, and
 the prediction step size is set to 1. In addition to the above
 parameters, the parameter optimizer of the model is Adam on
 all datasets, and the learning rate is set to 0.001. The validation
 sets of SWaT, WADI, and SMD account for 10% of each dataset,
 and for SMAP and MSL, where the number of data samples is
 TABLE V relatively small, the percentage is set to 30%.
 TRAINING PARAMETERS TABLE

 B. Resource Cost
 In order to better demonstrate the resource costs of HybridAD
 in practical applications, we recorded the model parameter size,
 time cost per training epoch, time cost for outputting anomaly
 scores for each observation point, and GPU memory usage of
 HybridAD on five datasets, as shown in Table VI. The number
 APPENDIX B of model parameters is related to the size of the input window
 DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTS and the number of channels. A larger window size and more
 channels will result in a larger number of model parameters.
A. Experimental Setup GPU memory usage is related to the batch size setting. A larger
 Our experiments are conducted on a machine equipped with batch size will result in larger memory usage. All of the above
a 16-cores CPU (model: Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ factors will lead to longer training time for each epoch of the
2.30 GHz), a GPU (model: Nvidia Tesla T4), and 256 GB of model. Nevertheless, according to Section IV-D2, we know that
memory. The HybridAD model is implemented on the platform HybridAD can achieve good detection performance in a few
with Python 3.9.7 and Pytorch 1.10. Tables IV and V list the training iterations, so the training time cost of HybridAD on
model parameters and training parameters, respectively. Spe- these five datasets is acceptable. At the same time, HybridAD
cially in Table IV, the Conv1d(Kernel, Stride) denotes the param- requires very little time to score each observation point, enabling
eter of the one-dimensional convolutional neural network. The it to detect more data points within a given time frame.
inter-channel embedding size denotes the size of compressed
dimensions M  . The VAE latent variable size denotes the size C. Baseline Algorithms Implementation
of the latent variable z in the VAE model. The q and level are OCSVM [13] and Isolation Forest [14] use the existing imhyperparameters associated with POT. q denotes the expected plementation of scikit-learn. MTAD-GAT [19] comes from a
probability that the anomaly score exceeds the initial threshold. Github implementation on https://github.com/ML4ITS/mtad-
The level denotes the quantile, while (1 − level) × Ntrain rep- gat-pytorch. USAD [7] comes from a Github implementation on
resents the number of samples with scores exceeding the initial https://github.com/manigalati/usad. GDN [21] comes from the
threshold. authors’ implementation on https://github.com/d-ailin/GDN.
 Additional configurations are explained as follows. The num- The rest of the DL-based learning models [18], [20], [22] are
ber of layers of the one-dimensional convolutional neural net- implemented followed their papers on the platform of Pytorch
work used to obtain the temporal embedding is 3. The activation 1.10.
functions are all designed as ReLU functions, and the Batch
Normalization module is added to stabilize the training of the
 D. Further Performance Analysis
model. The inter-channel embedding is obtained using a GRU
network of 1 layer with 128 hidden units. The body of both Results in Table III reveals that traditional anomaly detection
temporal prediction network and the data reconstruction network algorithms such as OCSVM [13] and IF [14] are not good options
(i.e., the hidden dense layer) is a three-layer fully connected for complex anomaly detection for MTS due to their inherent
neural network with the structure (512, 256, 128), and the restricted learning ability. DAGMM [20] focuses on anomaly
activation function is ReLU. The Batch Normalization module detection for multidimensional data, but in time series anomaly
is also implemented. The parameter  is set to 0.001 in the detection, it only analyzes the current point of observation and
Softplus layer. For the training parameters not listed in Table V, disregards historical information. However, it is essential to
876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE VII in the dataset and the complexity of the anomaly patterns. At
 PERFORMANCE SIGNIFICANCE ANALYSIS EXPERIMENT
 the same time, we can see that deep learning-based anomaly detection models have greatly improved performance compared to
 traditional anomaly detection models (such as IF and OCSVM),
 which means that deep learning models still have great research
 value in anomaly detection tasks.

 E. Details of the Ablation Experiment
 In Section IV-C2, we designed five model variants to verify
 the effectiveness of the probability density model designed
 in HybridAD. Each variant corresponds to an anomaly score
 (which is strongly correlated with the model design). The first
consider temporal dependency in the time series research. The
 three value-based model variants (ED-Only Prediction, ED-
LSTM-VAE [22] model combines LSTM and VAE, but it only
 Only Reconstruct, ED-Composite) typically calculate anomaly
considers the current moment zt in the distribution of latent
 scores as the Euclidean distance between the model’s output
variables, which limits the decoder’s ability in the reconstruction
 and the actual observation values. The latter two probability
of the data and consequently affects anomaly detection perfordensity-based model variants (PD-Only Prediction, PD-Only
mance. BeatGAN [18] and USAD [7] are based on the adver-
 Reconstruct) calculate anomaly scores as the negative logarithm
sarial training in GAN model, but their performance in anomaly
 of the probability density of the actual observation values under
detection is unreliable due to adversarial training being unstable
 the distribution output by the model. The specific definitions of
and prone to pattern collapse. Both the MTAD-GAT [19] and
 the anomaly scores in each model variant are shown below.
the GDN [21] models are based on graph neural networks,
 ED-Only Prediction: The anomaly score takes into account
which have recently gained popularity. MTAD-GAT is a hybrid
 only the prediction error, which is the mean square error beanomaly detection model that combines temporal prediction and
 tween predicted and actual observations for each dimension, as
data reconstruction. In addition, it integrates prediction error and
 demonstrated by (12).
reconstruction error for anomaly scoring, thereby strengthening
 M
the model’s robustness. However, the error-based anomaly scor- 1  i 2
ing mechanism is verified inferior to the probability-based one Sxt+1 = x̂t+1 − xit+1 , (12)
 M i=1
through the ablation experiments.
 At the same time, we found that the performance of HybridAD where M is the dimension size of the sequence.
on the SMD, SMAP, and MSL datasets was not significantly ED-Only Reconstruct: The anomaly score only takes recondifferent from that of some baseline models. Therefore, in order struction error into account. As shown in (13), the error of the
to give a more objective and comprehensive display of the observation at the moment t in the reconstruction sequence is
performance of HybridAD, we used the Mann-Whitney Test [36] utilized as the anomaly score in this work.
(which is a non-parametric statistical test) to verify whether the
 M
performance difference between HybridAD and other baseline 1  i 2
 Sx t = x̂t − xit . (13)
models on the five datasets is significant. The significance level M i=1
was set to 0.05. Specifically, we conducted 10 repeated experiments for each model on each dataset and collected the best ED-Composite: This anomaly score takes into account the
performance of the model in each experiment as its optimal per- reliability of the prediction source, which is calculated as the
formance. Table VII shows whether the performance difference sum of the weighted reconstruction error and the prediction error
between HybridAD and multiple baseline models is significant of the sequence, as shown in (14).
or not significant on the five datasets. ‘*’ indicates that the perfor-  2
 t M j j
mance improvement of HybridAD on that dataset is significant, i=t−L+1 di × j=1 x̂i − xi
 Sxt+1 =
‘=’ indicates that the performance improvement of HybridAD DL
on that dataset is not significant. Moreover, we further divided M
the significant combinations (where p-value < 0.05) into three 1  i 2
 + x̂ − xit+1 , (14)
categories based on the magnitude of the calculated p-values M i=1 t+1
using the Mann-Whitney Test: strongly significant (p-value <
0.001, denoted by ‘***’), moderately significant (where 0.001 where di = αi−(t−L+1) and DL = ti=t−L+1 di . In experi-
< p-value < 0.01, denoted by ‘**’), and marginally significant ment, α is a constant set to 1.25.
(where 0.01 < p-value < 0.05, denoted by ‘*’). PD-Only Prediction: The anomaly score considers only the
 We can see that HybridAD has significant performance im- prediction probability density, as specified in (15).
provement over other baseline models on the SWaT and WADI
 Sxt+1 = − log p xt+1 | μxt+1 , σxt+1 . (15)
datasets, while on the other three datasets, models such as
LSTM-VAE and MTAD-GAT also exhibit comparable perfor- PD-Only Reconstruction: The anomaly score considers only
mance. This phenomenon is related to the distribution of data the reconstruction probability density and is defined as the
LIN et al.: HYBRIDAD: A HYBRID MODEL-DRIVEN ANOMALY DETECTION APPROACH FOR MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES 877

reconstruction probability density of the observation xt in the [24] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
reconstructed sequence Wt , as given in (16). “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2020,
 pp. 4322–4326.
 Sxt+1 = − log p (xt | μxt , σxt ) . (16) [25] M. Abdelaty, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, “DAICS: A deep
 learning solution for anomaly detection in industrial control systems,”
 IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1117–1129,
 REFERENCES Apr.–Jun. 2022.
 [26] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
 [1] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
 for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
 Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
 2018, pp. 187–196.
 [2] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for anomaly
 [27] S. Zhang et al., “Efficient KPI anomaly detection through transfer learning
 detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, pp. 1–38, 2021.
 for large-scale web services,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 8,
 [3] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation
 pp. 2440–2455, Aug. 2022.
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th
 [28] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 2672–2680.
 [4] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on
 [29] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multioutlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
 variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
 pp. 1–33, 2021.
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 703–716.
 [5] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 [30] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interdetection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 pretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [31] Y. Wang, A. Smola, D. Maddix, J. Gasthaus, D. Foster, and T.
 [6] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 Januschowski, “Deep factors for forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 Learn., 2019, pp. 6607–6617.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 [32] D. Salinas, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, and T. Januschowski, “DeepAR:
 [7] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive recurrent networks,” Int. J.
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 Forecasting, vol. 36, pp. 1181–1191, 2020.
 Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 [33] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” 2013,
 pp. 3395–3404.
 arXiv:1312.6114.
 [8] J. Hou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, S. Pu, and H. Zhou,
 [34] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
 “Divide-and-assemble: Learning block-wise memory for unsupervised
 in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
 pp. 8791–8800.
 [35] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 [9] T. Kieu et al., “Anomaly detection in time series with robust variational
 for research and training on ics security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop
 quasi-recurrent autoencoders,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Conf. Data Eng.,
 Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
 2022, pp. 1342–1354.
 [36] P. E. McKnight and J. Najab, “Mann-whitney U test,” in The Corsini
[10] W. Wu et al., “Developing an unsupervised real-time anomaly detection
 Encyclopedia of Psychology, Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2010. [Online].
 scheme for time series with multi-seasonality,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0524
 Eng., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 4147–4160, Sep. 2022.
[11] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[12] H. Ringberg, A. Soule, J. Rexford, and C. Diot, “Sensitivity of PCA for
 traffic anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS Int. Conf. Meas.
 Model. Comput. Syst., 2007, pp. 109–120.
[13] K.-L. Li, H.-K. Huang, S.-F. Tian, and W. Xu, “Improving one-class SVM Weiwei Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Cybern., 2003, M.S. degrees from Nanchang University, Nanchang,
 pp. 3077–3081. China, in 2001 and 2004, respectively, and the Ph.D.
[14] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE degree in computer application from the South China
 8th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in
[15] P. Malhotra, L. Vig, G. Shroff, and P. Agarwal, “Long short term memory 2007. He is currently a Professor with the School
 networks for anomaly detection in time series,” in Proc. 23rd Eur. Symp. of Computer Science and Engineering, South China
 Artif. Neural Netw., Comput. Intell. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 89–94. University of Technology. His research interests in-
[16] Z. Xiao, X. Xu, H. Xing, S. Luo, P. Dai, and D. Zhan, “RTFN: A robust clude distributed systems, cloud computing, Big Data
 temporal feature network for time series classification,” Inf. Sci., vol. 571, computing, and AI application technologies. He has
 pp. 65–86, 2021. authored or coauthored more than 150 papers in refer-
[17] L. Zhong, L. Hu, and H. Zhou, “Deep learning based multi-temporal crop eed journals and conference proceedings. He is the reviewers for many internaclassification,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 221, pp. 430–443, 2019. tional journals, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS, IEEE TRANS-
[18] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous ACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CLOUD COMrhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. 28th PUTING.
 Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439.
[19] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850.
[20] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018, pp. 1–19.
 Songbo Wang received the bachelor’s degree in 2021
[21] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 from the South China University of Technology,
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 Guangzhou, China, where he is currently working topp. 4027–4035.
 ward the master’s degree in computer technology with
[22] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
 the School of Computer Science and Engineering. His
 robot-assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder,” IEEE
 research interests include Big Data computing and
 Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 anomaly detection.
[23] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EMERGING TOPICS IN COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 8, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Wentai Wu (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s Albert Y. Zomaya (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a
 and master’s degrees from the South China Univer- Peter Nicol Russell Chair Professor of computer scisity of Technology, Guangzhou, China, in 2015 and ence and the Director of the Centre for Distributed
 2018, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer and High-Performance Computing, The University of
 science from the University of Warwick, Coventry, Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia. To date, he has au-
 U.K., in 2022, Sponsored by CSC. He is currently thored or coauthored more than 700 scientific papers
 an Assistant Researcher with Peng Cheng Labora- and articles and is the (co-)author/Editor of more than
 tory, Shenzhen, China. His main research interests 30 books. As a sought-after speaker, he has delivered
 include distributed systems, federated learning, and more than 250 keynote addresses, invited seminars,
 sustainable computing. He is a reviewer for multiple and media briefings. His research interests include
 high-impact journals and conferences, such as IEEE parallel and distributed computing, networking, and
TRANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSAC- complex systems. He is the Editor in Chief of the ACM Computing Surveys
TIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE COM- and was the Editor in Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTERS during
PUTING, International Conference on Machine Learning, and NeurIPS. 2010–2014, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE COMPUTING during
 2016–2020. He is a decorated scholar with numerous accolades, including
 Fellowship of the IEEE, American Association for the Advancement of Science,
 and the Institution of Engineering and Technology. He is also a Fellow of the
 Australian Academy of Science, Royal Society of New South Wales, Foreign
 Member of Academia Europaea, and Member of the European Academy of
 Dongdong Li received the M.S. degree with the Col- Sciences and Arts. He is a Clarivate 2022 Highly Cited Researcher.
 lege of Mathematics, Physics and Electronic Information Engineering, Wenzhou University, Wenzhou,
 China, in 2019. He is currently working toward the
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer Science
 and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China. His general research interests include federated learning, bioinformatics, and
 machine learning.