This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 1

 I2RNN: An Incremental and Interpretable
 Recurrent Neural Network for Encrypted Traffic
 Classification
 Zhuoxue Song, Ziming Zhao, Fan Zhang , Member, IEEE, Gang Xiong,
 Guang Cheng, Member, IEEE, Xinjie Zhao , and Shize Guo

 Abstract—Traffic classification occupies a significant role in cybersecurity and network management. The widespread of encryption
 transmission protocols such as SSL/TLS has led to the dominance of deep learning based approaches. In cybersecurity, strong
 adversaries often complicate their strategies by constantly developing emerging attacks. Meanwhile, security practitioners desire to
 grasp the reasons for inference results. However, existing deep learning approaches lack efficient adaptation for incremental traffic
 types and often have less interpretability. In this paper, we propose I2 RNN, an Incremental and Interpretable Recurrent Neural Network
 for encrypted traffic classification. The I2 RNN proposes a novel propagation process to extract the sequence fingerprints from sessions
 with local robustness. Meanwhile, this proposal provides interpretability including time-series feature attribution and inter-class
 similarity portrait. Moreover, we design I2 RNN in an incremental manner to adapt to emerging traffic types. The I2 RNN only needs to
 train an additional set of parameters for the newly added traffic type rather than retraining the whole model with the entire dataset.
 Extensive experimental results show that our I2 RNN can achieve remarkable performance in traffic classification, incremental learning,
 and model interpretability. Compared with other local interpretability methods, our I2 RNN exhibits excellent stability, robustness, and
 effectiveness in the interpretation of network traffic data.

 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, incremental learning, interpretability, recurrent neural network

 ✦

1 I NTRODUCTION

T RAFFIC classification is important to the entire
 network for many different purposes, such as network
management, Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees, and
 Therefore, the classification of encrypted traffic has attracted
 great attention in both academia and industry [6].
 Previous traffic classification methods can be roughly
cybersecurity [1], [2], [3]. Over the last decades, the divided into four main categories: port-based [7], payloadvolume of traffic starts to be encrypted by application-layer based [8], [9], machine-learning-based (ML-based) [10],
encryption transmission protocols, such as Secure Socket [11], and deep-learning-based (DL-based) [12], [13]. The
Layer/Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) [4], [5]. Such wide adoption of traffic encryption techniques, such as
encryption technology protects the privacy of Internet users, the SSL/TLS protocols, causes traditional port-based and
yet it provides attackers chances to evade firewall detection payload-based methods to nearly fail. The payload values
and circumvent surveillance systems. For example, an in packets can be considered as totally randomized after
attacker may exploit encryption technology to invade and cryptographic encryption [14], which are extremely difficult
attack the system anonymously. That is to say, encryption (nearly impossible to some extent) for those port-based
technology brings new challenges to traffic identification. and payload-based methods to handle. Therefore, many
 researchers turn to ML-based and DL-based methods, which
 have become the mainstream methods for encrypted traffic
• Zhuoxue Song, Ziming Zhao, Xinjie Zhao, and Shize Guo are
 with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
 classification nowadays.
 University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China. E-mail: {songzhuoxue, The workflow of traffic classification with machine
 zhaoziming}@zju.edu.cn. learning mainly contains two phases, namely feature
• Fan Zhang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, engineering and model training [15]. The former is to design
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China, with ZJU-
 Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, and select statistical features from traffic flows, such as
 Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311200, with the Key Laboratory of Blockchain the average packet length, the average interval of packet
 and Cyberspace Governance of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, Zhejiang arrival time, the maximum TCP window size, etc. The
 310027, and also with Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University,
 Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314000, China. E-mail: fanzhang@zju.edu.cn.
 latter is to feed the features into a specific classification
• Gang Xiong is with the Institute of Information Engineering, model, e.g., SVM [16]. Both phases will directly affect the
 Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: eventual performance and effectiveness of the classification.
 xionggang@iie.ac.cn. Meanwhile, the ML-based method is especially dependent
• Guang Cheng is with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211189, China. E-mail: on the so-called feature selection process which requires
 chengguang@seu.edu.cn. the sophisticated experience of those experts in the area.
Manuscript received 17 Feb. 2022; revised 10 Nov. 2022. (Corresponding Therefore, many end-to-end or nearly end-to-end methods
authors: Fan Zhang and Xinjie Zhao.) based on deep learning were proposed as in demand [17],

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 2

[18]. These methods directly use the raw traffic as input and state-of-the-art methods.
fully automate the feature extraction process.
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
 Nonetheless, there are still some problems with existing
 and Section 3 list some related works and preliminaries,
state-of-the-art (SOTA) DL-based methods.
 respectively. The detailed design of I2 RNN is introduced
 (i) They are not suitable in incremental learning scenarios:
 in Section 4. Section 5 presents model interpretability.
Incremental learning refers to sequentially learning from
 In Section 6, we exhibit validation results. After a brief
data for new categories, which are available over time,
 discussion in Section 7, we conclude the paper in Section 8.
without accessing past data while preserving the learned
knowledge for old categories [19]. A fatal limitation of
current DL-based traffic classification methods lies in 2 R ELATED W ORK
assuming the training data for all categories are always 2.1 Traffic Classification
available, making them unsuitable in some real-world
 2.1.1 Unencrypted Traffic Classification
situations, where new traffic types are always emerging.
In order to append a new capability of identifying an The basic idea of unencrypted traffic classification is
additional traffic type, a common way in the previous to exploit useful information from packet headers and
works is to retrain the whole model with the entire dataset, payloads. The port-based methods classify traffic by
which will consume a lot of computing time and memory checking the TCP/UDP port number at the transport
resources. layer [7]. Unfortunately, port-hopping techniques [21] make
 (ii) They lack interpretability in modeling traffic behavior: the port-based methods ineffective. The payload-based
An interpretable model allows us to understand how it methods [8], [22] inspect the contents in packet payloads
comes to specific conclusions [20]. These DL-based traffic with a predefined rule set, and then use rule-matching
classification methods are designed as end-to-end, which results as traffic decisions. The design of the rule set affects
naturally lack interpretability. The calculation process is put the accuracy of the payload-based methods. In addition,
into a black-box setting, whose details are hard to infer. such approaches fail in encrypted traffic classification as the
Specifically, it is much more difficult to grasp the internal payloads are encrypted.
cause of inference results.
 In this paper, we propose I2 RNN, an Incremental 2.1.2 Encrypted Traffic Classification
and Interpretable Recurrent Neural Network model for In 2014, Korczynski et al. proposed an encrypted traffic
encrypted traffic classification. The I2 RNN leverages classification method based on the first-order Markov
fingerprint learning from the raw session sequences rather chain [23]. They used message-type sequences of encrypted
than manually designed features. A list of fingerprint traffic to build a first-order Markov model for classification.
modules is trained in fingerprint learning. Each fingerprint Subsequently, Shen et al. proposed a similar but improved
module is a long short-term memory unit with an encoding method based on the second-order Markov chain [24] with
layer. The fingerprint modules characterize the patterns new features including certificate length and the first packet
of sequential features and thus learn the fingerprints of length. Chang et al. combined both message type sequences
different traffic types. Particularly, (i) I2 RNN maintains a and length sequences to build Markov models and got
set of specific yet independent parameters for each traffic better performance [25]. However, all those Markov-based
type. Therefore, it only needs to train an additional set of methods are with small orders (e.g., 1 or 2) and thus they
parameters for the newly added traffic type. (ii) I2 RNN is cannot deal with the long-term relationship.
inherently interpretable with respect to time-series feature In addition to the Markov chain, many other machine
attribution and inter-class similarity portrait. It determines learning algorithms were used in encrypted traffic
the traffic type by comparing the output losses of different classification. Liu et al. proposed a semi-supervised
fingerprint modules. Therefore, by decomposing the process method for encrypted traffic classification with carefully
of losses comparison, we can provide explanations for the selected features which include the maximum, minimum,
model classification results. and average of sent and received bytes [26]. Anderson
 Our main contributions can be briefly summarized as et al. took flow metadata, packet length distribution,
below: and time distribution into consideration and analyzed
 encrypted malware traffic with the logistic regression
 • We propose I2 RNN, an incremental and interpretable algorithm [27]. However, these ML-based methods are
 recurrent neural network model for encrypted traffic especially dependent on feature selection which relies on
 classification. It learns fingerprints from the raw sophisticated experience.
 session sequences and holds local robustness. In recent years, the research on encrypted traffic
 • I2 RNN can be updated in an incremental manner. It classification is evolving towards the direction of deep
 only needs to train an additional set of parameters learning. In 2019, Chang et al. applied the recurrent neural
 for the newly added traffic type. network to the encrypted traffic classification problem
 • I2 RNN is an interpretable model. It can rank features and propose the Flow Sequence Network (FS-Net) [12].
 for each traffic type, identify important features The FS-Net is an end-to-end classification model that
 for classification, and depict the inter-class distance learns representative features from the raw packet size
 between traffic types in specific dimensions. sequences of encrypted traffic. Unlike FS-Net, TSCRNN [28]
 • I2 RNN achieves excellent results on the real-world learned from raw payloads. In 2020, Wenbo et al. proposed
 network traffic dataset and outperforms several the Flow-Based Relation Network (RBRN), which uses

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 3

the meta-learning approach to address the problems There are some well-known local interpretability methods
of encrypted traffic classification including imbalanced like LIME [39], SHAP [40], feature permutation [41], etc.
network data, model generalization, and overly dependent However, previous model interpretability algorithms are
on data size [17]. In 2021, Shen et al. utilized different mainly applicable to tabular data. The network traffic data,
graph structures (e.g., spindle-shaped, fish-shaped) as input however, is time series. Existing model interpretability
features for traffic classification [29]. In 2022, Lin et al. methods do not consider the temporal characteristics of
proposed a new traffic representation model called ET- data. Thus they may be incapable of interpreting the
BERT, which utilizes pre-training transformers and the network traffic classification task.
contextualized datagram representation to classify the
encrypted traffic [30]. However, these DL-based methods
usually lack interpretability and cannot conduct the learning
 3 P RELIMINARIES
incrementally. 3.1 Problem Definition
 Our work incorporates the idea of learning traffic The traffic classification in this paper refers to classifying
fingerprints. However, unlike the previous work modeling the encrypted traffic of sessions into specific traffic types
the fingerprints of traffic with Markov chains, we adopt with raw features of packets. Assume that there are N
LSTM to learn the fingerprints of traffic, which can deal samples and M types of traffic in total. Let the sequence
with the long-term relationship. Our work is an end-to-end (p) (p) (p)
 of the p-th sample be x(p) = [L1 , L2 , ..., LT ], where T
traffic classification network that learns fingerprints from is the time sequence length of each sample and Li ∈ Rd
 (p)
the raw session sequences. Compared with the previous is the packet feature at time step i. The traffic type of
deep-learning-based work in traffic classification [31] and x(p) is denoted as y (p) , 0 ≤ y (p) < M . We consider an
anomaly detection [32], we focus on incremental learning incremental learning scenario and aim to build an endand model interpretability. to-end incremental model ψ(x(p) ) to predict a label yˆp
 that is exactly the real label yp . Suppose that there are
2.2 Incremental Learning total S sequential stages in the learning process. We define
A variety of strategies have been explored to train the stage s as introducing the new class C s using the dataset
model incrementally [33], [34], [35]. Li et al. proposed Ds = {(x, y)|y ∈ C s }. The training samples and labels are
Learning without Forgetting (LwF), which uses the new defined as X s = {x|(x, y) ∈ Ds } and y s = {y|(x, y) ∈ Ds },
data to supervise the learning of the new tasks and to respectively. Especially, y i ∩ y j = ∅ for i ̸= j . At stage 0, a
provide unsupervised output guidance on the previous classification model ψ 0 (x(p) ) is trained on dataset X 0 with
tasks [33]. Further, Dhar et al. introduced Learning m0 classes. For stage j Pa model ψ j (x(p) ) is trained to classify
 j
without Memorizing, which extends LwF by adding a on accumulated M = q=0 |mq | classes.
distillation term based on attention maps [34]. Yanan
et al. proposed an incremental method for the instance 3.2 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
segmentation task, which uses multi-teacher networks and
achieves excellent performance on instance segmentation
 Output Softmax
datasets [35]. However, previous work on incremental
learning mainly focuses on computer vision tasks. The
 LSTM Unit LSTM Unit ... LSTM Unit
data format of network traffic is significantly different from
that of images. Therefore, existing incremental learning Input
techniques cannot be applied directly to network traffic Sequence

classification. It is both challenging and meaningful to (a) Traditional LSTM For Classification
explore incremental learning models for network traffic
classification. Output Output Output

 LSTM Unit LSTM Unit ... LSTM Unit Comparator
2.3 Model Interpretability
The model interpretability can be classified as global Input
 Sequence
interpretability and local interpretability. The global level
of interpretability is to give a holistic view of the input (b) Fingerprint LSTM For Classification
features. The output of the global interpretability is usually Fig. 1. Comparison between traditional LSTM and fingerprint LSTM.
feature ranking and selection results. Previous feature
selection algorithms can be roughly divided into three ways: The LSTM [42] is one of the most popular recurrent
filter-based, wrapper-based and embedded. Filter-based neural networks (RNNs) [43] to model sequential data.
feature selection algorithms remove features suspected to be LSTM can infer the current state based on the previous
irrelevant based on metrics such as mutual information [36]. state and the current input. Therefore, LSTM can remember
Wrapper-based feature selection algorithms iteratively select past information, which is naturally suitable for sequence
features through retraining the model across different modeling. The main weak point of the vanilla version of
feature subsets [37]. Embedded feature selection algorithms RNN is the vanishing/exploding gradient problem which
select important features as the model is trained [38]. The means cannot retain long-term information [44]. By adding
local level of interpretability is about understanding the gate units with different functions, the LSTM solves the
importance of each feature in a single prediction of a model. problem. It can control the information transformation

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 4

 Incremental Learning Classiﬁcation

 Feature Input Fingerprint Learning Unknown Trafﬁc Data
 Sessions Feature Tensors Fingerprint List
 Fingerprint Module
 Sessions
 Encoding ...
 LSTM Unit
 Trafﬁc Data of ... ... Layer
 Type A

 Fingerprint Module

 Encoding
 LSTM Unit ...
 Trafﬁc Data of ... ... Layer
 Type B
 Original
 (Stage )
 Incremental Loss
 (Stage )
 Fingerprint Module

 Encoding Comparator
 LSTM Unit
 Trafﬁc Data of ... ... Layer
 New Type

Fig. 2. Overview of I2 RNN.

between the hidden states and track the states of the input summarize the limitations and motivations as the following
sequences without using separate memory cells. two points.
 Traditionally, as shown in Fig. 1a, when LSTM is used (i) Current methods for encrypted traffic classification are not
for classification tasks, the input sequence is first fed into suitable for incremental learning. These methods assume the
the LSTM unit. Secondly, the output of the last time step training data for all categories is available at the time of
of the LSTM unit is given to the fully connected layer. initial training. However, it will always emerge new attacks
The classification results can be get after the calculation in real-world situations. This motivates us to design an
of the softmax layer. However, in this paper, we use our incremental model.
proposed fingerprint LSTM instead of traditional LSTM. As (ii) Current methods for encrypted traffic classification are not
shown in Fig 1b, the fingerprint LSTM tries to capture the interpretable. The inference process of these methods is under
fingerprints of different types. It calculates and compares the a black-box setting and lacks interpretability. However,
loss between the output of the current state and the input of we need to understand how the model comes to specific
the next time step. In the classification stage, the prediction conclusions and what the model learns.
results are determined by the fingerprint LSTM with the Based on the above limitations and motivations, we
minimum loss. There are two main benefits of fingerprint propose the I2 RNN. The two main design principles are as
LSTM. First, the traditional LSTM only uses the output of follows:
the last time step for the calculation of the fully connected (i) I2 RNN learns the fingerprints of traffic and is interpretable.
layer. Therefore, the traditional LSTM model tends to learn The training process of I2 RNN does not directly implement
the features of the subsequent input. It can be easily affected a traditional classification task. Instead, each LSTM unit
by noise in the later-arrived packets. In the contrast, the learns the fingerprint (behavioral characteristics) of the input
learning process of the fingerprint LSTM makes the output samples. In other words, at each time step, the current
of each time step (except the last time step) as close as output of each LSTM unit is as close as possible to
possible to the input of the next time step. This process the next input of the sequence. This learning process is
makes full use of all packets in a session and thus has different from the typical classification task which calculates
local robustness. Second, a fingerprint LSTM module only cross-entropy loss at the last time step as described in
characterizes the packet sequence of a specific traffic type. Section 3. We term this training process fingerprint learning.
The modeling process will not be influenced by other traffic By such replacement, our I2 RNN has local robustness
types. In the contrast, traditional LSTM may have a bias and is adaptive to imbalanced data. Moreover, we can
towards traffic types with a large number of samples. rank time-series features, identify import features in
 prediction and calculate the inter-class distance between
 different traffic types based on the learning process. These
4 P ROPOSED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ETHOD capabilities enhance the interpretability of I2 RNN and will
 be demonstrated in Section 5.
4.1 Overview
 (ii) I2 RNN is an incremental model. It contains multiple
In Section 1 and Section 3, we have discussed the limitations independent fingerprint modules. Each module maintains
of current encrypted traffic classification methods, which a set of parameters and corresponds to the fingerprint of a
motivate us to carry out further studies. Here we briefly specific traffic type. Therefore, we only need to train a set of

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 5

additional parameters for the newly introduced traffic type. features into numerical features, which are more convenient
Such a design indicates that I2 RNN could be deployed as an for computation. (ii) There may be redundant information
incremental model. in the original features. The encoding layer can reduce the
 The overview of I2 RNN is depicted in Fig. 2. The redundant information, which helps the model learn the
whole process of I2 RNN includes incremental learning fingerprints of network traffic better.
and classification. Further, the workflow of incremental Moreover, the I2 RNN maintains a fingerprint list. As
learning can be divided into feature input and incremental depicted in Fig. 2, there are multiple fingerprint modules
fingerprint learning. We will discuss each part in detail in the fingerprint list. Each fingerprint module maintains an
below. independent set of parameters that corresponds to a traffic
 type. This means that I2 RNN is designed in an incremental
4.2 Feature Input learning manner. In other words, the only thing that needs
 to be done for having the ability to recognize a new traffic
The first part is feature input. In this process, we extract type is to introduce an additional fingerprint module to
feature tensors from raw traffic data. We first split the the fingerprint list and to train this module with the new
raw traffic data of each traffic type into sessions and then traffic data. This provides I2 RNN the capability to classify
perform feature extraction on each packet in sessions. new traffic types, without retraining existing fingerprint
 For formalization, suppose we have raw traffic data D modules.
and we split it into N sessions. Each session is a sample
 The entire algorithm of incremental fingerprint learning
and is composed of bi-directional packets with the same IP,
 is exhibited in Algorithm 1.
port, and transport layer protocol. The feature tensors are
extracted from the first T packets in each session and are
composed of the packet feature vectors. Each packet feature Algorithm 1 Incremental Fingerprint Learning.
vector consists of packet length, direction, the interval of Input: X s , ψ s−1
arrival time, and values of fields in the packet header, e.g., 1: Create a new fingerprint module [ρs , Ωs ]
TTL (Time To Live), TCP flags, and TCP window size. 2: Initialize the parameters of [ρs , Ωs ] randomly
Therefore, the feature tensor of the p-th sample can be 3: for x(p) ∈ D s do
 (p) (p) (p)
denoted as x(p) = [L1 , L2 , ..., LT ], where T is the time 4: e(p) ← ρs (x(p) )
sequence length of each sample and Li
 (p)
 ∈ Rd is the d- 5: a(p) ← Ωs (e(p) )
 1 PT −1 (p) (p)
dimensional packet feature vector at time step i. 6: L(x(p) ) ← T −1 t=1 ||at − Lt+1 ||
 Particularly, the flexibility of our feature input is that 7: Calculate the gradient of parameters of [ρs , Ωs ]
we can select different features and different time sequence 8: Update the parameters of [ρs , Ωs ]
lengths for each traffic type, i.e., d and T can be different 9: end for
for various traffic types. In other words, the feature input 10: ψ s ← append [ρs , Ωs ] to the fingerprint list of ψ s−1
process is not dependent on the fixed number of traffic Output: ψ s
types. When a new traffic type is added, we can select
the appropriate features and time sequence length for this
newly added traffic type without affecting those of existing In an incremental learning scenario, we introduce a
traffic types. This property of the feature input process new traffic type using training samples X s . After the
creates the conditions for incremental fingerprint learning. incremental fingerprint learning, the previous stage model
 ψ s−1 becomes ψ s , which has the ability to classify the new
 traffic type. The first step of incremental fingerprint learning
4.3 Incremental Fingerprint Learning is to create a new fingerprint module, which consists of an
The second part is incremental fingerprint learning. In this encoding layer ρs and a fingerprint LSTM Ωs (line 1). Then
process, we learn the fingerprints of different traffic types in we randomly initialize the parameters of each component
an incremental manner. of the fingerprint module (line 2). In each iteration, we
 Different from the model training process of typical sequentially feed the training samples into the encoding
classification tasks with LSTM, I2 RNN aims to train a model layer and the fingerprint LSTM (lines 4-5). The learning
which can learn fingerprints (behavioral characteristics) of (p)
 process aims to make the output at as close as possible to
each traffic type. We call this process fingerprint learning. (p)
 the next input Lt+1 at t-th time step, where 1 ≤ t ≤ T − 1
As described in previous sections, we use fingerprint LSTM (line 6). Therefore, the loss function of the p-th sample can
instead of traditional LSTM to model the packet sequence be set as follow:
in sessions of a traffic type, which has local robustness and
is suitable for an imbalanced dataset. T −1
 1 X (p) (p)
 In addition, we add an encoding layer before fingerprint L(x(p) ) = ||a − Lt+1 || (1)
LSTM to constitute a fingerprint module. The encoding T − 1 t=1 t
layer takes the original feature tensors as input and
generates the latent representations. It simply uses a linear After the calculation of loss, we can obtain the gradient
layer with the tanh activation function. There are two of the parameters of the fingerprint module with
benefits of adding an encoding layer. (i) Some fields in backpropagation (line 7). Then we update the parameters of
the packet headers are categorical features, e.g., TCP Flags the fingerprint module (line 8). We can get the new model
(SYN, ACK, etc). The encoding layer can transform these ψ s after iterations over all training samples (line 10).

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 6

4.4 Traffic Classification
The third part is the traffic classification. When the
 Outputs
unknown traffic data arrives, we first process the data ... ... ...
with feature input, which converts the raw traffic data
into feature tensors. Then we feed feature tensors to each
fingerprint module in the fingerprint list that is trained in LSTM Unit LSTM Unit ... LSTM Unit
 Loss
 Loss
 Calculation
the incremental fingerprint learning part. Each fingerprint
module calculates the loss defined in Eq. (1). Since each
fingerprint module has learned the fingerprint of a specific Comparator
 Input
traffic type, it will output a small loss for traffic with Sequence ... ... ...
exactly the same type while giving a relatively large loss
 Zoom In
for the sample of other traffic types. Consequently, the
unknown traffic is classified as the corresponding type of
the fingerprint module with the minimum loss. This process
is represented as a comparator in Fig. 2. To formulate this
 ...
process, suppose that Li (x(p) ) represents the output loss of ... ... ...
p-th unknown traffic sample calculated by i-th fingerprint Sum Sum

module in the fingerprint list. We can classify the sample 1 T-1
as yˆp by determining the specific i which makes Li (x(p) ) ?
 =
 ?
 =
 ?
 =
 ...
 ... ... ... ...
minimum, 2 T

 yˆp = arg min Li (x(p) ) (2)
 i
 ...
 ... ... ...
5 M ODEL I NTERPRETABILITY
In the previous section, we have described the design
of I2 RNN. In this section, we elaborate on the model
interpretability of I2 RNN from the aspects of feature Fig. 3. Internal computational process of I2 RNN.
attribution and inter-class distance between traffic types.
 Our feature attribution method stems from the
5.1 Sequence Feature Attribution decomposition of the internal computational process of
Feature attribution is an important part of model I2 RNN. Fig. 3 illustrates the internal computational process
interpretability, which can be divided into global-level of I2 RNN when feeding traffic sequence data. As mentioned
attribution and local-level attribution. The result of the in Section 4, each fingerprint module is trained to learn
global level attribution is usually the feature ranking of a the fingerprint (behavioral characteristics) of a specific traffic
specific type, while the local level attribution mainly gives type and the classification result of the unknown traffic
the importance of each feature in the prediction of a single is decided by the fingerprint module with the minimum
sample. loss. At each time step, the fingerprint module outputs
 However, existing feature attribution methods are the prediction of the next time step based on the previous
mainly applicable to tabular data and are not designed input. The loss is computed according to Eq. (1). Actually,
for network traffic data, which is time series. If we want Eq. (1) is equivalent to first calculating the L2 distance
these existing feature attribution algorithms to handle the between the output vector and the next input vector at
network traffic data, we need to convert the time-series each time step and then summing the distance of each
 (p) (p)
data to tabular data. A common way to accomplish the dimension. Specifically, each dimension of at − Lt+1
above transformation is to reshape the time sequence data. jointly contributes to the overall loss in Eq. (1). Therefore,
For example, assume the time sequence data a has a total for a specific traffic type, compared the loss at a certain
of T time steps, and each time step is a d-dimensional dimension of the corresponding fingerprint module with
feature vector. We can use b = a.reshape(1, T × d) losses of other fingerprint modules at the same dimension,
to reshape the time sequence data a to tabular data b if the loss at this dimension is smaller and thus has a larger
with NumPy [45]. However, this way has two shortages. loss difference, we can say this dimension contributes more
(i) This transformation considers features at each time step to the final prediction and thus ranks higher. This is the
individually and ignores the relationship between the time basic idea of our feature attribution method. Practically, we
sequence data. (ii) Current feature ranking methods need a feed data of a specific type to all the fingerprint modules in
long computation time and have a scalability problem to the fingerprint list of I2 RNN. We calculate the sum of loss
handle the high-dimensional reshaped data [46]. difference in each dimension among fingerprint modules
 To address the feature attribution of network traffic data, and use it to represent the feature importance.
we propose an effective sequence feature attribution method For formalization, we first define the single-dimensional
based on I2 RNN. The interpretability of I2 RNN focuses on loss of a sample as
the influence of features on fingerprints in terms of time T −1
sequence. Therefore, I2 RNN provides a new perspective 1 X (p) (p)
 SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) = |a [K] − Lt+1 [K]| (3)
that illustrates the attribution of sequence features. T − 1 t=1 J,t

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 7

 t
where SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) represents the K -th dimensional fram t t tcp tcp t cp.w
loss when feeding sample x(p) into the J -th fingerprint diree.intframip.flaip.flag cp.flatgcp.fclap.flag.flags.flagcsp. .flagindowudp.leicmpicmp
 ctio erva e.le gs.d s.m ip.t s.sy gs.fi s.ac .pus rese s.ur _siz ngt .typ .cod 16
 n l n f f tl n n k h t g e h e e
module in the fingerprint list. Subsequently, we can
 Benign 10 14 12 4 13 7 9 8 5 6 15 16 11 1 3 2 14
calculate the loss difference between fingerprint modules in
 Botnet 13 12 11 5 14 4 7 9 6 8 16 15 10 3 1 2 12
the K -th dimension of a sample x(p) (abbreviated as feature
 DDoS 1 15 12 9 13 3 11 8 6 7 14 16 5 10 2 4

 Feature Ranking
loss) as follows, 10
 DoS 2 16 12 4 14 3 9 11 6 8 13 15 7 10 1 5
 M −1 FTP Patator 6 13 1 11 16 3 14 4 9 5 8 15 2 12 7 10 8
 1 X
 FL(x (p)
 , K) = ReLU (SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) Port Scan 9 6 5 13 15 4 10 8 12 11 14 16 2 7 3 1 6
 M J=0 (4) SSH Patator 3 16 8 14 15 2 12 6 11 4 10 13 1 9 5 7 4
 Brute Force 10 13 12 8 14 4 11 6 5 7 16 15 9 3 1 2
 − SL(x(p) , ψI , K)) 2
 The I -th fingerprint module only learns the fingerprint (a) Feature ranking for each traffic type.
of traffic type I , which is the corresponding type of
sample x(p) . Consequently, if I ̸= J , the overall loss direction ip.flags.mf tcp.flags.ack tcp.window_size
 frame.interval ip.ttl tcp.flags.push udp.length
LI (x(p) ) is supposed to be less than LJ (x(p) ), and K - frame.len tcp.flags.syn tcp.flags.reset icmp.type
 ip.flags.df tcp.flags.fin tcp.flags.urg icmp.code
th dimension loss SL(x(p) , ψI , K) should be less than
 Benign
SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) correspondingly. Therefore, FL(x(p) , K) is #0
usually a positive value. We use ReLU [47] to get the non- Botnet
 #4764
negative part. A larger value indicates that the feature at this DDoS
 #5133
dimension contributes more to the difference in the overall
 DoS
loss that the traffic classification relies on. Thus we consider #33838
the value FL(X I , K) as the significance of the feature at the FTP Patator
 #86237
K -th dimension of a sample x(p) . Port Scan
 #87435
 Eq. (3) and Eq. (4) define the feature importance of
 SSH Patator
a single sample, which offer local interpretability. For the #135479
global interpretability of I2 RNN, we can sum the feature Brute Force
 #136373
importance of all the samples belonging to traffic type I , 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
 X Feature Importance
 SL(X I , ψJ , K) = SL(x(p) , ψJ , K) (5) (b) Feature importance for classification of traffic samples.
 ˆ =I
 y (p)
 Fig. 4. An example of feature attribution results.
 X
 I (p)
 FL(X , K) = FL(x , K) (6)
 ˆ =I
 y (p)
 between the input traffic and the expected traffic of the
 Fig. 4 shows an example of the feature attribution fingerprint module. In the previous section, we have defined
results. Fig. 4a depicts the feature ranking results for each the single-dimensional loss SL(X I , ψJ , K) in Eq.(5), which
traffic type. Each row represents a specific traffic type. Each is the K -th dimension of the output loss when feeding traffic
column stands for a specific feature. The numbers inside data of type I into the J -th fingerprint module. Based on
the square represent the feature ranking (smaller is higher). this, we define the inter-class distance from traffic type I to
These results are interpretable from the perspective of attack traffic type J at dimension K as
principles. For example, from Fig. 4a, we can see that the
direction is the significant feature for DDoS and DoS. This DI(I, J, K) = ReLU (SL(X I , ψJ , K) − SL(X I , ψI , K))
is because the communication pattern of these two traffic (7)
types is mainly the attacker (the client) sending a flood of The inter-class distance actually reflects the similarity
packets to the server. Fig. 4b shows the feature importance between traffic types. Considering that the distance is
of samples, illustrating which features contribute more to always the non-negative value, we use ReLU to extract
the classification results. The numbers on the y-axis are the non-negative part. If we take each traffic type as a
indexes of the selected sample on the dataset. It facilitates us point and express the distance between the traffic types
to understand how the model comes to the final prediction as an edge between the points, we can draw the distance
results. Take the FTP Patator #86237 as an example, we map on a two-dimensional plane. Note that in general
can see that the frame.len plays an important role in the DI(I, J, K) ̸= DI(J, I, K) and thus the distance map
classification. This is mainly because the purpose of the FTP should be a directed graph.
Patator is to keep trying to decipher the password of the FTP Fig. 5 shows an example of the inter-class distance
server. Meanwhile, the packet length of the authentication between traffic types. We use a larger linewidth to represent
process in FTP is always a fixed value. a smaller inter-class distance. In each subfigure, the red
 and blue lines indicate the largest and smallest inter-class
 distances, respectively. Due to the page limitation, we only
5.2 Inter-Class Distance between Traffic Types present the inter-class distance in the dimension of direction
According to our design of fingerprint learning, the and in all features. We find the results are rational. For
fingerprint module will output a larger loss if we feed example, we can see that Port Scan and Brute Force are
traffic data whose type is not the corresponding type of the close in direction. This is mainly because the behavior of
fingerprint module. In other words, the loss is the distance these two traffic types is similar, i.e., attempting to access

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 8

 ranking [37], and random forest feature ranking [38].
 Since these methods cannot be performed on time-series
 features directly, we first reshape the time-series data into
 tabular data as mentioned in Section 5.1. Then we calculate
 the feature importance on the reshaped data with these
 methods respectively. Finally, we restore the results of feature
 importance to the corresponding time-series features to
 obtain the feature ranking of the original features. The
 process restore is to accumulate the feature importance
 (
 a)Di
 stancei
 ndi
 reci
 ton. (
 b)Di
 stancei l
 nalf ur
 eat es.
 of corresponding features on the reshaped data, for each
 feature of the original time-series data.
Fig. 5. An example of the inter-class distance between traffic types. In terms of local interpretability, we compare the
 performance of our proposed method against well-known
 methods, including LIME [39], SHAP [40], and Feature
information about the server by sending massive packets Permutation [41].
to the target in a short time. DoS and DDoS are close
to each other in all features due to their similar attack 6.1.3 Implementation Details
behaviors. Particularly, Benign and Botnet are the closest in The time sequence length of each LSTM unit is set as
direction because they are both bidirectional communication 32. We set the dimension of the encoding layer as 8. The
between the client and servers. In contrast, DoS and Benign dimension of hidden states of each fingerprint LSTM is set
are the farthest in direction as the DoS traffic is usually as 16. The Adam optimizer [53] with a learning rate of
from clients to the target server while Benign contains 0.001 is used. Our proposed method I2 RNN is implemented
bidirectional flows. Moreover, we can observe that Botnet with PyTorch. We use scikit-learn [54] to implement other
and Brute Force are the closest while Port Scan and SSH compared methods. The compared local interpretability
Patator are the farthest in all features. Inspired by this result, methods are the implementation from Captum [55]. All
we try to group the traffic types with close distances to a experiments in this paper are conducted using a 12-core PC
new individual type, which may reduce the struggle of the with an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1070 GPU, 128GB of RAM,
model to distinguish between similar types and improve the and Ubuntu 16.04 LTS.
classification performance of the model. The details of this
experiment can be found in Section 6.4.3. 6.1.4 Evaluation Metrics
 We evaluate the classification performance of I2 RNN with
6 E VALUATION other baselines in terms of Accuracy (AC), Precision (PR),
In this section, we present the experimental settings and the Recall (RC), and F1-Score (F1) [17]. Macro Average [56]
evaluation results of the proposed I2 RNN. is used to avoid biased results due to imbalance between
 multiple categories of data by calculating the mean value of
6.1 Experimental Settings AC, PR, RC, and F1 of each category.
 The performance of local interpretability will
6.1.1 Datasets
 be evaluated in terms of stability, robustness, and
We evaluate the proposed I2 RNN on two public effectiveness [20].
datasets CIC-IDS2017 dataset [48] and ISCXVPN2016 traffic
dataset [49], respectively. The first dataset contains the
hybrid of encrypted and unencrypted network traffic across 6.2 Evaluation of Classification
five days, which can be divided into 8 classes, Benign, In this section, we evaluate I2 RNN and baseline
FTP Patator, SSH Patator, DoS, Web Brute Force, Botnet, classification methods with the 5-fold cross-validation.
Port Scan, and DDoS respectively. The second dataset
contains pure encrypted traffic, which is composed of 6.2.1 Effectiveness of the Fingerprint Learning
14 applications, e.g., Facebook, Netflix, Skype, etc. The In order to show the effectiveness of fingerprint learning,
applications are encrypted with various security protocols, we plot the distribution of losses output by each fingerprint
including HTTPS, SSH, and proprietary protocols. Both two module when feeding traffic data of different types. Each
datasets are imbalanced. For example, in the CIC-IDS2017 subfigure in Fig. 6 shows the kernel density estimation
dataset, Port Scan accounts for 35.07%, while Botnet only (KDE) [57] of the distribution of losses (due to page
accounts for 0.27%. In the ISCXVPN2016 traffic dataset, limitation we do not show all results). The losses of samples
Email accounts for 16.89%, while SFTP only accounts for whose types are exactly the corresponding type of the
0.65%. fingerprint module (red rectangle part) are significantly
 lower than that of other types (x-axis). It demonstrates that
6.1.2 Baselines each fingerprint module in the fingerprint list of I2 RNN can
We compare I2 RNN against various baseline works for learn the fingerprint of the corresponding traffic type well. In
encrypted traffic classification, including KNN [50], RF [51], other words, the core idea of I2 RNN described in Section 4
MLP [52], LSTM [6], and FS-Net [12]. is effective.
 We compare our global feature ranking method against Table 1 and Table 2 show the classification results.
the mutual information feature ranking [36], RFE feature It is clear that I2 RNN achieves significant classification

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 9

 a)Beni
 ( gn (
 b)DoS at
 c)FTPPat
 ( or d)Por
 ( tScan (
 e)SSHPat
 ator

Fig. 6. KDE of losses output by fingerprint modules when feeding different types of traffic data on CIC-IDS2017.

performance and outperforms all other methods in both
traffic datasets. The KNN, RF, and MLP are designed 99
to learn from the tabular data. They cannot model the 98 95

 Accuracy (%)

 F1-Score (%)
context information in the sequence data and thus perform 97 90
worse than I2 RNN. The I2 RNN has a better classification 85
 96
performance than LSTM and FS-Net, especially in F1-Score.
 95 Traditional LSTM 80 Traditional LSTM
It is mainly because both datasets are imbalanced. The Fingerprint LSTM Fingerprint LSTM
I2 RNN leverages the advantage of fingerprint learning, i.e., 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 750.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
each fingerprint module is only responsible for identifying
one traffic type. Thus it will not be confused by different
traffic fingerprints and is suitable for imbalanced data. Fig. 7. Comparison results of traditional LSTM and fingerprint LSTM on
 CIC-IDS2017 with different perturbation ratios β .

 TABLE 1
 Comparison Results of Different Classification Methods on
 CIC-IDS2017 dataset 6.2.3 Ablation Study of the Encoding Layer
 To verify the effectiveness of the encoding layer, we train a
 Method AC PR RC F1 variant version of I2 RNN without the encoding layer (EL),
 I2RNN 0.9897 0.9864 0.9859 0.9861
 I2RNN w/o EL 0.9769 0.9752 0.9729 0.9766 which is termed as I2 RNN w/o EL in Table 1 and Table 2. We
 KNN [50] 0.9579 0.8886 0.8891 0.8886 can see that the I2 RNN with the encoding layer has a better
 RF [51] 0.9698 0.9692 0.9621 0.9629 performance than the variant version of I2 RNN without
 MLP [52] 0.9699 0.9699 0.9693 0.9630
 the encoding layer. This result indicates that the encoding
 LSTM [6] 0.9649 0.7961 0.8560 0.8124
 FS-Net [12] 0.9526 0.4721 0.4439 0.4218 layer has effects on categorical feature transformation and
 redundant information reduction.

 TABLE 2
 Comparison Results of Different Classification Methods on 6.3 Evaluation of Incremental Learning
 ISCXVPN2016 dataset
 6.3.1 Comparison of Training Time and Preserved Data
 Method AC PR RC F1 Size
 I2RNN 0.9393 0.9068 0.9178 0.9013 Fig. 8 presents the comparison of the training time and the
 I2RNN w/o EL 0.8922 0.8683 0.8693 0.8490
 KNN [50] 0.8799 0.7692 0.7094 0.6924
 size of data needed to be preserved when giving different
 RF [51] 0.8712 0.8742 0.8647 0.8634 numbers of incremental data. Compared to the traditional
 MLP [52] 0.8503 0.6992 0.6745 0.5540 LSTM, our proposed fingerprint LSTM is more efficient in
 LSTM [6] 0.8813 0.5213 0.5132 0.5006 training time and the size of data needed to be preserved
 FS-Net [12] 0.5230 0.0924 0.1122 0.0859
 under an incremental learning scenario.

6.2.2 Local Robustness of the Fingerprint Learning
 2.5 Traditional LSTM 30 Traditional LSTM
We compare the local robustness of the fingerprint learning Fingerprint LSTM Fingerprint LSTM
 25
 Preserved Data Size (GB)

of I2 RNN and traditional classification with LSTM when 2.0
 Train Time (×103s)

having noise in packet sequence. We add a Gaussian noise 20
 1.5
ϵ N (0, 1) with different perturbation ratios β ∈ [0, 1] to the 15
 1.0
last two packets in the packet sequence of a session. The 10
experiment results are shown in Fig. 7. When gradually 0.5 5
increasing the perturbation ratio from 0.0 to 1.0, we find 0.0 0
the accuracy and F1-Score of the fingerprint LSTM change 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
 Incremental Data Num. (×104) Incremental Data Num. (×104)
slightly while the performance of the traditional LSTM
drops sharply. This result indicates our fingerprint LSTM Fig. 8. Comparison of training time and size of data needed to be
has local robustness and is more stable in face of noises in preserved with different numbers of incremental data.
sessions.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 10

6.3.2 Classification Performance in Different Incremental Finally, we also compare the time cost of different feature
Scenario ranking methods and the results are shown in Fig. 9d. We
We verify the classification performance of I2 RNN under can see that I2 RNN uses the shortest time to rank features
different incremental learning scenarios. We consider three while other methods need a longer time to handle or are
incremental scenarios including the addition of one traffic even impossible to get results in a tolerable time (see a red
type, the addition of multiple traffic types at once, and cross in RFE). We argue that the efficiency of the feature
the sequential addition of multiple traffic types. We first ranking method is also a part of the interpretable evaluation,
sort the names of traffic types in alphabetical order. In which allows users to have quick feedback and a good user
each incremental scenario, we select the first few traffic experience.
types as the incremental traffic types and the remaining
traffic types as the initial types. Then we train the model 1.0
 1.2
to learn new traffic types according to the incremental All Group 1 Group 2
 1.0
scenarios. Table 3 shows the experiment results. In Table 3, 0.9
 0.8

 Accuracy
the symbol plus (+) means that the corresponding type

 F1-Score
 0.6 0.8
is added for incremental learning. The new means traffic
 0.4 MI
types newly added during incremental learning and the
 0.2 0.7 RF
old means traffic types before incremental learning. We I2RNN
 0.0 MI RF I2RNN 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
observe that as long as the trained traffic types are the same
 Method Feature Num.
(including those gradually added for incremental learning),
 (a) (b)
the performance of the I2 RNN will be the same. This
indicates that incremental learning of I2 RNN has the same
effect as the training model with full data at once. In other 0.95
words, our incremental learning algorithm of I2 RNN does
 0.90
not cause a degradation in classification performance. F1-Score
 0.85
 0.80 MI
 TABLE 3 RF
 Classification Performance (F1-Score) Under Different Incremental
 Learning Scenarios
 0.75
 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
 I2RNN
 X
 Feature Num.
 Scenario Total New Old (c) (d)
 +Benign 0.9861 0.9899 0.9855
 +Benign & Botnet 0.9861 0.9886 0.9852 Fig. 9. Experiment results of global model interpretability.
 +Benign & Botnet
 0.9861 0.9891 0.9829
 →+DDoS & DoS
 6.4.2 Performance Comparison of Local Interpretability
 We compare the performance of the local interpretability
 of I2 RNN with LIME [39], SHAP [40], and feature
6.4 Evaluation of Interpretability permutation (PERM) [41] in terms of stability, robustness,
For the model interpretability of I2 RNN, we first evaluate and effectiveness [20]. Stability is the fundamental metric
the global and local interpretability respectively, and then of local interpretability. The explanation results generated
the effectiveness of inter-class distance. in a critical security system should be stable. That is, the
 feature importance must not be seriously influenced by
6.4.1 Effectiveness of Global Feature Ranking the slight fluctuation of the model (e.g., n epochs = 95,
To examine the effectiveness of features ranked by different n epochs = 100, and n epochs = 105). Robustness is used to
methods, we first partition the ranked features into two measure how similar the explanation results are for similar
equal groups, that is, each group has 8 features. Then instances, i.e., the feature importance of samples of the same
we use features in each group to classify the traffic. class should be similar, while the feature importance of
The results are shown in Fig. 9a. We can observe that samples of different classes should be as distinct as possible.
the first group of I2 RNN has a better F1-Score than the Effectiveness is the measure of whether the explanation
second group. This indicates that the feature ranking of results are important to the decision-making. In other
I2 RNN is effective. Moreover, we validate the effectiveness words, if the explanation results are really the decision basis
of feature ranking by selecting a different number of for an individual prediction, then after the elimination of
features according to feature ranking results to perform such features, the classification result would be changed.
classification tasks. Fig. 9b and 9c show the experiment Fig. 10 illustrates the performance comparison of
results. Compared with other feature ranking methods, our local interpretability in terms of stability, robustness, and
method can achieve higher classification performance with effectiveness under different top-k features. From the figure,
the same number of features. This suggests that our feature we can observe that:
ranking method can choose the important features of time- • The I2 RNN shows the best stability, robustness,
series data and is more effective than other feature ranking and effectiveness compared to other methods under
methods. Particularly, using our feature ranking method different top-k features.
can achieve classification performance similar to using all • The ranking of the four local interpretability
features with only half the number of original features. approaches in term of the stability metric is I2 RNN

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 11

 some dimensions or in all features), while the performance
 1.0 LIME significantly decreases if we group traffic types with large
 0.6 SHAP
 0.8 PERM
 distances. These results indicate that our inter-class distance

 Robustness
Stability

 0.6 0.4 I2RNN is rational, which captures the relationships between traffic
 LIME types.
 0.4 SHAP 0.2
 PERM
 0.2 I2RNN
 0.0 TABLE 4
 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Experiment Results of Different Grouping Strategies
 k k
 (a) Stability (b) Robustness Grouping Strategy Distance AC (%) F1 (%)
 Botnet & Brute Force 0.65 99.95 98.90
 DDoS & DoS 1.28 99.64 98.81
 0.95 Benign & DDoS 2.67 91.24 85.31
 Effectiveness

 Port Scan & SSH Patator 7.49 79.71 80.84
 0.90
 0.85 LIME
 SHAP
 PERM
 0.80 I2RNN 7 D ISCUSSION
 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 2
 I RNN with fingerprint learning has shown a great
 k
 (c) Effectiveness
 advantage in encrypted traffic classification. It can be
 deployed as a model capable of efficient incremental
Fig. 10. Performance comparison of local interpretability. learning to cope with the ever-increasing types of traffic
 in the real world. The global level feature ranking and
 selection help eliminate unnecessary features and alleviate
 > PERM > SHAP > LIME. The stability of I2 RNN the computational overhead. Moreover, researchers and
 is above 0.8 when k ≥ 6, indicating that explanation users can understand the deep insights for the model’s
 features hardly change when slightly modifying the predictions from the local feature interpretation with high
 model. stability, robustness, and effectiveness. Besides, I2 RNN
 • The ranking of the four local interpretability profiles the differences and relations between traffic types
 approaches in term of the robustness metric is I2 RNN with the inter-class distance portrait. Users can group
 > PERM > SHAP > LIME. With the increase of k , the similar traffic types to improve classification performance in
 robustness of the four methods decreases. For SHAP practice. Below, we discuss the identification of new traffic
 and LIME, their robustness scores are lower than 0.2, types, model scalability, and limitations.
 and they hardly change under various k values. The Where do the new traffic types come from? Though
 robustness of PERM is less than 0.5. These indicate I2 RNN focuses on coping with the incremental learning
 that PERM, SHAP, and LIME cannot capture the core scenario, with the ability to incrementally learn new types
 differences between traffic types especially when k is without accessing past data and retraining the model, it is
 small. natural to think about where the new traffic types come
 • The ranking of the four local interpretability from. Currently, the newly labeled data for updating the
 approaches in term of the effectiveness metric is model are manually proposed by the same party who uses
 I2 RNN > LIME ≥ SHAP > PERM. The effectiveness the model for detection. We can obtain new application
 of LIME and SHAP is very similar. For I2 RNN, the types by collecting relevant information in the application
 effectiveness starts to be stable when k > 8. This markets such as App Store and Google Play. New types
 indicates important features of I2 RNN are in the top of attacks may be reported by researchers after analyzing
 half of the ranked features, which results in little system logs and traffic data. Some arts [58], [59] also propose
 change of predicted label with higher k values. open-set recognition for encrypted traffic classification,
 which focus on automatically recognizing and labeling
6.4.3 Effectiveness of Inter-Class Distance new traffic types. I2 RNN could leverage these methods to
To validate whether inter-class distance effectively improve the identification of new traffic types and build a
characterizes the similarity between traffic types, we more automatic incremental learning process.
group traffic types with close distance as an individual What is the scalability of the model? As the number
traffic type. As depicted in Fig. 5, Botnet and Brute Force of fingerprint modules increases, the scalability of the
are the closest in all features and thus we group them into I2 RNN may become a concern for users. Here we clarify
an individual type. We also group DDoS and DoS which the scalability of I2 RNN in terms of space and time. In
are close in all features. For a fair comparison (i.e., taking terms of space, each fingerprint module is lightweight
out the factor of category reduction), we also group traffic and does not take up too much disk space. For example,
types with large distances. We group Port Scan and SSH the number of parameters of each fingerprint module
Patator which are the farthest types in all features. Benign trained on ISXCVPN2016 is only 5334. The size of the
and DDoS are also grouped as an experiment for large hard disk space occupied by each fingerprint module is
distances. The results are shown in Table 4. We can observe only 23.17 KB. Therefore, even if the fingerprint module
that the performance is improved if we group traffic types continues to increase, there will be no obvious scalability
that have small inter-class distances (i.e., they are close in problem in space. In terms of time, since each fingerprint

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 12

module is independent, the network traffic data can be System Security, by State Key Laboratory of Mathematical
simultaneously fed into each fingerprint module for parallel Engineering and Advanced Computing, and by Key
computation. Therefore, the computing capacity practically Laboratory of Cyberspace Situation Awareness of Henan
depends on the maximum number of parallel threads Province.
the CPU allowed. Furthermore, this computational process
can be extended to distributed computing clusters using
the idea of MapReduce [60]. Fingerprint modules can be R EFERENCES
deployed on multiple computing nodes. When new traffic [1] H. Shi, H. Li, D. Zhang, C. Cheng, and X. Cao, “An efficient feature
data arrives, each computing node can calculate the loss for generation approach based on deep learning and feature selection
the input traffic in parallel. After waiting for all computing techniques for traffic classification,” Computer Networks, vol. 132,
nodes to complete the calculation, we can aggregate all pp. 81–98, 2018.
 [2] T. Bujlow, V. Carela-Español, and P. Barlet-Ros, “Independent
losses and give the final prediction results by comparing comparison of popular dpi tools for traffic classification,”
the outputs of each fingerprint module. Therefore, even if Computer Networks, vol. 76, pp. 75–89, 2015.
the fingerprint module keeps increasing, the model will also [3] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Appscanner:
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted
maintain good scalability in time.
 network traffic,” in 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
 Limitations and Future Work. There are still two Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2016, pp. 439–454.
limitations of I2 RNN. The first limitation is that the [4] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (tls)
fingerprint may be outdated over time as the behavior protocol version 1.2,” 2008.
 [5] A. Freier, P. Karlton, and P. Kocher, “The secure sockets layer (ssl)
of the corresponding traffic type may vary at different protocol version 3.0,” RFC 6101, Tech. Rep., 2011.
times. Future work can develop some systematic strategies [6] L. Vu, H. V. Thuy, Q. U. Nguyen, T. N. Ngoc, D. N. Nguyen,
to periodically update the fingerprint modules in I2 RNN. D. T. Hoang, and E. Dutkiewicz, “Time series analysis for
The second limitation is that hyper-parameters of I2 RNN encrypted traffic classification: A deep learning approach,” in 2018
 18th International Symposium on Communications and Information
are configured empirically. Future work can investigate Technologies (ISCIT). IEEE, 2018, pp. 121–126.
the sensitivity of hyper-parameters, and provide brief [7] J. McPherson, K.-L. Ma, P. Krystosk, T. Bartoletti, and
guidelines about how to configure them. M. Christensen, “Portvis: a tool for port-based detection of
 security events,” in Proceedings of the 2004 ACM workshop on
 Visualization and data mining for computer security, 2004, pp. 73–81.
 [8] M. Finsterbusch, C. Richter, E. Rocha, J.-A. Muller, and
8 C ONCLUSIONS K. Hanssgen, “A survey of payload-based traffic classification
In this paper, we have presented I2 RNN, an incremental and approaches,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16,
 no. 2, pp. 1135–1156, 2013.
interpretable recurrent neural network model for encrypted [9] A. W. Moore and K. Papagiannaki, “Toward the accurate
traffic classification. The I2 RNN learns fingerprints from identification of network applications,” in International Workshop
the raw session sequences, which has local robustness. on Passive and Active Network Measurement. Springer, 2005, pp.
The I2 RNN considers an incremental learning scenario. It 41–54.
 [10] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
only needs to train an additional set of parameters for in automated traffic analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
the newly added traffic type rather than retraining the SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2021,
whole model. Moreover, the I2 RNN is an interpretable pp. 3366–3383.
 [11] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust
model, which provides the feature attribution globally smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic
and locally. It can also depict the similarity between analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
traffic types through inter-class distance. The evaluation vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, 2017.
results on two public datasets demonstrate that our [12] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “Fs-net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in IEEE INFOCOM
I2 RNN can achieve remarkable performance in terms of 2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2019,
encrypted traffic classification, incremental learning, and pp. 1171–1179.
model interpretability. In performance comparison with [13] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
well-known local interpretability methods, our I2 RNN “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
 using deep learning,” Soft Computing, pp. 1–14, 2017.
exhibits excellent stability, robustness, and effectiveness in [14] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey
the interpretation of network traffic data. In future work, of methods for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,”
we plan to investigate effective techniques for identifying International Journal of Network Management, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 355–
 374, 2015.
new types of traffic automatically and updating the learned
 [15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
fingerprints to keep pace with the time evolution of traffic. encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution
 neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
 Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI). IEEE, 2017, pp. 43–48.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS [16] J. Platt, “Sequential minimal optimization: A fast algorithm for
 training support vector machines,” 1998.
This work was supported in part by National Key R&D [17] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A
Program of China (2020AAA0107700), by National Natural flow-based relation network for encrypted traffic classification,”
Science Foundation of China (62072398), by Alibaba- in Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, 2020, pp. 13–22.
 [18] Z. Chen, K. He, J. Li, and Y. Geng, “Seq2img: A sequence-
Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies, to-image based approach towards ip traffic classification using
by Zhejiang Key R&D Plan (2021C01116), by Leading convolutional neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE International
Innovative and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program Conference on Big Data (Big Data). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1271–1276.
of Zhejiang (2018R01005), and by Research Institute of [19] B. Cui, G. Hu, and S. Yu, “Deepcollaboration: Collaborative
 generative and discriminative models for class incremental
Cyberspace Governance in Zhejiang University, by National learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Information Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 2, 2021, pp. 1175–1183.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 13

[20] M. Fan, W. Wei, X. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Guan, and T. Liu, “Can we [41] A. Altmann, L. Toloşi, O. Sander, and T. Lengauer, “Permutation
 trust your explanations? sanity checks for interpreters in android importance: a corrected feature importance measure,”
 malware analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Bioinformatics, vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1340–1347, 2010.
 Security, vol. 16, pp. 838–853, 2021. [42] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
[21] F. Constantinou and P. Mavrommatis, “Identifying known Neural computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 and unknown peer-to-peer traffic,” in Fifth IEEE International [43] D. Mandic and J. Chambers, Recurrent neural networks for prediction:
 Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA’06). IEEE, learning algorithms, architectures and stability. Wiley, 2001.
 2006, pp. 93–102. [44] Y. Bengio, P. Simard, and P. Frasconi, “Learning long-term
[22] J. Zhang, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and Y. Wang, “Unsupervised dependencies with gradient descent is difficult,” IEEE transactions
 traffic classification using flow statistical properties and ip packet on neural networks, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157–166, 1994.
 payload,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 79, no. 5, [45] C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman et al., “Array programming with
 pp. 573–585, 2013. numpy,” Nature, vol. 585, no. 7825, pp. 357–362, 2020.
[23] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting [46] Q. Zou, J. Zeng, L. Cao, and R. Ji, “A novel features ranking
 to classify encrypted traffic,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2014-IEEE metric with application to scalable visual and bioinformatics data
 Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2014, pp. 781–789. classification,” Neurocomputing, vol. 173, pp. 346–354, 2016.
 [47] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
[24] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification boltzmann machines,” in Icml, 2010.
 of encrypted traffic with second-order markov chains and [48] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
 application attribute bigrams,” IEEE Transactions on Information generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
 Forensics and Security, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1830–1843, 2017. characterization.” ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, 2018.
[25] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “Mampf: [49] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A.
 Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute markov Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using
 probability fingerprints,” in 2018 IEEE/ACM 26th International time-related,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
 Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–10. information systems security and privacy (ICISSP). sn, 2016, pp.
[26] H. Liu, Z. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic 407–414.
 classification using composite features set,” Journal of Networks, [50] D. McGaughey, T. Semeniuk, R. Smith, and S. Knight, “A
 vol. 7, no. 8, p. 1195, 2012. systematic approach of feature selection for encrypted network
[27] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s traffic classification,” in 2018 Annual IEEE International Systems
 use of tls (without decryption),” Journal of Computer Virology and Conference (SysCon). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.
 Hacking Techniques, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 195–211, 2018. [51] Y. Zhai and X. Zheng, “Random forest based traffic classification
[28] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “Tscrnn: A novel classification scheme method in sdn,” in 2018 International Conference on Cloud
 of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for Computing, Big Data and Blockchain (ICCBB). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
 efficient management of iiot,” Computer Networks, vol. 190, p. [52] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile
 107974, 2021. encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” in 2018
[29] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate Network traffic measurement and analysis conference (TMA). IEEE,
 decentralized application identification via encrypted traffic 2018, pp. 1–8.
 analysis using graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on [53] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic
 Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021. optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
 [54] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
[30] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “Et-
 O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg,
 bert: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training
 J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot,
 transformers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of
 and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,”
 the ACM Web Conference 2022, 2022, pp. 633–642.
 Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[31] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic [55] N. Kokhlikyan, V. Miglani, M. Martin, E. Wang, B. Alsallakh,
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021 J. Reynolds, A. Melnikov, N. Kliushkina, C. Araya, S. Yan et al.,
 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, “Captum: A unified and generic model interpretability library for
 2021, pp. 3431–3446. pytorch,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07896, 2020.
[32] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly [56] C. Liu, W. Wang, M. Wang, F. Lv, and M. Konan, “An efficient
 detection and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” instance selection algorithm to reconstruct training set for support
 in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and vector machine,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 116, pp. 58–73,
 communications security, 2017, pp. 1285–1298. 2017.
[33] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE [57] B. W. Silverman, Density estimation for statistics and data analysis.
 transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40, Routledge, 2018.
 no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, 2017. [58] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Encrypted
[34] P. Dhar, R. V. Singh, K.-C. Peng, Z. Wu, and R. Chellappa, traffic classification of decentralized applications on ethereum
 “Learning without memorizing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF using feature fusion,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM 27th International
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–10.
 5138–5146. [59] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-
[35] Y. Gu, C. Deng, and K. Wei, “Class-incremental instance application filtering and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier
 segmentation via multi-teacher networks,” in Proceedings of the update,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 2, 2021, pp. Communications. IEEE, 2020, pp. 397–405.
 1478–1486. [60] J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “Mapreduce: simplified data processing
[36] A. Kraskov, H. Stögbauer, and P. Grassberger, “Estimating mutual on large clusters,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, no. 1, pp.
 information,” Physical review E, vol. 69, no. 6, p. 066138, 2004. 107–113, 2008.
[37] I. Guyon, J. Weston, S. Barnhill, and V. Vapnik, “Gene selection
 for cancer classification using support vector machines,” Machine
 learning, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 389–422, 2002.
[38] G. Louppe, “Understanding random forests: From theory to
 practice,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.7502, 2014.
[39] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “”why should I trust
 you?”: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proceedings
 of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
 Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, August 13-17,
 2016, 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[40] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting
 model predictions,” Advances in neural information processing
 systems, vol. 30, 2017.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2022 14

 Zhuoxue Song received the B.S. degree Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the
 in computer science and technology from B.S. degree in traffic engineering from Southeast
 Hangzhou Dianzi University, in 2021. He is University, Nanjing, China, in 1994, the M.S.
 currently working toward the M.S. degree in the degree in computer application from the Hefei
 security of cyberspace at Zhejiang University. University of Technology, Hefei, China, in 2000,
 His main research interests include encrypted and the Ph.D. degree in computer network from
 traffic classification and intrusion detection. Southeast University, in 2003. He is currently a
 Full Professor with the School of Cyber Science
 and Engineering, Southeast University. He has
 authored or coauthored seven monographs and
 more than 100 technical papers, including top
 journals and top conferences. His research interests include network
 security, network measurement, and traffic behavior analysis.

 Ziming Zhao received the B.S. degree
 in computer science and technology from
 Shijiazhuang Tiedao University, in 2019. He is
 currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Xinjie Zhao received the B.S., M.S., and
 security of cyberspace at Zhejiang University. Ph.D. degrees from Ordnance Engineering
 His main research interests include network College, Shijiazhuang, China, in 2006, 2009,
 security and intrusion detection. and 2012, respectively. He is currently with the
 College of Computer Science and Technology,
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. His
 main research interests include side channel
 analysis, fault analysis, and combined analysis
 in cryptography. Dr. Zhao won the best paper
 award in COSADE 2012.

 Fan Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the Department of Computer
 Science and Engineering, University of
 Connecticut, Mansfield, CT, USA, in 2011. He
 is currently a Full Professor with the College of Shize Guo received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang from Ordnance Engineering College, China, in
 University, Hangzhou, China, and also with the 1988 and 1991, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 Alibaba–Zhejiang University Joint Institute of degree from the Harbin Institute of Technology,
 Frontier Technologies, Hangzhou. His research in 1994. He is currently with the College of
 interests include system security, hardware Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
 security, network security, and cryptography. University, Hangzhou, China. His main research
 interests include information technology and
 information security.

 Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and
 Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 China. He has authored more than 60 papers in
 refereed journals and conference proceedings.
 His research interests include network and
 information security. He is a member of the 3rd
 Communication Security Technical Committee of
 China Institute of Communications.

 Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 09:03:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.