IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024 1667

 Integrating Entity Attributes for Error-Aware
 Knowledge Graph Embedding
 Qinggang Zhang , Junnan Dong , Qiaoyu Tan , and Xiao Huang

 Abstract—Knowledge graphs (KGs) can structurally organize While many KG embedding algorithms have been exlarge-scale information in the form of triples and significantly plored [8], [9], [10], the impact of erroneous triples has often
support many real-world applications. While most KG embedding been ignored. Manual construction is impractical due to the masalgorithms hold the assumption that all triples are correct, considerable errors were inevitably injected during the construction pro- sive scale of KGs. Most real-world KGs are extracted from web
cess. It is urgent to develop effective error-aware KG embedding, corpora using heuristic algorithms [3], [11], [12]. A considerable
since errors in KGs would lead to significant performance degra- number of noisy triples were inevitably introduced into KGs due
dation in downstream applications. To this end, we propose a novel to the noises in the original sources and the imperfect extraction
framework named Attributed Error-aware Knowledge Embedding algorithms [13]. For example, NELL [14] is a frequently used
(AEKE). It leverages the semantics contained in entity attributes
to guide the KG embedding model learning against the impact of KG with 2.4 million triples, with an accuracy of 74%, correerroneous triples. We design two triple-level hypergraphs to model sponding to roughly 0.6 million erroneous triples [15]. Errors
the topological structures of the KG and its attributes, respectively. in KGs would lead to significant performance degradation in
The confidence score of each triple is jointly calculated based downstream applications. Thus, it is urgent to develop effective
on self-contradictory within the triple, consistency between local error-aware KG embedding.
and global structures, and homogeneity between structures and
attributes. We leverage confidence scores to adaptively update the It is nontrivial to enable error-aware learning in KGs, given
weighted aggregation in the multi-view graph learning framework that the patterns of KG errors are unknown and diverse [16], [17],
and margin loss in KG embedding, such that potential errors will [18]. Recently, a few studies explore guiding the KG embedding
contribute little to KG learning. Experiments on three real-world model learning against the impact of erroneous triples [19], [20],
KGs demonstrate that AEKE outperforms state-of-the-art KG [21]. Particularly, Vault [22] is the first work that performs graph
embedding and error detection algorithms.
 representation learning while considering erroneous triples dur-
 Index Terms—Knowledge graph, graph neural network, ing the learning phase. It estimates a probability score of reliaanomaly detection, node representation learning. bility to determine the quality of a triple via several prior models
 fitted with existing KGs. The similar concept of judgments for
 I. INTRODUCTION each triple is also applied in CKRL [23] and NoiGAN [24]. The
 former model generates confidence scores for triples via internal
 NOWLEDGE graphs (KGs) can aggregate millions of
K relational facts in the form of triples [1], i.e, (head entity,
relation, tail entity). Examples include general-purpose KGs,
 structure information and utilizes them in representation learning to produce robust representations, while the latter improves it
 in the aspect of sample selection. The key idea of these methods
e.g., YAGO [2] and DBpedia [3], and domain-specific KGs,
 is to guide the embedding model to focus on more convincing
e.g., biomedical KGs [4] and agricultural KGs [5]. KGs are
 triples by exploiting the internal graph structures. However,
essential supporters for many knowledge-driven artificial intelmerely KG topological structures are often not effective to
ligent systems, such as KG-enhanced recommender systems [6]
 support the detection of nontrivial errors [25]. For instance,
and KG-based conversational agents [7]. Meanwhile, KG emgiven a triple {London, is_larger_than, W ashington} with
bedding has been intensively studied, which can improve the
 sparse graph structure, it is hard to know which London it refers
generalization and adaptability of KGs in downstream tasks. By
 to, since there are many cities called London. Thus, efforts
representing entities as continuous vectors and each relationship
 have been devoted to employing extra information sources,
as an operation in the same space, such as translation and
 such as related webpages [26], external knowledge bases [25]
projection, we can perform KG inference in continuous spaces
 and annotation information from crowdsourcing websites [27].
with simple numerical computations.
 But these supplemental sources are often prohibitive to acquire
 which impedes its success in practice.
 Manuscript received 6 June 2022; revised 31 July 2023; accepted 26 August
2023. Date of publication 5 September 2023; date of current version 8 March KGs are often associated with fertile and valuable attribute
2024. This work was supported by the Research Grants Council of the Hong data, describing the property of entities. Fig. 1 illustrates a
Kong Special Administrative Region, China under Grant PolyU 25208322. Rec- toy KG with six entities. Each entity contains a set of atommended for acceptance by X. Chen. (Corresponding author: Xiao Huang.)
 The authors are with the Department of Computing, Hong Kong Poly- tributes, e.g., the entity M adameCurie has an attribute list
technic University, Hong Kong (e-mail: qinggangg.zhang@connect.polyu.hk; of {birth_date, gender, nationality, language} which indihanson.dong@connect.polyu.hk; qiaoytan@polyu.edu.hk; xiaohuang@comp. cates its role as a human being, while {latitude, longitude,
polyu.edu.hk).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3310149 population, area} shows M ariaSalomea’s role as a location.

 1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

 information to depict the various levels of semantics for entities.
 (ii) It is hard to leverage the semantics learned from attributes to
 help the KG embedding model learn error-aware embeddings.
 Entity attributes can be used to implicitly portray the semantics
 of entities, but it is hard to integrate different KG components,
 i.e., entities, relations and attributes into a suitable vector space
 since they always exhibit rather distinct characteristics. Some
 existing KG embedding models attempt to integrate attributes
 into the learning framework by directly fusing the learned at-
Fig. 1. Running examples of complex errors in real-world KGs. (a) Presents tribute semantics into the entity embedding [28], [29], [30],
a KG error with mismatched head/tail entities and relations. This error can be
detected by reasoning over neighboring triples. But, real-world KGs are often [31]. However, in this fusing way, it is hard to measure the
incomplete and noisy. (b) Demonstrates a further difficult case with some key complex correlation and dependency between entity attributes
links missing. In this case, the rich semantics in entity attribute types can facilitate and knowledge graph structure, which is crucial to guide the
the detection of errors.
 embedding model to filter out noisy information from hidden
 erroneous triples.
 Through this article, we aim to answer the following research
Considering that most entities in KGs are not typed or are very questions. ❶ How to jointly embed different kinds of KG compoloosely typed, being able to learn about the semantic portrait of nents, i.e, entities, relations and attributes, into suitable vector
the entity from the attribute set is valuable. spaces? ❷ How to construct an effective detector that calcu-
 Modeling and measuring the correlation between entity at- lates the confidence score for each triple based on the learned
tributes and KG structure can guide the KG embedding model features? ❸ How to make the best of confidence information
learning against the impact of erroneous triples. In real-world learned from the detection module to get the error-aware KG
KGs, entity attributes often show high dependency with the embeddings? To solve these problems, in this article, we propose
graph structure, i.e., entities with relevant semantic meanings a novel framework named Attributed Error-aware Knowledge
are usually linked by specific relations. For example, enti- Embedding, i.e, AEKE, that leverages the semantics contained
ties with attribute set {latitude, longitude, population, area} in entity attributes to guide the KG embedding model learning
are generally connected to live_in or born_in while enti- against the impact of erroneous triples. The key idea is to guide
ties with {pen_name, writing_style} are more likely con- the embedding model to focus on more convincing triples by
nected to author_of . It means that triples whose entities exploiting the correlation between knowledge graph structures
have inconsistent attributes with its neighboring relations and entity attributes. Concretely, we designed two triple-level
are more likely to contain noisy facts. Taking the triple hypergraphs, i.e, relational hypergraph, and attribute hyper-
{M adameCurie, spouse_of, M ariaSalomea} in Fig. 1(b) graph, to model the topological structure of the original KG
as example, analyzing the attribute list of M adameCurie and and its attributes, respectively. A contrastive learning framework
M ariaSalomea and comparing the learned semantics with the is then used to learn the representation of each instance from
corresponding relation, it can be easily deduced that this triple is these two different views. Analyzing and mining the unique
erroneous since it is impossible to has the relation of spouse_of structure of KGs and the correlation between graph structure and
between a person and a location. Hence, we propose to enrich the attributes, the confidence score of each triple can be calculated
entity semantics with its attribute list, and measure the degree of by considering three anomaly signals, i.e., self-contradictory
consistency between attributes and graph structure as anomaly within the triple, global acknowledgment across triples, and
signal to guide the learning process of KGs to enable effective conformity between attribute and graph structure. We leverage
error-aware KG embeddings. confidence scores to adaptively update the weighted aggregation
 However, it is still a challenging task to integrate en- in contrastive learning and margin loss in KG embedding, such
tity attributes into error-aware KG embedding, with two ma- that potential errors would contribute little to KG learning. The
jor key challenges. (i) The heterogeneity of entity attribute main contributions of this work are concluded as follows:
makes it hard to utilize. In general, attributes are not uni- r In this research, we propose a novel knowledge graph
formly distributed over all entities. As shown in Fig. 1(b), embedding framework, i.e., AEKE, which leverages the
different entities usually have distinct types or numbers of semantics contained in entity attributes to guide the KG
attributes. Furthermore, the same entity can represent differ- embedding model learning against the impact of erroneous
ent roles in different triples. When an entity describes its dif- triples.
ferent roles, it tends to associate with different attribute sets r We design a tailored multi-view contrastive learning frameto represent the certain semantics. For example, an entity of work to use attribute information as a congruent view to
both scientist and amateur writer prefers an attribute list of guide the learning process of KGs.
{research_area, citation, h_index} when describes its role r Based on the KG structure characteristics and the previas scientist and {pen_name, writing_style, notable_book} ously learned multi-view features, we propose to measure
when it means the status of writer. Therefore, a tailored and the confidence score of each triple by considering anomaly
uniform encoder is desired to fuse such heterogeneous attribute signals of three levels.
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1669

 r We leverage confidence scores to adaptively update TABLE I
 NOTATIONS SUMMARY
 weighted aggregation in the multi-view graph learning
 framework and margin loss in KG embedding, such that
 potential errors will contribute little to KG modeling.
 A preliminary version of this paper was published in the
proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management (CIKM 2022) [32]. In
the conference version, we introduced a contrastive graph learning framework for Knowledge Graph Error Detection, named
CAGED. The key idea of CAGED is to detect the potential
errors from noisy KG by exploiting the internal graph structures.
Despite its superiority over existing error detection models, we
found that there are still two significant limitations that need
to be addressed before its successful application in real-world
scenarios. 1) CAGED performs error detection merely relying on is a relation r ∈ R linking a head entity h and a tail entity t.
KG topological structures. However, real-world KGs are often Learning from the KG representation, we use uppercase bold
incomplete and sparse. Simply relying on KG topological struc- letters to denote matrices (e.g., W), lowercase bold letters to
tures is often not effective to support the detection of nontrivial represent vectors (e.g., z). We list the major symbols in this
errors with sparse graph structure. 2) Given the detected errors, paper in Table 1.
it is still hard to get effective KG embeddings for downstream When taking entity attributes into consideration, we use A
tasks. A straightforward solution is to retrain the KG by filtering to denote the attribute set and define the attributes of enout all the possible noisy triples. However, we found that it is tity h in the form of {ah,1 , ah,2 , . . . , ah,|Ah | } where ah,i ∈
infeasible in practice since in real-world KGs, it is difficult to di- A is the ith attribute type and |Ah | is the total number
rectly conclude whether a triple is true or not without being tested of attribute types with regard to the entity h. Here, we
in practice or strictly and mathematically proven. As shown in only utilize attribute types to quantitatively depict the enprevious study [32], even the SOTA error detection method could tity semantics without considering accurate values due to its
only achieve 60% accuracy. Consequently, directly filtering out low quality. For example, given the entity M ariaSalomea
all the possible erroneous triples will lead to severe information in Fig. 1, we reconstruct its semantics with the attribute
loss, especially for these long-tail entities which only have few set {longitude, latitude, population} instead of {longitude :
links in the original KG. 53.74 W, latitude : 20.77 N, population : 1.5M }. We adopt
 In this article, instead of performing KG modeling via a E and R to represent the feature matrices of entity and relatwo-step way, i.e., i) conduct error detection first, and then ii) tion, respectively. Similarly, we adopt A to denote the learned
retrain the KG by filtering out all the possible noisy triples, attribute matrix of entities in G, where i-th row of A ∈ RD×FA
we propose an end-to-end graph learning framework, named represents the feature indicators to the attributes ah,i ∈ A of
AEKE. While CAGED serves as a KG error detection model entity h ∈ E. D is the max value across the attribute number of
seeking anomaly labels for each triple, our newly proposed each entity. In our model, these embeddings will be used in two
AEKE focuses on error-aware KG embedding learning that ways: (i) for representation learning, and (ii) for confidence
aims to encode entities and relations into a low-dimensional learning.
vector space while considering erroneous triples during the Definition 1. Errors in Knowledge Graph. Given a triple
learning phase. In particular, we extend the preliminary work in a KG, denoted as (h, r, t), if there is a mismatch among
as follows: 1) We formally define the task of error-aware KG its head entity h, relation r, and tail entity t, then this triple
embedding and highlight its difference with error detection. 2) (h, r, t) is an error. There are two types of mismatching.
Rather than relying solely on internal topological structures, First, relevant entities might be connected by wrong relations.
we leverage additional information, i.e., entity attributes, to E.g., {ElonM usk, f ounder_of, T esla}, where ElonM usk
guide AEKE learning against the impact of nontrivial errors. is connected with T esla indeed, but he is the CEO, not the
3) We introduce a novel training objective function, where the founder. Second, irrelevant entities might be connected. E.g.,
confidence score is learnable and dynamically updated during {BruceLee, place_of _birth, England}, in which BruceLee
the representation learning phase so that the noisy information was born in Los Angeles.
from erroneous triples can be minimized while the valuable In a KG, it is difficult to directly conclude whether a triple
information from correct triple will be mostly preserved during is true or not without being tested in practice or mathematically
the training process. 4) More experiments are conducted to proven. Thus, following previous studies [15], [19], [23], [32],
verify the effectiveness of our proposed model on both detection [33], we introduce the concept of triple confidence and try to
performance and downstream task of KG completion. validate the whole KG from the perspective of triples, where the
 confidence value indicates the degree of a triple being true.
 II. PROBLEM STATEMENT Definition 2. Triple Confidence. In this article, we introduce
 Given a knowledge graph G, we define G = (E, R), indicating the concept of confidence to measure the correctness of each
an aggregation of an entity set E and a relation set R. We use triple. Its value is set to be in the range [0, 1]. The closer the
(h, r, t) ∈ T to represent a triple fact inside one KG, where there value gets to 0, the more likely the triple is incorrect.
1670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Fig. 2. We perform a relation-induced construction process to build the relational hypergraph, and construct the attribute hypergraph based on entity attributes.
These two hypergraphs can be regarded as congruent views of the target KG. A contrastive learning framework is used to learn the representation of each instance
from these two different views. Meanwhile, a triple confidence estimation module is designed to calculate the confidence score of each triple by considering:
self-contradictory within the triple; local-global consistency in graph structure; and structure-attribute homogeneity. Under the joint adaptive training scheme, we
leverage confidence scores to adaptively update the weighted aggregation in contrastive learning and margin loss in KG embedding, such that potential errors would
contribute little to KG learning.

 Definition 3. Error-Aware KG Embedding. Given a KG G, into KG embeddings, which leads to significant performance
with noisy triples, we aim to learn low-dimensional repre- degradation in downstream tasks.
sentations for all entities E and relations R, i.e., a mapping To eliminate the impact of noisy triples over embedding
{G} → {E, R}, such that all information in correct triples can vectors, following a previous study [23], [33], we introduce
be preserved, while the impact of false triples on the embedding the concept of confidence to describe whether a triple fact is
is minimized. The performance of error-aware embedding is noisy or not. Its value is set to be in the range [0, 1]. The closer
evaluated by applying E and R to downstream tasks. the value gets to 0, the more likely the triple is incorrect. With
 the introduction of confidence, we can define the new erroraware objective function to eliminate the noisy data from the
 III. METHODOLOGY learning process of KG embedding model.
 We propose AEKE to learn error-aware KG embedding by  
integrating entity attributes. As shown in Fig. 2, AEKE consists Lemb = max(0, γ + C(h, r, t) · E(h, r, t)
of three key components. ❶ KG representation learning model. (h,r,t)∈G (h ,r  ,t )∈G 
It incorporates a confidence score C(h, r, t) into the traditional − E(h , r , t )), (1)
KG embedding model to isolate the impact of noise over embedding vectors. ❷ Triple confidence learning module. It aims where E(h, r, t) = eh + er − et 2 is the traditional energy
to learn a confidence score C(h, r, t) to measure the correctness score for translational embedding models following translaand significance of each triple with the favor of both internal tion assumption. γ > 0 is the hyperparameter of margin, and
structural information and external heterogeneous attribute in- G represents the sampled positive triple set. Here, the triple
formation. ❸ Joint adaptive training scheme. A tailored adaptive confidence C(h, r, t) forces our model to pay more attention
mechanism is applied to optimize the KG representation learning to those more convincing facts. For pair-wise training, since
and confidence learning model under an end-to-end framework. there are no explicit negative triples in KGs, we sample negative
 triples complying with the following rules:
A. Knowledge Graph Representation Learning G  = {(h , r, t) | h ∈ E} ∪ {(h, r, t ) | t ∈ E}
 Knowledge graphs can effectively store and handle structured ∪ {(h, r , t) | r ∈ R} , (h, r, t) ∈ G. (2)
information of real-world entities and facts, and have been
widely utilized in various knowledge-driven applications. In It means that one entity or relation in a positive triple is randomly
fact, real-world KGs always suffer from serious quality problem replaced by another entity or relation in the overall set. Note that
since amounts of errors were introduced into KGs in construc- different from TransE, we also add relation replacements for
tion phase due to the original noises in sources and the imperfect better performances. The corruption of entity (relation) might
extraction methods. However, most existing knowledge graph lead to false negative samples. To this end, we discard all triples
embedding methods assume that all triple facts hold true to the already in G from G  to make sure our generated negative triples
knowledge graph. Therefore, the noisy information is overfitted are truly negative.
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1671

B. Triple Confidence Learning With Entity Attributes
 To enhance the robustness of our error-aware KG embedding
model, we learn a confidence score C(h, r, t) for each triple. As
illustrated in Fig. 2, our key idea is to measure the correctness and
significance of each triple by exploiting the correlation between Fig. 3. Triple feature extraction for local relational structure.
knowledge graph structures and entity attributes. In the real
world, KGs are often accompanied by entity attributes, which possible errors in original KGs since a KG error usually occurs
have three paradigms as follows.
 r In triple level, relations can be interpreted as translations inside a triple as a mismatch of the head entity, tail entity, and
 their corresponding relation.
 operating on the low-dimensional embeddings of the enti- Definition 4. Relational Hypergraph. Given a knowledge
 ties. So, the more a triple fits the translation assumption, graph G = {(h, r, t)|h, t ∈ E, r ∈ R}, the corresponding relai.e., h + r ≃ t, the more convincing this triple should be  A r ),
 r , X
 tional hypergraph is the triple-level graph Gr = (V,
 considered.
 r In graph level, the connected triples that share the same  
 where V and Ar are the set of nodes and adjacency metric
 respectively. X r = {Γ(h, r, t) | (h, r, t) ∈ G} represents the
 entity are always semantically relevant. Intuitively, a KG
 can be regarded as a social group, where each triple is an feature matrix of V,  where Γ(·) is a concatenation function.
 individual. The degree of acknowledgements from neigh-  
 Ar (v, u|u, v ∈ V) = 1, if u and v share the same entity in the
 boring triples to the target triple reflects whether the target original KG, i.e., G.
 triple can be properly integrated into the society. When taking entity attributes into consideration, we build
 r Entity attributes often show high dependency with the another triple-level graph, i.e., attribute hypergraph, to recongraph structure, i.e., entities whose attributes show relevant struct the knowledge graph from the perspective of attributes.
 semantic meanings are usually linked by specific relations. Specifically, we treat each triple in the original KGs as an
 It means triples whose entities have inconsistent attributes individual instance and reconstruct its semantics with the feature
 with its neighbors are more likely to contain noisy facts. learned from the attribute sets of its head and tail entity.
 Based on these observations, we propose a novel confidence Definition 5. Attribute Hypergraph. Given the same knowllearning model to answer the research problems mentioned at edge graph G = {(h, r, t)|h, t ∈ E, r ∈ R}, with entity attribute
the beginning of this paper. To model the different components set A = {{ah,1 , ah,2 , . . . , ah,|Ah | }|h ∈ E} where ah,i is the ith
in KGs, i.e., entity, relation and attribute, into suitable vector attribute type for entity h, the attribute hypergraph can be despaces, we proposed a multi-view knowledge graph learning noted as Ga = (Va , Aa , Xa ), where Va and Aa are the set of
framework in which a dual-view structure information encoder nodes and adjacency metric respectively, which have the same
and a relation-specific attribute encoder are designed to model structure with Gr . And Xa represent the feature matrices of
the topological KG structure and entity attributes, respectively. each node vi ∈ Va learned from corresponding entity attributes.
Specifically, we first design two triple-level hypergraphs, i.e., These two hypergraphs can be regarded as congruent views of
relational hypergraph and attribute hypergraph to model the the target KG. The relational hypergraph models the correlation
topological structure of the original KG and its attribute, re- between relational triples, while the attribute hypergraph represpectively. And then we employ a unified contrastive learning sents the distribution of entity attributes. Considering that entity
framework to model their dependency. To construct an effective attributes always show high dependency with graph structure,
detector that calculates the confidence score for each triple based i.e., entity attributes are always linked with certain relevant
on the learned features, we propose to measure the confidence relations, for normal triples in KGs, we can easily find enough
score of each triple by considering three anomaly signals, i.e., relevant attributes in attribute hypergraph to reconstruct its
self-contradictory within relational triple structure, global con- semantics learned from relational hypergraph. Thus, it helps
sistency across triples, and attribute-structure dependency. us assess the trustworthiness of each triple in the original KG by
 1) Multi-View Construction: Knowledge graph embedding measuring the consistency between its representations learned
projects entities and relations into low dimensional vector space, from these two views.
which has been successfully applied in KG-based tasks. How- 2) Learning From View I: Relational Hypergraph: Existing
ever, the existing embedding approaches only model entities KG embedding approaches only model entities and their relaand their relations within triples, ignoring the global correlation tions within triples, ignoring the global correlation among triples
among triples in KGs. To model the complex topological graph in KGs. In this section, we propose a new graph encoder in a
structure, in this article, we propose a novel view towards dual-view which learns both the local structure within relational
knowledge graph modeling that augments the target KG into triples (local view), and the contextual information buried among
hyper-views (triple-level), by regarding each relational triple as their neighboring community simultaneously (global view), as
nodes. Concretely, we perform a relation-induced construction shown in Fig. 3.
process to build the relational hypergraph. In essence, we follow Local View of Relational Structure Modeling: Constructing
one strategical criterion: we regard each relational triple as nodes relational hypergraph from the original knowledge graph, in
and link them in the relational hypergraph if they share the same some way, may lose some local structure information, which
entity in the original KG. Such triple-level transformation could means the translational or sequential structure inside a triple
filter out low-level information without changing the structure of (head → relation → tail). Since every instance in the relational
1672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

hypergraph is transformed from a corresponding triple (h, r, t)
in the original knowledge graph, we first randomly initialize the
embedding of entities and relations in the original knowledge
graph, and then adopt a local information modeling layer, i.e,
a set of BiLSTM units, to to integrate the embedding of head
entity, relation and tail entity (eh , er , et ) into triple-level rep- Fig. 4. Attribute triple Embedding initialization by capturing attribute inforresentation p. Taking the ith triple (h, r, t) as an example, our mation.
local information modeling layer is formulated as follows.
 a relation-specific encoder, i.e., gattr learn the attribute-based
 pi = Glocal (h, r, t) = fconcat (fBiLST M (eh , er , et )). (3)
 triple representation from attribute hypergraph, as shown in
 The output triple embedding pi is supposed to well capture the Fig. 4.
local relational structure of the input triple. Thus, we use them Attribute Hypergraph Embedding: Attributes are not unias the initial embedding of each node in relational hypergraph. formly distributed over all entities. In general, different entities
 Global View of Neighbor Information Aggregation: Except always have different types or numbers of attributes, even the
the local structure inside triples, abundant contextual infor- same entity may represent different roles in different triples.
mation among a community of triples are useful in detecting When an entity describes its different roles in different triples,
anonymous triples. To model such global contextual informa- it tends to associate with different attribute sets to represent
tion, an intuitive way is to use graph neural network (GNN) or the certain semantics. Thus, it is necessary to choose which
its variants. However, existing graph neural networks are not attribute corresponds to the semantics the current entity repreoptimal for KG embedding task since they ignore the existence sents when we want to reconstruct triple-level semantics based
of anomalous instance in the graph. In other words, potential on the attributes of its head/tail entities. To capture which level
noisy triples may draw relatively equal attention as normal of information the current entity mainly focuses on, we therefore
ones, which leads to a more challenging triple representation adopt the relation-specific mechanism, which uses the relation
learning. To reduce impacts from potential anomalies, we adopt type as an indicator to lead the selection of entity attributes in
an attention-based architecture, i.e., Gglobal , to selectively ag- different triples.
gregate messages from the neighboring triples. Given a triple (h, r, t), in order to extract the rich semantics
 Given an anchor triple pi ∈ Rd in relational hypergraph, information from more valuable attributes of entity h and t, we
we update its embedding by attending over its neighborhoods’ first splice the embeddings of attribute type into an embedding
features, e.g., {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm }, pm ∈ Rd through a two-layer matrix, denoted by Mh = {ah,1 , ah,2 , . . . , ah,|Ah | } and Mt =
graph attention network. A single graph attentional layers is {at,1 , at,2 , . . . , at,|At | }, then feed them to an attention module
given by: with relation embedding er to get the integrated representation
 êh and êt for target entity h and t. Take entity h as an example:
 attij = fatt (Wpi , Wpj ) . (4)
 atth,i = fatt (femb (er ), femb (ah,i )), (7)
Here, attij is a raw attention coefficient which indicates the
importance of triple j to triple i. W ∈ Rn×d is a learnable exp (atth,i )
linear transformation matrix to project the initialized triple αh,i = |A | , (8)
 j=1 exp (atth,j )
 h

representations into the same high-level vector space. fatt is
the attentional function. To make attention coefficients easily where femb and fatt are all single-layer feed-forward neural
comparable across different triples, We normalize the attention networks. The αh,i is the normalized attention weight of atvalues by applying a softmax function: tribute ah,i . Now, we can compute the aggregated attribute-based
 representation êh of Ah , which is the weighted sum of all the
 exp (attij )
 αij = m . (5) transformed representation of attributes in it:
 k=1 exp (attik )
 |At |
Then, the final triple embedding in relational hypergraph can 
 êt = αt,i ∗ femb (at,i ) . (9)
be calculated with a nonlinearity sigmoid function as follows.
 ⎛ ⎞ i=1

 m
 Then given a triple (h, r, t) in attribute hypergraph, we can get
 xi = σ ⎝ αij Wpj ⎠ . (6) the attribute-based entity representations, i.e., êh and êt , by using
 j=1
 this attribute encoder. The final attribute-based triple embedding
 3) Learning From View II: Attribute Hypergraph: Most of qi can be calculated as:
the current knowledge graph embedding frameworks focus on
 qi = fconcat (êh ; er ; êt ). (10)
learning the inner structure of relational triples. However, entity
attributes contain amounts of accurate and targeted semantic Aggregating Neighbor Attribute Information: Homogeneously,
information that can describe entities quantitatively, which is given an anchor triple qi ∈ Rd in attribute hypergraph, we
equally valuable to enable effective KG embedding. To fa- follow the global view of relational hypergraph to update the
cilitate information transfer between entity attributes and the embedding by attending over neighbors’ features of qi , e.g.,
target KG for error-aware embedding, we propose a tailored {q1 , q2 , . . . , qm }, qm ∈ Rd through the same two-layer graph
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1673

attention network: developed various energy functions to model the translational
 ⎛ ⎞ structure for better learning embeddings. In this paper, we take a
 
 m
 simple squared euclidean distance to measure the unconformity
 zi = σ ⎝ αij Wqj ⎠ . (11)
 j=1
 of each triple with translation assumption, and define the local
 triple confidence LT (h, r, t) as follows.
 4) Model Learning: To learn discriminative features from
 1
both relational hypergraph and attribute hypergraph, we adopt LT (h, r, t) = . (15)
a tailored contrastive loss to optimize the proposed multi-view 1 + e−eh +er −et 2
knowledge graph neural network. Global Acknowledgement Estimation: The connected triples that
 Contrasting Between Structure and Attribute Views: The share the same entity are always semantically relevant, and thus
relational hypergraph models the global correlation between the degree of acknowledgements from neighboring triples to
relational triples, while the attribute hypergraph represent the the target triple reflects whether the target triple can properly
distribution of entity attributes. These two hypergraphs can be integrate into the KG. Inspired by social identity theory [34],
regarded as congruent views of the original KG since entity [35], the KG can be regarded as a social group, where each
attributes always show high dependency with graph structure. triple is an individual. The degree of acknowledgements from
In this paper, we adopt the normalized temperature-scaled cross other individuals to the targeted individual (target triple) reflects
entropy loss as our contrastive objective and train the encoders by whether the targeted individual can properly integrate into the
maximizing the mutual information between triple embeddings, society, i.e., the KG. We believe that only a true triple can achieve
i.e., xi and zi , learned from these two views. popular recognition from its neighboring triples. In other words,
 exp (sim (xi , zi ) /τ ) if a triple is well accepted, we tend to believe that it is trustworthy.
 Lsa (xi , zi ) = − log  , Hence, we define another confidence function to measure the
 j∈{1,2,...,N }\{i} exp (sim (xi , zj ) /τ )
 global acknowledgement of target triple (h, r, t).
 (12)
where τ denotes the temperature parameter. sim(xi , zi ) denotes GT (h, r, t) = sim(pi , xi ), (16)
the cosine similarity of triple embedding xi from relational
hypergraph and zi learned from attribute hypergraph. where pi = Glocal (h, r, t) is the local embedding of triple
 Contrasting Between Local and Global Views: As mentioned (h, r, t), and xi = Gglobal (h, r, t) represent the feature learned
at the beginning of Section III-B, the connected triples that share from its global context.
the same entity are always semantically relevant, and thus the Structure-Attribute Dependency Estimation: The relational
degree of acknowledgements from neighboring triples to the tar- hypergraph models the correlation between relations, while
get triple reflects whether the target triple can properly integrate the attribute hypergraph represent the distribution of entity
into the community. To model such paradigm between individual attributes. Considering that entity attributes always show high
triple and its community, we propose another contrastive training dependency with graph structure, i.e., entity attributes are alobjective by maximizing the mutual information between pi ways linked with certain relevant relations, for normal triples in
and xi . Here, pi is the embedding of ith triple learned from KGs, we can easily find enough relevant attributes in attribute
local relational structure (3), while xi is the embedding of the hypergraph to reconstruct its semantics learned from relational
same triple that learned by aggregating information from its hypergraph. So, the consistency between its representations
neighboring community (6). learned from these two views can be regarded as an effective
 anomaly signal to assess the trustworthiness of each triple in the
 exp (sim (pi , xi ) /τ )
 Llg (pi , xi ) = − log  . original KG.
 j∈{1,2,...,N }\{i} exp (sim (pi , xj ) /τ )
 (13) AT (h, r, t) = sim(xi , zi ), (17)
Finally, by combining the above two losses, we have our final
contrastive objective function, i.e Lcon defined below: where xi = Glocal (h, r, t), zi = gattri (h, r, t) are the representations of triple (h, r, t), learned from relational hypergraph and
 1 
 N
 attribute hypergraph, respectively.
 Lcon = (Lsa (xi , zi ) + Llg (pi , xi )) . (14) Triple Confidence: Finally, we measure the confidence score
 2 N i=1
 of each triple based on the previously learned features and define
 5) Triple Confidence Estimation: Based on the KG final score functions for detecting potential errors as follows:
paradigms and the previously learned multi-view features,
we propose to measure the triple confidence by considering C(h, r, t) = σ(LT (h, r, t) + λ1 · GT (h, r, t)
three anomaly signals: self-contradictory within local relational + λ2 · AT (h, r, t)), (18)
structure, global consistency across triples, and attributestructure dependency. where LT (h, r, t) reflects the degree of self-conformity within
 Self-Contradictory Measurement: In triple level, relations can the local relational triple, GT (h, r, t) denotes the consistency
be interpreted as translations operating on the low-dimensional between local-global structure, AT (h, r, t) measures the simiembeddings of the entities. So, the more a triple fits the transla- larity of the same sample between relational hypergraph and
tion assumption, i.e., h + r ≃ t, the more convincing this triple attribute hypergraph. When the confidence value is larger, the
should be considered. Existing KG embedding algorithms have triple (h, r, t) is more likely to be a normal one.
1674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

 r Q5 (Section IV-F): Is our proposed AEKE an efficient
 Algorithm 1: Error-Aware KG Embedding Learning.
 method compared to baselines?
 r Q6 (Section IV-G): How does our proposed AEKE perform
 error-aware embedding in real-world scenarios?

 A. Datasets
 We evaluate our proposed AEKE on three real-world benchmark datasets, including FB15K-237, YAGO15 K, and DB15 K.
 Due to the human curation, these benchmark datasets contain highly reliable facts. Following prior work [23], [24],
 we amplify each of three datasets by incorporating 5%
 and 15% noisy triples to imitate real-world errors, respectively. Since most errors in real-world KGs derive from
 the misunderstanding between similar entities, e.g., the error
 (N ewton, N ationality, England) is more likely to occur in
 real-world KGs than (N ewton, N ationality, Google), in this
 paper, the noisy triples are appropriately generated in the following way. Given a positive triple (h, r, t), the head or tail
 entity is replaced to form a harder and more confusing negative
C. Joint Adaptive Training Scheme triple (h , r, t) or (h, r, t ), where h (or t ) should have appeared
 in the head (or tail) position with the same relation in the
 In this section, we introduce the details of the training scheme dataset.
to answer the third research question mentioned at the beginning FB15K-237 [36] stands as the widely-applied subset with 114
of this paper, i.e., how to make the best of confidence information relations and 10054 entities under Freebase, which is known as
learned from the detection module to get the error-aware KG the huge knowledge base with over 1 billion triples. FB15Kembeddings. Concretely, we define a comprehensive objective 237 proves to be better than FB15K-237 by getting over the
function to tightly integrates the KG embedding model and con- challenges FB15K-237 faced for inverse relations and keeping
fidence learning model that work jointly to get the error-aware symmetrical, asymmetrical and combinatorial relationships, as
embeddings. The learning process of AEKE is summarized in well as the attributes.
Algorithm 1. DB15K [37] is a subset of Wikidata, making up for the
 weakness of Wikipedia. To avoid test leakage, it also excludes
 L = Lcon + βLemb . (19)
 inverse relations using the same procedure as the derivation of
Under this scheme, KG representation learning and confidence FB15K-237.
learning mechanism could be mutually beneficial for each other YAGO15K [38] augmented WordNet with over one million
in each iteration that the former provides a promising embed- entities, transforming WordNet from the plane data to a knowlding in latent space for the latter, while the latter singles out edge graph. YAGO15 K gets formed based on YAGO aligned
less credible triples to improve the performance of the former. with the entities in Freebase.
Through iteratively joint estimation of triple confidence, we aim
at reducing impacts from potential anomalies and learn optimal B. Capability of AEKE in Distinguishing KG Errors (Q1)
representation of the target KG.
 In this section, we conduct experiment on KGs in terms of
 KG error detection task to verify the capability of AEKE in
 IV. EXPERIMENTS
 distinguishing errors. Specifically, we rank all the triples in the
 In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments on target KG according to their confidence scores in ascending
a variety of real-world KGs to verify the effectiveness of the order. The top ranked triples are treated as potential errors. The
proposed framework AEKE. Specifically, we aim to answer the experiments are conducted on three benchmark datasets, includfollowing questions. ing FB15K-237, DB15 K and YAGO15 K with noisy triples to be
 r Q1 (Section IV-B): Is our proposed AEKE valid and effec- different ratios of 5% and 15% of KGs. In the following part, we
 tive for distinguishing noisy triples? elaborate the experiment settings and prerequisites of baseline
 r Q2 (Section IV-C): How effective is the KG embeddings models and evaluation metrics.
 learned by AEKE in comparison with the state-of-the-art 1) Baselines: From three aspects we single out models as
 KG embedding models? the baseline to evaluate the error detection performance, among
 r Q3 (Section IV-D): How does each component of AEKE which CKRL [23] and NoiGAN [24] represent the error-aware
 contribute to its prominent performance? embedding methods; TTMF [15], CAGED [32], and Crossr Q4 (Section IV-E): How do the hyperparameters influence Val [25] represent the state-of-the-art error detection alternathe performance of AEKE? tives; TransE [39], DistMult [40], ComplEx [41], SimplE [42]
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1675

TuckER [43] and EARL [44] are picked for being representa- codes for conducting our experiments. Training of our proposed
tive knowledge graph embedding methods. The details of the framework and the baselines is performed on a Nvidia 3090 GPU
baseline methods are elaborated as follows: server. Specifically, we employ the Adam optimizer with a fixed
 TransE [39] assumes that entities and relations are embedded batch size of 256 to optimize all models. The model parameters
in the same space, allowing for the approximation of the tail are initialized using the default Xavier initializer, and the initial
entity related to a given head entity and relation after training. learning rate is set to 0.01. Additionally, we maintain a fixed
As a result, the original triples are transformed into word vectors embedding size of 100 for all models.
using either L1 or L2 norm. In order to assess the performance of the baseline approaches,
 DistMult [40] is a bi-linear model that calculates the con- we utilize ranking measures. These measures involve calculating
fidence of potential semantics for entities and relations in the ranks based on the scores assigned by the models to the triples
vector space. It simplifies the RESCAL model by representing in the knowledge graph (KG). A lower score indicates a lower
the relational matrix as a diagonal matrix, removing the limita- likelihood of a triple being correct. The triples in the target KG
tion. However, DistMult can only handle symmetric relations in are ranked in ascending order according to their scores, where the
a knowledge graph. top-ranked triples have a higher probability of being incorrect.
 ComplEx [41] is another notable bi-linear model that builds To provide a fair assessment of KG validation performance, we
upon DistMult. It improves upon DistMult by introducing com- employ the following two evaluation measures.
plex numbers and expanding the model into the complex number Precision@K assesses the percentage of real anomalies found
space. This enhancement enables ComplEx to handle both sym- in the first K queries.
metric and asymmetric relations in a knowledge graph.
 SimplE [42] SimplE embeddings offer interpretability and | Errors Discovered in Top K Ranking |
allow the integration of specific background knowledge by Precision@K = .
 K
employing weight tying. It provides evidence of its complete (20)
expressiveness and establishes a bound on the size of its embed- Recall@K measures reflects the percentage of real anomalies
dings to ensure full expressivity. found in the overall number of ground truth anomalies.
 TuckER [43] is a linear model that offers a relatively simple
approach to link prediction in knowledge graphs. It leverages
 | Errors Discovered in Top K Ranking |
the Tucker decomposition of a binary tensor containing known Recall@K = . (21)
facts. | Total number of Errors in the KG |
 EARL [44] focuses on learning embeddings for a specific
group of entities referred to as reserved entities. To obtain 3) Experimental Results: We now answer the first question,
embeddings for the entire set of entities, it encodes their i.e., Q1 evaluating the effectiveness of AEKE. The experimental
unique characteristics by considering their connected relations, results are summarized in Table II. We have three observations
k-nearest reserved entities, and multi-hop neighbors. as follows.
 TTMF [15] utilizes semantic information to calculate the Obs. 1. AEKE demonstrates superior performance compared
trustworthiness of triples in order to distinguish between normal to both embedding methods and state-of-the-art error detecinstances and anomalies. This differentiation is achieved through tion baselines. Our proposed model, AEKE, outperforms all
corresponding confidence values. baselines in terms of recall and precision evaluation metrics.
 CAGED [32] By joint training with KG embedding and Specifically, at a 5% anomaly ratio and k value of 5%, AEKE
contrastive learning loss, CAGED assesses the trustworthiness achieves a 1.8% improvement over the second-best method.
of each triple based on two learning signals, i.e., the con- Obs. 2. Knowledge graph embedding baselines, such as
sistency of triple representations across multi-views and the TransE, ComplEx, and DistMult, generally yield satisfactory
self-consistency within the triple. results. However, when compared to tailored error detection
 NoiGAN [24] aims to learn noise-aware knowledge graph em- and error-aware methods, these knowledge graph representation
beddings. It combines error detection and completion tasks using baselines exhibit inferior performance. The reason behind this is
a unified Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) framework. that KG embedding frameworks do not account for errors in the
 CKRL [23] is an advanced confidence-aware knowledge rep- KG, resulting in the inability to learn discriminative represenresentation learning method. It aims to overcome the assumption tations for normal and noisy triples. This outcome emphasizes
made in conventional KRL, where all triples in the original graph the need for an error-aware representation learning framework
are considered correct. CKRL focuses more on triples with lower to achieve robust KG embeddings.
confidence, as they may indicate potential noise. Obs. 3. The inclusion of auxiliary human-curated information
 CrossVal [25] suggests using an external human-curated proves to be useful in detecting errors in KGs. For instance,
knowledge graph as an auxiliary information source to aid in CrossVal, which utilizes an external human-curated KG as auxerror detection within a target knowledge graph. The external iliary information, demonstrates better detection performance
knowledge graph is constructed based on human-curated knowl- than other baselines. However, our model surpasses it due to
edge repositories and tends to have high precision. its ability to leverage the relational structure within triples, the
 2) Evaluation Protocol: The implementation of both the global contextual structure across triples, and the rich semantics
baselines and our proposed framework is carried out using Py- derived from entity attributes. This comprehensive approach
Torch. For the baseline methods, we utilize the publicly available allows our model to excel in error detection.
1676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

 TABLE II
 ERROR DETECTION RESULTS OF PRECISION@K AND RECALL@K BASED ON THE THREE DATASETS WITH ANOMALY RATIO = 5%

C. Quality of KG Embeddings Leaned by AEKE (Q2) Obs. 1. AEKE consistently outperforms the embedding-based
 The goal of our model is to learn effective knowledge graph models and other tailored KG completion competitors over
embeddings that could facilitate various applications. To verify different anomaly ratios, which verifies the quality and effecthe quality and effectiveness of learned embeddings, we evaluate tiveness of KG embeddings learned by AEKE.
AEKE in terms of KG completion task. Knowledge graph com- Obs. 2. Error-aware embedding methods, including NoiGAN,
pletion is a traditional evaluation task that aims to complete the CKRL and our proposed AEKE, always show better perforincomplete triples that lack a head entity, tail entity or relation. mance than other models. And the embedding-based methods,
In the following part, we elaborate the experiment settings and i.e., TransE, SimplE, and EARL, are always surpassed by both
prerequisites of baseline models and evaluation measurements. KG completion models, i.e., RGCN and RGHAT. It is because
 1) Baseline Methods: To validate the quality of KG embed- embedding-based methods that are trained in a pair-wise mode
dings leaned by our proposed AEKE, we compare it with the and only model the local relational structure of triples, are more
strongest baselines according to our best knowledge. Following likely to over-fit noisy information.
the taxonomy aforementioned in Section V, we divide all base- Obs. 3. As the anomaly rate increases, the performance gap
lines into three categories: (i) embedding-based: TransE [39], between the baseline models and our AEKE become more
SimplE [42], EARL [44]; (ii) state-of-art completion models: significant. Specifically, comparing with second-best method,
RGCN [45] and RGHAT [46]; (iii) Error-aware embedding our AEKE just gets the improvements of 0.3%, 0.6% and 0.5%
method: NoiGAN [24] and CKRL [23]. on FB15k-237, DB15 K and YAGO15 K respectively. As the
 2) Evaluation Protocol: In this research paper, our primary anomaly rate increases to 15%, our AEKE gets more significant
focus revolves around entity prediction. To provide a more improvements of 0.8%, 1.2% and 1.6% on FB15k-237, DB15 K
precise description, we establish the KG completion as a task and YAGO15 K, respectively. It indicates that our proposed
that involves predicting either the head entity in a given query framework is more robust, especially for KGs with larger scale
(?, r, t) or the tail entity in a given query (h, r, ?). To be specific, of noises.
we mask the head or tail entity of each triple in the test dataset and
require each method to predict the missing entities. To maintain D. Ablation Study (Q3)
consistency with the previous study [23], [24], we utilize two We now investigate the third question. In this part, four pairs
evaluation metrics: 1) Mean Rank of correct entities, denoted as of variants of AEKE are used for this ablation study.
MRR, and 2) Hits@K, which denotes the proportion of correct 1) The Role of Attribute Hypergraph Encoder: Entity atanswers ranked within the top K positions. tributes can be used to implicitly portray the semantics of
 3) Experiment Results: We conduct the experiments on entities, but it is hard to integrate different KG components,
three benchmark datasets, including FB15K-237, DB15 K and i.e., entities, relations and entity attributes into a suitable vector
YAGO15 K with noisy triples to be different ratios of 5% and space since they always exhibit rather distinct characteristics. To
15% of KGs. Evaluation results are shown in Table III. In leverage the semantics contained in entity attributes to guide the
general, we have the following observations. KG embedding model learning against the impact of erroneous
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1677

 TABLE III
 RESULTS OF KNOWLEDGE GRAPH COMPLETION

triples, in this article, we first build an attribute-based hypergraph TABLE IV
 RESULTS OF PRECISION@K% AND RECALL@K% BASED ON FB15K-237
and then propose a novel attribute encoder to model the attribute WITH ANOMALY RATIO = 5%
information with heterogeneous structure. To test the effect of
our proposed attribute encoder, we remove the attribute view
from AEKE, and denote the variant as AEKE(none). In this
part, we compare our model and its variant with three KG
embedding models in terms of the capability in distinguishing
KG errors. Specifically, we use TransE, ComplEx and DistMult
to model the KGs without attribute information and denote
them as TransE(none), ComplEx(none) and DistMult(none),
respectively. In the same time, we directly integrate attributes
into KG embedding frameworks by initializing the entity feature
with the concatenated attribute semantics, and denote them as
TransE(attr), ComplEx(attr) and DistMult(attr).
 As shown in Table IV, after introducing the attributes, all
baselines as well as our model, present better performance,
which verifies the value and importance of attribute information
in KG representation learning. But the improvement of the
baselines is quite marginal compared to our model. Particularly,
there is only an increase of 0.99%, 0.65%, 1.75% for TranE,
ComplEx and DistMult, respectively. And our model shows a
significant improvement of 3.97% at K equals 1%. It is because
these baseline models attempt to integrate attributes into KG
embedding framework by directly initializing the entity feature
with the learned attribute semantics and train the model in pairwise mode. However, in this fusing way, it is hard to measure the
complex correlation and dependency between entity attributes 2) The Role of Relational Hypergraph Encoder: To assess
and knowledge graph structure, which is crucial to guide the the effectiveness of capturing translational structure within each
embedding model to filter out noisy information from hidden triple using a local information modeling layer, we introduce two
erroneous triples. variations: AEKE_LSTM and AEKE_Concat. AEKE_LSTM
1678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

Fig. 5. KG completion results of AEKE variants based on the three datasets with anomaly ratio = 5%.

replaces the Bi-LSTM units in our local information modeling
layer with LSTM, while AEKE_Concat removes the Bi-LSTM
units and directly concatenates randomly initialized embeddings
of the head entity, relation, and tail entity to form the local
representation of each triple. Our results indicate a significant
drop in performance for both variants, with AEKE_LSTM outperforming AEKE_Concat. This outcome is expected because
a simple concatenation approach can lead to the loss of local
structural information.
 Fig. 6. Margin parameter and trade-off parameters analysis on the three
 Next, to validate the error-aware functionality of our datasets.
global encoder, we substitute our tailored graph encoder
with RGCN [45] and RGHAT [46], creating AEKE_GCN
and AEKE_GAT, respectively. As observed from Fig. 5,
 baseline methods. This discrepancy arises due to the fact that
AEKE_GAT outperforms AEKE_GCN, but there remains a
 the negative sampling employed in the KG embedding framenoticeable gap compared to our model. This gap arises due to
 work primarily assists our model in learning rich structural
RGCN assuming that all observed triples in the KG are correct,
 and semantic information within triples. However, such local
which can result in overfitting on noisy facts and the failure to
 features alone are insufficient to enable effective error detection
detect errors. On the other hand, RGHAT employs an attention
 across the entire KG. Contrastive learning, on the other hand,
mechanism to learn KG representations, which has the potential
 complements the negative samples by facilitating the learning
to filter out some noisy information. However, AEKE_GAT still
 of distinguishable across-view representations. With the distindoes not exhibit excellent performance in the error detection
 guishable across-view representations, denoising noisy triples
task. This can be attributed to the fact that RGHAT applies
 on KGs will be much more effective.
the attention mechanism from the perspective of entities and
relations, whereas KG errors often occur at the triple level, where
mismatches between the head entity, tail entity, and the corre- E. Parameter Analysis (Q4)
sponding relation are common. In contrast, our graph encoder In this section, we investigate the impact of three key paramincorporates a customized error-aware attention layer that takes eters in AEKE and report the results in Fig. 6(a) and (b).
triple-level embeddings as input. This tailored approach enables 1) Trade-Off Parameters in Confidence Score Function: As
us to effectively filter out noisy facts. shown in (18), λ1 and λ2 are trade-off coefficients that balance
 3) The Role of Joint Adaptive Training Scheme: To evaluate the contribution of three learning signals for error detection,
the effectiveness of our joint optimization approach, we conduct i.e., the self-contradictory within the triple embedding, global
experiments using different training losses, resulting in three alignment among triples, and the conformity between attributes
variants: AEKE_SA, AEKE_LG, and AEKE_KGE. From the and the graph structure. The larger λ1 and λ2 indicate that
results depicted in Fig. 5, it is evident that all three variants are effective error detection relies more on the signals of global
inferior to our proposed model. Notably, AEKE_KGE performs acknowledgement and cross-view conformity, respectively. To
particularly poorly, even when compared to straightforward search for suitable trade-off parameters, we vary them from
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1679

 TABLE V
 COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS (SPACE COMPLEXITY, TIME COMPLEXITY, THE
OVERALL TRAINING TIME Ttotal AND THE AVERAGE TRAINING TIME IN EACH
 EPOCH Tepoch )

 Fig. 7. Case study on FB15K-237. (a) presents a 2-hop subgraph extracted
 from FB15K-237 centering at the target entity /m/0f b1q. While (b) demonstrates the corresponding subgraph with attribute information attached to each
10−3 to 103 . We perform completion on FB15K-237 and the entity.
performance in terms of MRR is shown in Fig. 6(b). From
the results, we observe that the completion performance is
 TABLE VI
much better when the value of λ1 and λ2 is larger than 1, CONFIDENCE SCORE OF EACH TRIPLE IN THE SUGRAPH
with an optimal result at λ1 = 10 and λ2 = 100. We omit
the results on the other two datasets since they show similar
trends.
 2) Margin Parameter: The translation-based KG embedding
loss function utilizes γ as a margin to regulate the distance
between the representations of positive and negative pairs, as
indicated in (1). In order to examine the influence of γ, we
vary its value from 0 to 1.0 and present the results in Fig. 6(a).
The DB15 K dataset achieves optimal outcomes when λ1 is
approximately 0.1. From a global perspective, the variations in
the parameter λ do not appear to have a significant impact, as
its value remains stable within a specific range, as observed in models. 3) Although both our proposed AEKE and CrossVal use
YAGO15 K. However, for FB15K-237, the performance notably extra data sources for KG modeling, our proposed AEKE shows
improves when λ is set below 0.5, with the best result obtained at better efficiency than CrossVal. It is because entity attributes
0.2. The overall performance changes exhibit a stable trend with used in AEKE are naturally attached to entities, which can be
minimal fluctuation as γ varies. This is primarily attributed to directly leveraged for KG learning, while CrossVal need extra
the joint training approach employed, which prevents the model time to align the knowledge from the original KG and external
from becoming suboptimal. KG since a entity may have different IDs or names in different
 KGs.
F. Complexity Analysis (Q5)
 G. Case Study on Interpretability (Q6)
 In this section, we conduct a comprehensive complexity
analysis to investigate the efficiency of our proposed AEKE. We conduct a case study to investigate how AEKE can per-
N _e, N _r and N _t denote the number of entities, relations form error-aware learning in real-world scenarios. We select the
and triples, respectively. m, n and t are the dimensions of entity /m/0f b1q as the target entity and visualize its 2-hop
entity, relation and triple embeddings. N _k is the number of subgraph and the corresponding attribute information in Fig. 7.
entities in external KG used in CrassVal, and d is the dimension There are nine triples in the subgraph, five of which are normal
of entity embedding in external KG. N _a is the number of ones and the other four are erroneous (in red). To verify the
attributes in AEKE. As shown in Table V, we have the following ability of AEKE in distinguishing noisy triples, we show the
observations: 1) Embedding-based methods including TransE, confidence score of each triple in Table VI. To make the effect
SimplE, and EARL are time and space efficient and run faster measurable and comparable, apart from the ground truth labels,
than error detection and error-aware methods in general since we also include the confidence score that are learned from
they only need to calculate the mean square losses. In the same the SOTA error-aware embedding method, i.e., NoiGAN, as
time, EARL costs more time than TransE and SimplE since it counterparts.
introduces multi-layer convolution network in knowledge graph Based on the results shown in Table VI, we have the
embedding. 2) In terms of computation time per epoch, NoiGAN following observations: (i) compared to NoiGAN, our proand CAGED outperform AEKE and CrossVal. This is attributed posed AEKE shows its superiority in distinguishing erroto NoiGAN and CAGED leveraging fewer data sources for KG neous triples. To be clear, NoiGAN learn a confidence set of
modeling. Nonetheless, the overall training time of NoiGAN {0.6836, 0.2673, 0.7864, 0.6781} for the four real-world eris considerably larger than CAGED due to the challenges in rors, which means three erroneous triples have escaped the
convergence that are commonly encountered with GAN-based detection with the help of the conflicting and complicated
1680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

structure. Our method, in contrast, assigns a confidence set methods such as rule-based approaches [54], classificationof {0.1684, 0.1086, 0.4309, 0.1146} to four triples, which in- based methods [16], clustering-based methods [55], [56],
dicates that it accurately identifies three errors, i.e., only one distance-based methods [57], distribution-based methods [58],
erroneous triple is oddly assigned a slightly higher score of and others [59], [60]. Among these approaches, several notable
0.4309. (ii) When measuring the correctness of normal triples, methods have been developed specifically for error detection in
AEKE shows better stability and robustness than NoiGAN in knowledge graphs (KGs). One such method is KGClean [61], a
most cases. Specifically, the normal triples get a confidence classification-based framework that employs a novel approach
set of {0.8921, 0.8427, 0.9254, 0.8710, 0.8549} using AEKE, called AL-detect to determine the truthfulness of triples and
which are generally closer to 1 (the ground truth value), com- subsequently detect and repair erroneous data. Another method,
pared with the confidence set {0.7553, 0.7017, 0.8257, 0.7682, SDValidate [58], utilizes statistical distributions to identify error
0.7944} learned from NoiGAN. Interestingly, the triple with relations in noisy KGs, without relying on any external knowlmore erroneous neighbors tends to have a lower confidence edge. Inspired by SDValidate and PRA [62], PaTyBRED [16]
score in NoiGAN, while this phenomenon is not that obvious in incorporates type and path features into local relation classifiers
our proposed AEKE. It is mainly because AEKE measures the to detect relation assertion errors in KGs. However, in many
triple confidence by considering three different anomaly signals, cases, it is challenging to acquire a sufficiently labeled dataset
i.e, self-contradictory within relational triple structure, global with explicit error labels, which limits the broader application
consistency across triples, and attribute-structure dependency, of unsupervised learning methods in error detection tasks.
while NoiGAN only relies on pure graph structure to estimate The advancement of graph embedding techniques, such as
triple confidence, which makes it more vulnerable to neighbor- TransE [39], KBGAN [63], ConvE [64], and DistMult [34], has
ing erroneous instances. led to a significant focus on embedding-based error detection
 methods. Numerous models have been developed, demonstrat-
 V. RELATED WORK ing the effectiveness of embedding approaches on benchmark
 datasets. One notable model is TransT [65], which is a trans-
A. Knowledge Graph Embedding lating embedding model based on TransE [39] and incorporates
 A lot of efforts have been laid on the KG embedding to learn triple trustworthiness to handle noisy knowledge graphs. TransT
the representation of triples within KGs after establishment, introduces two sub-models that consider entity types and entity
contributing an essential base for downstream tasks [47], [48], descriptions, respectively, in order to calculate triple trustwor-
[49], [50], [51]. Translational distance models represented by thiness values. In the Correction Tower framework proposed by
TransE [39] seize greater attention than before, more applica- Abedini et al. [17], three distinct embedding-based solutions are
tions prove its reliability for embedding based on the design introduced to address different types of errors, including outliers,
to embed entities and relations into a continuous vector space inconsistent triples, and erroneous relations. These solutions are
as the projection of the original triples. As to three methods then combined to form a filter-like structure that detects and
which sharing roots with each other, Rescal [46] represents the corrects errors within the knowledge graph.
bi-relational data into three-dimensional tensors, in the form of
an entity matrix and a relation matrix. DistMult [40] simplifies C. Error-Aware Knowledge Graph Embedding
Rescal with a bi-linear formulation, taking entities as low di- Different from KG error detection that aims to get the anomaly
mensional vectors and relations from a bi-linear mapping func- labels of each triple, error-aware KG embedding is an end-to-end
tion.However, this kind of simplification brings the restriction KG representation learning framework that encodes entities and
of a symmetry problem, ComplEx [41] improved DistMult and relations into low-dimensional vector space with the considerfixed the problem by introducing complex value which enables ation of erroneous triples during the learning phase. Vault [22]
the model to handle both symmetric and asymmetric problems. is the first work that aims to detect possible errors in KGs while
 KG Embedding Methods With External Information: While learning knowledge representations. It estimates a probability
the traditional ones are showing their advantages, more and more score of reliability to determine the quality of a triple via several
researches start to focus on attaching importance to external prior models fitted with existing KGs. A similar concept of
information of the original KG aiming to support better embed- judgments for each triple is also applied in CKRL [23] and
ding methods. DKRL [52] introduces entitiy description into the NoiGAN [24]. The former model generates confidence scores
KG embedding for better semantic understanding. It trains the for triples via internal structure information and utilizes them in
energy function with mutual promotion of structural embedding representation learning to produce robust representations, while
and description embedding. KDCoE [53], similarly, also takes the latter improves it in the aspect of sample selection.
the advantage of abundant semantics as a semi-supervised algorithm, which embeds multilingual entity descriptions through a VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
co-learning method for knowledge alignment across languages.
 Learning effective and robust embeddings of entities and
 relations in KGs can facilitate various downstream applications.
B. Knowledge Graph Error Detection
 Most existing efforts take advantage of the internal structure
 Error detection, being one of the most challenging problems, within KGs to help train a discriminative detector. But, they
has been the subject of extensive research for many years. Ini- are confronted with the bottleneck that the internal topological
tially, studies on error detection primarily focused on traditional information implied in pure KGs is far from abundant to support
ZHANG et al.: INTEGRATING ENTITY ATTRIBUTES FOR ERROR-AWARE KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING 1681

the validation task in real-world scenarios. In this article, we [17] F. Abedini, M. R. Keyvanpour, and M. B. Menhaj, “Correction tower:
propose a novel KG representation learning framework, i.e., A general embedding method of the error recognition for the knowledge
 graph correction,” Int. J. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, no. 10,
AEKE, to incorporate the semantic information contained in 2020, Art. no. 2059034.
entity attributes to automatically validate triples in KGs. We [18] Z. Zhang et al., “Towards robust knowledge graph embedding via multitreat the original KG without attributes information as relational task reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4,
 pp. 4321–4334, Apr. 2023.
hypergraph, and build an attribute hypergraph based on these [19] Y. Shan, C. Bu, X. Liu, S. Ji, and L. Li, “Confidence-aware negative
side-information and treat it as a congruent view of target KG. sampling method for noisy knowledge graph embedding,” in Proc. IEEE
The confidence score of each triple is calculated by considering: Int. Conf. Big Knowl., 2018, pp. 33–40.
 [20] J. Pujara, E. Augustine, and L. Getoor, “Sparsity and noise: Where knowlself-contradictory within the triple; local-global consistency in edge graph embeddings fall short,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods
graph structure; and structure-attribute homogeneity between Natural Lang. Process., 2017, pp. 1751–1756.
triple-level views. Experiment results demonstrate that AEKE [21] M. Nayyeri, S. Vahdati, E. Sallinger, M. M. Alam, H. S. Yazdi, and J.
 Lehmann, “Pattern-aware and noise-resilient embedding models,” in Proc.
outperforms state-of-the-art KG error detection algorithms. Eur. Conf. Inf. Retrieval, Springer, 2021, pp. 483–496.
Since real-world KGs are always evolving and introducing new [22] X. Dong et al., “Knowledge vault: A web-scale approach to probabilistic
knowledge, extending our method to temporal KG represen- knowledge fusion,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 Data Mining, 2014, pp. 601–610.
tation learning will be a very valuable and promising future [23] R. Xie, Z. Liu, F. Lin, and L. Lin, “Does William Shakespeare REALLY
work. Besides, in the future, we will also explore using the write Hamlet? Knowledge representation learning with confidence,” in
error-aware knowledge graph representation learning method in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 4954–4961.
 [24] K. Cheng, Y. Zhu, M. Zhang, and Y. Sun, “NoiGAN: Noise aware knowl-
AEKE for downstream applications such as question answering edge graph embedding with GAN,” 2019.
and recommender systems. [25] Y. Wang, F. Ma, and J. Gao, “Efficient knowledge graph validation via
 cross-graph representation learning,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
 Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 1595–1604.
 REFERENCES [26] J. Lehmann, D. Gerber, M. Morsey, and A.-C. Ngonga Ngomo, “DeFactodeep fact validation,” in Proc. Int. Semantic Web Conf., Springer, 2012,
 [1] Q. Wang, Z. Mao, B. Wang, and L. Guo, “Knowledge graph embedding: pp. 312–327.
 A survey of approaches and applications,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., [27] M. N. Jeyaraj, S. Perera, M. Jayasinghe, and N. Jihan, “Probabilistic error
 vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2724–2743, Dec. 2017. detection model for knowledge graph refinement,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 [2] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, and F. M. Suchanek, “YAGO3: A knowledge Comput. Linguistics Intell. Text Process., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1243–1257,
 base from multilingual Wikipedias,” in Proc. Conf. Innov. Data Syst. Res., 2019.
 2015. [28] M. Li, N. Gao, C. Tu, J. Peng, and M. Li, “Incorporating attributes
 [3] J. Lehmann et al., “DBpedia – A large-scale, multilingual knowledge base semantics into knowledge graph embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE 24th Int.
 extracted from Wikipedia,” Semantic Web J., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 167–195, Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperative Work Des., 2021, pp. 620–625.
 2015. [29] Z. Liu, Y. Cao, L. Pan, J. Li, and T.-S. Chua, “Exploring and
 [4] P. Ernst, A. Siu, and G. Weikum, “KnowLife: A versatile approach for evaluating attributes, values, and structures for entity alignment,”
 constructing a large knowledge graph for biomedical sciences,” BMC 2020, arXiv:2010.03249.
 Bioinf., vol. 16, May 2015, Art. no. 157. [30] B. D. Trisedya, J. Qi, and R. Zhang, “Entity alignment between knowledge
 [5] Y. Chen, J. Kuang, D. Cheng, J. Zheng, M. Gao, and A. Zhou, “AgriKG: graphs using attribute embeddings,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019,
 An agricultural knowledge graph and its applications,” in Proc. Int. Conf. pp. 297–304.
 Database Syst. Adv. Appl., Springer, 2019, pp. 533–537. [31] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, and M. Sun, “Knowledge representation learning with
 [6] H. Wang, M. Zhao, X. Xie, W. Li, and M. Guo, “Knowledge graph entities, attributes and relations,” Ethnicity, vol. 1, pp. 41–52, 2016.
 convolutional networks for recommender systems,” in Proc. World Wide [32] Q. Zhang, J. Dong, K. Duan, X. Huang, Y. Liu, and L. Xu, “Contrastive
 Web Conf., 2019, pp. 3307–3313. knowledge graph error detection,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 [7] X. Huang, J. Zhang, D. Li, and P. Li, “Knowledge graph embedding Manage., 2022, pp. 2590–2599.
 based question answering,” in Proc. 12th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data [33] S. Wang, X. Huang, C. Chen, L. Wu, and J. Li, “REFORM: Error-aware
 Mining, 2019, pp. 105–113. few-shot knowledge graph completion,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
 [8] S. Guo, Q. Wang, L. Wang, B. Wang, and L. Guo, “Jointly embedding Knowl. Manage., 2021, pp. 1979–1988.
 knowledge graphs and logical rules,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods [34] T. Trouillon, C. R. Dance, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, É. Gaussier, and G.
 Natural Lang. Process., 2016, pp. 192–202. Bouchard, “Knowledge graph completion via complex tensor factoriza-
 [9] J. Feng, M. Huang, M. Wang, M. Zhou, Y. Hao, and X. Zhu, “Knowledge tion,” 2017, arXiv:1702.06879.
 graph embedding by flexible translation,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Princ. [35] J. C. Turner and P. J. Oakes, “The significance of the social identity concept
 Knowl. Representation Reasoning, 2016, pp. 557–560. for social psychology with reference to individualism, interactionism and
[10] S. Guo, Q. Wang, L. Wang, B. Wang, and L. Guo, “Knowledge graph social influence,” Brit. J. Social Psychol., vol. 25, pp. 237–252, 1986.
 embedding with iterative guidance from soft rules,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [36] K. Toutanova, D. Chen, P. Pantel, H. Poon, P. Choudhury, and M. Gamon,
 Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 4816–4823. “Representing text for joint embedding of text and knowledge bases,” in
[11] K. Bollacker, R. Cook, and P. Tufts, “Freebase: A shared database of Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2015, pp. 1499–
 structured general human knowledge,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 1509.
 2007, pp. 1962–1963. [37] Y. Liu, H. Li, A. Garcia-Duran, M. Niepert, D. Onoro-Rubio, and D. S.
[12] S. Heindorf, M. Potthast, B. Stein, and G. Engels, “Vandalism detection Rosenblum, “MMKG: Multi-modal knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 16th Int.
 in Wikidata,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2016, Conf. Semantic Web, Springer, 2019, pp. 459–474.
 pp. 327–336. [38] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, and F. Suchanek, “YAGO3: A knowledge base
[13] R. Fasoulis, K. Bougiatiotis, F. Aisopos, A. Nentidis, and G. Paliouras, from multilingual Wikipedias,” in Proc. 7th Biennial Conf. Innov. Data
 “Error detection in knowledge graphs: Path ranking, embeddings or both,” Syst. Res., 2014.
 2020, arXiv:2002.08762. [39] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, and O. Yakhnenko,
[14] T. Mitchell et al., “Never-ending learning,” Commun. ACM, vol. 61, no. 5, “Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data,” in Proc. Int.
 pp. 103–115, 2018. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
[15] S. Jia, Y. Xiang, X. Chen, and K. Wang, “Triple trustworthiness mea- [40] B. Yang, W. T. Yih, X. He, J. Gao, and L. Deng, “Embedding entities and
 surement for knowledge graph,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2019, relations for learning and inference in knowledge bases,” 2015.
 pp. 2865–2871. [41] T. Trouillon, J. Welbl, S. Riedel, É. Gaussier, and G. Bouchard, “Complex
[16] A. Melo and H. Paulheim, “Detection of relation assertion errors in embeddings for simple link prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 knowledge graphs,” in Proc. Knowl. Capture Conf., 2017, pp. 1–8. 2016, pp. 2071–2080.
1682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 4, APRIL 2024

[42] S. M. Kazemi and D. Poole, “Simple embedding for link prediction in Qinggang Zhang received the bachelor’s degree of
 knowledge graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, engineering in computer science from the Northwestpp. 4289–4300. ern Polytechnical University, China. He is currently
[43] I. Balažević, C. Allen, and T. M. Hospedales, “TuckER: Tensor factoriza- working toward the PhD degree with the Department
 tion for knowledge graph completion,” 2019, arXiv:1901.09590. of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
[44] M. Chen et al., “Entity-agnostic representation learning for parameter- Hong Kong SAR. He is currently a group member
 efficient knowledge graph embedding,” 2023, arXiv:2302.01849. in DEEP Lab supervised by Dr. Xiao Huang with
[45] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. V. D. Berg, I. Titov, and M. the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research
 Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks,” interests include graph neural networks, knowledge
 in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., Springer, 2018, pp. 593–607. graphs, and network anomaly detection.
[46] D. Nathani, J. Chauhan, C. Sharma, and M. Kaul, “Learning attentionbased embeddings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs,”
 2019, arXiv:1906.01195.
[47] J. Ashish, B. A. Ramesh, Z. M. Zaki, B. Debapriya, and M. Fillia, “A survey
 on contrastive self-supervised learning,” Technologies, vol. 9, no. 2, 2021,
 Art. no. 2.
[48] R. Hadsell, S. Chopra, and Y. LeCun, “Dimensionality reduction by
 learning an invariant mapping,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2006, pp. 1735–1742.
[49] O. Henaff, “Data-efficient image recognition with contrastive predictive Junnan Dong received the MS degree from the Hong
 coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 4182–4192. Kong Polytechnic University, supervised by Dr. Xiao
[50] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for Huang. He is currently working toward the PhD
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. degree with DEEP Lab, Department of Computing,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 9729–9738. Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research in-
[51] S. Monka, L. Halilaj, S. Schmid, and A. Rettinger, “ConTraKG: terests mainly include graph neural networks and
 Contrastive-based transfer learning for visual object recognition using knowledge-enhanced reasoning. He has published
 knowledge graphs,” CoRR, 2021. papers on WSDM and WWW related to learning with
[52] R. Xie, Z. Liu, J. Jia, H. Luan, and M. Sun, “Representation learning of knowledge graphs.
 knowledge graphs with entity descriptions,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 Intell., 2016, pp. 2659–2665.
[53] M. Chen, Y. Tian, K.-W. Chang, S. Skiena, and C. Zaniolo, “Co-training
 embeddings of knowledge graphs and entity descriptions for cross-lingual
 entity alignment,” 2018, arXiv:1806.06478.
[54] Y. Ma, H. Gao, T. Wu, and G. Qi, “Learning disjointness axioms with
 association rule mining and its application to inconsistency detection of
 linked data,” in Proc. Chin. Semantic Web Web Sci. Conf., Springer, 2014,
 pp. 29–41.
[55] H. Paulheim and A. Gangemi, “Serving DBpedia with DOLCE–More than
 Qiaoyu Tan received the BEng degree from the Coljust adding a cherry on top,” in Proc. Int. Semantic Web Conf., Springer,
 lege of Computer Science and Technology, Southwest
 2015, pp. 180–196.
 University, China, in 2017. He is currently working
[56] X. Wang, X. L. Wang, and D. M. Wilkes, “A minimum spanning tree- toward the PhD degree with the Department of Cominspired clustering-based outlier detection technique,” in Proc. Ind. Conf.
 puter Science and Engineering, Texas A&M Univer-
 Data Mining, Springer, 2012, pp. 209–223.
 sity, College Station, Texas. His research interests in-
[57] J. Debattista, C. Lange, and S. Auer, “A preliminary investigation towards
 clude graph neural networks, knowledge graphs, netimproving linked data quality using distance-based outlier detection,” in work anomaly detection, and recommendation sys-
 Proc. Joint Int. Semantic Technol. Conf., Springer, 2016, pp. 116–124.
 tems. He has published more than 20 peer-reviewed
[58] H. Paulheim and C. Bizer, “Improving the quality of linked data using
 research papers and serves as a reviewer and PC
 statistical distributions,” Int. J. Semantic Web Inf. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2,
 member for several premier conferences and journals.
 pp. 63–86, 2014.
[59] J. Lehmann, D. Gerber, M. Morsey, and A.-C. N. Ngomo, “Defacto-deep
 fact validation,” in Proc. Int. Semantic Web Conf., Springer, 2012, pp. 312–
 327.
[60] B. Shi and T. Weninger, “Discriminative predicate path mining for fact
 checking in knowledge graphs,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 104, pp. 123–
 133, 2016.
[61] C. Ge, Y. Gao, H. Weng, C. Zhang, X. Miao, and B. Zheng, “KG-
 Clean: An embedding powered knowledge graph cleaning framework,”
 2020, arXiv:2004.14478.
[62] N. Lao and W. W. Cohen, “Relational retrieval using a combination of Xiao Huang received the BS degree in engineering
 path-constrained random walks,” Mach. Learn., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 53–67, from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 2012, the MS
 2010. degree in electrical engineering from the Illinois In-
[63] Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Feng, and Z. Chen, “Knowledge graph embedding stitute of Technology, in 2015, and the PhD degree in
 by translating on hyperplanes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2014, computer engineering from Texas A&M University,
 pp. 1112–1119. in 2020. He is an assistant professor with the Depart-
[64] Y. Lin, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Y. Liu, and X. Zhu, “Learning entity and relation ment of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic Univerembeddings for knowledge graph completion,” in Proc. 29th AAAI Conf. sity. He is a program committee member of AAAI
 Artif. Intell., 2015, pp. 2181–2187. 2021–2023, ICLR 2022–2023, NeurIPS 2021–2022,
[65] Y. Zhao, H. Feng, and P. Gallinari, “Embedding learning with triple KDD 2019–2022, TheWebConf 2022–2023, ICML
 trustiness on noisy knowledge graph,” Entropy, vol. 21, no. 11, 2019, 2021–2022, IJCAI 2020–2022, CIKM 2019–2022,
 Art. no. 1083. WSDM 2021–2023, SDM 2022, ICKG 2020–2021.