IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 7619

 Inter-Flow Spatio-Temporal Correlation Analysis
 Based Website Fingerprinting Using Graph
 Neural Network
 Xiaobin Tan , Member, IEEE, Chuang Peng , Peng Xie, Hao Wang, Mengxiang Li,
 Shuangwu Chen , Member, IEEE, and Cliff Zou, Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Website fingerprinting has emerged as a prominent I. I NTRODUCTION
topic in the area of network management. However, the proliferation of encrypted network traffic poses new challenges for
website fingerprinting. In this paper, we analyze the behavior and
correlations among the network flows generated by browsing a
 W ITH the increasing prevalence of websites sharing
 data centers and employing masquerade techniques,
 determining specific websites simply based on IP addresses is
webpage and conclude that there exist specific spatio-temporal no longer feasible. Website fingerprinting, an area of research
correlations among these network flows. Based on this finding, dedicated to identifying specific websites, has garnered conwe propose the construction of an inter-flow spatio-temporal
correlation graph (STCG) to model these correlations. In the
 siderable attention in the field of network management.
STCG, each node represents a flow, with its features capturing Nevertheless, the prevalent incorporation of encryption techthe properties of the flow itself, and each edge with a weight nology in network flow, such as the TCP session, poses
vector represents the spatio-temporal correlation between two significant challenges to the efficacy of website fingerprinting
flows. Subsequently, we propose a graph neural network-based techniques. As reported by the Google Transparency Report,1
website fingerprinting method (STC-WF) by considering the
inter-flow spatio-temporal correlations, in which the Graph
 the utilization of HTTPS for loading Chrome webpages has
Attention Network (GAT) and Self-Attention Graph Pooling reached an impressive 99% as of May 2022. Consequently,
(SAGPool) mechanisms are employed to acquire a comprehensive traditional network traffic classification methods, such as those
representation of the STCG. To evaluate the performance of based on port numbers [1] or deep packet inspection (DPI) [2],
STC-WF, we construct a real-world traffic dataset and conduct are rendered ineffective in the context of encrypted network
comprehensive evaluations. The experimental results demonstrate
that STC-WF outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of
 traffic scenarios.
accuracy and time consumption. Recent studies have proposed many schemes for website
 fingerprinting. Some of them use features extracted from a
 Index Terms— Website fingerprinting, encrypted traffic classification, inter-flow spatio-temporal correlation, graph neural single network flow [3], [4], [5]. However, such methods are
network. very sensitive to small changes in network flow characteristics,
 which diminishes their effectiveness when facing websites’
 continuous updates and changing traffic environments. For
 Manuscript received 9 January 2024; revised 9 June 2024 and 27 July 2024; example, the arrival time of packets or the ordering of packet
accepted 29 July 2024. Date of publication 12 August 2024; date of current sequences may change even when one user browses the same
version 20 August 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Key website twice. Furthermore, browsing sessions, which mean all
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2020YFA0711400;
in part by the Key Science and Technology Project of Anhui under Grant user interactions with a site over a continuous period, including
202103a05020007 and Grant 202103a05020006; in part by China Environ- page loads, resource requests, user interactions, and dynamic
ment for Network Innovations under Grant 2016-000052-73-01-000515; in content loading, consistently generate multiple distinct flows.
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62101525, Grant 62341113, and Grant 62021001; and in part by the Fun- This diversity poses a challenge in selecting the appropriate
damental Research Funds for the Central Universities. The associate editor flow for website fingerprinting.
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was The multiple flow-based methods for website fingerprinting,
Dr. Luca Caviglione. (Corresponding author: Shuangwu Chen.)
 Xiaobin Tan and Shuangwu Chen are with the Department of Automation, such as [6] and [7], fuse the features extracted from multiple
University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei 230026, China, flows; however, they only achieve limited fingerprinting perand also with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive formance. The main reason is that these schemes just crudely
National Science Center, Hefei 230031, China (e-mail: xbtan@ustc.edu.cn;
chensw@ustc.edu.cn). combine the information of multiple network flows generated
 Chuang Peng and Hao Wang are with the Institute of Advanced Tech- by a single webpage browsing session, while not considering
nology, USTC, Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: pengchuang@mail.ustc.edu.cn; the temporal and spatial correlation between multiple network
wanghao1014@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
 Peng Xie is with the Department of Automation, USTC, Hefei 230026, flows generated by one webpage browsing session, thus low-
China (e-mail: xiepeng2001@mail.ustc.edu.cn). ering the accuracy of website fingerprinting.
 Mengxiang Li is with the School of Cyber Science and Technology, USTC, In fact, there exist specific spatio-temporal correlations
Hefei 230026, China (e-mail: limx2017@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
 Cliff Zou is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Central among the multiple network flows generated by browsing a
Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA (e-mail: changchun.zou@ucf.edu).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3441935 1 https://transparencyreport.google.com/

 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

single webpage. Therefore, an effective website fingerprint- II. R ELATED W ORK
ing scheme should not only consider the properties of each In this section, we make a brief summary of existing
network flow but also account for the correlations among methods for website fingerprinting and traffic classification.
them. Moreover, these spatio-temporal correlations among the
network flows can be accurately represented using a graph A. Traditional Machine Learning Based Methods
structure, and the Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [8] prove
 Many machine learning-based traffic identification methods
to be a powerful tool for analyzing such graph-structured
 have emerged as a result of the advancement of artificial inteldata. Consequently, an efficient website fingerprinting method
 ligence technology. Machine learning methods concentrate
can potentially incorporate GNNs based on suitable graph
 on extracting relevant features from network traffic. Referconstruction methods to analyze the graph that models the
 ence [12] constructed a Markov Chain using the SSL/TLS
spatio-temporal correlation among multiple network flows.
 message type and achieved high application identification
 In this paper, we propose an inter-flow spatio-temporal
 accuracy. On this basis, [13], [14] built a second-order Markov
correlation analysis-based website fingerprinting approach
 model based on three states of the flow, adding the length
utilizing the graph neural network (STC-WF). We conof the certificate packet and the length of the first communistruct an inter-flow spatio-temporal correlation graph (STCG)
 cation packet as features. Reference [15] identified malware
that captures the inter-flow correlations among network
 using a logistic regression algorithm that combines the joint
flows, considering the fact that a single website browsing
 features of packet length distribution, time distribution, byte
session typically generates multiple flows that exhibit spatiodistribution, and unencrypted SSL/TLS header information.
temporal correlations. Our proposed STC-WF methodology
 Reference [7] proposed the Flowprint, a semi-supervised
incorporates the Graph Attention Network (GAT) [9] and
 learning method that uses temporal correlations among
Self-Attention Graph Pooling (SAGPool) [10], [11] to extract a
 destination-related features of network traffic to generate app
comprehensive representation of the STCG, enabling effective
 fingerprints.
website fingerprinting.
 In terms of website fingerprinting, [16] proposed a method
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
 that uses statistical features such as the number of incoming
follows.
 and outgoing packets and the number of bursts and uses
 • We reveal that there exist distinctive spatio-temporal cor- k-Nearest Neighbor as the classifier. Reference [3] proposed
 relations among network flows generated by one webpage the CUMUL, which is based on an SVM classifier and
 browsing session by analyzing the correlation among uses the cumulative sum of packet sizes to represent trafmultiple network flows generated by browsing the same fic traces. Reference [17] proposed a method for extracting
 webpage based on the network traffic collected from real- 150-dimensional statistical features from traffic traces and then
 world experiments. This finding serves as inspiration for using a Random Forest classifier to extract website fingerthe design of our proposed novel website fingerprinting prints. Shen et al. proposed a method based solely on packet
 method. length information [5], and then they developed FineWP [4],
 • We construct the inter-flow spatio-temporal correlation which is dedicated to extracting features from the cumulative
 graph that captures the inter-flow correlations among sum of packet length sequences in the uplink-dominant stage.
 network flows, which can comprehensively characterize ProFi [18] uses Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs) to
 the flow behavioral pattern of a certain website by incor- model and classify encrypted traffic.
 porating representative features of the flow itself and the
 temporal and spatial correlation among network flows. B. Modern Deep Learning Based Methods
 • We propose a website fingerprinting method named
 The neural network can automatically extract the potential
 STC-WF based on the analysis of spatio-temporal corfeatures of the original data.
 relation within captured network flows using GNN.
 1) Deep Neural Network Based Methods: Deep learning-
 Specifically, we utilize GAT and SAGPool to learn a combased traffic classification methods can date back to
 prehensive representation of the corresponding STCG.
 2015 when Wang [19] applied a simple sparse autoencoder
 • We create a real-world traffic dataset of website surfing,
 (SAE) to traffic classification. Reference [20] introduced
 and then perform a series of comprehensive experiments
 Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) into network traffic clason it to compare STC-WF against three state-of-the-art
 sification by putting the payload byte size sequence into
 website fingerprinting methods. The experiment results
 an attention encoder to obtain features and then using a
 demonstrate the superiority of STC-WF and the effec-
 Softmax classifier for traffic classification. Reference [21]
 tiveness of STCG.
 proposed the Flowpic that converts the original traffic into
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first images and uses an image-based classification algorithm to
review the related work in Section II. Then, we make some classify the encrypted traffic. Reference [22] proposed an
preliminary analysis in Section III and present our method in end-to-end model called FS-Net that takes into account the
Section IV. Next, we describe the dataset collection process length of packets in encrypted traffic and employs a multilayer
and evaluate the performance of STC-WF through a compre- bi-GRU encoder to learn the flow sequence representation
hensive comparison with state-of-the-art methods in Section V. and a multilayer bi-GRU decoder to reconstruct the original
Finally, we conclude this paper in Section VI. sequence. Reference [23] proposed a method that directly
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7621

recognizes the content inside the data stream, regardless of Despite the availability of flow-level methods [6], these
the external protocols and applications. approaches often neglect the importance of incorporating both
 For deep learning-based website fingerprinting, [24] pro- spatial and temporal correlations among network flows in a
posed BurNet, a model for fine-grained website fingerprinting comprehensive manner. Neglecting to synthesize these spatial
that restores the length sequence of one-way HTTP messages and temporal correlations would result in underutilizing the
and trains the data using a CNN model. Reference [25] potential benefits offered by multi-flow-based website fingerproposed Deep Fingerprinting (DF), which uses the direc- printing techniques.
tion of each packet as input features and a CNN model as
a classifier. Reference [26] proposed Triplet Fingerprinting III. P RELIMINARIES
(TF), which utilizes N-shot learning to achieve high accu- In this section, we first present the threat model of website
racy with fewer examples per website. Reference [27] is fingerprinting. Next, we analyze the behavior of network flows
a transformer-based approach to implement malware traffic generated from real-world webpage browsing and provide
detection, which takes channels with similar behaviors as an explanation for the ineffectiveness of existing methods.
detection objects and extracts the side-channel contents to Finally, we explain the insights derived from our research.
construct behavioral sequences. SNWF [28] improves the
robustness and classification performance of WF attacks by A. Threat Model
combining snapshot integration techniques with deep learning. Website fingerprinting allows an attacker to deduce the spe-
Reference [29] proposes and evaluates a web site finger- cific web page being accessed by a client through encrypted or
printing attack method that uses deep convolutional neural anonymized network connections [17]. According to [25], the
networks for feature extraction and improves the accuracy of threat model assumes that the attackers are passive, meaning
the attack by continuously collecting and updating real Tor they can only eavesdrop on the encrypted packets through
traffic data. network devices and are unable to alter, modify, or decrypt
 2) Graph Neural Network Based Methods: With some web packets.
successful applications of GNN to classification tasks [30], It needs to be explained that a “webpage” is a single docseveral attempts to apply GNN to traffic classification have ument or resource accessible on the internet, typically part of
emerged. Reference [31] proposed to represent each flow using a website, and can include text, images, and other multimedia
a traffic interaction graph, then they designed a GraphDApp content, while a “website” is a collection of related web pages,
model based on GNN using a multilayer perceptron (MLP) and typically identified by a common domain name, and hosted on
a fully connected layer to map the traffic interaction graphs of at least one web server. In this paper, we consider that different
various applications. In addition, there are also methods [32] to webpages under the same website have similar elements and
construct traffic graphs from the initial number of interaction structures.
packets of each two-way network flow, thus realizing the As depicted in Fig. 1, the victim accesses the website from
network intrusion detection. the Internet via a browser to retrieve web content. Simultane-
 There are some GNN-based website fingerprinting methods. ously, an attacker may attempt to identify the website being
Reference [6] proposed a framework called GAP-WF for fine- accessed through website fingerprinting. In general, there exist
grained website fingerprinting. GAP-WF introduced a trace two types of threat models, where potential attackers are
graph to describe the contextual correlations between flows in situated in different network locations and possess varying
webpage browsing and used a GNN-based model to learn the capabilities to capture network traffic, leading to different
representation of the trace graph. However, GAP-WF was a attack efficiencies.
generalized method for website and webpage recognition. This The threat model is categorized into local and remote
method constructed graphs in which edges were not assigned attacks. In a local attack, the attacker is located in the victim’s
weights and therefore did not provide a measure of the degree local network and can eavesdrop on two-way network traffic
of correlation between network flows. between the victim and the corresponding web server. The
 attacker could be a campus network administrator or a local
C. Analysis of Existing Methods Internet Service Provider (ISP), enabling him or her to capture
 Most existing website fingerprinting methods [3], [4], [5], both uplink and downlink network flows passing through the
[16] extract the pattern of website traffic from the packet level local network. The objective of the attacker is to utilize the
to obtain the fingerprint of a website. In other words, they fingerprinting results to enforce network censorship or restrict
record the packets generated by the website browsing process access to specific web pages for users within a certain region.
in chronological order and then analyze this packet sequence. Given that the local attacker model (the first threat model)
However, as we have just explained, features such as total is common and effective, many existing research efforts have
packet number, packet order, and so on of packet sequence focused on it [3], [6]. This paper also adopts the local attacker
generated by one browsing can vary widely, so treating a model for website fingerprinting.
packet as an independent entity and ignoring flow information In addition, this paper only consider closed-world coarsemay lead to errors. Moreover, packet sequence-based methods grained website fingerprinting, i.e., users only visit known
are sensitive to small changes in the characteristics of the websites, and we aim at website categorization rather than
sequence, limiting their effectiveness in the face of constantly fine-grained web pages. If want to learn more about open vs.
updated and changing network environments. closed world scenarios, you can refer to [24].
7622 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 1. Two different threat models in website fingerprinting.

B. Website Browsing Process
 The website browsing process necessitates an interactive
data exchange between the local browsers (such as Internet
Explorer and Chrome) and remote web servers with HyperText
Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Browsers implement the client Fig. 2. Network flows temporal pattern generated by browsing a website.
side of HTTP, and web servers implement the server side
of HTTP housing webpage elements. When a user visits
a webpage, the browser sends HTTP request messages to behavior of website browsing based on TCP traffic. In this
the server for the webpage elements. The server receives paper, a network flow refers to a TCP session between a
the requests and responds with HTTP response messages browser and a web server, which represents a bidirectional
containing the elements. Each website inherently manifests flow between the client and the server. To analyze the network
variety in the organization of webpage elements, which include flows’ behavior of website browsing, we collected network
texts, images, and other content. These elements are commonly traffic while browsing the BiliBili2 and Douyu3 websites
hosted on separate servers and are accessed in a predetermined (two dominant video streaming and live streaming websites
order as defined by the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), in China) using the Chrome browser. The data collection
the standard markup language for documents intended for web process involved multiple browsing for each website, with
browser display. HTTP uses TCP as its underlying transport each browsing lasting for 10 seconds.
protocol. Consequently, the transmission of these elements to Fig. 2 illustrates two instances of network flows from
the local host initiates multiple TCP flows, with the sequence repeatedly browsing the same webpage for Bilibili and Douyu,
adhering to the positions of these elements within the HTML respectively. A chart is employed to depict the temporal
file. pattern of multiple network flows generated during website
 Furthermore, to accelerate browsing speed, browsers fre- browsing. Each flow is represented by a column, where the
quently adopt a strategy referred to as concurrent requests horizontal coordinate indicates the flow’s beginning time and
[33]. This approach involves the near-simultaneous dispatch the height of the column corresponds to its number of packets.
of multiple requests for webpage elements to the web server. Additionally, network flows with the same remote IP address
For an element of a particular type on the webpage, upon are depicted using a consistent color scheme. Due to the X-axis
determining its appropriate web server, the browser may time scale, multiple columns could overlap with each other in
transmit multiple concurrent requests to this server. The server the chart. For this reason, we use the small charts positioned
then establishes a TCP session for each request, responding at the top of each chart to present the zoomed-in details of
to the first one that arrives while the remaining requests are the overlapping areas in the chart. Inspired by the analysis of
terminated through negotiation. Consequently, the beginning the observations presented in Fig. 2, we make the following
time of multiple network flows are closely aligned, with a hypothesis.
single network flow housing a substantial number of packets 1) Multiple Flows Are Generated When Browsing a Weband the others containing a minimal number of packets. page: From Fig. 2, we can observe that the browsing of a
Given the prevalent utilization of Content Delivery Network webpage always generates multiple network flows with distinct
(CDN) technology, the geographical location of the physical beginning time and packet counts. Moreover, the total number
server and the sequence in which webpage elements load can of network flows generated may vary across different browsing
vary across websites. Such variation gives rise to distinctive sessions of the same webpage. For instance, browsing BiliBili
temporal and spatial correlations among the network flows resulted in 17 and 18 network flows in two separate browsing
generated during website browsing. instances.
 2) Spatio-Temporal Correlations Exist Among Multiple
 Flows Generated by Browsing a Webpage: Fig. 2 also reveals
C. Analysis of Network Flows’ Behavior of Website Browsing
 As mentioned before, TCP provides a reliable data transfer 2 https://www.bilibili.com/
service for HTTP. Therefore, we analyze the network flows’ 3 https://www.douyu.com/
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7623

the presence of a relatively stable beginning time and packet correlations among them. The GNNs have proven to be
counts distribution of flows in the temporal dimension, as well effective in analyzing such graph-structured data [36]. Thereas a distribution of specific remote IP addresses in the spa- fore, we propose employing graph representations to capture
tial dimension, for multiple network flows generated during the multi-flow structure and the associated spatio-temporal
browsing of the same webpage. The temporal correlation of correlations, harnessing the power of GNNs for website finthe vertical coordinate response and the spatial correlation of gerprinting applications.
the color response are important for the classification of flows,
in which “correlation” means being related in temporal dimen- IV. T HE P ROPOSED M ETHOD
sion or spatial dimension and bringing help to the classification
 In this section, we present the architecture and design details
of encrypted traffic. This phenomenon of spatio-temporal
 of the proposed GNN-based website fingerprinting scheme,
correlation between multiple flows is consistently observed
 namely the STC-WF.
when analyzing flows generated by browsing other websites,
indicating the existence of behavior patterns within network
flows. A. Overview
 3) A Specific Website’s Browsing Session Has Its Own The overview of the proposed STC-WF is depicted in
Unique Network Flow Behavioral Pattern: As depicted in Fig.3, which consists of three stages, the Graph Generation
Fig.2, the network flow behavioral patterns, such as the Stage, the Graph Repr esentation Lear ning Stage, and the
distribution of colors and heights of columns representing Classi f ication Stage.
the network flows, exhibit notable differences between the • In the Graph Generation Stage, the raw network traffic
browsing sessions of the BiliBili and Douyu websites. This is initially divided into multiple network flows. The
distinction in behavioral patterns is consistently observed Featur es E xtraction module extracts sequence features
across other websites as well. Based on these observations, and statistical features from each network flow. Subsewe deduce that network flows generated during website brows- quently, the Graph Constr uction module constructs the
ing possess distinct and characteristic behavioral patterns. STCG using the extracted features.
Exploiting these unique network flow behavioral patterns holds • The Graph Repr esentation Lear ning Stage aims to
the potential for effective website fingerprinting applications. derive a comprehensive representation of the STCG. This
 is achieved through the utilization of GAT, SAGPool, and
D. Insight a readout layer.
 By analyzing the behavior of all network flows generated • Finally, in the Classi f ication Stage, website fingerwhile browsing a website, we have discovered the existence printing is performed using a Fully-Connected Layer .
of spatio-temporal correlations that stem from the behavioral This stage leverages the extracted and refined features to
patterns exhibited by multiple network flows associated with classify the network traffic accurately.
specific websites at the flow level. These findings provide To implement the STC-WF scheme proposed in this paper,
valuable insights and can serve as a foundation for designing we first train the GNN model using pre-labeled network
novel solutions for website fingerprinting. traffic data. Once trained, the GNN model and its weights are
 1) Website Fingerprinting Based on Multiple Flows With deployed on a server. During runtime, incoming network traffic
Spatio-Temporal Correlation: Inspired by the remarkable is fed into the model to recognize websites. If a new website
achievements of contemporary facial recognition methods needs to be recognized or an existing website changes, the
[34], [35], which effectively incorporate not only the dis- GNN model must be retrained, and the weights on the server
tinctive features of individual facial organs but also their must be updated accordingly.
spatial arrangement, leading to superior recognition accuracy,
we aim to address a similar question in the context of website
fingerprinting. B. Graph Generation Stage
 During the process of website browsing, multiple net- In the Graph Generation Stage, the packets in network
work flows are generated; these network flows and the traffic are parsed into network flows based on its five-tuple
spatio-temporal correlations among them exhibit specific information, including the source IP address, source port,
behavioral patterns. These patterns are intrinsic to each website destination IP address, destination port, and transport layer
and can be leveraged to achieve accurate website fingerprint- protocol. Subsequently, the inter-flow Spatio-Temporal Correing. Therefore, a rational and effective website fingerprinting lation Graph (STCG) of these network flows is constructed
method should not only consider the features of individual to capture their characteristics and the inter-flow correlations
network flows but also incorporate the spatio-temporal cor- among them.
relations among them, akin to the approach used in facial 1) Flow Feature Selection: In the STCG, each node correrecognition. sponds to a specific network flow. Given the substantial impact
 2) Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Correlations of Multiple of node information on the classification outcome of Graph
Flows Using GNN: The multiple spatio-temporally correlated Neural Networks, it is crucial to carefully select appropriate
flows generated during website browsing can be compre- features to effectively characterize the nodes. Inspired by [4],
hensively represented using a graph structure, wherein the we select features of nodes to encompass both sequence
nodes represent individual flows and the edges denote the features and statistical features of network flows.
7624 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 3. System architecture of the proposed STC-WF scheme.

 • Sequence Features: The packet length is a representative sequence features to improve the classification accuracy
 feature in the encrypted traffic classification task [22]. of the model.
 The packets in a network flow can be divided into uplink Therefore, the features of a network flow can be represented
 and downlink packets according to whether the source by an F-dimensional vector h⃗ = {l1 , . . . , l T , s1 , . . . , s M },
 IP is a local host where the web browser is running. where the lt represents the length of a packet in bytes, the
 Therefore, a network flow can be divided into an uplink sm represents a statistical feature and F = T + M.
 flow and a downlink flow. The sequence feature is a 2) Inter-Flow Spatio-Temporal Correlation Graph: The
 packet length sequence with a fixed length T of the STCG is constructed to capture the inter-flow correlations
 network flow, where the size of an uplink packet is among network flows. Within the STCG, each node correpositive, and the size of a downlink packet is negative. sponds to a network flow and possesses a property associated
 It is worth noting that the sequence feature does not with that flow including the sequence features and the statisfully describe the entire network flow and its value is not tical features. Additionally, edges within the graph represent
 stable enough, because the sequence feature is generally the spatio-temporal correlation between two endpoints, charcalculated based on only a small sequence of packets in acterized by a two-dimensional vector. The first dimension
 the entire network flow. of the vector signifies the temporal correlation between the
 • Statistical Features: According to [37], statistical features corresponding flows, while the second dimension represents
 of flows can be used for encrypted traffic identification the spatial correlation between them.
 with good results. So we select 18 statistical features for The temporal correlation between two network flows is
 the whole network flow, uplink sub-flow, and downlink measured by calculating the difference in their beginning time.
 sub-flow of this network flow respectively, including However, due to network bandwidth fluctuations, if the differminimum (min), maximum (max), mean (mean), median ence in beginning time between two flows is below a specified
 absolute deviation (mad), standard deviation (std), vari- threshold, they are considered concurrent. On the other hand,
 ance (var ), skew (skew), kurtosis (kur t), number of the spatial correlation between two flows describes the distance
 packets (len), and 9 percentiles from 10% to 90% between their network destinations. To simplify the calculation
 ( per 1, . . . , per 9). Table VI in the Appendix lists the of this property, we simply consider whether the destinations
 detailed formulas, where x refers to the size of each of these network flows belong to the same network or not.
 packet in the sequence. Then we get 54 statistical fea- Suppose there exists an edge ei j between node i and node
 tures for each flow and then use the Random Forest j, and the edge’s feature vector is e⃗i j = [τ, s]. The first
 method to rank the contribution of these statistical fea- dimension component τ and the second dimension component
 tures [38]. To reduce the parameters and model running s of the edge feature vector e⃗i j are calculated according to
 time, we select M statistical features with the highest Eq. (1) and Eq. (2).
 contribution as the statistical features of the nodes. The
 statistical features can be used as a complement to the τ = e−(ti −t j ) , ti ⩾ t j , (1)
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7625

Fig. 4. An example of the STCG construction for a certain website browsing Fig. 5. Graph attention network used in STC-WF.
session.

 into Graph Neural Networks to train a graph classifier. This
 (
 1, desti = dest j ,
 s= (2) classifier is subsequently utilized to classify the current cap-
 0, else,
 tured network traffic by processing the corresponding STCG
where ti and desti are the beginning time and destination constructed from the captured data. The key components incornetwork of node i, respectively. porated in the GNN model of the STC-WF method comprise
 The calculation method of τ ensures that a larger value is Graph Attention Networks (GATs) and a Self-Attention Graph
assigned when there is a smaller difference in the beginning Pooling (SAGPool) layer, enabling the identification of critical
time between two network flows. The value of τ ranges nodes within the graph.
from 0 to 1. Regarding the calculation method for the spatial Given a set of STCGs {G 1 , . . . , G N }, and their labels
correlation s, we adopt the approach utilized in Flowprint [7]. {y1 , . . . , y N }, the objective of the GNN is learning the rep-
In this method, two network flows sharing the same destination resentation vector H⃗G that can predict the label of each
network address or the serial number of the TLS certificate STCG. In the STC-WF, the GAT and SAGPool are utilized
are considered to belong to the same destination network, to construct the core components of the GNN.
resulting in s being assigned a value of 1. For other cases, s is 1) Graph Attention Layer: GAT is a prominent example
assigned a value of 0. In STCG, unidirectional edges between of a graph neural network that incorporates the attention
two nodes represent the temporal relationship between two mechanism to process graph-structured data. In the STC-WF
network flows, while bidirectional edges indicate the concur- method, GAT is employed to aggregate node features. The
rency between two network flows. Nodes corresponding to webpage browsing process generates multiple flows, including
all concurrent flows form a group. Any two nodes within the flows carrying HTML requests and responses, as well as flows
same group are connected by bidirectional edges. Additionally, originating from third-party sources, such as advertisements,
in order to reduce the complexity of the STCG, unidirectional which can introduce interference in the classification process.
edges that can be derived through transitivity are not explicitly The rationale behind the utilization of GAT lies in its attention
generated. mechanism, which enables the model to focus on the most
 An illustration of the STCG construction process is pre- relevant components, facilitating effective decision-making.
sented in Fig. 4. The left section of the figure displays a As depicted in Fig. 5, the Graph Attention Layer is the
list of eight network flows, each represented by its sequence only layer used in GAT. The feature vector corresponding to
features and statistical features. On the right side, the corre- any node i in STCG is h⃗i ∈ R F and after an aggregation
sponding STCG is depicted, which is constructed based on operation centered on the attention mechanism, the output is
 ′
these network flows. Within the STCG, each node represents the new feature vector h⃗i′ ∈ R F of that node. GAT uses αi j
a specific network flow, while the edges indicate the correla- to specify the importance of node j’s features to node i.
tions between pairs of network flows. These correlations are To take the structural information of STCG into account,
characterized by a feature vector [τ, s], where ‘τ ’ signifies αi j is computed when and only when there exists an edge ei j
the temporal correlation and ‘s’ represents the spatial corre- between node i and node j. αi j is calculated as in Eq. (3).
lation. In Fig. 4, the nodes enclosed within a dashed ellipse
represent concurrent network flows, and the edges connecting a T [W h⃗i ||W h⃗j ||We e⃗i j ])
 exp(LeakyReLU(⃗
 αi j = P , (3)
these nodes are bidirectional. Conversely, all other edges are k∈N exp(LeakyReLU(⃗
 i
 a T [W h⃗i ||W h⃗k ||We e⃗ik ])
unidirectional and have directions aligned with the temporal
flow, while thick arrows represent all of the unidirectional where “·T ” represents transposition and “||” is the concateedges that connect one group to the next. nation operation. Ni is the set of neighbor nodes of node
 i in the STCG including node i itself, e⃗i j is the feature
 vector of edge ei j . W is a weight matrix that is applied to
C. Graph Representation Learning Stage every node, and We is a weight matrix that is applied to
 Based on the STCG constructed from captured network every edge. a⃗ is the parameter of a single-layer feedforward
flows, the website fingerprinting task is transformed into a neural network. The W , We , and a⃗ are learnable parameters.
graph classification problem. Pre-labeled STCGs are input The LeakyReLU function is introduced for non-linearization,
7626 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

and the Softmax function is employed to calculate the final where pi represents the probability of the ith category, z i
αi j . Then the neighborhood representations of the nodes are represents the ith element in the input vector, and K represents
linearly accumulated according to αi j to obtain the output the total number of categories.
representation of one GAT layer for node i: We leverage the cross entropy function as the loss function:
 X N
 h⃗i′ = σ ( αi j W h⃗j ), (4) X
 H (y, p) = − yi log( pi ), (8)
 j∈Ni
 i=1
where σ (·) denotes an activation function. where H (y, p) represents the cross entropy function, y repre-
 Furthermore, the extension of the aforementioned attention sents the right label, p represents the model’s predicted label,
mechanism to a multi-head attention approach has demon- and N represents the total number of categories.
strated improved efficiency [39]. In our proposed approach, Adam [40] is a highly effective optimization algorithm
we employ the multi-head attention mechanism, where each widely utilized in various classification problems, particularly
head of the attention mechanism independently performs the in the realms of deep learning and neural network training. Its
attention operation as described previously. The resulting adaptive learning rate, efficient parameter updating, and ability
representations from each head are subsequently concatenated to mitigate the issue of gradient vanishing have positioned it as
together. one of the preferred optimizers for numerous machine learning
 X (k) tasks. Consequently, we choose to employ the Adam optimizer
 h⃗i′ = ||k=1
 K
 σ( αi j W (k) h⃗j ), (5) as the optimization algorithm in the STC-WF method.
 j∈Ni

where K represents the number of heads of the attention V. E VALUATION
mechanism. This section focuses on the evaluation of the proposed
 In STC-WF, as depicted in Fig. 3, we use three-head STC-WF method. We have conducted a thorough comparison
attention to operate node features aggregation for STCG. The between STC-WF and three state-of-the-art methods, comnode feature matrix output from each GAT is spliced, at which prehensively analyzing the efficacy of the proposed STC-WF
point the features of each node contain both their information approach. Since the datasets and code of the existing methods
and the information of neighboring nodes. are not open source, we can only implement these algorithms
 2) Self-Attention Graph Pooling Layer: In order to focus by ourselves and evaluate them on our dataset.
more on important nodes, and weaken the influence of noisy
nodes on recognition results, while reducing model parameters A. Experimental Settings
and improving training and testing efficiency, we use the
self-attention graph pooling mechanism [10] to pool the output 1) Dataset: As of now, there is no available dataset that
of the GAT layers. contains multiple flows generated during website browsing.
 In STC-WF, the SAGPool also utilizes the graph attention Therefore, we collected network traffic data from the browsing
mechanism to learn a score, which can be expressed as a one- activity of 21 commonly used websites using the China Environment for Network Innovations (CENI-HeFei) platform [41].
dimensional h⃗i′ in Eq. (5). SAGPool eliminates nodes in the
 The dataset encompasses a variety of website types, including
graph based on low scores while preserving essential graph
 video, music, news, live streaming, and forums.
information, thereby enhancing representation efficiency and
 To automate traffic generation and collection, we utilized
reducing computational and memory overhead. This pooling
 Selenium4 and QPA5 tools. Selenium, integrated with a test
approach draws inspiration from the maximum pooling operscript, was employed to simulate real-world network traffic
ation in Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to filter out
 by mimicking user browsing sessions such as entering URLs,
less significant information.
 accessing webpages, and scrolling. QPA, a process-based
 3) Readout Layer: Finally, the representation of the whole
 packet capture tool, facilitated the real-time identification
graph is obtained through the Readout Layer :
 of the process to which each packet belongs, enabling the
 H⃗G = Readout ({h⃗i |i ∈ G}). (6) recording of network traffic associated with the target website
 into a Pcap file.
 To replicate a realistic scenario, Selenium performed web-
D. Classification Stage site browsing operations for varying durations across each
 STC-WF uses a linear function to perform the linear trans- website. Random browsing sessions of 60, 30, and 10 seconds
formation on the output data of the Readout Layer . Then, were conducted, with 200 samples collected for each website,
a dropout function is employed to avoid over-fitting. and we collected data for 21 websites, which are shown in
 Finally, a Softmax function is used to obtain the predicted Table V in the Appendix. The resulting dataset consists of
probability vector indicating the likelihood that the input 4,200 Pcap files, occupying a total storage space of 21.1GB.
STCG belongs to each website: To ensure appropriate utilization, the dataset was divided into
 a training set, a validation set, and a test set. The size ratio
 ezi
 pi = P K , (7) 4 https://www.selenium.dev/
 zj
 j=1 e 5 https://github.com/l7dpi/openQPA/
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7627

of the training set to the validation set to the test set was set
at 3:1:1, which has been determined as the optimal ratio for
datasets at or below the ten-thousand level [42]. We performed
a 4-fold cross-validation, i.e., one copy is fixed as the test
set, and the other four copies are rotated to be the training
set and validation set. In addition, in order to avoid the
fluctuating effect on the results caused by the randomness
of data partitioning and deep learning, we selected 10 fixed
random seeds, each of which conducts 5 experiments. the
average of 50 experiments is used as our experimental results.
 2) Metrics: We use accuracy to measure the performance
of the model of website fingerprints. Accuracy is defined as
the number of samples correctly classified (NC) divided by
the total number of samples (NS):
 NC
 accuracy = . (9)
 NS
 In addition, pr ecision, r ecall, and F1-scor e are also
metrics we used. These metrics are defined based on four
concepts commonly used in classification tasks, namely True
Positive (TP), False Positive (FP), True Negative (TN), and
False Negative (FN). They are defined as:
 TP
 pr ecision = , (10) Fig. 6. The frequency of flow length of five websites browsing.
 T P + FP
 TP
 r ecall = , (11)
 T P + FN • GAP-WF [6] introduces the trace graph to describe the
 pr ecision × r ecall contextual correlation between network flows generated
 F1-scor e = 2 × . (12)
 pr ecision + r ecall by webpage browsing. In the trace graph, each node
 Additionally, the time consumption of website fingerprinting represents a network flow, and node i and node j have
methods is an important metric that encompasses both training edge ei j if and only if the two nodes satisfy two rules:
time and classifying time. node i and node j have the same local IP, and their
 3) Comparative Methods: In order to demonstrate the beginning time interval is no more than 2.39s. Then they
performance of the proposed STC-WF method, we selected utilize GNN to classify trace graphs.
three existing state-of-art methods for comparison, which 4) Implementation: We started the experiment in September
are introduced below. For the deep learning-based methods, 2022. The experiment platform was built on an HP laptop runi.e. GAP-WF and our proposed STC-WF, we train 100 and ning Windows 10 operating system, configured with Intel (R)
50 epochs, respectively. Core (TM) i7-10750H CPU (12 hyper-threads) @2.60GHz,
 • CUMUL [3] extracts fixed-size features from the cumu- 16GB RAM, and NVIDIA GeForce RTX2060 graphics card
 lative sum of packet sizes to capture the characteristics with 8 GiB of memory and 1,920 CUDA cores. We used Netof traffic traces. Subsequently, a Support Vector Machine workX to implement the graph construction and used PyTorch
 (SVM) is employed as a classifier for website classi- Geometric Library to implement graph neural network models.
 fication. In line with the evaluation settings employed The versions of NetworkX, Pytorch, and CUDA are 2.4,
 by CUMUL, we also consider setting the uplink packet 1.12.1, and 11.6, respectively.
 length as negative and the downlink packet length as
 positive. Additionally, we utilize the first 100 cumulative
 packet lengths, as well as the total number of uplink, B. Parameter Optimization
 downlink, and complete packets, as features for the 1) The Length of Sequence Features: We counted the length
 classification process. of the entire network flow in the dataset. Fig. 6 shows the
 • FineWP [4] defines U0 sequence based on cumula- frequency distribution of flow lengths, defined as the number
 tive packet lengths. It concludes that U0 sequences of of packets in a sequence, for 5 websites. Due to space
 different webpages in the uplink-dominant stage are dis- limitations, only these 5 websites are displayed. It can be seen
 tinguishable. It extracts three types of features during that for the 5 websites, the highest frequency flow lengths are
 the uplink-dominant stage, i.e., block features, sequence less than 20, and this rule applies to the other websites as
 features, and statistical features, and feeds them to a well according to statistical results. We conducted experiments
 Random Forest classifier. In this evaluation, we intercept using sequence features of different dimensions. The f1-scores
 the 20th to 100th packets of the U0 sequence as the for our classification with 20, 30, 40, and 50-dimensional
 sequence features and use statistical features in STC-WF sequence features were 0.9828, 0.9809, 0.9815, and 0.9823,
 as statistical features. respectively, indicating minimal differences between these
7628 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 7. Ranked contributions of individual statistical features.

 TABLE I Fig. 8. Experiment results of different methods.
 H YPERPARAMETERS OF GNN

results. Therefore, we select the first 20 packets’ size as
sequence features, which requires less zero padding while still
containing enough information.
 2) Selection of Statistical Features: Statistical features represent to some extent the overall characteristics of the flow Fig. 9. Distribution of f1-scores for four methods.
and are complementary to the sequence features. To cover as
much of the full length of the flow as possible, we calculated
the percentile of flow lengths in the dataset and found that the analyze the evaluation results. As shown in Fig. 8, we can
percentage of flows with lengths less than 150 exceeded 90%, see that STC-WF obtains the best performance in terms of
so we did statistics for the first 150 packets of each flow. these four metrics. Fig. 9 shows the box plot of the results
Fig.7 exhibits the top 10 statistical features that contribute of the f1-score for 50 experiments, from which it can be seen
most to the classification of our dataset using Random Forest. that the results of STC-WF do not show large fluctuations
In this figure, the first character of the name, such as a, u, due to random factors such as dataset partitioning. We further
and d, denotes the statistical features of the complete flow, the analyze the reasons for the performance disparity among the
uplink flow, and the downlink flow, respectively. For example, four methods.
dlen means the number of packets of the downlink flow. CUMUL, as evaluated on our dataset, achieves the lowest
We select the top 6 features with the highest contribution, i.e., accuracy of 89.6% among the four methods considered. This
umax, alen, uper 9, dlen, uper 8, and dmean as the statistical can be attributed to its reliance solely on the cumulative packet
features. length as a feature. The cumulative packet length is derived
 The 20-dimensional sequence features and the from a sequence of packets arranged in chronological order.
6-dimensional statistical features are combined to be a As discussed in Section III, the arrival order and quantity of
26-dimensional vector for each node. Although more features packets are not constant, which results in the lack of stability
can provide more information, subsequent experiments for CUMUL.
demonstrate that the 26-dimensional feature is adequate. FineWP achieves the second-best performance on our
 3) Hyperparameters of GNN: We conduct an extensive dataset. FineWP addresses the instability of packet sequences
search through hyperparameter space to make the proposed by focusing on the uplink-dominant stage of data interaction.
model achieve its best performance. Table I shows the selected It extracts features based on the cumulative length sequence
hyperparameters. of packets, incorporating block features, sequence features,
 and statistical features. The combination of these three features significantly enhances the generalization capability of
C. Comparison Results the model. Even with modifications to its features, FineWP
 In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of STC-WF continues to perform admirably. However, it does rely heavily
and the other three methods using our dataset. Then we on prior knowledge, such as the need for obtaining the average
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7629

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON ON RUNNING T IME

number of blocks in the dataset, which poses challenges for
practical application.
 In terms of GAP-WF, it constructs the website fingerprinting
model from the perspective of network flow, distinguishing Fig. 10. Impact of the number of epochs on validation accuracy of STC-WF
 and GAP-WF.
itself from the first two methods. This approach yields better
classification ability, as evidenced by the experiment results
 TABLE III
showing a 4% higher classification accuracy compared to
 I MPACT OF G RAPH C ONSTRUCTION S CHEME
CUMUL because GAP-WF utilizes graph attention mechanisms to focus on key nodes. However, when constructing
the traffic trace graph, GAP-WF simply connects nodes with
a flow start interval of less than 2.39s, which does not
fully leverage the advantages of graph-structured data. Additionally, its node features consist of the first 30 packets’
length sequence and packet arrival interval sequence of the
flow, but it is not optimal according to FineWP’s practice. These limitations in utilizing graph-structured data and
graph neural networks impact the overall performance of
GAP-WF. STC-WF and GAP-WF is shown in Fig. 10, and we can find
 In contrast to CUMUL and FineWP, which rely on that STC-WF not only has a higher accuracy than GAP-WF,
cumulative packet length sequences, STC-WF extracts mul- but it also converges faster, indicating that the node features
tidimensional features from the network flow, resulting in and edge definitions are better than GAP-WF.
improved stability for website fingerprinting. By constructing
the STCG through the exploration of temporal and spatial
correlations between network flows, STC-WF captures the D. Impact of Graph Construction Scheme
unique network flow behavioral pattern of different websites In this subsection, we analyze STC-WF by controlling
from graph structure data. In summary, the node features in the variables and verify the effectiveness of STCG by comparative
STCG are more representative, and the inclusion of edge fea- experiment. In this case, we only change the graph constructures further enhances the advantages of graph structure data. tion scheme of the graph, keeping the graph neural network
As demonstrated by the experimental results, the STC-WF unchanged. We obtain Fully-connected Graph with Uniform
method stands out as an excellent approach. Edge Weight (FcG-UEW) and Fully-connected Graph (FcG),
 Another important performance metric is time consumption. respectively, then use these two models to compare with
We calculated the running time of each method, including both STC-WF, and the results are shown in Table III.
training time and testing time, and the results are shown in We obtain FcG-UEW by letting the nodes in the inter-flow
Table II. spatio-temporal correlation graph connect with each other and
 As can be seen from Table II, CUMUL and FineWP have setting the weights of edges of the graph as value 1 uniformly.
the shortest running time, which is one of the advantages We set the edge features of the graph in FcG-UEW to spatioof the traditional machine learning-based approach. We focus temporal correlation vector described in Section IV to get
on comparing GAP-WF and STC-WF because both use deep FcG. As shown in Table III, the performances of FcG-UEW
learning algorithms. We can see that STC-WF has an advan- and FcG are quite good with 95.56% accuracy and 96.86%
tage in terms of running time. The reason is clear, the graph accuracy, respectively. It is worth noting that we simply
neural network model of STC-WF is simpler than GAP-WF. connect all nodes to each other in the graph, which means
Our graph neural network model is equivalent to one of the that combining information from multiple flows is an effective
blocks in GAP-WF, which means that the GAP-WF model is way of website fingerprinting. It is also determined that the
twice as complex as ours and has more parameters. This is spatio-temporal correlation between flows is useful because all
confirmed by the running time results, where STC-WF has metrics of FcG are better than that of FcG-UEW.
about 50% less running time than GAP-WF, both in training Compared to GAP-WF, FcG has better performance.
time and testing time. We attribute this to the fact that, unlike GAP-WF, FcG not
 We compare GAP-WF and STC-WF once more. The impact only employs a fully connected graph construction but also
of the number of epochs on the validation accuracy of incorporates node features and edge features. Additionally,
7630 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY ON GAT AND SAGP OOL IN STC-WF W EBSITE L IST

the STCG used in STC-WF is derived by removing redundant edges from the fully connected graph. These redundant
edges can introduce interference, thereby affecting the results.
Therefore, it is crucial to reasonably consider the correlations
between the flows and accurately construct the graph data to
describe these relationships. By doing so, the advantages of
graph neural networks can be effectively leveraged to achieve
the ideal results.
 We also input these 26-dimensional features to two typical
machine learning methods, Random Forest and K-Nearest
Neighbors, which yield the f1-score of only 0.8237 and
0.7410. The reason for this discrepancy is that these traditional machine learning methods without graphs are unable
to effectively handle the correlation information in the traffic
data, leading to reduced accuracy. TABLE VI
 S TATISTICAL F EATURES AND T HEIR F ORMULAS
E. Ablation Experiments
 We conducted ablation experiments to demonstrate that both
GAT and SAGPool positively impact traffic identification and
both are indispensable. In this experiment, we train different
versions of STC-WF by systematically removing either GAT
or SAGPool, resulting in variations of STC-WF, namely, the
STC-WF with GAT-only and STC-WF with SAGPool-only.
 The classification results from our ablation experiments are
presented in Table IV. These results clearly demonstrate that
incorporating both GAT and SAGPool into the STC-WF model
yields higher accuracy compared to utilizing only one of them.
Thus, the inclusion of both GAT and SAGPool is crucial for
further enhancing the classification efficiency of the STC-WF real-world website browsing sessions, revealing explicit and
model. stable spatio-temporal correlations among these flows. Leveraging these findings, we constructed an STCG to capture and
F. Summary represent these correlations effectively. Subsequently, we proposed a robust website fingerprinting method, named STC-WF,
 In this evaluation, we conducted a comprehensive series which leverages the analysis of the corresponding STCG using
of experiments to compare the performance of the STC-WF GNN. Specifically, the GAT and SAGPool mechanisms are
method with state-of-the-art approaches. The experimental employed to acquire a comprehensive representation of the
results clearly demonstrate that the STC-WF method sur- STCG. Experimental results demonstrated the superior perforpasses these existing methods. Furthermore, by evaluating the mance of STC-WF, surpassing three state-of-the-art methods
rationality of the graph construction scheme for inter-flow and achieving the highest accuracy in website fingerprinting.
correlations among network flows, this evaluation showcases
the capability of the STC-WF method to employ simpler GNN
models. Moreover, through ablation experiments, we estab- A PPENDIX
lish the indispensability of GAT and SAGPool in GNN See Tables V and VI.
architectures.
 R EFERENCES
 VI. C ONCLUSION
 [1] P. Schneider, “TCP/IP traffic classification based on port numbers,” Divi-
 In this paper, we conducted an extensive analysis of sion Appl. Sci., Cambridge, MA, USA, Tech. Rep. 5, 1996, vol. 2138,
the behavior exhibited by network flows generated during pp. 1–6.
TAN et al.: INTER-FLOW SPATIO-TEMPORAL CORRELATION ANALYSIS BASED WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 7631

 [2] L. Deri, M. Martinelli, T. Bujlow, and A. Cardigliano, “nDPI: Open- [26] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet
 source high-speed deep packet inspection,” in Proc. Int. Wireless fingerprinting: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with
 Commun. Mobile Comput. Conf. (IWCMC), Aug. 2014, pp. 617–622. N-shot learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 [3] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc. Nov. 2019, pp. 1131–1148.
 23rd Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2016, pp.1–15. [27] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A
 [4] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained web- channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detecpage fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted tion,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, 2023.
 traffic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, [28] Y. Wang, H. Xu, Z. Guo, Z. Qin, and K. Ren, “SnWF: Website
 2021. fingerprinting attack by ensembling the snapshot of deep learning,” IEEE
 [5] M. Shen, Y. Liu, S. Chen, L. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Webpage fingerprint- Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 1214–1226, 2022.
 ing using only packet length information,” in Proc. ICC - IEEE Int. [29] G. Cherubin, R. Jansen, and C. Troncoso, “Online website fingerprinting:
 Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2019, pp. 1–6. Evaluating website fingerprinting attacks on Tor in the real world,” in
 [6] J. Lu et al., “GAP-WF: Graph attention pooling network for fine-grained Proc. 31st USENIX Security Symp., Aug. 2022, pp. 753–770.
 SSL/TLS website fingerprinting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. [30] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 (IJCNN), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–8. convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
 [7] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting [31] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decenon encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. 27th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 Secur. Symp. (NDSS), 2020, pp. 1–18. graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 [8] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 “The graph neural network model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 20, [32] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 no. 1, pp. 61–80, Jan. 2009. and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 [9] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
 Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [33] I. Grigorik, High Performance Browser Networking. Sebastopol, CA,
 Represent., 2018, pp. 1–12. USA: O’Reilly Media, 2013.
[10] J. Lee, I. Lee, and J. Kang, “Self-attention graph pooling,” in Proc. 36th [34] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “FaceNet: A unified
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 97, 2019, pp. 3734–3743. embedding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
[11] B. Knyazev, G. W. Taylor, and M. Amer, “Understanding attention Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 815–823.
 and generalization in graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. [35] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face
 Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 4204–4214. recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
[12] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify Jun. 2018, pp. 5265–5274.
 encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., [36] W. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Tang, S. Wang, and J. Tang, “Graph structure
 Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789. learning for robust graph neural networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD
[13] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 66–74.
 encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in [37] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart-
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016, phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 pp. 1–10. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[14] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted [38] Y. Zhai and X. Zheng, “Random forest based traffic classification method
 traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute in SDN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Big Data Blockchain
 bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8, (ICCBB), Nov. 2018, pp. 1–5.
 pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017. [39] J.-B. Cordonnier, A. Loukas, and M. Jaggi, “Multi-head attention:
[15] B. Anderson, S. Paul, and D. McGrew, “Deciphering malware’s use of Collaborate instead of concatenate,” 2020, arXiv:2006.16362.
 TLS (without decryption),” J. Comput. Virol. Hacking Techn., vol. 14, [40] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 no. 3, pp. 195–211, Aug. 2018. 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[16] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective [41] (Jan. 28, 2022). China Environment for Network Innovations (CENIattacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. 23rd Hefei). [Online]. Available: https://ceni.ustc.edu.cn/
 USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2014, pp. 143–157. [42] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, per-
[17] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “k-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website spectives, and prospects,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 255–260,
 fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Jul. 2015.
 Security), Aug. 2016, pp. 1187–1203.
[18] P. Krämer et al., “ProFi: Scalable and efficient website fingerprinting,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1271–1286,
 Feb. 2024. Xiaobin Tan (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
[19] Z. Wang, “The applications of deep learning on traffic identification,” and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Sci-
 BlackHat USA, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1–10, 2015. ence and Technology of China (USTC), China, in
[20] R. Li, X. Xiao, S. Ni, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, “Byte segment neural 1996 and 2003, respectively. He is currently an
 network for network traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Associate Professor with the Department of Automa-
 Symp. Quality Service, Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10. tion, School of Information Science and Technology,
[21] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted Internet traffic classi- USTC. His research interests include future internet
 fication is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM architecture, information security, and multimedia
 Workshops, Apr. 2019, pp. 680–687. communication.
[22] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[23] Y. Liang, Y. Xie, S. Tang, S. Yu, X. Liu, and J. Hu, “Network
 traffic content identification based on time-scale signal modeling,” IEEE
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2607–2624, Chuang Peng received the B.S. degree from Tongji
 Mar. 2023. University in 2020 and the M.S. degree from the
[24] M. Shen, Z. Gao, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Efficient fine-grained website Institute of Advanced Technology, University of
 fingerprinting via encrypted traffic analysis with deep learning,” in Science and Technology of China (USTC), in 2023.
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQOS), Jun. 2021, His research interests include information security
 pp. 1–10. and future networking with emphasis on security.
[25] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Oct. 2018,
 pp. 1928–1943.
7632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Peng Xie received the B.S. degree from Xidian Shuangwu Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 University in 2023. He is currently pursuing the and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Science
 M.S. degree with the Department of Automation, and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei, China,
 USTC. His research interests include cybersecurity in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He is currently
 and artificial intelligence. an Associate Professor with USTC. His research
 interests include future networks, multimedia communication, and network security.

 Hao Wang received the B.S. degree from East China
 University of Science and Technology in 2020. He is
 currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the Institute of Advanced Technology, USTC, China. His
 research interests include encrypted network traffic
 identification.

 Cliff Zou (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 and M.S. degrees from the University of Science
 and Technology of China (USTC) in 1996 and
 Mengxiang Li received the B.S. degree from the 1999, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the
 Department of Cyberspace Security, USTC, in 2021, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineerwhere he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree. ing, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA,
 His research interests include information security USA, in 2005. He is currently a Professor with
 privacy and network traffic identification. the Department of Computer Science, University
 of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA, where he
 is also the Program Coordinator of the master’s
 degree in digital forensics and the master’s degree in
 cyber security and privacy. His research interests include cyber security and
 computer networking.