IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 7147

 K-GetNID: Knowledge-Guided Graphs for Early
 and Transferable Network Intrusion Detection
 Minxiao Wang, Ning Yang , Member, IEEE, and Ning Weng , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Developing early and transferable Network Intru- tasks [30], [33], such as the diversity of traffic caused by
sion Detection Systems (NIDSs) is essential for robust network different network environments and the fixed and biased
security. Early detection prevents further damage, while parameter selection during the training stage may not be
transferable NIDSs enables reuse across diverse networks.
For Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)-based suitable for the deployment scenario.
NIDSs, transferability significantly reduces data collection and For transferability, given the broad application scenarios
annotation costs for timely attack mitigation. Current DL- of NIDSs, a DL-based NIDS model trained for one scenario
based early intrusion detection studies often focus on identifying should be easily adaptable or fine-tuned for another. However,
attacks from the first few packets, neglecting the crucial the high cost associated with collecting and annotating a
aspect of adjustable early detection. Additionally, most DLbased NIDS methods overlook transferability during both design NIDS dataset for each scenario is often unaffordable. In the
and evaluation phases. To address these limitations, we propose context of early intrusion detection, a proficient NIDS model
K-GetNID, a knowledge-guided graph learning-based NIDS should demonstrate the ability to detect intrusions early and
that excels in both early and transferability. We introduce a generalize to distribution shifts in inputs. Early intrusion
Heterogeneous Temporal Graph (HTGraph) to represent the detection involves discerning whether network traffic flows are
dynamic feature series of network flows, providing enough
information for early detection. Additionally, we construct this benign or malicious in the initial stages, leading to changes in
HTGraph format based on prior knowledge about feature input patterns and providing only a partial view of the original
types and correlations to assist the neural network in learning input traffic. These alterations in input significantly degrade
general and transferable knowledge for intrusion detection. the inference accuracy of trained NIDS models.
We develop a corresponding Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Although early intrusion detection challenges current DL-
Neural Network (HTGNN) model to learn from the HTGraph
format. Furthermore, an Adjustable Early Detection Decoder based NIDSs, it is essential so that correct counterattack
is designed to enhance the generalization of the proposed responses can be implemented before an attack can inflict
model to the input distribution shifts caused by early detection. more damage [3], [29]. Early intrusion detection also offers
Experiments on CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets show additional benefits, such as saving time in collecting raw
that K-GetNID matches the performance of deep learning packets and extracting features. Additionally, we observe that
methods, excelling in adjustable early intrusion detection and
transferability. many existing DL-based NIDS models [4], [13], [21], [23],
 [29] could be capable of early intrusion detection if trained
 Index Terms— Intrusion detection systems, graph neural
 with early detection data, and their early detection accuracy is
networks, transferability, early detection, deep learning.
 only slightly degraded [36]. Therefore, the real challenge in
 I. I NTRODUCTION early intrusion detection lies in the trade-off between accuracy
 and response speed, which cannot be further adjusted after

E ARLY and transferable NIDSs play a crucial role in
 addressing the challenges posed by the dynamic and
diverse nature of network environments for ensuring network
 the training stage. In particular, the trained NIDS models
 are not generalized to distribution shifts caused by early
 detection [35].
security. An investigation into potential solutions for network
 Learning early and transferable NIDS models requires
intrusion detection suggests that NIDSs utilizing ML and
 these models to identify attack behavior patterns that remain
DL models could prove highly effective [1], [27]. However,
 consistent across varying application scenarios and input
existing ML/DL models still encounter limitations, pose open
 domains. Consequently, we contend that training models to
questions, and face unique challenges in the context of NIDS
 capture the correlations among numerous input items (such
 Manuscript received 22 December 2023; revised 24 June 2024; as features in tabular format) is more crucial than learning
accepted 16 July 2024. Date of publication 22 July 2024; date of the absolute values of independent input items. While handcurrent version 29 July 2024. This work was supported in part by Dr. picked features, grounded in extensive domain knowledge
Yang’s SIUC Startup and NSF under Award 2018919. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was from network security experts, significantly contribute to
Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Ning Yang.) distinguishing different types of traffic. However, the use of
 Minxiao Wang and Ning Weng are with the Computer Engineering Program, a tabular format in feature-based methods poses a challenge
School of ECBE, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale,
IL 62901 USA (e-mail: minxiao.wang@siu.edu; nweng@siu.edu). due to the existence of heterogeneous and sparse relationships
 Ning Yang is with the Information Technology Program, School of Com- among feature values’a current open research question [19].
puting, Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, IL 62901 USA Utilizing Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)-based models, which
(e-mail: nyang@siu.edu).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3431932 are fully connected, is difficult to learn feature correlations
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7148 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

from scratch [2]. Furthermore, the tabular format fails to proposed HTGNN model, trained with attention restricted by
provide temporal information, rendering tabular-based NIDS the graph format, achieves better transferability than existing
methods insufficiently generalized to handle dynamic inputs, methods. To enable adjustable early intrusion detection in
such as early intrusion detection. the inference stage, we further designed an Adjustable
 The recent state-of-the-art tabular model FT- Early Detection Decoder to train the HTGNN model for
transformer [12] improves the performance of deep models generalization to input distribution shifts caused by early
on tabular data by separately embedding numerical and detection. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
categorical features and modeling the embeddings with 1) Novel NIDS traffic representation format and
the Transformer model. Additionally, the FT-transformer detection model: developed a comprehensive NIDS
model demonstrates effectiveness in the NIDS field [37]. system by integrating a HTGraph with an HTGNN-
Splitting different types of features and modeling the feature based NIDS model. The HTGraph format includes
embeddings with the self-attention mechanism [34] addressed edges that capture feature correlations and temporal
the mentioned heterogeneous and sparse relationship issues dependencies, while the HTGNN aggregates feature
but not tackle the lack of temporal information. Feature information through the pre-defined edges based on prior
series-based methods can provide temporal information to knowledge.
NIDS, but extending the temporal dimension increases the 2) Improving NIDS transferability: the proposed
size of each data sample significantly compared to the tabular HTGraph format and HTGNN NIDS model leverage
format. Consequently, applying the Transformer in feature prior knowledge to guide modeling the correlations
series format incurs high time complexity and memory usage. among input elements, enhancing attention calculation
Despite efforts to enhance the efficiency of Transformers on efficiency. The results of transfer learning demonstrate
time series, as seen in models like Informer [44], performing that the simplified attention-based model exhibits better
self-attention on a large scale of multivariate time series transferability.
(multiple feature series) remains inefficient. Recognizing 3) Enhancing generalization to early intrusion detecthe limitations of tabular and feature series formats has tion: the designed Adjustable Early Detection Decoder
motivated the design of a new type of NIDS data format that enables the proposed HTGNN model to generalize to
incorporates prior knowledge to overcome these shortcomings. the distribution shifts caused by early detection. The
 An alternative data format to tabular and feature series is results demonstrate that the proposed NIDS model can
the graph structure, as both provide numerical and relational still maintain its detection accuracy under distribution
information, allowing the incorporation of prior knowledge. shifts in the inference stage.
For example, provenance-based studies against Advanced In the remainder of this paper, we introduce related works
and Persistent Threats (APTs) such as UNICORN [14] and in Sec.II and preliminary in Sec.III. We describe the entire
HOLMES [24], use graph structures to analyze the correlation pipeline of our proposed framework in Sec.IV, including
among actions or events for detecting attacks. For example, network flow HTGraph construction, the HTGNN-based NIDS
in the NIDSs on enterprise networks, graph embedding model, and the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder. In Sec.V,
learning [18], [28] show the effectiveness for detecting lateral we present the evaluation results and analysis. Finally,
movement of APTs. Graph formats and graph neural networks we provide our conclusion in Sec.VI.
possess the capability to explicitly capture inter-temporal and
inter-variable relationships, a challenge that traditional and II. R ELATED W ORKS
other deep neural network-based methods frequently struggle This section introduces feature-based NIDSs and the
with [17]. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is graph-based NIDSs. We also summarize the similarities and
no existing graph-based NIDS that is flow-based. Drawing differences between our work and existing works.
inspiration from the successful application of HTGraph in
other fields [10], [22], this paper investigates the use of
HTGraph to represent network flow for NIDS design. A. Feature-Based Network Intrusion Detection
 In this paper, we propose a novel framework, as shown in Nowadays, flow-based NIDSs typically consists of a
Fig. 2, which incorporates prior knowledge into a NIDS design preprocessing module that converts traffic flows into samples
using heterogeneous temporal graphs and neural network with a particular data format and a detection module that
models. The proposed heterogeneous graph data format is predicts classes of traffic flows based on the format [25], [39],
utilized to represent each network flow, incorporating high- [43]. This field is predominantly dominated by the tabular
level prior knowledge such as feature types and dependence data format, specifically the feature vector. Feature-based
between features. Additionally, we extend the heterogeneous methods [38] extract pre-defined features from traffic flows
graph to a HTGraph by recording dynamically updated and feed these features into neural network models. However,
features. For this HTGraph format, we design a corresponding the tabular format lacks temporal information, making it
HTGNN-based NIDS model. unsuitable for adjustable early intrusion detection. Besides
 Furthermore, edges based on prior knowledge can reduce the tabular format, another existing feature-based format is
the computational load in feature series format by narrowing the feature series. He et al. [15] introduced a Multimodalthe self-attention calculation space from global to the Sequential data format in their work. Doriguzzi-Corin et al.
predefined edge range. The results demonstrate that the developed a sampling window-based packet sequences data
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7149

Fig. 1. The different NIDS data formats. The network traffic can be constructed in different formats to leverage the different DL models and different types
of information in them. This figure presents the differences among Tabular, Feature Series, existing topology graph, and the proposed graph.

 TABLE I TABLE II
 C OMPARISON W ITH E XISTING F EATURE -BASED C OMPARING A DOPTED G RAPH S TRUCTURE W ITH E XISTING
 N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS G RAPH -BASED N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS

format for DDoS detection in their study [7]. While the feature
 in each snapshot. Hu et al. [16] propose a graph embedding
series format is similar to the feature vector as they both use a
 method to model the packet interactions in network traffic for
pre-defined feature set, the feature series format also records
 NIDS.
the dynamic trends of all the features as packets arrive. Feature
 Most existing graph-based NIDS convert network traffic
series-based methods typically adopt learning methods, such
 flows into a dynamic IP address graph. Their primary advanas Transformer and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which
 tage lies in the ability of the graph structure to incorporate
are also used in the field of time series learning.
 the “global” topology of cyberspace and provide insights
 into the evolutionary patterns of host-to-host communication
B. Graph-Based Network Intrusion Detection interactions. These graph-based methods focus on the global
 In recent years, there has been a significant amount view of the interaction among hosts and classify whether graph
of research focused on NIDSs that utilize graph analysis. nodes (hosts) behave maliciously.
Shen et al. [32] introduce the Traffic Interaction Graph
(TIG) as a comprehensive representation of encrypted
DApp flows, incorporating multidimensional features within C. Differences From Existing Work
bidirectional client-server interactions. Yao et al. [41] design As shown in Fig. 1, most of the existing Graph-based
spatial-temporal deep learning on network communication NIDS works represent the hosts in the network as the nodes
graphs, using the graph structure as the additional prior of the graph, and the communication between two hosts is
information. Zola et al. [45] propose a pipeline for working represented as an edge. The packet trace records or the network
with network traffic data, extracting temporal graph-based traffic flow records are considered as the interactions among all
(node) features and finally detecting malicious nodes (IPs). nodes in the graph along the time dimension. In our method,
Lo et al. [20] propose E-GraphSAGE, a GNN approach that we define the dynamically updated features in the Feature
allows capturing both edge features of a graph as well as Series format as the nodes of the graph. When only one
the topological information for network intrusion detection in packet arrives, our graph has N nodes to represent the N
IoT networks. Duan et al. [8] propose a Dynamic Line Graph different features. For each arriving packet, the graph will add
Neural Network (DLGNN)-based intrusion detection method N nodes to represent the updated features. In our graph, the
with semi-supervised learning. The DLGNN extracts dynamic edges connect nodes along the feature’s spatial and temporal
lines (edges) features by learning from flow statistics features dimensions.
7150 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE III
 S UMMARY OF S YMBOLS AND D ESCRIPTIONS

 Although our work also adopts a graph structure, it should Our framework aims to embed the heterogeneous and weak
be noted that our method is fundamentally different from correlated features f into representation vectors e ∈ Rd ,
the existing graph-based NIDS methods [16], [20]. Instead where d is the dimension of embedding vectors. Therefore,
of utilizing network topology information or packet-sending the embedding model G embed seeks to learn parameters θ1 as
interactions, K-GetNID employs a heterogeneous temporal follows:
graph to model different correlations among dynamic feature
 Gθembed (H T Graph f low (T, f i,t
 x
 )) → h i,t
 x
 (2)
series. Therefore, K-GetNID is a feature-based NIDS method 1

to represent flow behaviors and classify the entire graph x refers to a flow’s x type ith dynamic statistics
 where f i,t
as benign or malicious flow. Graph formats and graph feature at time t.
neural networks have the capability to explicitly model inter- Another model G pr ed aims to learn parameters θ2 to predict
temporal and inter-variable relationships, a task that traditional whether the flow is malicious or not, as given in Equation (3).
and other deep neural network-based methods often find The prediction is based on the updated HTGraph, in which
challenging [17]. x
 nodes’ representations are replaced by embedding vectors h i,t
 obtained from Equation (2),
 III. P RELIMINARY pr ed
 Gθ2 (H T Graph f low (T, h i,t
 x
 )) → pr ediction (3)
 In this section, we introduce the concepts related to using
HTGraphs to formalize the NN application for flow-based x refers to the learned embedding for feature nodes
 where h i,t
NIDS. Specifically, an HTGraph is generated to represent vi,t .
a network traffic flow for the GNN-based NIDS model to
classify whether the flow is malicious or not. The expert- IV. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
defined heterogeneous features, dynamically extracted with the
 In this section, we introduce the design of our proposed
flow’s packets arriving, are included as nodes in the graph.
 framework. First, we present the overview structure of
The correlation among different features and the sequential
 the whole framework in Sec. IV-A. We describe how to
relationships of the same feature are represented by spatial
 construct a heterogeneous temporal graph format to represent
and temporal edges of an HTGraph. All defined notations are
 network traffic in Sec. IV-B. Then we illustrate the design of
summarized in Table III.
 heterogeneous temporal graph neural networks for NIDS in
 Following the definition in [42], the heterogeneous graph
 Sec. IV-C. Finally, we delve into the details of the Adjustable
can be defined as G = (V, E, OV , R E ), where V represents
 Early Detection Decoder in Sec. IV-D.
nodes with different types, E represents edges, OV is the set
of object types and R E is the relation types.
 Definition: Given a network flow f low, which consists A. Framework Overview
of a series of packets pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktn , statistical In the following, we introduce our heterogeneous temporal
features ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f m )t are dynamically updated for NIDS GNN-based framework for NIDS, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
prediction. Our goal is to predict f low is malicious or benign The framework comprises six key steps: features extraction,
at duration T through learning on a heterogeneous temporal relation definition, HTGraph construction, HTGNN model,
features graph H T Graph f low (T ), which is constructed from Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, and heterogeneous
dynamic statistical features as given in Equation (1), knowledge fusion and classification.
 First, when presented with a network flow, we record
 H T Graph f low (T ) = (V x , E homo , E heter , E temp ) (1)
 the dynamically updated features as sequences with new
where x refers to feature types, V x refers to the set of nodes packets arriving. These pre-defined features are heterobelonging to type x, E homo refers to the edges connect pairs of geneous and have different scales or units. Based on
homogeneous nodes, E heter refers to the edges connect pairs strong relations created for the same type of features
of heterogeneous nodes, E temp refers to the temporal edges. (homogeneous features), these homogeneous nodes assemble
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7151

Fig. 2. Our proposed NIDS Framework. It incorporates prior knowledge (features types and correlations) in NIDSs design using HTGraph and HTGNN
models.

into a sub-graph. By considering multiple varying features,
an HTGraph is generated, which consists of nodes representing
heterogeneous features at different times. We also define
three types of edges to establish correlation among features:
“Heter-Correlation edge”, “Homo-Correlation edge” and
“Temporal edge”.
 Subsequently, with the constructed HTGraph, multiple
HTGNN layers are designed to generate node (features)
embeddings. Corresponding to the three edge types, three
types of GNN layers independently aggregate information
through each type of edge. During this step, most information
is still aggregated among homogeneous neighbors. Finally,
we employ the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder to generate
embedding for each type of feature. A fusion network is
then applied to combine heterogeneous embeddings (learned
knowledge) for further prediction.

B. Network Flow HTGraph Construction
 Fig. 3. Heterogeneous temporal graph-based representation of NIDS’s
 Data pre-processing is widely recognized as an essential feature-based traffic flow. (The feature types used by the CIC-IDS-2017
 dataset are used as introducing examples.)
stage in anomaly detection and is found to predominantly rely
on expert domain knowledge for identifying the most relevant
parts of network traffic and constructing the initial candidate update features with new packets arriving. Another aspect is
set of traffic features [6]. Compared with feature vectors, constructing multiple feature sequences into a graph, with
graphs are more flexible, allowing us to create correlations details introduced in the following Sec. IV-B2.
among features and depict features’ dynamic updating trends In this work, we utilize the statistical feature set provided in
as packets arrive. In this work, we enhance traditional traffic the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset [31], comprising 80 features. These
features by representing network flow in the form of an features encompass different attribute types, value scales, and
HTGraph. In this section, we introduce the traffic feature set a mix of discrete and continuous variables (heterogeneous).
used in this paper and then present the details of constructing First, because we have already adopted feature sequences
an HTGraph with those features. instead of a single feature value, the 80 features can be
 1) Statistical Features: Feature extraction is a crucial step simplified to 28 features by discarding some excess features,
in all knowledge discovery tasks, including NIDS. From such as tot_l_ f w_ pkt, f w_ pkt_l_max, f w_ pkt_l_min,
multiple published NIDS datasets, we find that the chosen f w_ pkt_l_avg, f w_ pkt_l_std, which represent total, maxfeature sets differ significantly. Rather than delving into imum, minimum, average, and standard deviation size of
optimizing the feature set to maximize relevance with labels, packets in the forward direction. These are replaced by
our focus is on enhancing the effectiveness of a fixed feature one feature sequence: “each packet size in the forward
set by formatting features in a new structure. direction. Then, based on feature types, we categorize
 One aspect of improvement involves using a dynamically the 28 features into 5 types: “time” (3), “packets” (8),
updated feature sequence instead of a single feature value. “binary” (9), “bulk” (6), and “window” (2). The details
We anticipate that the feature sequence can provide more about statistical features used in this work are shown
temporal information to better distinguish and classify in Table VIII.
network traffic as normal or anomalous. Fortunately, extracting We would like to remark that the chosen feature set is not
the mentioned feature sequence doesn’t incur significant tied to the method, the features and feature types can all be
computational resources. Because during dataset creation or customized. The utilization of specific features of CIC-IDSthe practical NIDS detection process, the feature extraction 2017 and the following graph construction on those features
programs, such as NetFlow, Argus, and CICFlowMeter, always are just examples to explain the concepts and methods.
7152 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 d) Temporal edge (E temp ): We further take temporal
 dependency into account. Since we have already extended
 features to feature sequences, which record the updated
 features after the packet arrives. Hence, the neighbors in the
 same features, such as f i,tx and f x
 i,t+1 , have temporal relation
 x
 ei,(t,t+1) , where t is packet arriving sequence number instead
 of actual time and i is the sequence of features in type
 x. Therefore, the temporal edge is represented as E temp =
 x
 {ei,(t,t+1) |x ∈ {times, packets, binar y, bulk, win}}. In contrast to the homo-edge and heter-edge, where edge connections
 show binary direction correlations, temporal edges are
 unidirectional. Messages can only be shared from the early
 nodes to late nodes.

Fig. 4. Heter-correlation edges decided by the usages of basic feature series. Algorithm 1 The Function of Graph Construction
(The features used by the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset are used as introducing Input: Network traffic f low = { pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktT }
examples.) Output: H T Graph : (V x , E homo , E heter , E temp )

 2) HTGraph Construction: As we analyzed before, the function G RAPH CONSTRUCT( f low)
challenges posed by heterogeneous and weakly correlated for t = 1 T do
features motivate us to seek a more suitable format for sub f low(t) = { pkt1 , pkt2 , . . . , pktt }
representing network flows. This shift aims to achieve better ( f 1 , . . . , f m )t = F EATURE E XTRACT(sub f low(t))
intrusion detection performance by modeling heterogeneous Split f 1 , . . . , f m into 5 sets:
spatial dependencies among different types of features. {·}times , {·} pkt , {·}bin , {·}bulk , {·}win
 As illustrated in Fig. 3, the extracted feature sequences for set x in the 5 sets do
are transformed into HTGraph structure H T Graph f low (T ). for i = 1 T si ze(set x ) do
Following the definition in Equation (1), the HTGraph consists V x ← f i,t x ∈ set x
of four components: V x , E homo , E heter , E temp . x
 E temp ← ei,(t−1,t) to connect ( f i,t−1
 x x)
 , f i,t
 a) Nodes (V x ): First, we consider the dynamically
 j),t to connect ( f i,t , f j,t )
 E homo ← e(i, x x x
updated statistical features ( f 1 , f 2 , . . . , f m )t as nodes, and end for
their values are nodes’ initial values. Then, based on the for set y in the rest 4sets do
feature types, corresponding nodes are divided into x different for i = 1 T si ze(set x ), j = 1 T si ze(set y ) do
types. In this work, the number of node types x is 5, which x , f y sharing the same basic feature
 if f i,t i,t
are “times”, “packets”, “binary”, “bulk”, and “window”. then
 x,y x, fy
 b) Homo-correlation edge (E homo ): In H T Graph f low , E heter ← e(i, j),t to connect f i,t j,t
the homo-correlation edges are those links between homogeneous nodes (nodes of the same type but representing
different features), shown as the blue links in Fig. 3. Although
homo-correlation edges share the same color, they actually C. Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Neural Networks
have different types, which are the same as the connected In this section, we formally present our HTGNN designed
nodes’ type. Indeed homo-correlation edge is represented as to address the challenges posed by heterogeneous features
 j),t |x ∈ {times, packets, binar y, bulk, win}}.
E homo = {e(i,x
 and early intrusion detection. HTGNN model comprises
Because features of the same type have similar value two main parts: (1) dynamic features graph embedding;
scales or the same unit, they naturally exhibit strong (2) heterogeneous knowledge fusion. Fig. 5 illustrates these
correlations. two components. The first part extracts node embedding
 c) Heter-correlation edge (E heter ): In addition to by learning knowledge from the constructed heterogeneous
homogeneous correlation, there are also correlations between temporal feature graphs. Leveraging the graph structure
heterogeneous features. Heter-correlation edges represent links allows us to model correlations among different features
between heterogeneous nodes (nodes in different types), shown (nodes). In the second part, all node embeddings from each
as the green links in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 4, we define subgraph are aggregated to acquire heterogeneous knowledge
the heter-correlations based on the shared input components for the overall graph classification task, specifically predicting
for feature calculation. For calculating the feature series in the whether the flow is malicious or benign.
left column of Fig. 4, we use 6 basic feature series listed on the 1) Dynamic Features Graph Embedding: The key idea
right part, which are the packet length series, packet header of GNN is aggregating information from neighbor nodes
length series, packet direction series, timestamp series, flag through edges. However, as we mentioned in Sec.IV-B2,
series, and TCP window size series. Heterogeneous feature the nodes’ initial values are recorded features, and these
series sharing the same basic feature series are considered features are heterogeneous. Directly aggregating features from
correlated. different types of nodes poses a challenge for neural networks.
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7153

 Fig. 6. Multi-head GATv2 in Homo-GNN for “packets” type subgraph,
 x denotes the node embedding feature, which represents the ith statistical
 h i,t
 feature in x type at time t and e(.) is attention coefficient function. This
 example shows how node embedding for statistical feature pkts_s_series_bw
 is updated through multi-head attention. The attentions are learnable weights,
 which denote the correlations between feature pairs. (The features used by
 the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset are used as introducing examples.)

 Fig. 5. HTGNN-based NIDS model. as described by Equation (4).
  
 n
 K X
 ′
To address this issue, we design the dynamic features graph h i,t = ⊕  ai,k j W k h j,t  (4)
embedding module to encode the heterogeneous features as k=1
 j=1
a fixed-size embedding, which is more suitable for further
exchanging among heterogeneous nodes. Therefore, the first where K is a number of heads, j represents the neighbor
stage of homo-encoding only aggregates features through nodes of node i, t denotes the temporal dimension, ⊕
homo-correlation edges and temporal edges to encode represents concatenation, W x,k is the corresponding learnable
the nodes as same-size vectors. With these vectors, the weight matrix, a x,k
 j are attention coefficients computed using
second stage of heter-encoding incorporates heter-correlation Equation (5).
edges and aggregates embedding through all three types
 ai, j = softmaxj e(h i,t , h j,t )
 
of edges.
 Specifically, we employ independent GATv2 [5] graph e(h i,t , h j,t ) = a⊤ LeakyRelu(W [h i,t ⊕ h i,t ]) (5)
neural networks for different types of edges to capture distinct
 b) An example of GATv2 for homo-subgraph: For each
information based on the temporal and semantic dependencies
 type of subgraph, which consists of all nodes from the
between dynamic features (see Table.III).
 same type, we adopt a multi-head to learn knowledge among
 homogeneous statistical features to encode corresponding
 x
 E homo = {e(i, j),t } nodes’ embedding features. Fig. 6 shows the operation
 x1 ,x2
 E heter = {e(i, G AT v2homo( packets) for the subgraph with “packets” type
 j),t }
 nodes.
 x
 E temp = {ei,(t,t+1) } 2) Heterogeneous Knowledge Fusion: Following the application of multiple HTGNN layers, the subsequent step
 a) GATv2: For a given HTGraph’s subgraph, defined is shrinking the sub-graph node embeddings into a subby a set of edges {e} representing a specific knowledge graph embedding. One simple alternative is to use the
relationship, an independent GATv2 neural network is sub-graph pooling layer to generate a comprehensive summary
employed to learn the embedding of feature nodes. For a embedding for each distinct feature type. In this work,
node in the subgraph, its learned embedding is denoted as we employ a Transformer decoder-based module to merge
h i,t . In each GATv2 layer, the embedding h i,t is updated to a the node embeddings into a summary embedding; more
 ′ through adaptive attention aggregation,
new representation h i,t details will be introduced in the following section. This
7154 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Learnable queries are responsible for scoring the importance of
 different nodes in the input sub-graph relative to the traffic type
 based on the information in different observation windows.
 To compute dot-product attention, the node embeddings of the
 spatial-temporal sub-graph are mapped into one dimension.
 Subsequently, the dot products of each query vector with all
 key vectors are calculated. The attention map results from the
 matrix multiplication between N learnable queries and S × T
 keys.
 During training, a masking mechanism is employed to
 ensure that the attention mechanism attends to the nodes
 within the observation windows. We choose increasing
 observation windows for different queries so that we can
 train different queries to extract features for different degrees
 of early detection. For instance, the first query can only
 observe the first 8 packets’ information, the second from
 the first 16, and the last one from all. As traffic flows
 may have a flexible number of packets denoted as T ,
 setting the observation window size uniformly for the i-th
 query as i×T N , i = 1, 2, . . . N proves challenging due to
 the unpredictable observation window size for each query.
Fig. 7. Adjustable Early Detection Decoder. N independent learnable queries
 To address this, we choose observation window sizes from
extracted sub-graph representations for intrusion detection. The temporal mask powers of 2. In particular, the observation window size for
is used for restricting different queries within different observation window the i th query as
sizes. 
 i ×T i ×T
 2 , if < 2 j+1
  j
 ≥ 2 j and
 Obser W in i = N N
summary embedding is then directed towards a fusion layer,  T, if i = N .
where it is combined with other types of heterogeneous (6)
knowledge to generate the final classification. The process
of integrating each distinct feature type into the fusion layer Next, we set the first S × Obser W in i elements of the oneensures the comprehensive amalgamation of all available dimension mask for the i th query to be 1 and the remaining
knowledge sources, resulting in a more accurate and informed S × (T − Obser W in i ) elements to be 0.
classification outcome. Thanks to the Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, the
 output of the proposed NIDS model for a single traffic flow
D. Adjustable Early Detection Decoder is extended to N classification results, each corresponding
 to different observation windows. In the training stage, these
 Early intrusion detection poses a challenge as the NIDS multiple results are used to calculate the loss for updating the
receives limited information about rapidly flowing traffic. model at the same time. This implies that the proposed NIDS
We define the threshold determining the detection’s earliness model is trained to enable different degrees of early detection.
as the observation window, which dictates the number of After the NIDS model is deployed, users can adjust the degree
packets in the input traffic. With varying observation windows, of early detection by selecting a query without the need to
shifts in the distribution of input traffic data can present a retrain the NIDS model with early detection data.
challenge to the generalization of the NIDS model. To adapt
the NIDS model’s response time after deployment, two key
considerations arise (1) the need for an adjustable neural V. E VALUATION AND R ESULTS
network component to govern the observation window, and (2) In this section, we present a detailed evaluation of the
ensuring the NIDS model can generalize effectively to varying proposed HTGraph-based traffic flow data format and the corobservation windows. responding HTGNN-based NIDS model. First, we introduce
 To fulfill these requirements, we propose an Adjustable the experiment setup in Sec. V-A. Then, we compare the
Early Detection Decoder designed to extract multiple rep- proposed method with other existing data formats and the
resentations corresponding to different observation windows. NIDS models in aspects of (1) general detection performance
As shown in Figure 7, a Transformer Decoder [34] (in terms of accuracy and F1 score et al.) and (2) model
structure is adopted as the required adjustable neural network transferability against domain change in Sec. V-C. Furthercomponent. An Adjustable Early Detection Decoder follows more, we conduct an ablation study to show the impact of
each homogeneous sub-graph before the Heterogeneous different types of edges in the proposed HTGraph in Sec. V-B.
Knowledge Fusion and classification modules. Within the Finally, we evaluate the early detection performance to show
Adjustable Early Detection Decoder, two inputs are utilized: the proposed HTGNN-based NIDS model is generalized to
the learnable queries and the sub-graph node embeddings. varying intrusion detection response times in Sec. V-E.
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7155

Fig. 8. The ratio of each class in the resampled CIC-IDS-2017 and Fig. 9. The distribution of the packet number per flow for the CIC-IDS-2017
UNSW-NB15 datasets. For each class, we choose up to 6000 samples, which and UNSW-NB15 datasets.
have more packets in flow.

A. Experiment Setup
 Experimental Environment. To train models, we use a
high-performance computer running Ubuntu 18.04 on 3.30GH
Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-9820X CPU with 128 GB main memory
equipped with two NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4070 Ti GPUs. All
models are built with Pytorch 2.0.1 and PyG [11] 2.3.0, then
are trained on two GPUs by using the DistributedDataParallel
module.
 CIC-IDS-2017 dataset is made up of benign flows and
14 classes of malicious flows. For our paper, we used the Fig. 10. Validation accuracy with various edges combinations on
improved version of CIC-IDS-2017 as described in [9]. Due CIC-IDS-2017.
to the limited number of samples available, we excluded four
malicious classes from our analysis: Heartbleed (11 samples),
Web Attack-XSS (27 samples), Web Attack-SQL Injection
(12 samples), and Infiltration (32 samples). Therefore, in our
experiment, the training and testing data comprised a total
of 11 classes, 1 for benign flows and 10 for malicious
flows.
 UNSW-NB15 dataset [26] consists of benign flows
and 9 classes of malicious flows, which include Fuzzers,
Analysis, Backdoors, DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance,
Shellcode, and Worms. The hybrid of real modern normal
activities and synthetic contemporary attack behaviors are
generated by the IXIA PerfectStorm tool. Fig. 11. Validation accuracy with various edges combinations on
 UNSW-NB15.
 Evaluation Metrics The intrusion detection task in this
work is an imbalance multi-class classification task. Therefore,
we evaluate the overall intrusion detection performance in
 B. Impact of Different Edges
terms of weighted Accuracy (ACC), weighted Detection Rate
(DR), weighted False alarm rate (FAR), and weighted F1 score To analyze the effectiveness of our heterogeneous temporal
(F1). The “weighted” refers to calculating the mean of the graph format design, we conduct an ablation study comparing
metrics for each class, with consideration given to each class’s variant combinations of different types of edge connections.
proportion of a class’s support to the total support across all Since changes in edge connections do not affect the HTGNN
classes. structure but influence the message passing through graph
 In this work, we use and re-process the raw Pcap data edges, we evaluated the impact of different edges by training
from both CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets, for three the same HTGNN structure from scratch with different edge
main purposes: (1) constructing the proposed graph data connections.
format to represent network traffic flow; (2) comparing it Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 present validation accuracy curves durwith other existing formats, such as tabular data, and feature ing training on CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15, respectively.
series; (3) studying the early detection problem. For the Clearly, applying all types of edge has the best performance
graph and feature series formats, we extract the dynamic across different datasets. When considering only using one
feature series defined in Table VIII. As for the tabular type of edge, the homo-edge has more impact on model
format, we adopt the feature set defined in the CIC-IDS- training than the heter-edge and temp-edge on both datasets.
2017 dataset, which is also the comprehensive version of the Moreover, using only the homo-edge connection can achieve
feature set in Table VIII. The classes’ sampling proportions even better performance than the combined heter-edge and
on two datasets are reported by Fig. 8. The distributions of temp-edge. In addition, for all edge combinations, if there
the packet number per flow for two datasets are reported is a homo-edge, they all have better performance than the
by Fig. 9. combinations without a homo-edge.
7156 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON R ESULT W ITH E XISTING TABULAR AND F EATURE S ERIES F ORMATS -BASED M ETHODS

 The performance difference on the two datasets is notable:
the heter-edge-only case outperforms the temp-edge-only case
on CIC-IDS-2017 but performs worse than the temp-edgeonly case on UNSW-NB15. A similar situation also happens
with the two combinations of homo-edge plus heter-edge and
homo-edge plus temp-edge. Therefore, the results show the
heter-edge has a larger impact on CIC-IDS-2017, while the
temp-edge has a larger impact on UNSW-NB15. However,
the homo-edge consistently has the most significant impact.
The lesser impact of heter-edge and temp-edge is attributed
to other components, such as AE Decoder and HK Fusion
modules, to some degree play the same role as fusing the
heterogeneous and temporal features.

C. Detection Performance
 In this section, we compare the detection performance Fig. 12. The validation accuracy curves when re-training the last layer of
among three different traffic representation formats, which are CIC-IDS-17 models on UNSW-NB15 for 20 epochs.
tabular, feature series, and the proposed graph. For both tabular
and feature series formats, we compare with one specific NIDS
model and one state-of-the-art DL model corresponding to the formats; (2) employing multiple queries in the AE Decoder
format. enhances general performance beyond the 1 query baseline;
 Table IV illustrates the general intrusion detection perfor- (3) self-attention-based methods (FT-transformer, Informer,
mance comparisons on datasets CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW- and our HTGNN using graph attention and Transformer
NB15. Overall, almost all formats and models achieved Decoder) outperform CNN or LSTM-based methods in general
nearly perfect performance (ACC) on CIC-IDS-2017 but performance.
exhibited relatively poorer performance (around 0.8 ACC) on
UNSW-NB15.
 On the CIC-IDS-2017 dataset, the proposed HTGNN model D. Domain Adaptation Performance
achieved accuracies of 0.9827 and 0.9934 (the highest) when To assess the transferability of the trained models,
utilizing 1 query and 8 queries in the AE Decoder, respectively. we conducted a domain adaptation task, specifically evaluating
The two Transformer-based methods, FT-transformer (for the ability to transfer models trained solely on CIC-IDS-2017
tabular) and Informer (for feature series), both slightly to UNSW-NB15. Since Table IV indicates that the CICoutperform the 1 query case HTGNN but lagged behind its IDS-2017 dataset is comparatively easier than UNSW-NB15,
performance with 8 queries. Among other NIDS models, the we focused on the domain adaptation task from CIC-IDS-
Lucid model, based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) 2017 to UNSW-NB15 (from an easier to a more challenging
for feature series, and the LuNet model, incorporating both dataset) to showcase model transferability. We did not explore
CNN and LSTM for tabular format, were also considered. the reverse case. Throughout the transfer learning process,
On the UNSW-NB15 dataset, the proposed HTGNN model we maintained frozen parameters for all models, except for
achieved accuracies of 0.8532 and 0.8612 with 1 query and their last dense layers.
8 queries in the AE Decoder, respectively. The FT-transformer Fig. 12 shows validation accuracy curves during the
model achieves 0.8613 accuracy and 0.8627 F1 score (the retraining of the output layers for all models listed in Table IV
highest) slightly outperforming both the 1 query and 8 queries on the UNSW-NB15 dataset for 20 epochs. The combination
HTGNN. of HTGraph format and HTGNN model demonstrates quicker
 From Table IV, three main observations emerge: (1) the adaptation to the new dataset compared to the other data
proposed HTGNN model, utilizing the HTGraph format, formats and models. In Fig. 12, the HTGraph+HTGNN
achieves comparable general classification performance with curve exhibits a significantly superior starting point, with
state-of-the-art DL models for both tabular and feature series around 0.73 accuracy for the first epoch, in contrast to
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7157

 TABLE V
D OMAIN A DAPTATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON . A LL M ODELS H AVE B EEN T RAINED ON THE CIC-IDS-17. T HEN W E R E -T RAIN THE L AST L AYER
 ON THE UNSW-NB15 AND F REEZE THE R EST L AYERS . T HE A RROWS S HOW THE D EGRADED P ERFORMANCE C OMPARING W ITH THE TABLE IV

 TABLE VI
 S YMMETRICAL PAIRS E XPERIMENTS T RAIN AND T EST NIDS M ODELS W ITH THE S AME O BSERVATION W INDOW
 S IZE TO S HOW THE M ODEL C APABILITY OF E ARLY D ETECTION

 TABLE VII
 A SYMMETRICAL PAIRS E XPERIMENTS T RAIN AND T EST NIDS M ODELS W ITH D IFFERENT O BSERVATION W INDOW
 S IZES TO S HOW THE M ODEL G ENERALIZATION TO E ARLY D ETECTION

the Tabular+FT-Transformer, which starts around 0.66. The NIDS models. To assess the model’s generalization to
HTGraph+HTGNN consistently outperforms other methods early detection, we utilize asymmetrical pairs of dataset
throughout the retraining process. versions.
 We show the details of the final transfer learning In the initial evaluation, we explore the NIDS models’
performances and the relevant performance decline, compared early detection capability by reducing both training and
with direct training on UNSW-NB15 in Table V. Besides testing observation window sizes. In this symmetrical case,
the proposed methods, we observed the other self-attention- less temporal information can be observed by the NIDS
based methods also exhibit good transferability. We attribute models which cause moderate performance degradation
the robust transferability of self-attention-based models to the on both CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15 datasets across
mechanism’s focus on modeling correlations among various all formats and models in Table VI. Notably, there is
input items, such as the features in the tabular format. only around a 1% accuracy degradation on CIC-IDS-2017
This emphasizes the importance of learning relationships when the observation window sizes are reduced from
among input items rather than absolute value scales. 1024 to 16.
Moreover, the prior knowledge-guided HTGraph format Combining the findings on edge effectiveness presented
and the associated HTGNN model help streamline the in Fig.10, we assume the CIC-IDS-2017 should have
learning scope of these relations, contributing to enhanced some significant patterns that are independent of temporal
transferability. information. Hence, the temp-edge has the least impact in
 Fig. 10, and the reduction in observation window sizes causes
 only a slight degradation, as indicated in Table VI. Moreover,
E. Early Detection Evaluation the decreasing trends in UNSW-NB15 are more pronounced
 In the early detection evaluation experiments, we assess than those in CIC-IDS-2017. This disparity is also evident in
two key aspects: the model’s capability for early detection Fig. 11, where the temp-edge has a more significant impact
and its generalization to early detection scenarios. To evaluate on the UNSW-NB15 dataset. The proposed HTGNN method,
the model’s early detection capability, we employ symmet- especially when using 8 queries in the AE Decoder, can
rical pairs of dataset versions with different observation maintain its performance on both datasets, and the 1 query
window sizes (i.e., 16, 64, 256) for training and testing case is also comparable to the FT-Transformer. Therefore,
7158 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VIII
 S TASTICAL F EATURES

we believe the proposed HTGNN exhibits good early detection VI. C ONCLUSION
capability, and the AE Decoder can further enhance this
capability. In this paper, we present a novel approach to incorporating
 In the asymmetrical case, we assess the models’ generaliza- prior knowledge into the design of early and transferable
tion to early versions of input data. All models are trained with NIDS. Our approach involves leveraging a heterogeneous
a 1024 observation window size on both CIC-IDS-2017 and temporal graph format that encodes prior knowledge about
UNSW-NB15, and their baseline performance is presented in NIDS feature types and their interdependence. Additionally,
Table IV. As the observation window sizes of training and we propose a corresponding graph neural network model,
testing data differ (asymmetrical), the trends of decreasing called HTGNN, capable of classifying network flows in the
detection accuracy results across all formats and models HTGraph format. An Adjustable Early Detection Decoder is
become more pronounced than in the symmetrical case. The introduced to further enhance generalization to early detection.
results demonstrate that even though training and testing Our experiments on the CIC-IDS-2017 and UNSW-NB15
data have different observation window sizes, the proposed datasets demonstrate that our proposed method achieves
HTGNN methods exhibit greater generalization to distribution comparable performance (98.27% and 85.32%) with stateshifts caused by the decreasing observation window size of-the-art deep learning methods in terms of accuracy
compared to other methods. and F1 score et al. At the same time, our proposed
 method demonstrates enhanced transferability. When adapting
 the model trained on CIC-IDS-2017 data to the UNSW-
 NB15 dataset—accomplished by retraining only the last
F. Discussion on Computational Complexity
 layer for 20 epochs—there’s only a 1.05% drop. This
 Compared with the Tabular and Feature Series formats, improvement is observed in domain adaptation tasks and a
the proposed HTGraph format obviously will introduce better ability to generalize to changes in input distribution
additional computation for building the graph structure. In our caused by early detection. Notably, the dynamic packet
experiments, our graph has N × T nodes, where N = 28 is number of traffic does not significantly impact performance.
the number of features and T is the number of packets, the In future research, we aim to collaborate the proposed
number of temporal edges is 28 × (T − 1), the number of traffic flow-level (features) graph with the existing network
home-edges is (32 + 82 + 92 + 62 + 22 ) × T , the number of topology graph-based NIDSs. In the future collaborating graph
heter-edges is (4 × 3 + 4 × 1 × 4 + 3 × 5 × 6) × T (, based on NIDS, the proposed K-GetNID is suitable for distributed
Fig. 4). Therefore, in the case of early detection where T is deployment in different nodes in the whole network
relevant small, the graph will not increase much computational topology (based on its transferability) and can efficiently
complexity. In addition, the home-edges and heter-edges in extract traffic embeddings (based on its early detection
each timestamp can also be pre-calculated. ability).
WANG et al.: K-GetNID: KNOWLEDGE-GUIDED GRAPHS 7159

 [12] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, V. Khrulkov, and A. Babenko, “Revisiting
 deep learning models for tabular data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 18932–18943.
 [13] I. Guarino, G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, and
 A. Pescapé, “On the use of machine learning approaches for the early
 classification in network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
 Meas. Netw. (MN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–6.
 [14] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN:
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,”
 2020, arXiv:2001.01525.
 [15] H. He, X. Sun, H. He, G. Zhao, L. He, and J. Ren, “A novel multimodalsequential approach based on multi-view features for network intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 183207–183221, 2019.
 [16] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 VII. A PPENDIX and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE
 NIDS Network Intrusion Detection System. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023.
 [17] M. Jin et al., “A survey on graph neural networks for time series:
 APT Advanced and Persistent Threat. Forecasting, classification, imputation, and anomaly detection,” 2023,
 ML Machine Learning. arXiv:2307.03759.
 DL Deep Learning. [18] J. Khoury, D. Klisura, H. Zanddizari, G. D. L. T. Parra, P. Najafirad,
 and E. Bou-Harb, “Jbeil: Temporal graph-based inductive learning to
 HTGraph Heterogeneous Temporal Graph. infer lateral movement in evolving enterprise networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 HTGNN Heterogeneous Temporal Graph Neural Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Oct. 2023, p. 9.
 Network. [19] T. Liu, Z. Qian, J. Berrevoets, and M. van der Schaar, “Goggle:
 MLP Multi-Layer Perceptron. Generative modelling for tabular data by learning relational structure,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023, pp. 1–12.
 LSTM Long Short-Term Memory. [20] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E-
 CNN Convolutional Neural Networks. GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system
 TIG Traffic Interaction Graph. for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manag. Symp., Budapest,
 Hungary, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–9.
 DLGNN Dynamic Line Graph Neural Network.
 [21] M. López-Vizcaíno, F. J. Novoa, D. Fernández, V. Carneiro, and
 ACC Accuracy. F. Cacheda, “Early intrusion detection for OS scan attacks,” in Proc.
 DR Detection Rate. IEEE 18th Int. Symp. Netw. Comput. Appl. (NCA), Sep. 2019,
 FAR False alarm rate. pp. 1–5.
 [22] W. Luo et al., “Dynamic heterogeneous graph neural network for realtime event prediction,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 R EFERENCES Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2020, pp. 3213–3223.
 [23] P. Manso, J. Moura, and C. Serr ao, “SDN-based intrusion detection
 [1] G. Apruzzese et al., “The role of machine learning in cybersecurity,” system for early detection and mitigation of DDoS attacks,” Information,
 Digital Threats, Res. Pract., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–38, Mar. 2023. vol. 10, no. 3, p. 106, Mar. 2019.
 [2] V. Borisov, T. Leemann, K. Seßler, J. Haug, M. Pawelczyk, and [24] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and
 G. Kasneci, “Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey,” IEEE V. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 7499–7519, correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE
 Jun. 2024. Symp. Security Privacy (SP), May 2019, pp. 1137–1152.
 [3] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and [25] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 via deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,” Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167.
 [26] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
 [4] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the
 “A hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in IoT scenarios,” comparison with the KDD99 data set,” Inf. Secur. J., Global Perspective,
 in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan, vol. 25, nos. 1–3, pp. 18–31, Apr. 2016.
 May 2020, pp. 1–7.
 [27] E. Grumbling and A. Johnson, Implications of Artificial Intelligence
 [5] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav, “How attentive are graph attention
 for Cybersecurity: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington, DC, USA:
 networks?” 2021, arXiv:2105.14491.
 National Academies Press, 2020.
 [6] J. J. Davis and A. J. Clark, “Data preprocessing for anomaly based
 [28] R. Paudel and H. H. Huang, “Pikachu: Temporal walk based dynamic
 network intrusion detection: A review,” Comput. Secur., vol. 30,
 graph embedding for network anomaly detection,” in Proc. NOMS
 nos. 6–7, pp. 353–375, 2011.
 IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manag. Symp., Apr. 2022, pp. 1–7.
 [7] R. Doriguzzi-Corin, S. Millar, S. Scott-Hayward,
 J. Martínez-del-Rincón, and D. Siracusa, “LUCID: A practical, [29] M. Pivarníková, P. Sokol, and T. Bajtoš, “Early-stage detection of cyber
 lightweight deep learning solution for DDoS attack detection,” IEEE attacks,” Information, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 560, Nov. 2020.
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 876–889, Jun. 2020. [30] E. Quiring et al., “DoS and don’ts of machine learning in computer
 [8] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a security,” in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., Boston, MA, USA, 2022,
 dynamic line graph neural network for intrusion detection with pp. 3971–3988.
 semisupervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, [31] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 pp. 699–714, 2023. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 [9] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion in Proc. ICISSp, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 detection dataset: The CICIDS2017 case study,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. [32] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
 Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2021, pp. 7–12. application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
[10] Y. Fan et al., “Heterogeneous temporal graph transformer: An intelligent neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 system for evolving Android malware detection,” in Proc. 27th pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, [33] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
 pp. 2831–2839. learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security
[11] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
 PyTorch geometric,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop Represent. Learn. Graphs [34] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 1–11.
7160 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[35] M. Wang, N. Yang, D. H. Gunasinghe, and N. Weng, “On the robustness Ning Yang (Member, IEEE) received the M.S.
 of ML-based network intrusion detection systems: An adversarial and degree in computer engineering from the University
 distribution shift perspective,” Computers, vol. 12, no. 10, p. 209, of Massachusetts at Amherst, USA, in 2006,
 Oct. 2023. and the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering
[36] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “Exploring the impact of early from Southern Illinois University Carbondale, USA,
 detection on DL-based NIDSs models,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Annu. in 2020. She is currently an Assistant Professor with
 Ubiquitous Comput., Electron. Mobile Commun. Conf. (UEMCON), the School of Computing, Information Technology
 Oct. 2023, pp. 0684–0691. Program, Southern Illinois University Carbondale.
[37] M. Wang, N. Yang, and N. Weng, “Securing a smart home with a Her research interests include network security, the
 transformer-based IoT intrusion detection system,” Electronics, vol. 12, Internet of Things, and machine learning.
 no. 9, p. 2100, May 2023.
[38] P. Wu and H. Guo, “LuNet: A deep neural network for network intrusion
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Jul. 2019,
 pp. 617–624.
[39] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[40] R. Xu, G. Wu, W. Wang, X. Gao, A. He, and Z. Zhang, “Applying
 self-supervised learning to network intrusion detection for network
 flows with graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 248, Jun. 2024,
 Art. no. 110495.
[41] Y. Yao, L. Su, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “STDeepGraph: Spatial–
 temporal deep learning on communication graphs for long-term
 network attack detection,” in Proc. 18th IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur.
 Privacy Comput. Commun./13th IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng.
 (TrustCom/BigDataSE), Aug. 2019, pp. 120–127.
[42] C. Zhang, D. Song, C. Huang, A. Swami, and N. V. Chawla,
 “Heterogeneous graph neural network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2019, pp. 793–803.
[43] Y. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Jin, X. Wang, and D. Guo, “Network intrusion
 detection: Based on deep hierarchical network and original flow data,”
 IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 37004–37016, 2019.
[44] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
 sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 vol. 35, 2021, pp. 11106–11115.
[45] F. Zola, L. Segurola-Gil, J. L. Bruse, M. Galar, and R. Orduna-Urrutia, Ning Weng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 “Network traffic analysis through node behaviour classification: the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and in
 A graph-based approach with temporal dissection and data-level electrical and computer engineering from Huazhong
 preprocessing,” Comput. Secur., vol. 115, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 102632. University of Science and Technology, China,
 in 1996, the M.S. degree in electrical and computer
 engineering from the University of Central Florida,
 Orlando, in 2000, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
 and computer engineering from the University of
 Minxiao Wang received the B.S. degree in Massachusetts, Amherst, in 2005. He is currently
 electronic and communication engineering and a Full Professor with the School of Electrical,
 the M.S. degree in electronic and information Computer, and Biomedical Engineering, Southern
 engineering from the Civil Aviation University Illinois University Carbondale. He is engaged in research and teaching in
 of China in 2014 and 2018, respectively. He is the areas of computer networks and security. His research interests include
 currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the scalable system design for deep packet inspection and many-field packet
 School of Electrical, Computer, and Biomedical classification, quality of information modeling, and deep leaning models for
 Engineering, Southern Illinois University Carbon- network intrusion detection. He has been active as a Program Committee
 dale, Carbondale, IL, USA. His research interests Member of several professional conferences, including IEEE INFOCOM and
 include developing machine learning and deep ACM SAC. At Southern Illinois University, he has received three times for
 learning models for diverse applications related Outstanding Teacher Award of the Department of Electrical and Computer
action recognition, object detection, and network and intrusion detection. Engineering.