3166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 Label-Free Multivariate Time Series
 Anomaly Detection
 Qihang Zhou , Student Member, IEEE, Shibo He , Senior Member, IEEE, Haoyu Liu ,
 Jiming Chen , Fellow, IEEE, and Wenchao Meng , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection in multivariate time series has I. INTRODUCTION
been widely studied in one-class classification (OCC) setting. The
 ULTIVARIATE time series (MTS) are commonly found
training samples in this setting are assumed to be normal. In more
practical situations, it is difficult to guarantee that all samples
are normal. Meanwhile, preparing a completely clean training
 M in various contexts, such as smart factories where data
 is produced by multiple devices, and smart grids where monidataset is costly and laborious. Such a case may degrade the per- toring data is generated by various sensors [1]. Anomalies in
formance of OCC-based anomaly detection methods which fit the
training distribution as the normal distribution. To overcome this
 MTS refer to unusual patterns or behaviors that occur at a
limitation, in this paper, we propose MTGFlow, an unsupervised particular time or over a specific period of time [2], [3], [4],
anomaly detection approach for Multivariate Time series anomaly [5]. Previous methods mainly center on developing one-class
detection via dynamic Graph and entity-aware normalizing Flow. classification (OCC) models, which rely solely on normal data
MTGFlow first estimates the density of the entire training samples to detect anomalies [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. The fundamental
and then identifies anomalous instances based on the density of
the test samples within the fitted distribution. This relies on a assumption of them is that the training dataset with all normal
widely accepted assumption that anomalous instances exhibit more samples can be easily obtained [12]. However, the premise
sparse densities than normal ones, with no reliance on the clean that the training dataset contains all normal samples may not
training dataset. However, it is intractable to directly estimate always hold true in real-world applications [13], [14], [15], [16],
the density due to the complex dependencies among entities and [17], [18]. This leads to noisy training datasets with a mixture
their diverse inherent characteristics, not to mention detecting
anomalies based on the estimated distribution. In order to address
 of normal and abnormal data instances. Using these training
these problems, we utilize the graph structure learning model to datasets will result in overfitting of the model to noisy labels [19].
learn interdependent and evolving relations among entities, which As shown in Fig. 1(a), this degrades the performance of those
effectively captures the complex and accurate distribution patterns OCC-based methods [20], [21]. Therefore, it is rewarding to
of multivariate time series. In addition, our approach incorpo- develop unsupervised MTS anomaly detection methods based
rates the unique characteristics of individual entities by employing
an entity-aware normalizing flow. This enables us to represent
 on the dataset with absolute zero known labels.
each entity as a parameterized normal distribution. Furthermore, Density estimation is a promising approach for unsupervised
considering that some entities present similar characteristics, we anomaly detection because they do not depend on the assumption
propose a cluster strategy that capitalizes on the commonalities of that training datasets are all normal. As presented in Fig. 1(b),
entities with similar characteristics, resulting in more precise and it detects an abnormal sample based on the widely accepted
detailed density estimation. We refer to this cluster-aware extension
as MTGFlow_cluster. Extensive experiments are conducted on six
 hypothesis that abnormal instances exhibit sparse densities than
widely used benchmark datasets, in which MTGFlow and MT- the normal, i.e., abnormal samples are typically in the low-
GFlow_cluster demonstrate their superior detection performance. density regions while normal samples are in the high-density
 regions [22], [23], [24]. Previous works have attempted this
 Index Terms—Multivariate time series, anomaly detection,
unsupervised learning. strategy for time series prediction and the key challenge lies
 in the accurate density estimation of the distribution. In [25],
 [26], [27], time series density is modeled as the parameterized
 probability distribution, while it is still challenging to model a
 Manuscript received 16 April 2023; revised 4 November 2023; accepted 27 more complex data distribution [28].
December 2023. Date of publication 4 January 2024; date of current version 10 More recently, GANF [29] explores the density estimation
June 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation to tackle MTS anomaly detection task. In their design, the static
Program of China under Grants U1909207 and U21B2029. Recommended for
acceptance by Y. Tong. (Corresponding author: Shibo He.) directed acyclic graph (DAG) is leveraged to model intractable
 Qihang Zhou, Shibo He, Jiming Chen, and Wenchao Meng are with the dependence among multiple entities, and normalizing flow is
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, employed to estimate an overall distribution for all entities to-
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China (e-mail: zqhang@zju.edu.cn; s18he@zju.
edu.cn; cjm@zju.edu.cn; wmengzju@zju.edu.cn). gether [30], [31]. Although GANF has achieved state-of-the-art
 Haoyu Liu is with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technol- (SOTA) results, it may suffer from two drawbacks. First, rather
ogy, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China, and also with than a static inter-relationship, in real-world applications, the
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Games, Hangzhou 310052, China (e-mail: haoyu_liu@
zju.edu.cn). mutual dependencies among entities could be evolving. For
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3349613 instance, in a water treatment plant, when the motorized valve is

 1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3167

 similar traffic conditions and weather [36]. Identifying the common information makes for fine-grained representation learning
 for downstream tasks [37], [38]. Motivated by this, we propose
 to cluster these entities into different groups. Each group is
 assigned to the same target distribution while also preserving
 the distinctiveness among different groups. This results in the
 creation of MTGFlow_cluster. Such a clustering strategy enables
 us to efficiently handle entities with similar properties and
 better model their respective density distributions. Incorporating
 these proposed technologies provides a powerful framework for
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of OCC-based and density-based methods on a tackling the complicated characteristics among diverse entities.
dataset with mixed normal and abnormal data. Left: OCC-based methods are
vulnerable to noisy labels, leading to inaccurate decision boundaries. Right:
 However, this fine-grained density estimation of MTGFlow and
Unlike OCC-based methods, density-based methods estimate the density of the MTGFlow_cluster multiplies memory overhead as the number
test samples, where anomalies are located in low-density regions. Note that the of entities/clusters increases. We share entity/cluster-specific
deeper the color, the higher the density.
 model parameters to reduce model size. As a result, MTGFlow
 and MTGFlow_cluster achieve more fine-grained density estimation without extra memory consumption.
turned on, it causes the water level to rise. And when the water Finally, all modules of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
level exceeds a certain threshold, the motorized valve is closed. are jointly optimized for overall performance, and maximum
These interactions between the actuator of the motorized valve log likelihood estimation (MLE) is used to train them. We
and the water level sensor are strongly coupled. Meanwhile, due explore MTGFlow and its extension in various settings includto different work conditions, the water level needs to rise for ing unsupervised and OCC settings. By comparing empirical
storing water or decrease for draining water. Such relationships results of these two settings, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
are not set in stone, and thus the static graph structure fails to are found to be robust to anomaly contamination and adapted
capture this evolving feature. Question 1: Since dependencies to more general scenarios. Experiments are conducted on six
among multi-entities are mutual, is there a better choice to model public datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of MTGFlow
complicated dependencies than the probabilistic model DAG? and MTGFlow_cluster, which make progress over the state-of-
Second, entities usually have diverse working mechanisms, lead- the-art (SOTA) methods [15], [29], [39], [40], [41], [42], [43],
ing to diverse sparse characteristics when anomalies occur. And, particularly outperforming 5% on SWaT. Besides, we attempt
GANF projects all entities into the same distribution. Question 2: to apply MTGFlow to univariate series (i.e., UCR dataset [44]),
Individual anomalous time series from different entities present and it still attains superior results.
diverse sparse characteristics. Is it suitable to map all these Our contributions are summarized as follows:
individual time series to the same latent space (i.e., normal r We propose MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster for unsu-
Gaussian distribution)? pervised MTS anomaly detection. It essentially enables
 In this paper, we propose MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster, anomaly localization and interpretation without any labels.
unsupervised anomaly detection methods for MTS anomaly de- r We model the complicated dependencies among entities
tection, to answer the above two questions. First, considering the into the dynamic graph, capturing the complex and evolvevolving relations among entities, we introduce graph structure ing mutual dependencies among entities.
learning to model these changeable interdependencies. To learn r Aiming at different sparse characteristics existing in indithe dynamic structure, a self-attention module [32] is plugged vidual entities, entity-aware normalizing flow is introduced
into our model for its superior performance on quantifying pair- to produce entity-specific density estimation.
wise interaction. Second, we introduce an entity-aware normal- r Considering the characteristics of entities are strongly conizing flow to handle the diverse inherent characteristics among nected to their positions, we propose MTGFlow_cluster,
entities. This approach enables us to model entity-specific den- which exploits cluster-aware normalizing flow to capitalize
sity estimation, allowing each entity to be associated with a on the commonality of these entities and keep the uniqueunique target distribution. Consequently, we can estimate the ness among entities with different characteristics.
densities of various entities independently. Moreover, the char- r Experiments on six datasets with seven baseline methacteristics of entities are strongly connected to their positions ods demonstrate the superiority of MTGFlow and MTin common scenarios. In industrial IoT, sensors within the same GFlow_cluster, which outperform the SOTA methods.
production line or workshop have common characteristics due It is worth mentioning that a conference version of this
to their exposure to the same industrial processes and operating research was presented in [45]. The conference paper does
conditions [33]. For example, temperature and humidity sensors not involve any priors. To consider the diverse characteristics
monitor the same area [3], [34]. Similarly, the common wind of entities, MTGFlow maps all entities to unique distributions
speed sensors in wind turbines exhibit similar wind speeds and for anomaly detection. In reality, many entities in industrial or
variations in the same regions [35]. In the domain of transporta- smart grids usually present similar characteristics [46], [47]. For
tion, traffic flow sensors along the same stretch of highway or example, water level sensors are used to detect the water level in
road will exhibit similar patterns because they are influenced by the same area but in different locations. The cluster information
3168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

is readily available, and mapping similar characteristics into domain and find graph anomalies lead to a shift of spectral energy
the different distributions is not an optimal choice. Therefore, distributions. They generate band-pass filters to capture this
we propose MTGFlow_cluster to perform more fine-grained energy shift and further perform anomaly detection. However,
density estimation, which not only considers the diverse charac- In real scenarios, the prior graph structure is hard to provide.
teristics among entities but also introduces a clustering strategy Therefore, it is important to learn the underlying graph structure
that capitalizes on the commonalities of entities with similar via the graph embedding itself [57]. GDN [9] learns a directed
characteristics. Given the cluster prior, this approach has the graph via node embedding vectors. According to the cosine
potential to further improve anomaly detection performance. similarity of embedding vectors, top-K candidates of each node
Moreover, we supplement the experiments about the OCC set- are considered to have dependencies. They rely on either the
ting and univariate time series for the overall evaluation. In label supervision or normal training dataset. In the field of
addition, more illustrations and visualizations are provided to unsupervised anomaly detection of MTS, some recent work
make a comprehensive analysis of our proposed methods. attempts to explore this area. GANF [29] uses a DAG to model
 the relationships between multiple sensors and then learns the
 II. RELATED WORK structure of the DAG through continuous optimization while
 applying a simplified constraint to facilitate backward propa-
 In this section, we introduce recent work in the field of gation. Our work, namely MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster,
time series anomaly detection, with a particular focus on graph models the mutual complex dependencies as a fully connected
structure learning and normalizing flow techniques. dynamic graph via a self-attention mechanism, so that a much
 more flexible relation among entities can be represented.
A. Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Anomaly detection for time series is a classical research C. Normalizing Flow for Anomaly Detection
topic, which has been extensively investigated under OCC set-
 Normalizing flow is a powerful technique for density estimating [48]. Temporal correlation is one of the most important
 tion, and it has proven successful in image generation applicafeatures of time series [49]. Compared with the normal, anomations [30], [31]. Recently, it has also been applied to anomaly
lous time points and sequences often present unusual temporal
 detection tasks under the assumption that anomalies occur in
correlations. To model the distribution of normal time series,
 low-density regions, as seen in the works of DifferNet [58] and
DeepSVDD [40] maps training data into preset hypersphere,
 CFLOW-AD [59]. These approaches utilize normalizing flow to
assuming that anomalous data lie outside this space during the
 estimate the likelihoods of normal embedding and identify imtest. EncDecAD [50] leverages LSTM [51] to extract sequence
 age defects by detecting embeddings that lie far from the dense
features and designs the reconstruction task to detect anomaregion. GANF is a great approach to employ normalizing flow
lies. USAD [43] and DAEMON [8] use adversarial learning
 for unsupervised anomaly detection in MTS data. We build on
to promote reconstruction quality. Considering the much more
 this research direction by incorporating an entity/cluster-aware
complex temporal dependence of MTS, OmniAnomaly [7] connormalizing flow design to increase model capacity.
structs informative stochastic representations for more robust
performance. More recent works [10] and [52] utilize Transformer [32] for anomaly detection, leaning on the superiority III. PRELIMINARY
modeling capacity of the self-attention mechanism for long- We provide a brief introduction to normalizing flow in this
range relations. section to better understand MTGFlow and its extension.
 However, all these works are based on the assumption that
a sufficient training dataset with all normal instances can be
acquired, which is very hard for real-world applications since A. Self-Attention
each instance should be manually checked carefully. Addition- Transformer [32] achieves unprecedented success for natally, once there exist abnormal instances in the training data, ural language processing (NLP), which largely benefits from
the performance of these OCC-based detection methods could self-attention superiority in modeling relations of input sebe severely degraded [20], [21]. Therefore, instead of fitting the quences. Give an input sequence, X = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xK ), where
distribution of normal training datasets, Dai and Chen propose xi ∈ RD , and K and D are the sequence length and embedding
GANF [29] to detect MTS anomalies in an unsupervised manner. dimension, respectively. Self-attention applies linear projections
Inspired by them, we propose MTGFlow to facilitate the learning to get the query Query ∈ RK×D and key Key ∈ RK×D via
capacity and improve detection performance. learnable parameter matrices W Query ∈ RD×D and W Key ∈
 RD×D . After projections, attention scores are derived by the
B. Graph Structure Learning for Anomaly Detection scaled dot product between Query and Key, and a Softmax
 function is utilized to normalize the scores to (0,1).
 Given a graph structure, graph neural networks [53], [54] have
achieved great success in modeling intrinsic structure patterns. Query = XW Query and Key = XW Key ,
Wang et al. [55] extend the OCSVM to graph anomaly detection,  
combining the powerful representation ability of GNN. Tang et QueryKey T
 Attention_matrix = Sof tmax √ , (1)
al. [56] analyze the anomaly detection from the graph spectral D
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3169

 This design allows for flexible modeling of pairwise relation- context, following [29], we focus on detecting window-level
ships within the neural network architecture. And, the resulting anomalies in this paper. That is when there exists an abnormal
attention matrix serves as the quantification of these relation- point in the chosen window, the window label is marked as the
ships. anomaly. Note that the time series is normalized by z-score from
 different entities.
B. Normalizing Flow xk − mean(xk )
 xk = , (5)
 Normalizing flow is an unsupervised technique for estimat- std(xk )
ing density, achieved by mapping the original distribution to
an arbitrary target distribution using a sequence of invertible where mean(xk ) and std(xk ) represent the mean and standard
affine transformations. When density estimation on original deviation of the k-th entity along the time dimension, respecdata distribution X is intractable, an alternative option is to tively.
estimate z density on target distribution Z. Specifically, suppose
a source sample x ∈ RD ∼ X and a target distribution sample B. Overview of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_ cluster
z ∈ RD ∼ Z. Bijective invertible transformation Fθ aims to The main concepts behind MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster
achieve one-to-one mapping z = fθ (x) from X to Z. According are to dynamically model mutual dependencies so that fineto the change of variable formula, we can get grained density estimation of the multivariate time series can
  
  ∂fθ  be obtained. This precise estimation allows for better detection
 
 PX (x) = PZ (z) det T  . (2)
 ∂x of low-density regions, even in datasets with high anomaly
 contamination during training. The overview of MTGFlow and
 ∂fθ
Benefiting from the tractable jacobian determinants | det ∂x T |. MTGFlow_cluster can be seen in Fig. 2. Concretely, each en-
The objective of flow models is to achieve ẑ = z, where ẑ = tity’s temporal variations are modeled using an RNN, while a
fθ (x). Parameters θ of fθ can be directly estimated by MLE as graph structure learning module is used to model the dynamic
follows interdependencies. The RNN’s time encoding output is then
 combined with the graph convolution operation, using the cor-
 θ∗ = arg max(log(PX (x)))
 θ responding learned graph structure. These outputs are called
    spatio-temporal conditions, as they contain both temporal and
  ∂fθ 
 = arg max(log PZ (fθ (x)) + log det T  . (3) structural information. In MTGFlow, these conditions are then
 θ ∂x input into the entity-aware normalizing flow module to achieve
 Design of fθ is an important topic in flow models. The core is precise fine-grained density estimation. And MTGFlow_cluster
to improve the flow model transferability under the premise of is designed to first cluster these entities and then estimate
the tractable jacobian determinants. Representative flow model the density via cluster-aware normalizing flow. As we do not
like RealNVP [30] utilizes the affine coupling, while MAF [31] have the cluster prior, we utilize time series clustering methods
applies autoregressive functions. like KShape [37] to perform group assignments. Finally, the
 Flow models are able to achieve more superior density estima- deviations of ẑ and z are measured by log likelihoods, and
tion performance when additional conditions C are input [60]. all modules of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are optimized
This is because C can usually provide relevant priors to ac- together using MLE.
curately characterize the source distribution, such as time and
position encoding [32]. Such the flow model is called conditional C. Self-Attention Based Graph Structure Learning
normalizing flow, and its corresponding mapping is derived as
z = fθ (x|C). Therefore, the training objective is rewritten as In order to capture the mutual dependencies that exist between
    entities in a multivariate time series, we employ self-attention to
  ∂fθ 
 θ∗ = arg max(log PZ (fθ (x|C)) + log det T 
 learn a dynamic graph structure. Each entity is treated as a graph
 .
 θ ∂x node. Given the window sequence xc ∈ RK×M , we calculate
 (4) the query and key vectors for each node i as xci W Query and
 xci W Key , where W Query ∈ RM ×M and W Key ∈ RM ×M are
 IV. METHOD the query and key weights, respectively. The pairwise relation-
A. Problem Statement ship ecij between node i and node j at the c-th sampling count
 is then obtained as follows:
 Considering a MTS dataset D = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xK ) and xk ∈
RL , where K represents the total number of entities, and L (xci W Query )(xcj W Key )T
 ecij = √ . (6)
denotes the total number of observations of each entity. To M
preserve temporal correlations of the original series, we use The attention score acij is used to quantify the pairwise relation
a sliding window with size M and stride size S to sample from node i to node j, calculated by:
the normalized MTS. M and S can be adjusted to obtain the ⎡ ⎤
training sample xc , where c is the sampling count. xc is short a c
 11 · · · a c
 1K
for xcS:cS+M . Due to the fact that anomalies exhibit unusual exp(ecij ) ⎢ . .. ⎥
 acij = K , Ac = ⎢
 ⎣
 .. ..
 . ⎥
 . ⎦ (7)
temporal patterns with their neighbors, introducing temporal exp(e c )
 j=1 ij c c
correlation to the input will benefit detection algorithms. In this aK1 · · · aKK
3170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster. Within a sliding window of size T , time series xc is fed to the RNN module to capture the
temporal correlations. Hidden states of RNN are regarded as time encoding, H c . Meanwhile, xc is also input to the graph structure learning module to capture
dynamic interdependencies among entities, which are modeled as adjacency matrix Ac . The spatio-temporal conditions C c are derived via the graph convolution
operation for H c and Ac . Finally, C c is used to help entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow model to produce entity/cluster-specific density estimation for the
distribution of time series.

 The resulting attention score is used to construct the attention as does in GANF, then the description capacity of the model
matrix Ac , which serves as the adjacency matrix of the learned will be largely limited, and the unique inherent property of each
graph. Since input time series are evolving over time, Ac also entity will be ignored. Therefore, we design the entity-aware
changes to capture the dynamic interdependencies. normalizing flow zk = fθk (x|C) to make more detailed density
 estimation, where x, C, k are the input sequence, condition
D. Spatio-Temporal Condition and the k-th entity, respectively. Technically, in MTGFlow, for
 one entity, we assign the multivariate Gaussian distribution as
 To accurately estimate the density of multiple time series,
 the target distribution. As for MTGFlow_cluster, due to the
it is crucial to incorporate robust spatio-temporal contextual
 absence of cluster priors, we leverage KShape for clustering
information. This involves modeling the underlying structure as
 all entities and subsequently assign the same target distribution
a dynamic graph and considering both spatial and temporal corto entities within a cluster. The covariance matrix of the above
relations to effectively capture the features of the time series. We
 target distribution is the identity matrix I for better convergence.
use recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to capture temporal cor-
 Moreover, in order to generate corresponding target distributions
relations. For a window sequence of k-th entity, xck , the time rep-
 Zk , mean vectors μk ∈ RM may be independently drawn from
resentation Hkt at time t ∈ [cS : cS + M ) is derived by Hkt =
 N (0, I) [62]. However, in our experiments, we find it better
RN N (xtk , Hkt−1 ), where RNN can be any sequence model
 to keep each element of μk the same. Specifically, for the time
such as LSTM [51] and GRU [61], and Hkt is the hidden state of
 series of the entity k, the entity-aware density estimation is
RNN. To obtain the spatio and temporal information C t of all
 given by:
entities at t, a graph convolution operation is performed through
  
the learned graph Ac . As mentioned in GANF, we also find that  ∂fθk 
 k 
 PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθ (xk |C)) det ,
history information of the node itself helps enhance temporal re- ∂xk T 
lationships of time series. Hence, the spatio-temporal condition
at t: Zk = N (μk , I),

 C t = ReLU (Ac H t W1 + H t−1 W2 )W3 , (8) μk ∼ N (0, 1), (9)

where W1 and W2 are graph convolution and history information The cluster-aware density estimation is given by:
  
weights, respectively. W3 is used to improve the expression abil-  ∂fθk 
 PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθk (xk |C)) det ,
ity of condition representations. The spatio-temporal condition ∂xk T 
C c for window c is the concatenation of C t along the time axis.
 Zk = N (μm , I) if k ∈ clusterm ,
E. Entity/Cluster-Aware Normalizing Flow μm ∼ N (0, 1),
 Distributions of individual entities have discrepancies be-
 {cluster1 , . . . , clusterm } = KShape {D} , (10)
cause of their different work mechanisms, and thus their respective anomalies will generate distinct sparse characteristics. If we Note that when the cardinality of all clusters is one, MTGFlow
map time series from all entities to the same distribution N (0, I), is equal to MTGFlow_cluster. In such a case, model parameters
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3171

will increase with the number of entities/clusters. To mitigate where Q1 and Q3 are 25th and 75th percentile of Sc .
this problem, we share entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow 2) Anomaly Interpretation: Abnormal behaviors of any enparameters across all entities. So, the density estimation for k tity could lead to the overall abnormal behavior of the whole
reads: window sequence. Naturally, we can get the anomaly score Sck
  
  ∂fθ  for entity k according to (12).
 PXk (xk ) = PZk (fθ (xk |C)) det . (11)
 ∂xk T  1
 K K
 Sc = − log(PXk (xck )) = Sck . (14)
 k
F. Joint Optimization k=1 k=1

 As described above, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster com- Since we map the time series of each entity into unique target
bine graph structure learning and RNN to capture the spatio distributions, different ranges of Sck are observed. This bias will
and temporal dependencies on multiple time series. Then, de- assign each entity to different weights in terms of its contribution
rived saptio-temporal conditions are utilized to contribute to to Sc . To circumvent the above-unexpected bias, we design the
entity/cluster-aware normalizing flow estimating the density of entity-specific threshold for each entity. Considering different
time series. To avoid getting stuck in the local optimum for each scales of Sck , IQR is used to set respective thresholds. Therefore,
module, we jointly optimize all modules. The whole parameters the threshold for Sck is given as:
W ∗ are estimated via MLE.
 T hresholdk = λk (Qk3 + 1.5 ∗ (Qk3 − Qk1 )), (15)
 ∗
W = arg max log(PX (x))
 W where Qk1 and Qk3 are 25th and 75th percentile of Sck across all
 N K
 observations, respectively. And λk is used to adjust T hresholdk
 1 1 because normal observations in different entities also fluctuate
 ≈ arg max log(PXk (xck ))
 W N c=1
 K with different scales.
 k=1
 N K   
 1  ∂fθ  V. EXPERIMENT
 ≈ arg max log PZk (fθ (xck |Ckc )) det
 W N K c=1
 k=1
 ∂xck T 
 A. Experiment Setup
 N K  
 1 1 ˆc  ∂fθ  1) Dataset: The commonly used public datasets for MTS
 ≈ arg max 2 
 − zk −μk 2 +log det c T 
 N K c=1 2 ∂x anomaly detection in OCC are as follows:
 W
 k=1 k r SWaT [63] is a collection of 51 sensor data from a real-
 
 world industrial water treatment plant, at the frequency
 + Const , of one second. The dataset provides ground truths of 41
 attacks launched during 4 days.
where N is the total number of windows, and Const is equal to
 r WADI [64] is a collection of 123 sensor and actuator data
− T2 ∗ log(2π). from WADI testbed, at the frequency of one second. The
 dataset provides ground truths of 15 attacks launched over
G. Anomaly Detection and Interpretation 2 days.
 r PSM [65] is a collection of multiple application server
 Based on the hypothesis that anomalies tend to be sparse on nodes at eBay with 25 features. The datasets provide
data distributions, low log likelihoods indicate that the observa- ground truths created by experts over 8 weeks.
tions are more likely to be anomalous. r MSL [49] is a collection of the sensor and actuator data of
 1) Anomaly Detection: Taking the window sequence xc as the Mars rover with 55 dimensions.
the input, the density of all entities can be estimated. The mean of r SMD [7] is comprised of 28 small datasets from 28 mathe negative log likelihoods of all entities serves as the anomaly chines at an internet company that records server metric
score Sc , which is calculated by: data like CPU utilization, at the frequency of one minute.
 K The dataset provides labeled anomalies for 5 weeks.
 1
 Sc = − log(PXk (xck )). (12) Since only normal time series are provided in these datasets
 K for training in OCC setting, we follow the dataset setting of
 k=1

A higher anomaly score represents that xck is located in the lower GANF [29] and split the original testing dataset by 60% for
density region, indicating a higher possibility to be abnormal. training, 20% for validation, and 20% for testing in SWaT. For
Since abnormal series exist in the training set and validation other datasets, the training split contains 60% data, and the test
set, we cannot directly set the threshold to label the anomaly, split contains 40% data. Dataset statistics are provided in Table I.
such as the maximum deviation in validation data [9]. Therefore, In addition, we also consider the common OCC setting for a
to reduce the anomaly disturbance, we store Sc of the whole comprehensive evaluation. Under the OCC setting, the training
training set, and the interquartile range (IQR) is used to set the datasets are required to be normal data, so we use the original
threshold: training datasets of the above-mentioned datasets as training
 datasets. Besides, Wu et al. [44] provides elaborate and chal-
 T hreshold = Q3 + 1.5 ∗ (Q3 − Q1 ), (13) lenging datasets (UCR) including 250-sub univariate datasets
3172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 TABLE I
 STATIC AND SETTINGS OF FIVE PUBLIC DATASETS

from diverse real scenarios (e.g., from biology and industry). r USAD [43]. An OCC-based method leverages Autoen-
For every sub-dataset, the training data is free of anomalies coder to reconstruct inputs. Anomaly data suffer poor
and the test data has only one short-period anomaly. Therefore, reconstruction quality.
we follow the origin split for evaluation on UCR. Although r DAGMM [15]. A density estimation approach combines
MTGFlow is designed to detect multivariate time series anomaly Autoencoder and Gaussian Mixture Model. Samples with
detection, it can also be applied to univariate series. Note that high energy are declared as anomalies.
MTGFlow is equivalent to MTGFlow_cluster when detecting r GANF [29]. The density estimation approach joints DAG
univariate time series. and flow model, and data on low-density regions are iden-
 2) Implementation Details: For datasets of MTS, we set the tified as anomalies.
window size as 60 and the stride size as 10. As for univariate 5) Performance:
dataset UCR, the duration of the anomalies is very short, and in a) Detection for multivariate time series: We list the AUsome cases only a dozen sampling points. Hence, the window ROC metric results in Table II, which is the average of five runs,
size is set as 10 for UCR. Adam optimizer with a learning rate in addition to the standard variance. Note that we do not provide
of 0.002 is utilized to update all parameters. One layer of LSTM the AUROC curves of SMD because it consists of 28 small
is employed to extract time representations in our experiment. datasets, where we test the performance on each of them and
One self-attention layer with 0.2 dropout ratio is adopted to average all the results. MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster have
learn the graph structure. We use MAF as the normalizing flow superior performance over all the other seven baselines under
model. In MTGFlow_cluster, KShape is used to perform the the unsupervised setting. To present an intuitive result, AUROC
whole time series clustering. The preset number of clusters is curves are also presented in Fig. 3. Compared with MTGFlow
20. For SWaT, one flow block and 512 batch size are employed. and MTGFlow_cluster, DeepSVDD and DROCC project all
For other datasets, we arrange two flow blocks for it and set the training samples into the hypersphere so they cannot learn the acbatch size as 256. λ is set as 0.8 for thresholds of all entities. curate decision boundary distinguishing normal from abnormal
The epoch is 40 for all experiments, which are performed in samples. Adversarial learning used by ALOCC and USAD and
PyTorch-1.7.1 with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 24 GB GPU.1 the semi-supervised learning strategy in DeepSAD leverages a
 3) Evaluation Metric: As in previous works, MTGFlow and more informative training procedure to mitigate the effect of
MTGFlow_cluster aim to detect the window-level anomalies, high anomaly contamination. As for DAGMM, it is restricted to
and labels are annotated as abnormal when there exists any the distribution estimation ability of GMM for multiple entities.
anomalous time point. The performance is evaluated by the Area Although GANF obtains a better result, its detection perfor-
Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve (AUROC). mance is still limited by inadequate dependence modeling and
 4) Baselines: To illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed indiscriminative density estimation. Due to a much more flexible
method, we compare the SOTA semi-supervised and unsuper- modeling structure, MTGFlow outperforms the above baseline
vised density estimation methods. methods. Moreover, we study log likelihoods for anomalies
 r DeepSAD [39]. A semi-supervised method maps normal ranging from 2016/1/2 11:07:00 to 11:37:00 in Fig. 4. It is clear
 data into a preset hypersphere, and additional anomaly that log likelihoods are high for the normal series but lower for
 labels are leveraged to improve the detection performance. labeled abnormal ones (highlighted in red). This variation of log
 r DeepSVDD [40]. An OCC-based method maps normal likelihoods validates that MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster can
 data into a preset hypersphere, and anomaly data are as- detect anomalies according to low-density regions of modeled
 sumed to be located outside the hypersphere. distribution. Meanwhile, to investigate the anomaly discriminar ALOCC [41]. An OCC-based method reconstructs inputs tion ability of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster, we present the
 via GAN and declares anomalies according to the output normalized Sc for GANF, MTGFlow, and MTGFlow_cluster
 of the discriminator. in Fig. 5. As it is displayed, for normal series, anomaly scores
 r DROCC [42]. An OCC-based method constructs robust of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are more closed at 0 than
 representations for normal data. Anomalies will deviate those of GANF, and the overlap areas of normal and abnorfrom the learned representations. mal scores are also smaller, reducing the false positive ratio.
 The larger score discrepancy corroborates MTGFlow and MT-
 1 Code is available at github.com/zqhang/MTGFLOW.
 GFlow_cluster superior detection performance.
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3173

 TABLE II
 ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF AUROC(%) ON FIVE PUBLIC DATASETS

Fig. 3. Comparison with advanced methods on ROC curves for four datasets.

 AUROC% on SWaT and from 67.5 AUROC% to 85.5 AUROC%
 on PSM. Besides, DROCC also obtains the advancement from
 75.6 AUROC% to 89.0 AUROC% on WADI. These observations reflect that the anomaly contamination severely degrades
 the detection performance of the above OCC-based methods.
 Therefore, such contrast illustrates that our method is more
 robust to anomaly contamination and thus applicable to both
 two scenarios.
 Although MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are superior to
Fig. 4. Log likelihoods for anomalies on MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster. the baselines, we observe that MTGFlow_cluster does not consistently outperform MTGFlow according to the results. We
 attribute this performance degradation (in the case of SWaT
 and WADI datasets) to the inappropriate cluster assignments.
 Because of the lack of prior clusters, we use KShape to provide
 the pseudo cluster label. Although KShape is a highly accurate
 and scalable time series clustering algorithm, the entity allocation is sensitive to the number of predefined clusters. If two
 or more entities with distinct characteristics are clustered into
 a group, MTGFlow_cluster will combine multiple underlying
 data manifolds into a single distribution, thereby hindering the
Fig. 5. Discrimination comparison on SWaT between GANF, MTGFlow, and
MTGFlow_cluster. accurate estimation for each entity. In our experiments, we apply
 default parameters to all datasets, i.e., the number of predefined
 clusters is set to 20 across different datasets such as SWaT and
 For the OCC setting, MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster also WADI. This cluster number may be not optimal for all datasets.
achieve promising performance. Interestingly, the performance To investigate the effect of cluster number, we perform a detailed
of MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster are close to that in the analysis in Section V-B2.
unsupervised setting, while other baselines have a tremendous b) Detection for univariate time series: As for univariate
performance improvement on different datasets. Specifically, series, we evaluate our method on UCR with other baselines.
DeepSVDD has a significant gain from 66.8 AUROC% to 85.9 Since UCR has 250 sub-datasets, we first average the results
3174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 6. Log likelihoods for anomalies on UCR. Top: The original test data in respective sub-datasets are presented. Middle: The corresponding labels provided in
these sub-datasets are provided. Normal time points are labeled as 0, while abnormal ones are labeled as 1. Bottom: Log likelihoods are obtained from our method,
and the ground truths of abnormal points are highlighted in red.

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE OF AUROC(%) ON UCR MODULE ABLATION STUDY (AUROC%)

over these sub-datasets and then average the above results over
five runs with a standard variance. From Table III, our method
still obtains the best performance. As suggested in [44], We
visual the original data of three sub-datasets (i.e., the unexpected
acceleration of distorted walking and walking) and present the
obtained log likelihoods from our method in Fig. 6. From the
figure, anomalous points in 054_U CR and 162_U CR datasets
are not sudden extreme values, which may be identified via an
empirical threshold. Their values are in the normal range but exhibit an unusual pattern caused by the unexpected acceleration.
Furthermore, in addition to the difficulty mentioned above, the
duration of the anomaly in 248_U CR dataset is also very short Fig. 7. Comparison on normalized anomaly scores between MTGFlow and
(i.e., just five abnormal points). These challenges make it more MTGFlow/G.
difficult to detect such anomalies. Bypassing these problems,
our method estimates the density of data points rather than
focusing on their numerical values and successfully detects such flow as MTGFlow/(G, E), MTGFlow only without graph as
anomalies according to the figure. Moreover, we can observe that MTGFlow/G, and MTGFlow only without entity-aware normalanomalous points incur lower log likelihoods than normal points. izing flow as MTGFlow/E. Results are presented in Table IV,
And, the prominent peaks show that MTGFlow can discriminate where MTGFlow/(G, E) obtains the worst performance. It is
anomalies clearly. attributed to the lack of relational modeling among entities and
 indistinguishable density estimation. Applying graph structure
 learning to model pairwise relations, MTGFlow/E achieves
B. Ablation Study
 better performance. Also, considering more fine-grained den-
 To study the effectiveness of our proposed module, we per- sity estimation, MTGFlow/G achieves an improvement over
form several ablation studies, including module ablation, hyper- MTGFlow/(G, E). Integrating these two modules, MTGFlow
parameter robustness, and anomaly ratio analysis. We mainly accomplishes the best results. To provide a more intuitive result,
focus on the analysis of MTGFlow because it is the special case we visualize the normalized anomaly score distributions of MTof MTGFlow_cluster, where the cardinality of each cluster is GFlow and MTGFlow/G in Fig. 7. Such a dynamic graph design
one. As for the effect of cluster quantities, we will analyze it in can push anomaly scores of normal series to 0 and enlarge the
Section V-B2. margin between normal and abnormal series. Also, we present
 1) Module Ablation Study: To test the validity of each de- the normalized anomaly score distribution for normal and absigned module, we give several ablation experiments. We de- normal series in Fig. 8. We observe that the margin between
note MTGFlow without graph and entity-aware normalizing normal and abnormal samples in MTGFlow is larger than that
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3175

 TABLE V
 ABLATION STUDY OF HYPERPARAMETERS (AUROC%)

Fig. 8. Comparison on normalized anomaly scores between MTGFlow and
MTGFlow/E.

 TABLE VI
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON MTGFLOW AND MTGFLOW_CLUSTER∗

Fig. 9. Effect of the cluster number in MTGFlow_cluster.

in MTGFlow/E. This demonstrates that MTGFlow amplifies the
discrepancy between normal and abnormal samples with the
help of entity-specific density estimation.
 2) Clustering Quantity Study: The pre-set cluster number is
important to the performance of MTGFlow_cluster. Hence, we Fig. 10. Effect of anomaly contamination ratio.
investigate the effect of the number of clusters on detection
performance under unsupervised and OCC settings. Since the
number of entities varies from different datasets, we assign dif- shown in Table V. Concretely, we conduct experiments with
ferent cluster numbers for them, as shown in Fig. 9. Take SWaT various sizes for the sliding window and the number of the
for example, the detection performance reaches the peak when normalizing flow blocks in Table V. When the window size is
the cluster number is 35. This illustrates that the appropriate small, such as 40, 60, and 80, the increase in the number of blocks
number of clusters can facilitate the detection performance for does not necessarily improve anomaly detection performance.
both settings. If the number of clusters is unexpectedly small, A larger model may cause overfitting to the whole distribution,
some entities with completely different characteristics are gath- where abnormal sequences are undesirably located in highered into the same cluster and transformed into the same target density regions of this distribution. When the window size is
distribution. In this case, the detection performance will de- large (i.e., 80, 100, and 120), the distribution to be estimated
crease, as presented by the cluster number from 35 to 30 in SWaT. is more high-dimensional so that model needs more capacity.
Conversely, when the number of clusters is excessive, too many Therefore, detection performance derives the average gain with
unnecessary target distributions need to be estimated, which may blocks increasing due to more accurate distribution modeling.
also result in performance degradation, as shown by the cluster 4) Anomaly Ratio Analysis: To further investigate the influnumber from 35 to 51 in SWaT. Similar phenomena are also ence of anomaly contamination rates, we vary training splits
observed across other datasets. We refer to MTGFlow_cluster to adjust anomalous contamination rates. For all the aboveas MTGFlow_cluster∗ when the appropriate cluster number is mentioned datasets, the training split increases from 60% to 80%
assigned. As shown in Table VI, MTGFlow_cluster∗ achieves with a 5% stride. We present an average result over five runs in
better detection performance than MTGFlow. Fig. 10. Taking SWaT as an example, the corresponding anomaly
 3) Hyperparameter Robustness: We conduct a comprehen- ratios of training datasets on SWaT are 17.7%, 16.7%, 15.7%,
sive study on the choice of hyperparameters, the results are 14.6%, and 13.9%, respectively. The detection performance of
3176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 have completely changed and the center has shifted from P 201
 to AIT 503 at 2016/1/2 7:00:00. This alteration of the graph
 structure may result from changes in working condition of the
 water treatment plant. Besides, two similar graph structures can
 be found at 2016/1/2 13:00:00 and 2016/1/2 14:00:00. This
 suggests that the graph structure will be consistent if the interdependencies remain unchanged over a period of time, possibly
 due to repetitive work patterns of entities. In addition, the main
 pairwise relations (thick arrow) at 2016/1/1 14:00:00 are similar
 to the ones at 2016/1/2 14:00:00, both centered on P 201. It
 indicates that the interdependencies on multiple sensors are
 periodic. We also find mutual interdependencies from learned
 graph structures, such as the edges between P 201 and AIT 201
 at 2016/1/2 13:00:00. We summarize the findings:
 1) Dynamic interdependencies among multiple entities.
 2) Consistent interdependencies among multiple entities.
 3) Periodic interdependencies among multiple entities.
Fig. 11. Transformed distributions of multiple entities. 4) Mutual interdependencies among multiple entities.
 Therefore, it is necessary to use a dynamic graph to model
 such changeable interdependencies.
MTGFlow fluctuates in a small range, which shows MTGFlow
 3) Distinct Sparse Characteristics: To demonstrate that the
is robust to the degree of anomaly contamination ratio. The same
 sparse characteristics vary with different entities, we study
phenomenon can be seen in the rest datasets. Consequently,
 changes of Sck along time on SWaT. As shown in Fig. 13, Sck
we can conclude that the anomaly detection performance of
 of AIT 201, P 102, F IT 502, AIT 502, P 403, and LIT 301 are
MTGFlow remains at a stable high level as the anomaly conpresented. The highlighted regions denote marked anomalies.
tamination ratio of the training dataset rises.
 For a better illustration, we divide the anomalous regions as A1 ,
 A2 , A3 , A4 , and A5 along the timeline. We can observe that
C. Result Analysis different entities react to different anomalies because of their
 In order to further investigate the effectiveness of MTGFlow, different work mechanisms. Specifically, AIT 201 and AIT 502
we give a detailed analysis based on SWaT dataset. has obvious fluctuations at A4 , while P 102 reacts to A2 . In
 1) Entity-specific Density Estimation: We further explore addition, F IT 502 is sensitive to A4 and A5 , yet P 403 has
whether the distributions of all entities are transformed into responses in the face of A2 and A4 . But LIT 301 is sensitive
different target distributions to verify our entity-aware design. to A2 , A3 , A4 , and A5 . Nevertheless, MTGFlow is still able to
Since the window size is 60, the corresponding transformed accurately distinguish and detect these anomalies.
distributions are also 60-dimensional distributions. Every single
dimension of the multivariate Gaussian distribution is a Gaussian
distribution. For better visualization, we present the 0th dimension of the transformed distributions across the whole test dataset
 D. Experimental Summary
in Fig. 11. Nine distributions of different entities are displayed.
It can be seen that these distributions have been projected as Without the requirement for any labeled data, MTGFlow and
unique distributions. Moreover, these distributions are success- MTGFlow_cluster have demonstrated their capabilities to idenfully converted to preset Gaussian distributions with different tify anomalies by leveraging their intrinsic low data density in
mean vectors. The one-to-one mapping models entity-specific Section V. We attribute the superior performance of MTGFlow
distributions and captures their respective sparse characteristics and MTGFlow_cluster to the following parts:
of anomalies, thus mitigating the above-mentioned performance r Individual anomalous time series from different entities
sacrifice. present diverse sparse characteristics. Instead of mapping
 2) Dynamic Graph Structure: Interdependencies among en- all these individual time series to the same latent space,
tities are not guaranteed to be immutable. In fact, pairwise we introduce an entity-aware normalizing flow to model
relations evolve with time. Benefiting from self-attention, MT- entity-specific density estimation. This allows each entity
GFlow can model this characteristic into a dynamic graph to be associated with a unique target distribution, which
structure. We treat the attention matrix as the graph adjacent results in an improvement in performance by 4.1%AUROC
matrix. An empirical threshold of 0.15 is set for the adjacency on SWaT and 1.6%AUROC on WADI.
matrix to show an intuitive learned graph structure in the test r Since interdependencies among entities are not immutable,
split. In Fig. 12, the node size represents its node degrees, they actually evolve over time. Rather than modeling such
the arrow direction represents the learned directed dependence interdependencies as static, we propose a dynamic graph
and the arrow width indicates the weight of the corresponding structure to capture these changeable interrelationships.
interdependencies. The graph structure at 2016/1/1 14:00:00 This innovation achieves the performance improvement of
is centered on the sensor P 201, while the edges in the graph 2.4% on SWaT and 0.6%AUROC on WADI.
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3177

Fig. 12. Dynamic graph structure in MTGFlow.

 for MTS and univariate series in both unsupervised and OCC
 settings. The superior anomaly detection performance of MT-
 GFlow and MTGFlow_cluster is attributed to dynamic graph
 structure learning and entity/cluster-aware density estimation.
 In addition, we explore various interdependencies that exist
 between individual entities from the learned dynamic graph
 structure. And a detected anomaly can be understood and localized via entity anomaly scores. In the future, we plan to apply our
 model to more flow models and further improve the practicality
 of our approach.

 REFERENCES
 [1] S. He, K. Shi, C. Liu, B. Guo, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “Collaborative sensing
 in Internet of Things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
 Tuts., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1435–1474, Third Quarter, 2022.
 [2] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection for discrete
 sequences: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 24, no. 5,
 pp. 823–839, May 2012.
 [3] S. R. Gaddam, V. V. Phoha, and K. S. Balagani, “K-means+ID3: A novel
 method for supervised anomaly detection by cascading K-means clustering
 and ID3 decision tree learning methods,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 345–354, Mar. 2007.
Fig. 13. Variation of log likelihoods for different entities on the whole testing [4] Z. Yang, L. He, H. Yu, C. Zhao, P. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Detecting PLC
dataset (Anomalies are highlighted in red, and the blue line is the threshold intrusions using control invariants,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12,
according to Sck ). pp. 9934–9947, Jun. 2022.
 [5] H. Pu, L. He, P. Cheng, M. Sun, and J. Chen, “Security of industrial
 r In reality, the characteristics of entities are strongly con- robots: Vulnerabilities, attacks, and mitigations,” IEEE Netw., vol. 37,
 no. 1, pp. 111–117, Jan./Feb. 2023.
 nected to their positions in common scenarios. In con- [6] B. Schölkopf et al., “Support vector method for novelty detection,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1999, pp. 582–588.
 trast to the approach of mapping all entities to unique [7] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 distributions like MTGFlow, MTGFlow_cluster further detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 proposes the cluster-aware normalizing flow to obtain the network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 commonality of these characteristics while maintaining [8] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interinter-cluster uniqueness. This cluster strategy empowers pretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data
 MTGFlow_cluster to outperform MTGFlow by 1.0%AU- Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
 [9] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 ROC on SWaT and 1.1%AUROC on WADI. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 pp. 4027–4035.
 [10] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer:
 VI. CONCLUSION Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,”
 In this work, we proposed MTGFlow and MTGFlow_cluster, 2021, arXiv:2110.02642.
 [11] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detecunsupervised anomaly detection approaches for MTS based on tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
the dataset with absolute zero known label. They first model Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
the distribution of training data and then estimate the density [12] L. Ruff et al., “A unifying review of deep and shallow anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 5, pp. 756–795, May 2021.
of test samples, which are identified anomalies when they lie [13] A. Goodge, B. Hooi, S. K. Ng, and W. S. Ng, “LUNAR: Uniin low-density regions of this distribution. Extensive experi- fying local outlier detection methods via graph neural networks,”
ments on real-world datasets demonstrate their superiority, even 2021, arXiv:2112.05355.
 [14] L. Zhang, J. Zhao, and W. Li, “Online and unsupervised anomaly detection
if there exists high anomaly contamination. MTGFlow and for streaming data using an array of sliding windows and PDDs,” IEEE
MTGFlow_cluster achieve SOTA anomaly detection methods Trans. Cybern., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 2284–2289, Apr. 2021.
3178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

[15] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsu- [40] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 2018, pp. 1–19. [41] M. Sabokrou, M. Fathy, G. Zhao, and E. Adeli, “Deep end-to-end one-
[16] C. Qiu, A. Li, M. Kloft, M. Rudolph, and S. Mandt, “Latent class classifier,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2,
 outlier exposure for anomaly detection with contaminated data,” pp. 675–684, Feb. 2021.
 2022, arXiv:2202.08088. [42] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain, “DROCC:
[17] S. Liu et al., “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial recon- Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 struction networks,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, 2020, pp. 3711–3721.
 pp. 4293–4306, Apr. 2023. [43] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
[18] K. Zhang, C. Li, and Q. Yang, “TriD-MAE: A generic pre-trained model “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in
 for multivariate time series with missing values,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3164–3173. pp. 3395–3404.
[19] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals, “Understanding [44] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
 deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization,” Commun. ACM, are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 107–115, 2021. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
[20] S. Wang et al., “Effective end-to-end unsupervised outlier detection via [45] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate time
 inlier priority of discriminative network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Process. Syst., 2019, Art. no. 536. 2023, pp. 4963–4971. [Online]. Available: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/
[21] N. Huyan, D. Quan, X. Zhang, X. Liang, J. Chanussot, and L. Jiao, AAAI/article/view/25623
 “Unsupervised outlier detection using memory and contrastive learning,” [46] R. Moghaddass and J. Wang, “A hierarchical framework for smart grid
 2021, arXiv:2107.12642. anomaly detection using large-scale smart meter data,” IEEE Trans. Smart
[22] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, “Outlier detection for Grid, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5820–5830, Nov. 2018.
 temporal data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 9, [47] M. Ghafouri, M. Au, M. Kassouf, M. Debbabi, C. Assi, and J. Yan,
 pp. 2250–2267, Sep. 2011. “Detection and mitigation of cyber attacks on voltage stability monitoring
[23] G. Pang, L. Cao, and C. Aggarwal, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: of smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5227–5238,
 Challenges, methods, and opportunities,” in Proc. 14th ACM Int. Conf. Nov. 2020.
 Web Search Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2021, pp. 1127–1130. [48] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3437963.3441659 survey,” 2019, arXiv: 1901.03407.
[24] R. Wang et al., “Deep learning for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 26th [49] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder-
 ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
 USA, 2020, pp. 3569–3570. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 3394486.3406481 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
[25] D. Salinas, V. Flunkert, J. Gasthaus, and T. Januschowski, “DeepAR: [50] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and G.
 Probabilistic forecasting with autoregressive recurrent networks,” Int. J. Shroff, “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly detec-
 Forecasting, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 1181–1191, 2020. tion,” 2016, arXiv:1607.00148.
[26] K. Rasul, C. Seward, I. Schuster, and R. Vollgraf, “Autoregressive denois- [51] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 ing diffusion models for multivariate probabilistic time series forecasting,” Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8857–8868. [52] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
[27] S. Feng, K. Xu, J. Wu, P. Wu, F. Lin, and P. Zhao, “Multi-scale attention networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,”
 flow for probabilistic time series forecasting,” 2022, arXiv:2205.07493. 2022, arXiv:2201.07284.
[28] K. Rasul, A.-S. Sheikh, I. Schuster, U. Bergmann, and R. Vollgraf, “Mul- [53] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 tivariate probabilistic time series forecasting via conditioned normalizing convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
 flows,” 2020, arXiv: 2002.06103. [54] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural
[29] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly de- networks?,” 2018, arXiv: 1810.00826.
 tection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [55] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for
 2021, pp. 1–16. anomaly detection,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., K. Chaudhuri,
[30] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation using real S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, and S. Sabato, Eds., 2022,
 NVP,” 2016, arXiv:1605.08803. pp. 21 076–21 089. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
[31] G. Papamakarios, T. Pavlakou, and I. Murray, “Masked autoregressive v162/tang22b.html
 flow for density estimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., [56] X. Wang, B. Jin, Y. Du, P. Cui, Y. Tan, and Y. Yang, “One-class graph neural
 2017, pp. 2338–2347. networks for anomaly detection in attributed networks,” Neural Comput.
[32] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Appl., vol. 33, pp. 12 073–12 085, 2021.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [57] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio,
[33] P. P. Rodrigues, J. Gama, and J. Pedroso, “Hierarchical clustering of “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv: 1710.10903.
 time-series data streams,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 20, no. 5, [58] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but Differpp. 615–627, May 2008. Net: Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc.
[34] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 1907–1916.
 for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. [59] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
 Qual. Serv., 2018, pp. 1–10. unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional normal-
[35] G. Liu, J. Si, W. Meng, Q. Yang, and C. Li, “Wind turbine fault detection izing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., 2022,
 with multimodule feature extraction network and adaptive strategy,” IEEE pp. 98–107.
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 3504613. [60] L. Ardizzone, C. Lüth, J. Kruse, C. Rother, and U. Köthe, “Guided image
[36] A. Aboah, “A vision-based system for traffic anomaly detection using generation with conditional invertible neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:
 deep learning and decision trees,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. 1907.02392.
 Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 4207–4212. [61] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
[37] J. Paparrizos and L. Gravano, “k-Shape: Efficient and accurate clustering decoder for statistical machine translation,” 2014, arXiv:1406.1078.
 of time series,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2015, [62] P. Izmailov, P. Kirichenko, M. Finzi, and A. G. Wilson, “Semi-supervised
 pp. 1855–1870. learning with normalizing flows,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
[38] Q. Ma, J. Zheng, S. Li, and G. W. Cottrell, “Learning representa- pp. 4615–4630.
 tions for time series clustering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Pro- [63] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
 cess. Syst., H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché- research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
 Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019, pp. 3776–3786. [On- Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
 line]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/ [64] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
 file/1359aa933b48b754a2f54adb688bfa77-Paper.pdf testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
[39] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv: in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
 1906.02694. pp. 25–28.
ZHOU et al.: LABEL-FREE MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 3179

[65] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn- Haoyu Liu received the PhD degree from Zhejiang
 chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” University, Hangzhou, China, in 2021. He is currently
 in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, working with NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, Hangzhou. His
 pp. 2485–2494. research interests include data mining and machine
 learning, with particular interests in anomaly detection and crowdsourcing.

 Qihang Zhou (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 BS degree from the China University of Geosciences,
 Wuhan, China, in 2020. He is currently working Jiming Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 toward the PhD degree in control science and en- in control science and engineering from Zhejiang
 gineering with the College of Control Science and University, Hangzhou, China, in 2005. He is currently
 Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. a professor with the Department of Control Science
 His research interests include generative learning, and Engineering, the vice dean with the Faculty of
 data mining, and anomaly detection. Information Technology, Zhejiang University. His research interests include IoT, networked control, wireless networks. He serves on the editorial boards of
 multiple IEEE Transactions, and the general co-chairs
 for IEEE RTCSA’19, IEEE Datacom’19, and IEEE
 PST’20. He was a recipient of the 7th IEEE ComSoc
 Asia/Pacific Outstanding Paper Award, the JSPS Invitation Fellowship, and the
 IEEE ComSoc AP Outstanding Young Researcher Award. He is an IEEE VTS
 distinguished lecturer. He is a fellow of the CAA.
 Shibo He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree in control science and engineering from Zhe-
 Wenchao Meng (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 jiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2012. He is curthe PhD degree in control science and engineering
 rently a professor with Zhejiang University. He was an
 from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2015,
 associate research scientist from March 2014 to May where he is currently with the College of Control Sci-
 2014, and a postdoctoral scholar from 2012 to 2014,
 ence and Engineering. His current research interests
 with Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
 include adaptive intelligent control, cyber–physical
 From 2010 to 2011, he was a visiting scholar with
 systems, renewable energy systems, and smart grids.
 the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada.
 His research interests include Internet of Things,
 crowdsensing, Big Data analysis, etc. He serves on
the editorial board of IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Springer
Peer-to-Peer Networking and Application and KSII Transactions on Internet
and Information Systems, and is a guest editor of the Elsevier Computer Communications and Hindawi International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks.
He was a general co-chair for iSCI 2022, symposium co-chair for the IEEE/CIC
ICCC 2022, IEEE GlobeCom 2020 and the IEEE ICC 2017, TPC co-chair for
i-Span 2018, a Finance and Registration chair for ACM MobiHoc 2015, a TPC
co-chair for the IEEE ScalCom 2014, a TPC vice co-chair for ANT 2013 and
2014, a track co-chair for the Pervasive Algorithms, Protocols, and Networks of
EUSPN 2013, a web co-chair for the IEEE MASS 2013, and a Publicity co-chair
of IEEE WiSARN 2010, and FCN 2014.