IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024 1715

 LogFiT: Log Anomaly Detection Using
 Fine-Tuned Language Models
 Crispin Almodovar , Fariza Sabrina , Member, IEEE, Sarvnaz Karimi, and Salahuddin Azad, Member, IEEE

 Abstract—System logs are a valuable source of information human operators are increasingly unable to cope with the
for monitoring and maintaining the security and stability of volume and velocity of log data generated by the systems
computer systems. Techniques based on Deep Learning and being monitored. Consequently, Machine Learning (ML) and
Natural Language Processing have demonstrated effectiveness
in detecting abnormal behaviour from these system logs. Deep Learning (DL)-based solutions have been proposed to
However, existing anomaly detection approaches have limita- automatically detect anomalies from system log data, thereby
tions in terms of flexibility and practicality. Techniques that reducing the burden on human operators [4], [5], [6].
rely on log templates such as DeepLog and LogBERT fail System logs are produced by the logging instructions that
to capture semantic information and are unable to handle software engineers insert in a computer program’s source code
variability in log content. On the other hand, classification-based
approaches such as LogSy, LogRobust and HitAnomaly require to communicate the program’s run-time state. The system logs
time-consuming data labelling for supervised training. In this thus produced consist of ordered sequences of log sentences
paper, a novel log anomaly detection model named LogFiT is that assert the occurrence of certain events in the system [7].
proposed. The LogFiT model doesn’t make use of a vocabulary Typically, log sentences are grouped according to some criteof log templates and it doesn’t require any labeled data as ria, such as time window (e.g., 60 second intervals) or unique
the model only requires self-supervised training. The LogFiT
model uses a pretrained Bidirectional Encoder Representations identifier (e.g., HDFS block ID). In this study, such grouping
from Transformers (BERT)-based language model fine-tuned to of log sentences is referred to as a “log paragraph”. The idea
recognise the linguistic patterns of the normal log data. The behind log anomaly detection is to learn a model of the normal
LogFiT model is trained using masked sentence prediction on behaviour of a computer system based on the sequence of log
the normal log data only. Consequently, when presented with sentences that it generates during normal operations. If there
the new log data, the model’s top-k token prediction accuracy
serves as a threshold for determining whether the new log data is a significant deviation in the new observed behaviour from
deviates from the normal log data. Experimental results show the learned normal behaviour, the deviation can be regarded as
that LogFiT’s F1 score exceeds that of baselines on the HDFS, an anomaly. For instance, a normal sequence of log sentences
BGL, and Thunderbird datasets. Critically, when variability is may consist of one or more “File opened successfully” entries
introduced in the log data during evaluation, LogFiT retains its followed by “File write operation completed” and/or “File
effectiveness compared to that of baselines.
 read operation completed” entries. However, a sequence of
 Index Terms—Service monitoring, fault management, log log sentences that only contains “File opened successfully”
anomaly detection, deep learning, natural language processing, entries without corresponding “read” or “write” entries can be
language modeling.
 considered an anomaly.
 There are several considerations in the study of log anomaly
 I. I NTRODUCTION detection. The first consideration is the overall Machine
 NNUALLY, cybercrime results in billions of dollars Learning approach to be used for anomaly detection. In
A of losses for businesses [1], [2], [3]. Log anomaly
detection is an active area of research owing to its relevance
 literature, approaches based on Deep Learning have been
 proven to be more effective than traditional Machine Learning
to the problem of ensuring the security and reliability of based approaches such as Principal Component Analysis
organisations’ digital infrastructure. The large amounts of (PCA), Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Isolation
log data generated by computer systems provide valuable Forest [6], [8], [9].
information about the systems’ real-time operation. However, A further consideration is whether to use supervised or
 unsupervised Machine Learning. Due to the high cost of
 Manuscript received 13 March 2023; revised 15 September 2023 and
9 December 2023; accepted 23 December 2023. Date of publication preparing labelled data, supervised methods such as LogSy
25 January 2024; date of current version 15 April 2024. This work was [10], LogRobust [11] and HitAnomaly [12] have limited utility
supported in part by the Central Queensland University’s School of Graduate in production settings. As a result, unsupervised techniques
Research and in part by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation (CSIRO)’s Data61 unit. The associate editor coordinating dominate; these techniques assume a zero-positive training
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao. scenario, where normal log data is the only data available for
(Corresponding author: Crispin Almodovar.) training [4]. The study in [13] identified two categories for unsu-
 Crispin Almodovar, Fariza Sabrina, and Salahuddin Azad are with the
School of Engineering and Technology, Central Queensland University, pervised models for log anomaly detection: forecasting-based
Rockhampton, QLD 4701, Australia (e-mail: crispin.almodovar@ model which learns by predicting the next log sentence based
cqumail.com; f.sabrina@cqu.edu.au; s.azad@cqu.edu.au). on immediately preceding log sentences; and reconstruction-
 Sarvnaz Karimi is with Data61, CSIRO, Sydney, NSW 2015, Australia
(e-mail: sarvnaz.karimi@csiro.au). based model which learns by reconstructing sequences of log
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3358730 sentences that have been intentionally corrupted.
 
 c 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 • We propose LogFiT, a log anomaly detection model
 implemented as a Python package. LogFiT leverages a
 fine-tuned, pretrained BERT-based model to semantically
 analyse logs without requiring an intermediate parsing
 step. During inference, top-k prediction accuracy is used
 for anomaly identification, with heuristics to set the
 threshold automatically.
 • The model employs a novel masked sentence prediction
 training objective to enhance the contextual understanding of log sentences and their constituent tokens, thus
 improving anomaly detection performance.
Fig. 1. Log parsing applied to HDFS log data. • LogFiT works directly on raw logs, eliminating the need
 for a separate log parsing step to extract log templates.
 Another consideration is the use of a log parser and log LogFiT uses the pretrained model’s extensive vocabulary
templates to generate representations of log sentences. The of sub-word tokens to adapt to diverse log content.
quality of the representation of log sequences is a critical • LogFiT offers a provision of using one of two base
factor that impacts the effectiveness of log anomaly detection models - RoBERTa and Longformer. The former allows
models, especially when the evolution of log content is faster training, while the latter is capable of handling
taken into account [14], [15]. As shown in Figure 1, log longer log sequences.
parsers [8], [9] extract string templates from the log data • Heuristics are used for base model selection and hyperto build a vocabulary of all known log templates (steps 1 parameter tuning, enhancing ease of use.
and 2). Subsequently, all input log sentences are mapped to • LogFiT can also serve as a semantic embedding tool,
an entry in the log template vocabulary (step 3). Thus a generating log representations that can be used for other
sequence of log sentences is represented by a sequence of tasks outside of anomaly detection.
log template IDs. This approach has been shown to negatively • LogFiT is designed for easy integration into existing NLP
affect model effectiveness because of its semantically deficient tool sets and the larger system observability ecosystem.
representation of log sentences. Furthermore, the unseen input • We compare LogFiT against established methods,
log sentences are expected to match a log template, which DeepLog and LogBERT, to demonstrate its effectiveness.
makes this approach incapable of handling variability in log The present paper differs from the authors’ earlier confersentences over time [10], [16], [17]. ence paper [20], outlined as follows. Firstly, the robustness
 An important consideration is the choice of model archi- of LogFiT against gradual changes to the lexical content
tecture. DL-based approaches have taken inspiration from of log data has been demonstrated. Secondly, the centroid
the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) to pro- minimisation training objective that was used in the earlier
cess log data that are in the form of natural language method has been removed, and the model’s effectiveness is
sentences. Literature reveals that state-of-the-art research in not degraded by its removal. Furthermore, the present paper
this area employs the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) leverages k-fold cross-validation to improve the reliability of
architecture, as exemplified by the DeepLog model [8], and the experiments, and includes experiments that explore the
Transformers, represented by the LogBERT model [9]. The effect of varying the top-k and top-k accuracy threshold values,
problems identified with LSTMs are (1) Inability to cater to and different time windows.
longer sequences owing to their sequential nature; and, (2) The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II
Deficient capacity to learn complex and ambiguous contextual discusses the related works on Deep Learning and natural
relationships in the input data [9]. Being an LSTM-based language-based approaches for anomaly detection using
architecture, DeepLog inherits the limitations of LSTM. On log data and the pros and cons of those approaches.
the other hand, Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Section III illustrates the proposed LogFiT model in detail.
Transformers (BERT) [18] has several advantages over LSTM. Section IV describes the datasets, experimental setup and
It inherits Transformer’s [19] self-attention mechanism which implementation details. Section V analyses the experimental
helps it avoid local bias, and its use of bidirectional con- results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper with future
text allows it to capture complex and ambiguous contextual directions.
relationships. Although LogBERT inherits the advantages of
BERT, its dependency on log parsing and log templates makes
it less adaptable to changes in log structures. Moreover, II. R ELATED W ORK
LogBERT trains a BERT model customised to a specific Considerable research has been done on Deep Learning
dataset from scratch, which limits its ability to generalise to based supervised and unsupervised anomaly detection. Many
other datasets. Furthermore, LogBERT does not benefit from of the approaches [8], [9], [11], [12] require log parsing,
prior semantic knowledge already learned by a pretrained while recent studies [11], [16] suggested that log parsing can
BERT model. reduce accuracy. Graph-based anomaly detection [21], [22],
 To address the limitations of existing approaches, this work [23], [24], [25], [26] is an emerging topic, drawing interest
introduces the following contributions: from researchers.
ALMODOVAR et al.: LogFIT: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION USING FINE-TUNED LANGUAGE MODELS 1717

A. Supervised vs. Unsupervised Methods [28] utilises BERT’s natural language understanding to detect
 1) Unsupervised Methods: DeepLog [8] pioneered the anomalies without relying on conventional parsing. This
application of Deep Learning and Natural Language approach allows it to handle variability in formats. However,
Processing to the log anomaly detection problem domain. By similar to the LogBERT method, this approach trains a BERT
utilising a forecasting-based approach based on the patterns model from scratch. This limits its reuse for other datasets
of past log sentences, it improved upon previous methods, and schemas and foregoes the benefits of a pretrained model’s
such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Support Vector prior semantic knowledge.
Machines (SVM) and Isolation Forest. However, its use
of LSTM and log template indexes negatively affects its C. Graph-Based Approaches
capability to handle complex semantic relationships between Log analysis for the intrusion detection use case prilog sentences. LogAnomaly [27] built upon the principles marily use graph-based models, requiring substantial feature
set by DeepLog by introducing the encoding of semantic engineering and domain knowledge to identify entities and
information. LogAnomaly used the template2vec method to their interactions [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26]. The input
encode the semantic content of log data, enhancing the model’s to graph-based models is formatted as information triples,
ability to detect anomalies. However, LogAnomaly’s use of such as (user1, authenticate, computer2). In contrast, LogFiT
LSTM hampers its ability to process longer sequences and operates on well-formed sentences, leveraging its transformer
complex log relationships. LogBERT [9] adopted the BERT architecture to understand both structural and semantic proparchitecture to learn more nuanced patterns in the log data, erties of log data [29], [30]. Recent studies indicate that
which allowed it to perform better than previous methods. Transformer models can learn representations comparable to
However, LogBERT’s use of log parsing and log templates graph-based approaches [31], [32]. Therefore in future, we aim
makes it less adaptable to changes in the lexical structure of to adapt LogFiT for intrusion detection scenarios, for example
log data. by converting intrusion detection log data into processable
 2) Supervised Methods: LogRobust [11] and HitAnomaly sentence structures.
[12] integrate semantic vectorisation, bidirectional LSTM
with attention, and transformer architecture, offering more
accurate anomaly classification. However, the supervised D. Log Anomaly Detection Workflow
nature limits their generalisability and scalability, demanding The log anomaly detection workflow involves four steps as
a significant effort in labelling data. The requirement for identified in prior studies [5], [33], [34], [35]: pre-processing
labelled data makes them less flexible in scenarios where for data quality, vectorisation for Machine Learning, model
obtaining labelled anomalies is challenging. Additionally, development and evaluation, and final operationalisation in
domain-specific embedding might limit their applicability production. Current research does not recommend log parsing
across various domains. Furthermore, their reliance on specific for vectorisation due to accuracy issues [11], [16], and recomlog parsers like the Drain parser may also limit flexibility. mends NLP-based architectures like LSTM and Transformers
LogSy [10] introduced flexible preprocessing through its for optimal performance [8], [9], [10], [16].
use of a Transformer architecture. LogSy also introduced a
spherical loss function, which was later adopted by LogBERT.
 E. Pretrained Language Models
However, LogSy’s classification-based approach can create
challenges in scenarios where labelled data is not readily In recent research, there has been a growing interest in
available. The method’s requirement for abnormal log lines the use of pretrained language models (LMs) such as BERT
imported from an auxiliary data source creates an external [18] to improve anomaly detection in system logs. Studies
dependency, which hinders its usability in settings where in [15], [16] demonstrated that pretrained LMs can offer
auxiliary data sources are not available. significant advantages over word embeddings, that were used
 in the LogRobust model [11]. According to these studies,
 pretrained LMs capture contextual information at the level of
B. Parsing-Based vs. Parsing-Free Methods the whole log sentence, whereas word embeddings only pro-
 1) Parsing-Based Log Anomaly Detection: As mentioned vide representations for individual words in a single sentence.
earlier, DeepLog [8] and LogBERT’s [9] dependency on Furthermore, pretrained LMs are capable of handling out-ofstandardized templates limits their adaptability to new or rare vocabulary words, unlike static word embeddings. Existing
log sentence structures. Also, the use of a log parsing tool research suggests that pretrained LMs such as BERT can
might affect its ability to capture the nuanced differences in log learn both syntactic and semantic information, which can
messages. Similarly, LogRobust [11] and HitAnomaly’s [12] improve the effectiveness of Natural Language Processing
dependency on log parsing tools limits flexibility in capturing tasks [29], [30], [36], [37]. The BERT model is a Transformer
nuanced differences. encoder model that has the capabilities of an auto-encoder.
 2) Parsing-Free Log Anomaly Detection: As mentioned The BERT model’s encoder capability allows it to generate
earlier, while LogSy’s [10] use of flexible pre-processing and semantic vectors that are sensitive to the full context of the
Transformer architecture makes it robust against the evolution input log sequence, and to reconstruct log sequences that have
of log data, its classification-based approach poses a challenge been corrupted [18]. Therefore, in this study, a pretrained LM
where labelled data is not readily available. LAnoBERT is incorporated into the LogFiT model to leverage its ability
1718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE I
 C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS OF L OG A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS

to understand the sequential properties and linguistic structure
of system logs.
 In Table I, various log anomaly detection methods are
summarised and compared, highlighting their key technical
aspects and limitations. Table I presents the landscape of
existing approaches to highlight the research gap addressed
by the proposed LogFiT method. LogFiT distinguishes itself
from other methods by leveraging transfer learning and LM
fine-tuning through masked sentence prediction, enabling it to
adapt more robustly to evolving log data, unlike other methods
that require log templates, LSTM, labelled data, from-scratch
training, or extensive domain knowledge. Furthermore, it is
important to note that LogFiT is not limited to using RoBERTa
or Longformer. It is straightforward to swap out LogFiT’s
underlying model and replace it with other Transformer
encoder models available on the Hugging Face model hub.

 III. L OG F I T
 The proposed LogFiT approach takes advantage of advancements in Deep Learning and NLP for system log anomaly
detection. It employs pretrained foundation models [38],
specifically fine-tuning RoBERTa [39] or Longformer [40]
to learn the linguistic and sequential properties of normal
log data. Longformer is selected for its support of sequences Fig. 2. Logical architecture of the LogFiT log anomaly detection approach.
exceeding 512 tokens, overcoming limitations in BERT [18]
and RoBERTa. LogFiT incorporates a heuristic to choose for multiple log streams. That is, (1) LogFiT preprocesses
between RoBERTa and Longformer based on log sequence centralised log data for training and inference; (2) The model
lengths: RoBERTa for sequences up to 512 tokens, and trains on normal historical logs; (3) Optimal threshold is
Longformer for longer log sequences. determined; (4) During inference, anomalies are detected
 LogFiT utilises a self-supervised training strategy, focusing using the model and threshold; and, (5) Alerts appear on the
exclusively on normal log data to learn its linguistic and platform’s UI for operator action.
sequential patterns. The model aims to predict masked tokens In its early version [20], LogFiT incorporated centroid loss,
in log sentences, employing cross-entropy loss to optimise its inspired by the LogBERT [9] method. Subsequent research
predictions. This loss function is logarithmic, penalising incor- indicated that centroid loss is unnecessary, thus the present
rect predictions more severely than correct ones. LogFiT’s version of LogFiT does not incorporate it.
semantic vectors, stored in the [CLS] token, are suitable for
downstream tasks like clustering and visualisation. As shown
in Figure 2, the LogFiT architecture and workflow involve: A. Framework
(1) preprocessing raw log lines; (2) and (3) fine-tuning a Input Representation: The LogFiT model utilises normal log
pretrained RoBERTa/Longformer model on normal logs using data for training, which is converted to semantic vectors before
masked sentence prediction and cross-entropy loss; and, (4) being passed to the model. In contrast to both the DeepLog
detecting anomalies in new log data. Additionally, Figure 3 and LogBERT methods, the LogFiT model does not require
shows LogFiT can be integrated into a system observability the input log data to first be converted to log templates. Rather,
platform (such as the Elasticsearch stack) and configured log data is directly tokenised using the pretrained RoBERTa
ALMODOVAR et al.: LogFIT: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION USING FINE-TUNED LANGUAGE MODELS 1719

 Fine-tuning: To adapt the RoBERTa or Longformer model
 to the log anomaly detection task, LogFiT utilises finetuning methods based on super-convergence techniques [41]
 implemented in the FastAI/ULMFiT framework [42], [43].
 Research has demonstrated that fine-tuning yields significant
 performance improvements (an average gain of 2%) [44] and
 that gradual unfreezing [42], [44] counters the negative effects
 of weight dissipation during fine-tuning of pretrained language
 models [45].

 B. Training Objective
 As mentioned previously, the LogFiT model is trained in a
 self-supervised manner using masked sentence prediction. This
 training objective is a modified version of the self-supervised
 masked language modelling (MLM) training objective used
 to pretrain BERT-based language models [18]. In LogFiT a
 variable ratio (default 0.5) of the sentences that constitute a
 log paragraph is randomly chosen for masking, unlike BERT
Fig. 3. LogFiT integrated into existing system observability platform.
 which randomly chooses a set ratio (0.15) of all the tokens
 that make up a log paragraph is randomly chosen for masking.
 Subsequently, LogFiT masks a variable ratio (default 0.8) of the
or Longformer model’s default tokeniser component. LogFiT
 tokens that make up each log sentence. Afterwards, the model
takes inspiration from recent models [15], [16] that forego
 is tasked with predicting what the masked tokens were. The
the log template extraction step and directly convert the log
 intuition behind this training objective is to force the model to
data into semantic vectors using a pretrained LM. These
 learn not just the contextual relationships between the tokens
models however treat the pretrained language model as a static
 that make up a log sentence, but also the contextual relationships
semantic embedding generator, whereas LogFiT fine tunes it
 between the log sentences to accurately predict the masked
to the log anomaly task.
 tokens. This enables the model to develop an understanding of
 Transformer Architecture: LogFiT inherits from the innothe language rules used by the normal system logs. As a result,
vations introduced by the BERT-based language models.
 it can differentiate normal log data from anomaly log data.
BERT’s ability to accurately reconstruct corrupted input
 To satisfy the masked token prediction training objeclogs can be used as a threshold-based anomaly detection
 tive, the model minimises the cross-entropy loss between
method. Thus by inheriting from BERT, LogFiT includes
 its masked token predictions and the actual tokens. The
both the vectoriser and log anomaly detection component
 computation of the cross-entropy loss for a mini-batch of log
in a single package, allowing for end-to-end training that
 data is shown in Equation (1). The LogFiT model minimises
does not require intermediate log template extraction or
 the training loss using the Adam optimiser, initialised using
vectorisation steps. As mentioned earlier, LogFiT makes use
 default values from the FastAI [43] Deep Learning library:
of the RoBERTa model to process log datasets containing
 momentum = 0.9, sqr_momentum = 0.99, epsilon = 1e − 5,
up to 512 tokens per sample, and the Longformer model
 and weight decay = 0.01.
for datasets where the token count per sample exceeds 512.
The Longformer model overcomes BERT’s limitation on the b m
 1  j  
 j
number of tokens, which is due to the quadratic computa- Loss = − ymaski log pmaski , (1)
 b
tional complexity of BERT’s self-attention mechanism, by j =1 i=1
introducing a sliding window strategy that effectively reduces
 where b is size of the mini-batch, m is the number of masked
attention computation to a linear time [40]. The LogFiT model
 tokens, y and p are the true and predicted values, respectively.
consists of 12 stacked Transformer encoders, 12 attention
heads per layer, 768-dimension vectors, and a maximum
possible sequence length of 4096 tokens – as illustrated in C. Anomaly Detection
Figure 2. The LogFiT model, which is exclusively trained on normal
 Heuristic: The LogFiT tool also includes a heuristic to data, can then be used to detect abnormal log data. During the
automatically select between RoBERta and Longformer based inference stage, log paragraphs are processed in the same way
on the 0.8-quantile length (in words) of the training log sam- as during training. To determine whether a log paragraph is
ples, found during preprocessing. LogFiT selects RoBERTa anomalous, LogFiT uses a technique adopted from LogBERT.
for datasets with log samples containing no more than 512 The trained model’s top-k accuracy in correctly predicting the
tokens. For log datasets with samples that exceed 512 tokens, masked tokens is used as an anomaly score. If the model’s
LogFiT switches to Longformer to take advantage of its ability top-k predictions for a masked token contain the correct token,
to handle longer log samples via its use of local and global the model’s prediction is considered correct. A log paragraph
attention. is considered normal if the model’s accuracy in correctly
1720 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE II
predicting the masked tokens is above some threshold. If the P ER -PARAGRAPH W ORD AND S ENTENCE S TATISTICS FOR THE DATASETS
model’s accuracy falls below the threshold, the log paragraph
is deemed an anomaly. LogFiT includes a heuristic to determine the optimal threshold during hyperparameter tuning, as
described in the Experimental Setup section.

 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 predicting the next log template based on its preceding ones.
 In this section, the datasets, experimental setup, and imple- The model deems a log sequence normal if the correct template
mentation details are described. Subsequently, the results of falls within its top-k predictions. The results are produced
running the experiments are evaluated. using the logdeep library,1 and it should be noted that the
 original DeepLog performance metrics are not reproducible
A. Experimental Setup with this implementation. LogBERT, on the other hand,
 Datasets: The LogFiT model is trained and evaluated employs a BERT-based architecture and a reconstruction-based
using three public datasets: HDFS [46], BGL [47] and approach. It learns normal log patterns through masked log
Thunderbird [47], as used by baseline models [8], [9]. While key prediction and centroid distance minimisation. Anomalies
these datasets are partially labelled, LogFiT uses the labels are identified by predicting masked log keys and calculating an
solely for model validation. In real-world applications, logs are anomaly score based on top-k accuracy and centroid distance.
often unlabeled. HDFS logs were generated by the Hadoop If either metric exceeds a certain threshold, the sequence is
Distributed File System and contain both normal and anoma- classified as anomalous. Results are produced from publicly
lous events, manually tagged by experts. Anomalies in this available LogBERT source code, and it is noted that the
dataset pertain to abnormal file system operations. The dataset original evaluations are also not reproducible.
comprises 11,175,629 log sentences, with 284,818 identified Implementation Details: LogFiT was implemented using
as anomalies. BGL logs come from the Blue Gene/L super- Python and leveraged several well-known libraries to accelcomputer at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. It has erate the development and evaluation of the model, such
4,747,963 log sentences, with 348,460 categorised as anoma- as Pytorch, FastAI and Hugging Face. The details of the
lies. Thunderbird logs were produced by the Thunderbird implementation can be found in the pre-print version of this
supercomputer system at Sandia National Laboratories. The paper [49]. The source code implementing the LogFiT model,
full dataset contains 211,212,192 log sentences; this study datasets and model checkpoints will be made available online.
considers the first 20,000,000, of which 758,562 are anomalies. Evaluation Metrics: To evaluate the effectiveness of the
 Log paragraphs: The HDFS log sentences are chunked into models, the experiments use the following metrics:
log paragraphs using the HDFS block ID, which represents a • Precision (P) measures the proportion of correctly idensession in HDFS. The BGL and Thunderbird datasets do not tified anomaly samples (TP), out of all the anomalies
have a natural grouping field, so the log sentences are grouped detected by the model, and is calculated as P = TP /
using time windows of 10, 30 and 60 seconds. A shorter (TP + FP).
time window facilitates timely feedback for system operators. • Recall (R) measures the proportion of correctly identified
Table II shows some statistics about the HDFS, BGL, and anomaly samples (TP) out of all real anomalies and is
Thunderbird datasets. calculated as R = TP / (TP + FN).
 K-fold Cross-validation: In the experiments, k-fold cross- • F1 Score (F1) is the harmonic mean of the Precision and
validation was used, specifically using a five-fold approach. Recall and is calculated as F1 = 2 * (P*R)/(P + R).
For each dataset, a total of 25,000 normal and 2,000 anomaly • Specificity (S) measures the proportion of correctly idenlog paragraphs were allocated for this process. The normal tified normal samples (TN) out of all real normal samples
logs were used exclusively for training, while the anomaly and is calculated as S = TN/(TN + FP).
logs were reserved for hyperparameter tuning and model In real-world deployment scenarios, having a predictive
evaluation. During each five-fold iteration, 5,000 logs sampled model with high Specificity is more advantageous since it
from the 20,000 training split were utilised for training. For minimises the chances of producing false positives or false
hyperparameter tuning, 1,000 normal logs (from the training alarms. Furthermore, in [4] it was noted that a high Specificity
split) were used, supplemented with 1,000 anomaly logs. The can help mitigate the impact of having an imbalanced class
final model evaluation exclusively used the 5,000 logs from distribution on the model’s overall performance.
the test split, supplemented with 1,000 anomaly logs. Hyperparameter tuning: During the hyperparameter tuning
 Log Content Variability: To test the models’ ability to step, LogFiT iterates through top-k values in the range: 5, 9,
handle variation in the syntactic structure of the log data, the and 12. Subsequently, for the top-k accuracy threshold, LogFiT
evaluation set is dynamically modified during model evalua- iterates through values based on the top-1 token prediction
tion on the BGL dataset, so that the top 10% most commonly accuracy of the model during training. For example, if the
occurring verbs are replaced with their WordNet [48] lemmas. model’s top-1 token prediction accuracy during training was
 Baselines: The performance of the LogFiT model is 0.9, the range of values for the top-k accuracy threshold search
compared against two key baselines. DeepLog [8] and is derived by computing 3 evenly spaced numbers in the
LogBERT [9]. DeepLog utilised an LSTM-based architecture
and a forecasting-based approach for anomaly detection by 1 Included in the LogBERT source code distribution.
ALMODOVAR et al.: LogFIT: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION USING FINE-TUNED LANGUAGE MODELS 1721

 TABLE III
range [(0.9 − 0.1), 0.9]. This computation is facilitated by the A NOMALY D ETECTION P RECISION (P), R ECALL (R), F1 S CORE (F) AND
linspace function from the NumPy library, which yields S PECIFICITY (S) OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE HDFS DATASET.
the values 0.8, 0.85, and 0.9. L OG F I T VALUES A RE AVERAGED F ROM 5-F OLD C ROSS -VALIDATION
 Observations: In our experiments, we observed that the
implementations of LogBERT and DeepLog included the test
set during the log parsing step (which builds the vocabulary
of log templates), thus artificially avoiding out-of-vocabulary
issues. The implementations also filtered out log instances
with fewer than 10 log template IDs, which avoided a failure TABLE IV
condition when the input sequence length is 1. We modified A NOMALY D ETECTION P RECISION (P), R ECALL (R), F1 S CORE (F) AND
the implementations to align with LogFiT’s setup. S PECIFICITY (S) OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE BGL DATASET.
 L OG F I T VALUES A RE AVERAGED F ROM 5-F OLD C ROSS -VALIDATION
 We note that k-fold cross-validation may lead the models AND T IME W INDOWS OF 10 S , 30 S , AND 60 S
to peek into the future, by processing log samples that only
occur at later times leading to the model’s effectiveness
improvement. This has been shown in the past in time-based
datasets [50].

 V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
 Log Anomaly Detection Effectiveness: Table III, Table IV TABLE V
 A NOMALY D ETECTION P RECISION (P), R ECALL (R), F1 S CORE (F), AND
and Table V show the results of running anomaly detec- S PECIFICITY (S) OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE T HUNDERBIRD
tion inference using LogFiT, as compared to the results DATASET. L OG F I T VALUES A RE AVERAGED F ROM 5-F OLD
from running DeepLog and LogBERT using the available C ROSS -VALIDATION AND T IME W INDOWS OF 10 S , 30 S , AND 60 S
source code implementation. The results show that LogFiT’s
F1 scores exceed that of LogBERT and DeepLog on all
three datasets, while LogFiT’s specificity exceeds that of the
baseline models on the HDFS and BGL datasets and is very
close to LogBERT’s on the Thunderbird dataset. The DeepLog
and LogBERT models were trained and evaluated using the TABLE VI
source code implementation mentioned earlier. A NOMALY D ETECTION T HROUGHPUT ( IN S AMPLES P ER S ECOND ) OF
 Analysis: The LogFiT results indicate that fine-tuning D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE HDFS, BGL AND T HUNDERBIRD
 DATASETS . BGL AND T HUNDERBIRD VALUES A RE AVERAGED ACROSS
pretrained RoBERTa or Longformer models with a novel T IME W INDOWS OF 10 S , 30 S , AND 60 S . B OLD VALUES R EPRESENT THE
masked sentence prediction training objective is effective for H IGHEST IN A C OLUMN
adapting these language models to the task of detecting
anomalies in system logs. This training approach enhances
LogFiT’s contextual understanding of log data. LogFiT’s
extensive sub-word token vocabulary and its lack of need for
log parsing allow it to easily adapt to diverse log content.
Additionally, we corrected implementation issues in DeepLog
and LogBERT, which may have influenced these methods’ DeepLog and LogBERT, whose vocabularies are based on the
performance. It is emphasized that while LogFiT improves upon number of unique log templates, LogFiT’s vocabulary is more
baseline methods on standard metrics, the LogFiT method’s true extensive - which allows it to handle variability in log content.
effectiveness is evident in scenarios where the textual content of Additionally, LogFiT accommodates up to 4096 tokens, as
log data changes due to log schema evolution. LogFiT’s superior opposed to the 512-token limit in DeepLog and LogBERT.
adaptability and robustness in handling dynamic changes in Finally, LogFiT’s lower throughput is also influenced by its
log data - achieved through LM fine-tuning - underscores its generation of detailed metrics and artifacts at inference time.
significant contribution to the domain of log anomaly detection. In contrast, DeepLog and LogBERT’s outputs are simple
 Anomaly Detection Throughput: Table VI presents the statements printed out to the terminal. It is important to clarify
throughput rates (in samples per second) for DeepLog, that the primary objective of our research was not centred
LogBERT and LogFiT on the HDFS, BGL and Thunderbird on throughput optimization. Throughput enhancements for
datasets. DeepLog excels in throughput on the HDFS LogFiT is a subject we explore in the future.
dataset, owing to this dataset’s shorter sequence lengths. Centroid Distance Minimisation: The LogFiT model was
However, its LSTM architecture limits its efficiency on the extended to include a centroid distance minimisation objective
BGL and Thunderbird datasets, where sequence lengths are (as used in LogBERT) alongside the standard masked token
longer. LogBERT achieves superior throughput on these latter prediction. The loss function, as shown in Equation (2),
datasets, benefiting from its parallel token processing due was thus a combination of the cross-entropy loss from
to its use of a transformer architecture. LogFiT lags in Equation (1) and a new term representing the centroid distance
throughput primarily due to its larger vocabulary size of weighted by a hyperparameter cw (set to 0.25). The centroid
50K, which dictates the size of its embedding layer. Unlike distance is essentially the proximity of each log paragraph’s
1722 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 LogBERT models. The results indicate that the LogFiT model
 is robust to changes in the log sentences, as the reduction in
 F1 is around 2% (from 91.22 to 89.38). However, the drop in
 F1 performance for LogBERT is large, from 88.63 to 44.22.
 Similarly for DeepLog, F1 dropped from 79.25 to 53.38.
 VI. C ONCLUSION
 The paper has introduced LogFiT, a novel log anomaly
 detection model that leverages the general linguistic knowledge
 of a pretrained BERT-based LM by adapting it to learn the
 linguistic patterns of normal system logs. LogFiT is trained
 using a novel self-supervised masked sentence prediction
Fig. 4. UMAP plot of Thunderbird semantic vectors, where the blue, objective, using only normal log data. This approach enables
pink, and yellow colours of the points represent training samples, normal LogFiT to recognise the linguistic structure of normal system
predictions, and anomaly predictions respectively.
 logs only, thus anomalies can be flagged when the model fails
 TABLE VII to predict the correct log sentences for new log data. Critically,
A NOMALY D ETECTION P RECISION (P), R ECALL (R), F1 S CORE (F) AND LogFiT can handle variability in the content of system logs
S PECIFICITY (S) OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE BGL DATASET. T HE
 E VALUATION DATA WAS M ODIFIED TO R EPLACE THE T OP 10 V ERBS
 because of its use of a BERT-based LM. The performance of
 W ITH T HEIR W ORD N ET L EMMAS LogFiT on the HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird datasets has been
 evaluated and it has been that LogFiT’s F1 score outperformed
 that of the baseline models. Moreover, LogFiT’s specificity
 exceeded that of the baselines on the HDFS and BGL datasets
 and was comparable to LogBERT on the Thunderbird dataset.
 In addition, LogFiT demonstrated superior effectiveness over
 LogBERT in experiments that tested for variations in the content
[CLS] vector to a mean vector calculated from normal of input log paragraphs, which is attributed to its ability to
logs. A specific q-quantile (with q between 0.65 to 0.9) handle out-of-vocabulary tokens. LogFiT integrates with the
centroid distance was also calculated to serve as a threshold popular Hugging Face ecosystem, making it easy to adapt in
during inference. However, experimental results indicated future work. Overall, LogFiT presents a flexible approach to
that the incorporation of centroid distance did not enhance detecting abnormal behaviour in computer systems through
the effectiveness of the model in distinguishing normal language model adaptation and fine-tuning.
from anomalous log entries. Despite these modifications,
the extended model’s performance remained comparable A. Future Work
to the original LogFiT model. Furthermore, the semantic While the LogFiT model is intended to be used as a
vectors of the training set did not form distinct clusters, after threshold-based anomaly detector trained in a self-supervised
dimensionality reduction via the UMAP algorithm [51], as manner, it can easily be converted to a classifier. If at some
shown in Figure 4. Consequently, we concluded that centroid point after the model is deployed, operators can collect and
distance minimisation does not offer an advantage and can be label anomaly log samples, the model can be converted to
omitted from the model. a classifier by replacing its language modelling head with
 b a classification head. Additionally, the LogFiT LM can be
 1  2
Loss = Losscross−entropy + cw ∗ CVj − centroid . pretrained on diverse log datasets, allowing it to be used
 b as the foundation for downstream NLP and log anomaly
 j =1
 (2) detection tasks. Furthermore, LogFiT’s suitability for the
 intrusion detection use case can be considered in future
 Variability in input data: In practical applications, it is studies. Lastly, ongoing research to address LogFiT’s subexpected that the content of the log sentences changes over optimal throughput performance focuses on efficient training
time. This can be because the programmers may change and deployment strategies. These include the use of LoRA
some words in the log sentences, or introduce misspellings. adapters, quantisation, and optimised model serving environ-
The LogFiT model contains built-in support for log sentence ments. These initiatives are aimed at improving LogFiT’s
variability due to its large vocabulary of sub-word tokens operational effectiveness in real-world scenarios, balancing its
(around 50K). In contrast, the DeepLog and LogBERT models throughput with its anomaly detection capabilities.
would fail if they encounter variations in log sentences that
cannot be mapped to their list of known log templates. To test R EFERENCES
the LogFiT model’s ability to handle log sentence variability,
 [1] (RiskIQ Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA). The Evil Internet Minute
the evaluation set is dynamically modified during inference so 2019. (2019). [Online]. Available: https://www.riskiq.com/resources/
that the top 10 occurring action words (that can be mapped infographic/evil-internet-minute-2019
to synonyms in WordNet) are replaced with their WordNet [2] (Australia Dept. Home Affairs, Belconnen, Australia). Australia’s
 Cyber Security Strategy 2020. (2020). [Online]. Available: https:
lemmas. Table VII shows the results of feeding the modified //www.homeaffairs.gov.au/cyber-security-subsite/files/cyber-security-
BGL evaluation set to the trained LogFiT, DeepLog and strategy-2020.pdf
ALMODOVAR et al.: LogFIT: LOG ANOMALY DETECTION USING FINE-TUNED LANGUAGE MODELS 1723

 [3] (Int. Bus. Mach. Technol. Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Cost of a Data [25] R. Yang, S. Ma, H. Xu, X. Zhang, and Y. Chen, “UIScope: Accurate,
 Breach Report 2022. (2022). [Online]. Available: https://www.ibm.com/ instrumentation-free, and visible attack investigation for gui applicasecurity/data-breach tions,” in Proc. NDSS, 2020, pp. 1–18.
 [4] V. H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep [26] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malilearning: How far are we?” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Assoc. cious traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” 2023,
 Comput. Mach., 2022, pp. 1356–1367. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv. arXiv:2301.13686.
 org/abs/2202.04301 [27] W. Meng et al., “Loganomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
 [5] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint
 on automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
 Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021. [28] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LAnoBERT: System log anomaly detection
 [6] Z. Chen, J. Liu, W. Gu, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Experience report: based on BERT masked language model,” 2023, arXiv:2111.09564.
 Deep learning-based system log analysis for anomaly detection,” 2022, [29] G. Jawahar, B. Sagot, and D. Seddah, “What does BERT learn
 arXiv:2107.05908. about the structure of language?” in Proc. 57th Annu. Meet. Assoc.
 [7] P. He, Z. Chen, S. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Characterizing the natural Comput. Linguist. Conf., 2020, pp. 3651–3657. [Online]. Available:
 language descriptions in software logging statements,” in Proc. 33rd https://aclanthology.org/P19-1356
 ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng., 2018, pp. 178–189. [30] D. Yenicelik, F. Schmidt, and Y. Kilcher, “How does BERT
 [8] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection capture semantics? A closer look at polysemous words,” in
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM Proc. 3rd BlackboxNLP Workshop Anal. Int. Neural Netw. NLP,
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298. 2020, pp. 156–162. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2020.
 [9] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via blackboxnlp-1.15
 BERT,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8. [Online]. [31] C. Ying et al., “Do transformers really perform bad for graph represen-
 Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.04475v1 tation?” 2021, arXiv:2106.05234.
[10] S. Nedelkoski, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Self- [32] V. P. Dwivedi and X. Bresson, “A generalization of transformer networks
 attentive classification-based anomaly detection in unstructured logs,” in to graphs,” 2021, arXiv:2012.09699.
 Proc.-IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., (ICDM), 2020, pp. 1196–1201. [33] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning
[11] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
 data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meet. Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. no. 2, pp. 1–38, Mar. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817. [Online]. Available: https://doi. 3439950
 org/10.1145/3338906.3338931 [34] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
[12] S. Huang et al., “Hitanomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
 detection in system log,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, [35] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly
 no. 4, pp. 2064–2076, Dec. 2020. detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meet.
[13] L.-P. Yuan, P. Liu, and S. Zhu, “Recompose event sequences vs. Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1404–1415.
 predict next events: A novel anomaly detection approach for discrete [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3473933
 event logs,” in Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, [36] Y. Lin, Y. C. Tan, and R. Frank, “Open Sesame: Getting inside BERT’s
 pp. 336–348. Linguistic Knowledge,” in Proc. ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP Anal.
[14] D. Hendrycks, X. Liu, E. Wallace, A. Dziedzic, R. Krishnan, Int. Neural Netw. NLP, 2019, pp. 241–253. [Online]. Available: https:
 and D. Song, “Pretrained Transformers Improve Out-of-Distribution //github.com/
 Robustness,” in Proc. 58th Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 2020, [37] Y. Goldberg, “Assessing BERT’s syntactic abilities,” 2019,
 pp. 2744–2751. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.06100v2 arXiv:1901.05287.
[15] H. Ott, J. Bogatinovski, A. Acker, S. Nedelkoski, and O. Kao, [38] R. Bommasani et al., “On the opportunities and risks of foundation
 “Robust and transferable anomaly detection in log data using pre-trained models,” 2022, arXiv:2108.07258.
 language models,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell. [39] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining
 (CloudIntell.), 2021, pp. 19–24. approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
[16] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log [40] I. Beltagy, M. E. Peters, and A. Cohan, “Longformer: The longparsing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng. (ASE), document transformer,” 2020, arXiv:2004.05150.
 2021, pp. 492–504. [41] L. N. Smith and N. Topin, “Super-convergence: very fast training of
[17] T. Wittkopp et al., “A2Log: Attentive Augmented Log Anomaly neural networks using large learning rates,” in Proc. SPIE Commer.
 Detection,” in Proc. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. (HICSS), 2021, Sens., 2019, p. 36.
 pp. 1–10. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.09537 [42] J. Howard and S. Ruder, “Universal language model fine-tuning for
[18] J. Devlin, M. W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training text classification,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist.,
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. 2018, pp. 328–339. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/P18-
 Conf. North Am. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguist. Human Lang. 1031
 Technol. (NAACL) HLT, 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [Online]. Available: [43] J. Howard and S. Gugger, “Fastai: A layered API for deep learnhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805v2 ing,” Information, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 108, 2020.
[19] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Adv. Neural [44] S. Gururangan et al., “Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 5999–6009. domains and tasks,” in Proc. 58th Annu. Meet. Assoc. Comput. Linguist.,
[20] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. Azad, “Can language 2020, pp. 8342–8360.
 models help in system security? investigating log anomaly detection [45] A. Kumar, A. Raghunathan, R. Jones, T. Ma, and P. Liang,
 using BERT,” in Proc. 20th Annu. Workshop Aust. Lang. Technol. Assoc., “Fine-tuning can distort pretrained Features and underperform out-of-
 2022, pp. 139–147. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2022. distribution,” 2022, arXiv:2202.10054.
 alta-1.19 [46] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
[21] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. 27th Int.
 attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2010, pp. 37–44.
 Secur.), 2021, pp. 3005–3022. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix. [47] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of
 org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/alsaheel five system logs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2007,
[22] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and pp. 575–584.
 V. N. Venkatakrishnan, “Holmes: Real-time apt detection through [48] G. A. Miller, “Wordnet: A lexical database for english,” Commun. ACM,
 correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 39–41, 1995.
 Secur. Privacy (SP), 2019, pp. 1137–1152. [49] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. Azad, “LogFiT:
[23] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “Euler: Detecting network lateral movement Log anomaly detection using fine-tuned language models,” Techrxiv.
 via scalable temporal link prediction,” ACM Trans. Privacy Secur., 2023.
 vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1–36, 2023. [50] S. Karimi, J. Yin, and J. Baum, “Evaluation methods for statistically
[24] F. Liu, Y. Wen, D. Zhang, X. Jiang, X. Xing, and D. Meng, “Log2vec: dependent text,” Comput. Linguist., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 539–548, 2015.
 A heterogeneous graph embedding based approach for detecting cyber [51] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform manithreats within enterprise,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. fold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2020,
 Commun. Secur., 2019, pp. 1777–1794. arXiv:1802.03426.