Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

Machine learning-enabled hybrid intrusion detection system with host data
transformation and an advanced two-stage classifier
Zhiyan Chen a , Murat Simsek a , Burak Kantarci a ,∗, Mehran Bagheri b , Petar Djukic c
a
 University of Ottawa, 800 King Edward Avenue, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1N 6N5
b
 Ciena, 5050 Innovation Drive Ottawa, ON, K2K 0J2, Canada
c
 Nokia Bell Labs, 600 March Rd, Kanata, ON, Canada K2K 2T6

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) have been extensively investigated by monitoring real network
Machine learning traffic and analyzing suspicious activities. However, there are limitations in detecting specific types of attacks
Network security with NIDS, such as Advanced Persistent Threats (APT). Additionally, NIDS is restricted in observing complete
Network intrusion detection
 traffic information due to encrypted traffic or a lack of authority. To address these limitations, a Host-based
Hybrid intrusion detection
 Intrusion Detection system (HIDS) evaluates resources in the host, including logs, files, and folders, to identify
Feature flattening
Collaborative classifier
 APT attacks that routinely inject malicious files into victimized nodes. In this study, a hybrid network intrusion
 detection system that combines NIDS and HIDS is proposed to improve intrusion detection performance.
 The host data undergoes a Language Processing (NLP)-based Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
 Transformers (BERT) model from textual representation to a numerical one in order to process host data in
 a similar way to the network flow data through machine learning models. The feature flattening technique is
 applied to flatten two-dimensional host-based features that is provided by BERT into one-dimensional vectors
 so that host-based and network flow-based features can be processed by advanced Machine Learning (ML)
 models. In order to enhance HIDS effectiveness, a two-stage collaborative classifier is utilized, which applies
 two tiers of machine learning algorithms, binary and multi-class classifiers, to detect network intrusions.
 Once a binary classifier is used to detect benign samples to reduce the complexity of the original problem,
 the attack data are classified by a multi-class supervised learner to identify attack types. Hence, the overall
 performance of the two-stage collaborative model outperforms the baseline classifier, XGBoost. The proposed
 method is shown to generalize across two well-known datasets, CICIDS 2018 and NDSec-1. The performance
 of XGBoost, which represents conventional ML, is evaluated. Combining host and network features enhances
 attack detection performance (macro average F1 score) by 8.1% under the CICIDS 2018 dataset and 3.7%
 under the NDSec-1 dataset. Meanwhile, the two-stage collaborative classifier improves detection performance
 for most single classes, especially for DoS-LOIC-UDP and DoS-SlowHTTPTest, with improvements of 30.7%
 and 84.3%, respectively, when compared with the traditional ML models.

1. Introduction entire network traffic can be challenging in scenarios such as encrypted
 traffic or without authentication monitoring. NIDS cannot inspect en-
 The importance of security solutions for networked systems has crypted network traffic, limiting its ability to detect only external
increased with the advances in information and communication tech- attacks [8]. Moreover, NIDS requires improved solutions to identify
nologies [1,2]. In the area of safeguarding network systems, consid- specific malicious activities, particularly APT, which often utilize maerable research and implementation efforts have been dedicated to licious files attached to various applications [9]. Host-based intrusion
the exploration of Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDSs [3–5].
 detection evaluates resources in a host, including logs, files, and folders,
ML-based NIDSs have been proven to detect prevalent and zero-day
 to detect attacks on hosts such as servers. HIDS provides a fine-grained
attacks, which have also been studied in the context of defensive and
 solution to detect anomalous patterns internally, making it a valuable
proactive/adversarial ML [6].
 tool in detecting APT [10]. HIDS also has the advantage of detecting
 NIDS identifies suspicious activities by analyzing data from a single
packet in captured global network traffic [7]. However, monitoring anomalies without analyzing or monitoring network traffic. As an

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: burak.kantarci@uottawa.ca (B. Kantarci).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110576
Received 14 November 2023; Received in revised form 7 April 2024; Accepted 5 June 2024
Available online 7 June 2024
1389-1286/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

example, [11] presents a HIDS use case for securing Android mobile
equipment. HIDSs are software components installed on observed systems, and they scan the entire system to prevent intrusions. HIDSs
offer rich context, enabling excellent knowledge for data processing
and analysis [12]. Although HIDSs increase costs due to their connectivity to the server, setup of distributed clients, and collection and
management of massive and sensitive data from host devices, they
have recently gained attention from researchers. Industrial companies
often implement both NIDS and HIDS to achieve promising detection
performance and secure their systems [13].
 In this work, we investigate intrusion detection system combining NIDS and HIDS via utilizing network and host features together.
Various public datasets, such as NSL KDD, KDD 99, Bot-IoT, and
MQTTTest, are utilized in network intrusion detection research [1].
However, there are only a limited number of public datasets that
include host information. The CICIDS 2018 dataset [14,15] and NDSec-
1 dataset [16], which incorporate host-based information, including
logs detailing events and messages, have been employed in various
intrusion detection schemes. Therefore, we selected the two datasets
to demonstrate the method integrating network and host features and
evaluate the proposed method. Despite the potential benefits of hostbased information in intrusion detection, very few studies have applied
hybrid host features and flow features together for intrusion detection
via machine learning or deep learning models. The authors in [17]
introduce a deep learning model named CIDS-Net to detect intrusions Fig. 1. An example of hybrid HIDS and NIDS system.
using hybrid host and flow features. In this work, we propose machine
learning-enabled intrusion detection system and an advanced two-stage
classifier for network intrusion detection with hybrid host and flow
 • The process involves converting host data from textual to a nudata. Furthermore, the literature demonstrates dataset pre-processing
 merical structure, wherein host-based features are further catein details for hybrid features, including host feature selection and host
 gorized into event features and message features. The efficacy
feature flattening. Host-based content is stored as a string and transof the proposed hybrid intrusion detection system has been valformed into a numeric array by BERT [18,19]. Event data and message
data stored in the host are transformed separately to obtain host-based idated through comparative analysis against state-of-the-art mafeatures. Moreover, the transformed host features are applied data pre- chine learning-based detection methods.
processing techniques to reduce the size of host features and finally are • Data flattening is a technique employed to convert multidimenflattened from two-dimensional into a vector. The following step is to sional features into a vector, facilitating their seamless integration
combine network/flow features1 and host features and send to detec- into machine learning or deep learning networks for both training
tion model, including traditional ML and the two-stage collaborative and testing purposes. This straightforward method simplifies the
classifier. transformation of host features into a vector, making them readily
 One of the motivations behind this work is the large number of applicable in machine learning models.
samples in intrusion datasets. For example, the CICIDS 2018 dataset • The design entails a two-stage collaborative classifier. The procontains approximately 1 million samples. Typically, the majority of posed novel classifier not only reduces computational complexity
the dataset consists of benign traffic, and attack samples are a minority but also improves the detection performance when compared to
since only a limited number of attack points can be appropriately hid- the baseline machine learning-based detection model.
den (except for denial-of-service related attacks). As a result, the large
number of benign samples increases the complexity of the intrusion The remainder of the article is structured as follows. Section 2
detection system due to the increased training overhead of the ML presents the state-of-the-art in network security, emphasizing NIDS
models. To address this, this work leverages both network-based and and HIDS. Section 3 introduces two public datasets, CICIDS 2018 and
host-based intrusion detection frameworks simultaneously to take ad- NDSec-1, and provides a sample distribution for each. In Section 4,
vantage of both systems. A two-stage collaborative classifier is proposed a machine learning-based approach using hybrid and network-based
to improve intrusion detection accuracy and minimize false alarm features is presented for detecting network intrusions, demonstrating
probability. Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed intrusion detection system, the benefits of using host features alongside flow features. Section 5
which bridges HIDS and NIDS to consider both real network traffic and introduces a two-stage machine learning framework, which filters out
records saved in host devices. To reduce detection system complexity benign samples before characterizing the attack instances. Finally, the
while maintaining detection performance, this article introduces a two- article concludes in Section 6 by discussing future directions.
stage collaborative classifier that comprises a binary classifier and a
multi-classifier. The binary classifier discriminates between benign and 2. Related work
attack instances, with all attacks sharing the same label. The multi-class
classifier characterizes the attack instances after the binary classifier Network security encompasses more than just communication nethas filtered out the benign instances. The proposed framework initially works; it also encompasses the security of the entire cyberspace envieliminates benign traffic and then focuses on recognizing individual
 ronment, including the information infrastructure, application systems,
attack categories.
 and data resources [20]. To achieve comprehensive network system se-
 The main contributions of this work can be listed as below:
 curity, several approaches can be employed, such as firewalls, antivirus
 software, access control, and anti-malware [1,21–24]. For instance, the
 1
 We use network and flow feature to represent the same feature in this study in [25] introduces a hardware/software-based firewall that plays
work that are extracted from network traffic data and different with host the role of monitoring and filtering traffic packets seeking to enter or
features. exit a safeguarded private network. The authors in [26] present novel

 2
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

methodologies, including emulation techniques and heuristic scanning and analyzing containerized environments (e.g., system calls), that is
to detect viruses. Current antivirus software products are designed with helpful to make accurate prediction for attacks. In [45], the authors
including but not limited to static and dynamic heuristics, machine investigate observing information from system logs, which are hostlearning mechanisms, neural networks, hidden Markov models, and based features, and show that such systems could classify suspicious
rootkit heuristics. Meanwhile, the study in [27] shows an innovative activities with high accuracy. Furthermore, the authors in [11] utilize
and scalable approach to implement immutable, verifiable, adaptive, host-based information to develop a detection system by organizing
and automated access control policies for Internet of Things (IoT) statistical data and ML models. The study [47] demonstrates the use of
equipment. Additionally, the authors provide a successful proof of HIDS in Industrial Automation Systems to identify intrusions targeting
concept for scalability. Furthermore, configuration and path analy- specific entities of embedded industrial equipment by analyzing inforsis can help to safeguard critical infrastructure, such as a smart-grid mation on host devices. In [46], a HIDS framework examines processes
network, and can be viewed as a firewall use case [28]. The study that consist of sequences of DLL (Dynamic Link Library) instruction
in [29] presents a refined iteration of Pigeon-Inspired Optimization calls made by diverse application and system tasks to the Windows
(PIO), that integrates PIO with the inclusion of a local search algorithm. operating system kernel to detect anomalous tasks. In [50], a HIDS
Furthermore, an ensemble learning approach, employing multiple one- system integrated with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) is declass classifiers, is implemented to enhance the performance of the scribed to ensure security in IoT, with general characteristics that make
proposed NIDS. The authors in [30] demonstrate a NIDS method built it compatible with all IoT products. Another study [48] introduces HIDS
in Pseudo-Siamese Stacked Autoencoder (PSSAE) to address limited to enhance cloud system security, integrating several machine learning
resource issue in IoT devices. The presented approach is strategically algorithms (such as KNN, Logistic Regression, and Naive Bayes). As
implemented in the fog computing layer, involving unsupervised train- demonstrated in [17], the CICIDS 2018 dataset was processed to yield
ing of stacked autoencoders (SAEs) to extract features from traffic. The a numerical representation of host-based features. A fully connected
following step is to utilize, supervised learning to identify abnormal layer-based machine learning model was employed to aggregate all
traffic. Meanwhile, in [31], a novel ensemble-based machine-learning features. In order to improve the performance, the proposed methodoltechnique for intrusion detection is introduced, aiming to address these ogy introduces more in-depth knowledge and new ML-based strategies
challenges and enhance detection capabilities across diverse attack to the data transformation strategy in [17], which is later utilized to
scenarios. The study in [32] demonstrates a novel system to detect generalize the performance under the two well-known datasets. Thus,
intrusions in an IoT network in the context of smart agriculture with this study quantitatively demonstrates the unique contribution of the
restricted computing resources in the IoT system. The study in [33] numerical representation of the host-based features (i.e., event and
illustrates how selecting a higher frequency of features can enhance message features) to the network flow features. Moreover, an advanced
intrusion detection accuracy through the utilization of ML algorithms. two-stage classifier provides more accurate performance beyond the
 HIDS performance. The proposed HIDS detection system is efficient in
The authors in [34] proposes a neural network-based classification
 handling large volume data in the cloud, in comparison to traditional
system that uses firewall logs to ensure system security. NIDS have also
 NIDS systems. Table 1 presents current works to identify network
become widely used for intrusion detection, particularly when comintrusion. A thorough qualitative comparison in the table unveils the
bined with machine learning algorithms, which have shown promising
 need for demonstrating a hybrid HIDS and NIDS.
detection performance. Another study [35] presents a neural network-
 While NIDS and HIDS are both effective in detecting various types
based framework that identifies abnormal actions in the system to
 of network intrusions, most current research tends to rely solely on one
protect against attacks. In [36], the authors introduce UNICORN, which
 of them. Because there are limited ML-based frameworks that integrate
uses time-efficient figures to extract provenance images, providing inboth HIDS and NIDS to identify attack samples, a hybrid framework
depth information to identify APT attacks. The study in [37] introduces
 that leverages the strengths of both approaches would be valuable
a novel hybrid model that integrates ML and DL approaches to enfor improving detection performance. Additionally, previous studies
hance detection rates while ensuring reliability. The proposed approach
 have shown that machine learning algorithms are effective in building
achieves efficient pre-processing by employing SMOTE and XGBoost for
 network intrusion detection systems. With this in mind, the goal of
oversampling and feature selection, respectively. Finally, [38] presents
 this work is to propose a machine learning-based hybrid approach that
a deep learning-based attack detection system for industrial internet of
 combines HIDS and NIDS to identify intrusions.
things, called the Sparse Evolutionary Training Approach. The proposed
method demonstrates promising detection performance. One study [39] 3. Dataset introduction
proposes a deep learning-integrated recurrent approach to detect network intrusions by extracting features from recurrent models. The This work utilizes two public datasets that contain network and
approach also employs a feature selection technique to identify optimal host information. Host-related data is text-based, extracted from host
features from the extracted and original ones, and an ensemble model resources such as logs, files, and folders. The Transformer technique
for classification. Another study [40] presents a NIDS framework that (Bert) is applied to convert text information into numerical data. Fig. 2
can detect specific attacks by integrating supervised (such as XGBoost) illustrates the structure of network-based and host-based features in the
and unsupervised (such as expectation–maximization) machine learn- CICIDS 2018 and NDSec-1 datasets. The message text and event text
ing algorithms. The study in [41] presents an intrusion detection system information are transformed into two-dimensional numerical matrices
to prevent routing attacks such as sinkhole and selective forwarding separately by Bert. Bert converts event text into an 𝑚 ∗ 𝑛 matrix and
attacks in IoT networks. The studies in [42] demonstrate ensemble message text into a 𝑝 ∗ 𝑞 matrix. Similarly, the flow feature/network
learning-based NIDS that take advantage of various individual ML mod- feature dimension is represented by a 1 ∗ 𝑓 matrix, where 𝑓 is
els to estimate wisely. It is worth to note that there have been studies determined by the number of network features in the dataset. This
that leverage federated learning-based intrusion detection [43] how- transformation enables machine learning algorithms to utilize flow
ever, we scope this work to centralized ML-based intrusion detection features and host features to train themselves, which benefits from both
solutions. network intrusion detection systems and host-based intrusion detection
 Related work discusses the use of host-based intrusion detection systems [17].
(HIDS) to detect specific attacks that are challenging for a NIDS. The
study in [49] positions HIDS as a crucial last mile of defense against 3.1. CICIDS 2018 dataset
cybersecurity attacks, especially following upon the failure or bypassing
of perimeter defenses such as NIDS and firewalls. The study in [44] pro- The CICIDS 2018 dataset is a public dataset that contains seven
poses a host-based system to detect network intrusion via monitoring types of attacks, including Brute-force, Heartbleed, Botnet, DoS, DDoS,

 3
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

Table 1
List of existing works for network intrusion detection.
 Ref. Methodology Dataset Benefit Further improvement Features
 [29] NIDS; enhanced PIO BoT-IoT, UNSW-NB15, Boosted performance Overfitting Flow
 feature selection NLS-KDD and KDD99
 [34] Identify intrusions in IFW-2019 High (98.50%) Dataset uniformity Flow
 firewall via SNN accuracy
 [35] DDoS identification Private High detection rate Testing in a real SDN Flow
 using DWT and 100% network
 auto-encoder
 [30] NIDS based on KDDTest Suitable for IoT device Reduce false-positive Flow
 pseudo-siamese stacked with low computing
 autoencoder resource
 [38] SET integrated attack CICIDS 2017, DS2OS Accelerated inference Diversity of test Flow
 detection model in IIoT time equipment
 [39] Via a end-to-end SDN-IoT, KDD 99, etc. Generalization Testing in a real-time Flow
 approach to identify system
 intrusions
 [31] Ensemble based NIDS UNSW-NB15, NSL-KDD, Generalization to False positive Flow
 etc multiple datasets improvements
 [32] CNN-based NIDS NSL KDD High accuracy Application of other Flow
 suitable for agriculture DNNs
 [42] Ensemble NSL-KDD Wise prediction is made Integration of other ML Flow
 learning-based NIDS models
 [44] Intrusion detection via CB-DS, LID-DS Reasonable run-time Identifying Heartbleed Host
 HIDS using two overhead and a few other
 datasets real-time intrusions.
 [45] Observe logs in hosts N/A Identify malicious logs Further test result Host
 and identify illegitimate analysis
 logs via OSSEC tool
 [46] NLP-based HIDS via ADFA-WD Identifying a diverse Extension with a Host
 analysis dll to identify array of attacks transformer-based HIDS
 anomalous
 [47] HIDS to secure N/A Deploy HIDS firstly in Extension of features Host
 embedded industrial a PLC, that has a and capability of the
 equipment real-time operation presented system
 system
 [48] Two IDS merged to N/A Identify intrusions and Combine different ML Host
 protect cloud create alerts models
 [17] Introduce CIDS-Net for CICIDS 2018, 99.89% macro F1 score Improving performance Host (Event and
 intrusion detection SCVIC-CIDS-2021 for some classes Message), Flow
 Our Hybrid NIDS and HIDS; CICIDS 2018, NDSec-1 Use public dataset; Apply deep learning Host (Event and
 Two-stage collaborative boost performance model Message), Flow
 classifier

Table 2 logs of each device, along with 80 features obtained from the cap-
CICIDS 2018 dataset sample distribution.
 tured traffic [51]. The seven attack scenarios are categorized into 14
 Class Training Test Total types, including Bot, DDOS-HOIC, DDOS-LOIC-HTTP, DDOS-LOIC-UDP,
 Benign 308 375 152 172 460 547 DoS-GoldenEye, DoS-Hulk, DoS-SlowHTTPTest, DoS-Slowingloris, FTP-
 Bot 60 767 29 693 90 460
 BruteForce, SSH-Bruteforce, Brute Force-Web, Brute Force-XSS, Infil-
 DDOS-HOIC 137 147 67 449 204 596
 DDOS-LOIC-HTTP 39 019 19 166 58 185 tration, and SQL Injection. Since Brute Force-Web, Brute Force-XSS,
 DDOS-LOIC-UDP 760 342 1102 Infiltration, and SQL Injection consist of very few samples (less than
 DoS-GoldenEye 2271 1163 3434 50), it is challenging to train machine learning and deep learning
 DoS-Hulk 13 388 6553 19 941 algorithms effectively. Compared to the significant number of other
 DoS-SlowHTTPTest 10 579 5351 15 930
 DoS-Slowloris 1394 702 2096
 attack scenarios, the limited samples can be considered noise in the
 FTP-BruteForce 32 222 15 918 48 140 training procedure and result in lower detection performance. Special
 SSH-Bruteforce 11 143 5418 16561 techniques are required for effective handling of rare samples. For
 instance, in [52], the authors merge five classes with limited data
 into one class for the training of the ML algorithm. Those five classes
 included Infiltration, Brute Force-Web, Brute Force-XSS, SQL Injection,
Web attacks, and infiltration of the network from inside2 . The atand Heartbleed. Similarly, the study in [53] excluded rare classes such
tacking infrastructure consists of 50 devices, and the victim system
 as Infiltration, FTP-Brute Force, and DoS-SlowHTTPTest in the perforhas 5 branches, comprising 420 devices and 30 servers. The CICIDS
 mance evaluation under the CICIDS 2018 dataset. Further, in [54],
2018 dataset comprises captured network traffic and recorded system
 the authors excluded certain flood classes such as Brute Force web
 attack due to their limited numbers in the CICIDS 2018 dataset. In the
 same study, it is observed that ML models may recognize alternative
 2
 The dataset is introduced in detail at: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ patterns within the data, pointing out the need for further investigation.
ids-2018.html This work adopts a similar approach by excluding four rare classes

 4
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

Fig. 2. Flow features and host-based event and message features after transforming through BERT which is one of the well known NLP model. This transform is previously applied
one of our dataset, CICIDS 2018 as shown in [17].

in the CICIDS 2018 dataset. Therefore, the four classes are eliminated logs in the host with event data, message data, and network traffic.
from the CICIDS 2018 dataset for later evaluation section. The sample The logged data in host equipment is saved as text representation to
distribution of the remaining attack scenarios in the CICIDS 2018 ensure readability for clients and within the organization. To integrate
dataset is presented in Table 2. Indeed, excluding minority samples network- and host-based data, text data needs to be transformed into
introduces a potential side effect, as complete elimination from a real numerical arrays. In this paper, we adopt the strategy proposed in [17]
system is inevitable. It is crucial to identify all attack samples, including and use Bert for word embedding to extract host features, a transformer
minority instances, for comprehensive analysis. We have identified the architecture trained to obtain language representations. We derive
inclusion of all attack types in the dataset as a prospective avenue event data and message data separately. Table 4 demonstrates that
for future research and intend to employ effective data augmentation the CICIDS 2018 dataset consists of 132 network features, 224 event
techniques on minority classes. features, and 76,800 message features.
 The CICIDS 2018 dataset contains network traffic with 132 features
that represent numerical arrays, which can be used directly by machine 3.2. NDSec-1 dataset
learning algorithms. This means that 𝑓 = 132 in Fig. 2. Most current
research utilizes network-based data to build NIDS when using the The NDSec-1 dataset was initially introduced in [55] and was gen-
CICIDS 2018 dataset. However, the CICIDS 2018 dataset also contains erated for research in attack composition in network security schemes.

 5
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Fig. 3. General framework for the proposed methodology. Algorithmic details of two-stage Collaborative Classifier are given in Fig. 8.

Table 3 demonstrates general framework of the hybrid network and host fea-
NDSec-1 dataset sample distribution.
 tures that are utilized via ML-based detection approaches.
 Class Training Testing Total
 BOTNET 52 40 92 4.1. Multiple dimension features combination for network and host features
 BRUTEFORCE 2150 1006 3156
 DOS 12 677 6389 19 066
 EXPLOIT 4 2 6
 As introduced before, host-based features are extracted from event
 MALWARE 23 12 35 data and message information, which both have two dimensions as
 MISC 31 18 49 presented in Fig. 2 (as presented in [17]). It is a problem to efficiently
 NORMAL 5701 2284 7985 utilize the two-dimensional host features, like regular one-dimensional
 PROBE 777 307 1084
 flow features. Feature flattening is a direct, easy, and low-cost tech-
 WEBATTACK 18 12 30
 nique to map a multi-dimension matrix into a vector. Feature flattening
 is used in CNN due to the lack of support for multidimensional data in
Table 4 the densely connected layers of a CNN [57,58]. Feature flattening is
Original dimension of CICIDS 2018 and NDSec-1 for flow, event, and message features.
 a feasible approach to adjusting multidimensional data to vectorized
 Flow (1*f) Event (m*n) Message (p*q) features. It is mainly used by ML algorithms.
 CICIDS 1*132 28*8 100*768 A sample has 𝑓 flow features, which is represented as a vector (1).
 NDSec-1 1*63 2182*8 512*768
 Thus, 𝑎11 to 𝑎1𝑓 stand for individual flow feature.
 [ ]
 𝐀 = 𝑎11 𝑎12 ... 𝑎1𝑓 (1)
The NDSec-1 dataset is a public dataset used in network intrusion Two-dimensional event features are denoted in (2). Matrix 𝐵 is exdetection [16,56]. The dataset consists of 8 types of attacks, including tracted from contextual event data in hosts via transformer technique,
Botnet, Bruteforce, DoS, Exploit, Malware, Misc, Probe, Webattack, that includes numerical value in it. Element in 𝐵, such as 𝑏𝑖𝑗 , denotes
Spoofing, and benign samples. However, there is only one sample single event feature.
for the Spoofing class, so this class is excluded from the evaluation
 ⎡ 𝑏11 𝑏12 ... 𝑏1𝑛 ⎤
section. Table 3 presents the sample distribution across the training ⎢ ⎥
 𝑏 𝑏22 ... 𝑏2𝑛 ⎥
and test sets. Flow features are extracted from the NDSec-1 dataset and 𝐁 = ⎢ 21 (2)
 ⎢ ... ... ... ... ⎥
included with 63 network features. Meanwhile, log records in hosts are ⎢𝑏
 ⎣ 𝑚1 𝑏𝑛2 ... 𝑏𝑚𝑛 ⎥⎦
provided, so host features are extracted using Bert for text-to-numeric
array transforming. The CICIDS 2018 dataset’s host features extraction Finally, two-dimensional message features are represented in (3). Maprocedures are adopted. Finally, the NDSec-1 dataset contains two parts trix 𝐶 is extracted from contextual message data in hosts via transof host features, including two-dimensional event and message features, former technique, that consists of numerical value in it. Element in 𝐶,
as shown in Fig. 2. Table 4 demonstrates that the NDSec-1 dataset such as 𝑐𝑖𝑗 , denotes single message feature.
consists of 63 network features, 17,456 event features, and 393,216
 ⎡𝑐11 𝑐12 ... 𝑐1𝑞 ⎤
message features. ⎢ ⎥
 𝑐 𝑐22 ... 𝑐2𝑞 ⎥
 𝐂 = ⎢ 21 (3)
 ⎢ ... ... ... ... ⎥
4. Hybrid network features and host features for intrusion detec- ⎢𝑐
 ⎣ 𝑝1 𝑐𝑝2 ... 𝑐𝑝𝑞 ⎥⎦
tion
 Flow features, also called network-based features, are the major fea-
 This section explains the framework to combine network and host tures in NIDS, especially in ML-based detection systems [58,59]. In
features for machine learning-integrated intrusion detection. Fig. 3 order to utilize host-based features, two-dimensional feature data is

 6
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

flattened into a one-dimensional vector. As a result, after flattening, there is a need to address the reduction of message features, given
a vector 𝐵 ′ of event-based features is obtained. that they form the majority (e.g., 76,800) among all feature types. The
 [ ] process involves condensing the message feature matrix from 100 × 768
𝐁′ = 𝑏11 ... 𝑏1𝑛 𝑏21 ... 𝑏2𝑛 ... 𝑏𝑚1 ... 𝑏𝑚𝑛 (4)
 to a smaller matrix, such as 10 × 10, directly diminishing the message
 Message-based host features are adjusted into a vector, denoted by features. Additionally, it is crucial to reduce both the event feature
𝐶′. matrix (i.e., 2182 × 8) and the message feature matrix (i.e., 512 × 768)
 [ ] for the NDSec-1 dataset before flattening them into a vector array. A
𝐂′ = 𝑐11 ... 𝑐1𝑞 𝑐21 ...𝑐2𝑞 ... 𝑐𝑝1 ... 𝑐𝑝𝑞 (5) method must be designed to select a small matrix from the original
As a result, multi-dimensional host features are mapped to a vector, large matrix and maintain intrusion detection performance. This work
so it is easy to obtain hybrid features, denoted by 𝐻1 combining flow applies the random selection method to determine rows and columns
features and event features, 𝐻2 combining flow features and message for a matrix prior to feature flattening. The random selection method
features, and 𝐻3 combining flow features, event features and message aims to ensure the selected message matrix is representative of the large
features, respectively. one and less likely to be subject to bias [60]. Specifically, message
 [ ] features in CICIDS 2018 are aimed to be reduced from 100 × 768 to
𝐇𝟏 = 𝐴 𝐵 ′ (6) 10 × 15; 10 is randomly selected among the range 1 to 100, and 15
 is randomly selected from the range 1 to 768. It is worth noting that
 [ ]
𝐇𝟐 = 𝐴 𝐶′ (7) the average of several rounds of test results is measured to reduce
 the impact of fluctuations across samples and to take all features
 [ ] into account. We will demonstrate the determination of the appropri-
𝐇𝟑 = 𝐴 𝐵′ 𝐶′ (8)
 ate dimension of a matrix considering computation performance and
 Therefore, the number of hybrid features depends on the number of detection performance in Sections 4.3 and 4.4.
flow features, event features, and message features. It is straightforward
to calculate the number of elements in vectors 𝐵 ′ and 𝐶 ′ , which stand 4.3. Performance evaluation under CICIDS 2018 dataset
for event features (𝑡𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 ) and message features (𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑠 ), respectively.
 As stated in Section 4.2, the message features matrix should be
𝑡𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 𝑚 × 𝑛 (9)
 reduced before flattening so as to address the issues regarding large
 number of host features that is mentioned earlier. Based on our pres-
𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑠 = 𝑝 × 𝑞 (10) sure test, our current test environment can handle about 800 message
 features among CICIDS 2018 dataset. Thus, feature reduction goal is
Thus, 𝐻3 contains the maximum number of features, represented in
 to condense the original message matrix of 100 × 768 into a smaller
(11).
 matrix 𝐶 ′ with a 𝑝 × 𝑞 dimension. Furthermore, 𝐶 ′ should have the
𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑓 + 𝑡𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 + 𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑠 (11) number of message features 𝑝 × 𝑞 equal to 800. To determine the most
 appropriate dimension, we evaluated various combinations of integers
4.2. Host features reduction 𝑝 and 𝑞 that satisfy 𝑝 × 𝑞 not being greater than 800. XGBoost is
 selected to evaluate the detection performance with various matrices
 As introduced in Section 4.1, this work flattens host features into (𝐶 ′ ) of message features, keeping the same flow features (132) and
a vector and combines vector-based host features and flow features event features (226). The message matrix was reduced to 10 × 80,
together for the training and testing of ML algorithms. However, feature 15 × 50, and 20 × 40. The detection performance under different mesflattening results in the phenomenon of dealing with too many features, sage matrices is shown in Fig. 4. It was observed that the performance
making the dataset complicated, challenging to use, and potential was almost the same under different message matrices. Therefore, we
overfitting for ML models. Specifically, in the CICIDS 2018 dataset, as selected the message feature matrix 15 × 50 (750 message features)
introduced in Section 3, there are 132 flow features, so 𝑓 is 132 in 𝐴. as a representative in the subsequent tests. The subsequent evaluation
Moreover, event features are extracted into a 288 matrix, so 𝑚 equals employs various combinations of flow, event, and message features
28, and 𝑛 is 8 in 𝐵. After flattening the event and message features, 𝐵 ′ in the CICIDS 2018 dataset. While flow and event features remain
contains 𝑡𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 , which equals 224 elements, indicating that there are 224 unchanged in the original dataset, message features are reduced to
event features in vector 𝐵 ′ . Meanwhile, the message feature dimension 750 and arranged in a 15 × 50 matrix. Consequently, the reduced
is 100 × 768, represented by 𝐶, so 𝑝 is 100, and 𝑞 is 768 in 𝐶. After message features in the CICIDS 2018 dataset are integrated with flow
flattening the message feature, we obtain a vector 𝐶 ′ consisting of 76800 and event features to create representations denoted as 𝐻1 , 𝐻2 , and 𝐻3
message features. The maximum number of features in the CICIDS 2018 as elaborated in Section 4.1. Calculation of the total number of features,
dataset 𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 is 77,156 features, according to Eq. (11), including flow as per Eq. (11), involves the addition of 132 flow features, 226 event
and host features. The magnitude of host features is notably large, features, and 750 message features.
necessitating feature reduction before employing them for training ML Fig. 5 shows XGBoost (i.e., F1 score) results for four scenarios: (1)
models. Moreover, the CICIDS 2018 training dataset includes about 1 only flow feature 𝐴, (2) a combination of flow and event features 𝐻1 ,
million samples, as described in Table 2. Therefore, it is challenging (3) a combination of flow and message features 𝐻2 , and (4) a comto apply a total of 77,156 features under our current test environment. bination of flow, event, and message features 𝐻3 . XGBoost with only
Meanwhile, in the NDSec-1 dataset, as described in Section 3.2, the flow features is benchmark for comparison with the proposed hybrid
number of flow features is 63 (𝑓 ). Event features are extracted into a flow and host-based performance. The results show that integrating
17,456 matrix, and the message feature dimension is 393,216. Thus, a message and event features improves the detection performance of all
sample in the NDSec-1 dataset consists of hybrid features up to 410,735 classes that cannot be fully detected. Particularly for the DDOS-LOICwhen mixing flattened host features and network features, according UDP attack, F1 score increases from 0.7609 (flow features only) to
to Eq. (11). With an overwhelming number of features to be processed 0.9828 (with event features) and 0.9942 (by integrating message and
by an ML model, the NDSec-1 dataset faces the same dimensionality event features). The most significant improvement is achieved for the
challenge as the CICIDS 2018 dataset. detection of DoS-SlowHTTPTest attack, which increases from 0.5425
 In order to reduce the number of features, this work diminishes the to 1.0000. Moreover, the overall performance is significantly improved.
message feature matrix and event feature matrix prior to transforming For instance, the macro F1 score raises up to 0.9993 with the event and
them into a vector by flattening. In the case of the CICIDS 2018 dataset, message features, compared to 0.9246 with benchmark flow features

 7
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Fig. 4. Performance comparison under various dimensions of message feature (host-based feature).

Fig. 5. NIDS (flow-based) and hybrid NIDS and HIDS (flow, event, and message-based) performance comparison under CICIDS 2018. ‘Mes’ abbreviates message. Flow-based NIDS
system performance is the benchmark against which the proposed hybrid flow and host features approaches are compared.

only. The host features, whether event or message, clearly improve the intrusion detection performance, as shown in Fig. 4. Most of the
the attack detection accuracy. Moreover, message features show further event features are excluded if a small matrix, such as 10 × 10, is chosen
advantages in boosting the intrusion detection performance compared instead of the original 100 × 768 event feature matrix. One might
to the event features. As an example, the combination of flow features expect this to reduce the effectiveness of the detection performance.
and message features results in a macro F1 score of 0.9993, whereas However, with a smaller matrix of event and message features, the
integrating flow features and event features yields a macro F1 score of number of host features is also significant, up to 80800 with 𝑡𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡 =
0.9727. 4000 and 𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑠 = 76800. Therefore, we employed Principle Component
 Analysis (PCA) [61] to reduce dimensions further for the mix of flow,
4.4. Performance evaluation under ndsec-1 dataset event, and message features.
 Fig. 6 presents a comparison of performance results (F1 score)
 We followed a similar rule to combine flow and host features for the using PCA to reduce features to different dimensions. The highest F1
NDSec-1 dataset, starting by reducing the event and message feature score is achieved when PCA reduces the features to 10, with a macro
matrices into smaller ones and flattening the two-dimensional event F1 score of 0.91. Therefore, in the following tests, PCA is applied
and message feature matrices into vectors. As introduced in Section 3.2, to reduce the features to 10. Fig. 7 presents the attack detection
event features are stored in a 2182 × 8 matrix 𝐵, while message performance (F1 score) with flow and host features. The detection
features are stored in a 512 × 768 matrix 𝐶. We used the random system using the composition of flow features, event features, and
selection method to determine the smaller matrices for the NDSec-1 message features 𝐻3 achieves the highest overall performance in macro
dataset, based on previous experience and methodology for the CICIDS average F1 score (MAvg) with 0.8913 and a weighted average F1 score
2018 evaluation. We selected the event feature matrix as 𝐵 ′ and the (WAvg) of 0.9964. With 𝐻3 , the detection system demonstrates the
message feature matrix as 500 × 8, and the message feature matrix best performance for DoS, Normal, and Probe. Specifically, MAvg is
as 𝐶 ′ with dimensions 100 × 768 for the NDSec-1 dataset. We skip at 0.8913 when compared to the flow-only case (0.8595), combined
the detailed procedure in matrix size determination, which is almost flow and event features 𝐻1 (0.8591), and the combination of flow
the same as the CICIDS 2018 dataset, as illustrated in Section 4.3. and message features 𝐻2 (0.8906). When flow and event feature 𝐻1
Meanwhile, numerical results using the CICIDS 2018 dataset indicate is utilized, the best performance for Botnet and Exploit is obtained
that the dimensions of the message feature matrix marginally impact with F1 scores of 0.9217 and 0.7933, respectively. Moreover, the flow

 8
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 both True Negatives (TN) and False Negatives (FN), it is excluded
 from subsequent phases. Only samples estimated as attack samples by
 𝑀𝐿1 are considered by 𝑀𝐿2 regardless of those instances actually
 being False Positives (FP) or True Positives (TP). The rationale behind
 the two-stage collaborative classifier stems from the analysis of prior
 testing results on the CICID 2018 dataset, as detailed in Section 4.
 This analysis indicates that benign samples can be detected with an
 accuracy approaching 100%, rendering the detection performance of
 benign samples nearly unaffected by the presence of attack instances.
 Consequently, the architecture does not scrutinize 𝑀𝐿1 predictions
 of TN and FN. The lack of analysis for FN may yield unintended
 consequences for the overall system performance as achieving 100%
 accuracy with 𝑀𝐿1 is practically challenging. To measure the side
 effect of FN predictions by 𝑀𝐿1, we evaluate an optimal scenario based
Fig. 6. Comparison of the impact of various dimensions (reduced by PCA) under the on two assumptions: (a) 𝑀𝐿1 does not make incorrect predictions for
NDSec-1. a specific intrusion sample; (b) 𝑀𝐿2 accurately estimates this attack
 sample. This study contrasts the performance evaluation section’s ideal
 scenario, where 𝑀𝐿1 makes zero incorrect predictions (zero FN) for
and message combination 𝐻2 case performs the best under Malware attack samples, with the actual scenario where 𝑀𝐿1 predicts cases with
(0.9091) and Misc (0.7762). Thus, host features are helpful in boosting FN. The quantified side effect that results from the variance between
attack detection performance in terms of overall performance and most the optimal and real scenarios is shown in Section 5.2.
individual classes when compared to the case where only network The proposed method conducts the training and testing procedures
features are used. However, introducing host features leads to a reduc- sequentially. In the first stage, the training dataset is used to train 𝑀𝐿1.
tion in performance in the detection of Bruteforce and Webattack. For In the data preprocessing step, the original training dataset is labeled
instance, Bruteforce F1 score reduces slightly from 0.9985 (flow only) with two classes, including 0 and 1, representing benign and attack,
to 0.9981 (flow and event), and Webattack reduces from 0.8571 (flow respectively. All attack classes share one label as attack, while benign
only) to 0.7974 (flow, event, and message together). samples keep the same label as the original dataset in Table 2. 𝑀𝐿1
 is trained to discriminate between attack (label 1) and benign (label 0)
5. Two-stage collaborative classifier classes. In the second stage for 𝑀𝐿2, the original training dataset filters
 out benign samples, and the filtered dataset is used to train 𝑀𝐿2. Thus,
5.1. Method introduction 𝑀𝐿2 is trained to discriminate between multiple attack types without
 benign samples, forming a multi-classifier. 𝑀𝐿2 reduces the complexity
 The CICIDS 2018 dataset contains a majority of benign samples, of the problem and saves computing time. The performance of the
with 308,375 in the training dataset and 152,172 in the test dataset, proposed two-stage collaborative classifier is verified by applying the
contributing to approximately 50% in both datasets, as shown in Ta- test dataset. 𝑀𝐿1 predicts whether a sample is benign or an attack. All
ble 2. Eliminating the benign samples would reduce the computational samples estimated as intrusion samples are sent to 𝑀𝐿2 for the secondcomplexity of the intrusion detection system. Moreover, filtering out stage classification. Performance evaluation of the proposed method
half of the samples in the dataset would reduce the dataset’s complex- is not straightforward since not all samples are predicted by one ML
ity and improve the intrusion detection performance per attack type. algorithm. In this work, the overall performance combines 𝑀𝐿1 and
Meanwhile, the numerical results show that the ML algorithms perform 𝑀𝐿2 prediction results. Specifically, we follow 𝑀𝐿1 estimation for
extremely accurate, close to 100% F1 score, in normal/benign class benign samples and 𝑀𝐿2 for attack sample prediction. This approach
among CICIDS 2018 dataset and NDSec-1 dataset as illustrated in Fig. 5 enables the detection of different types of intrusions while maintaining
and Fig. 7, respectively. Hence, we propose a two-stage collaborative high accuracy in identifying benign traffic. In the following evaluation
classifier, as shown in Fig. 8, that integrates a binary classifier 𝑀𝐿1 and section, 𝑀𝐿1 and 𝑀𝐿2 determination is based on classification perfora multi-class classifier 𝑀𝐿2. Within this architecture, the primary ob- mance. Specifically, 𝑀𝐿1 should perform a promising performance for
jective of 𝑀𝐿1 is to classify samples into benign and attack categories. binary classification while 𝑀𝐿2 performs better in multi-classification.
In the cases where 𝑀𝐿1 classifies a sample as benign, encompassing It is worth noting that the base classifier (𝑀𝐿1 and 𝑀𝐿2) can be any

Fig. 7. Performance comparison of NIDS (flow-based) and hybrid NIDS and HIDS (flow, event and message-based) under NDSec-1. ‘Mes’ abbreviates message. Flow-based NIDS
system performance is the benchmark against which the proposed hybrid flow and host features approaches are compared.

 9
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Fig. 8. Two-stage collaborative classifier architecture. First stage builds on a binary classifier (ML1), and the second stage builds on a multi-class classifier (ML2).

ML model. The objective of this study is not to propose a new ML From 𝑀𝐿1 binary classification results, we can observe that 𝑀𝐿1
algorithm but a new framework that can use any ML algorithm to boost introduces extremely slim side effect without the analysis of FP. There
the detection accuracy of multiple intrusive patterns. Based on previous are 3 benign (FN) samples predicted as attacks and sent to 𝑀𝐿2
test result, XGBoost demonstrates high performance, it will be applied for classification. Fig. 9 demonstrates the classification results of the
in the proposed two-stage classifier framework. second-stage machine learning model (𝑀𝐿2) using XGBoost. Fig. 10
 demonstrates confusion matrix for the two methods. We can see the
5.2. Performance evaluation proposed method improves attack detection rate especially for DoS-
 LOIC-UDP (class 4), DoS-SlowHTTPTest (class 7) and FTPBruteForce
 The proposed two-stage classifier is evaluated using the CICIDS (class 9). Fig. 11 shows the performance comparison between the
2018 dataset. To compare with the previous work in Section 4, all 132 proposed two-stage collaborative classifier and XGBoost for individual
flow features, flattened event features (224), and the same matrix of classes and overall performance (macro average F1 score) by intemessage features (15 × 50) are used to evaluate the proposed approach. grating 𝑀𝐿1 and 𝑀𝐿2 prediction results. The introduced framework
Based on previous test results, XGBoost achieves almost 100% accuracy demonstrates contributions by enhancing the performance of numerous
for benign samples, making it the chosen base classifier in the two-stage individual attack types and overall system effectiveness when compared
collaborative classifier, as shown in Fig. 8. The presented method relies to traditional machine learning models. The proposed approach demonon an ML algorithm that achieves extremely high detection accuracy strates a substantial enhancement in the MAvg F1 score, increasing
for benign samples. It uses a first-layer classifier, 𝑀𝐿1, to identify and from 0.9246 to 0.9994, which corresponds to an 8.1% improvement.
eliminate benign samples, and a second-layer classifier, 𝑀𝐿2, to detect Notably, it improves detection performance across various individual
different types of intrusions. Using deep learning-based approaches is classes, particularly for DoS-LOIC-UDP and DoS-SlowHTTPTest, showa prospective research direction to find a suitable 𝑀𝐿1 instead of ing enhancements of 30.7% and 84.3% respectively. However, it should
XGBoost. be noted that the introduced approach leads to a slight reduction
 When the test dataset is re-labeled for attack samples using one label in the performance of DDoS-GoldenEye, with a minimal decrease of
instead of the original labels, the performance of XGBoost (𝑀𝐿1) can 0.04% from 1 to 0.9996. This unintended consequence is a minor side
be seen in the confusion matrix illustrated in Fig. 9. The confusion effect of the proposed method. Furthermore, the two-stage collaboramatrix shows that most benign samples 152169 (TN) are predicted tive classifier exhibits only a marginal improvement in performance
correctly and filtered by XGBoost (ML1). Only one (1) attack sample compared to traditional machine learning methods presented in Sec-
(FP) is predicted as benign, which is removed by 𝑀𝐿1 prior to 𝑀𝐿2. tion 4.3, progressing from 0.9993 to 0.9994 in terms of the macro

 10
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

Fig. 9. The confusion matrix of stage-1 (Binary Classifier) and stage-2 (Multi-class Classifier) to demonstrate the prediction performance of the proposed collaborative two-stage
method.

average F1 score. Given the already high performance nearing 100%, intrusions using CICIDS 2018 dataset. Evaluation results in that study,
achieving significant improvements becomes challenging. In Fig. 9, in terms of F1 score, show 0.735 for Benign, 0.43 for DoS-Hulk, 0.09
𝑀𝐿1 identifies 1 attack sample as benign, which is later excluded DoS-SlowHTTPTest, 0.95 for DoS-GoldenEye, 0.89 for DoS-Slowloris,
from the estimation process of the next stage ML algorithm. When the 0.97 for DDoS-LOIC-HTTP, and 0.47 for DDoS-HOIC. Furthermore, our
confusion matrix of the proposed algorithm in Fig. 10(a) is analyzed, proposed framework demonstrates promising performance for individwe observe that the FNs of 𝑀𝐿1 are attributed to the Bot (class 1) ual attack types. For instance, the two-stage collaborative classifier
instances. Ideally, 𝑀𝐿1 would have zero false negatives, and 𝑀𝐿2 results in 1.0000 for DoS-Hulk, significantly improves the 0.09 score
would correctly predict 29,693 instances in class 1 with no affect on in [63]. The studies in [51,64] present several ML models using CICIDS
other classes. Based on these optimal predictions, the F1 score for the 2018 dataset and F1 score comparison is illustrated in Fig. 12. As seen
Benign class is calculated as 0.999990, and the F1 score for the Bot in the figure, the proposed method improves the state-of-the-art by
class is 1. However, in the actual scenario where 𝑀𝐿1 contributes one introducing the highest F1 Score. The suggested framework exhibits
FN for the Bot class, the F1 score of the Benign class is 0.999987, and potential in augmenting the performance of intrusion detection systems
0.999983 for the Bot class. The negligible difference between these by mitigating computational complexity and enhancing accuracy in the
scores can be attributed to the slight side effect of 𝑀𝐿1 due to incorrect identification of multiple intrusive patterns.
classification of an intrusion as benign. Nevertheless, this difference
is extremely small and does not affect other classes, resulting in a 6. Conclusion and future work
negligible impact on the overall evaluation.
 The proposed method is advantageous when compared to the ex- Network-based Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) have limitations
isting literature. The study in [62] presents the best performance of in recognizing particular attack types, such as Advanced Persistent
various machine learning models in terms of F1 score using the CICIDS Threats, which require bridging with Host-based Network Intrusion
2018 dataset, including SVM with 0.9935, KNN with 0.9546, and TREE Detection systems (HIDS). In this article, we proposed combining HIDS
with 0.9994. In comparison, the proposed framework showcases a and NIDS to detect various types of intrusive patterns in a networked
Weighted Average (WAvg) F1 score of 1.0000 and a Mean Average environment using Machine Learning (ML)-based approaches. We com-
(MAvg) F1 score of 0.9994, surpassing the results reported in [62]. bined network-based and host-based features using a feature flattening
The authors in [63] demonstrate a CNN-integrated method to identify approach and studied the impact of dimension reduction on message

 11
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Fig. 10. Confusion matrix for XGBoost using flow feature and the proposed two-stage collaborative classifier with flow, event and message features.

Fig. 11. Performance comparison for the two-stage collaborative classifier under the CICIDS 2018 dataset. The benchmark is the same one as shown in Fig. 5, using flow-only
features, while the proposed method uses flow, event, and host features.

features at the hosts. We used traditional ML algorithms (e.g., XGBoost) the F1 score of DDOS-LOIC-UDP increased from 0.7609 to 0.9942,
and a two-stage collaborative classifier to detect intrusions. The first and DoS-SlowHTTPTest improved from 0.5425 to approximately 1
estimation stage used a binary classifier to discriminate benign and under the CICIDS 2018 dataset. For the NDSec-1 dataset evaluation
attack traffic, and the second stage used a multi-class classifier to results, the hybrid of flow and host features improved macro avdiscriminate multiple attack types. We evaluated our approach using erage F1 score from 0.8595 to 0.8913. The two-stage collaborative
two public datasets, CICIDS 2018 and NDSec-1, which contain network classifier dramatically boosted performance, with the macro average
information and host-based data (e.g., event data and message data in F1 score increasing from 0.9246 to 0.9994 and 30.7% and 84.3%
host resources). improvements in individual class performance for DoS-LOIC-UDP and
 Our numerical results demonstrated that the hybrid of network and DoS-SlowHTTPTest, respectively. The proposed two-stage collaborative
host features significantly boosted performance. The overall perfor- classifier outperforms traditional ML models in literature as detailed
mance (macro average F1 score) raised from 0.9246 to 0.9993 using in the numerical results. Our ongoing work includes evaluating graph-
CICIDS 2018, representing an 8.1% enhancement, and the detection based datasets (e.g., StreamSpot, Long-hour dataset) introduced in [36]
performance for all individual attack types improved. For example, using the presented method in this work. We also plan to deploy

 12
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Fig. 12. Performance comparison for the proposed two-stage collaborative classifier and traditional ML algorithms, using the CICIDS 2018 dataset.

deep learning network-based approaches in the two-stage collaborative References
classifier instead of XGBoost to further boost detection accuracy.
 In this work, four minority attack types are excluded from original [1] Z. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Simsek, B. Kantarci, H.T. Mouftah, P. Djukic, Machine
 learning-enabled IoT security: Open issues and challenges under advanced perdataset. It is essential to identify all instances of attacks, including
 sistent threats, ACM Comput. Surv. (2022) http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3530812,
those belonging to minority categories, to conduct a thorough analysis. Just Accepted.
Recognizing the importance of incorporating all attack types in the [2] C. Zhang, I. Khan, V. Dagar, A. Saeed, M.W. Zafar, Environmental impact of
dataset, we consider it as a promising area for future investigation. information and communication technology: Unveiling the role of education in
Our research agenda includes the utilization of data augmentation developing countries, Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 178 (2022) 121570.
 [3] Z. Yang, X. Liu, T. Li, D. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Han, A systematic literature
techniques to enhance the representation of minority classes in the
 review of methods and datasets for anomaly-based network intrusion detection,
dataset. Furthermore, a thorough analysis on the two-stage collabo- Comput. Secur. (2022) 102675.
rative classifier regarding the incorrect predictions of the first level [4] A.B. de Neira, B. Kantarci, M. Nogueira, Distributed denial of service attack
classifier 𝑀𝐿1 for benign samples is also included in our research prediction: Challenges, open issues and opportunities, Comput. Netw. (2023)
agenda to further extend and optimize the proposed framework. 109553.
 [5] J.M. Kizza, System intrusion detection and prevention, in: Guide to Computer
 Network Security, Springer, 2024, pp. 295–323.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
 [6] J. Liu, M. Nogueira, J. Fernandes, B. Kantarci, Adversarial machine learning: A
 multilayer review of the state-of-the-art and challenges for wireless and mobile
 Zhiyan Chen: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Data systems, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 24 (1) (2022) 123–159, http://dx.doi.org/
curation, Conceptualization. Murat Simsek: Writing – review & edit- 10.1109/COMST.2021.3136132.
ing, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. [7] K. He, D.D. Kim, M.R. Asghar, Adversarial machine learning for network
 intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.
Burak Kantarci: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision,
 (2023).
Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Concep- [8] M. Zipperle, F. Gottwalt, E. Chang, T. Dillon, Provenance-based intrusion
tualization. Mehran Bagheri: Writing – review & editing, Validation, detection systems: A survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 55 (7) (2022) 1–36.
Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Petar Djukic: Writing – review & [9] D. Moon, S.B. Pan, I. Kim, Host-based intrusion detection system for secure
editing, Validation, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. human-centric computing, J. Supercomput. 72 (7) (2016) 2520–2536.
 [10] P.K. Mvula, P. Branco, G.-V. Jourdan, H.L. Viktor, Evaluating word embedding
 feature extraction techniques for host-based intrusion detection systems, Discover
Declaration of competing interest Data 1 (1) (2023) 2.
 [11] J. Ribeiro, F.B. Saghezchi, G. Mantas, J. Rodriguez, S.J. Shepherd, R.A. Abd-
 The authors declare the following financial interests/personal rela- Alhameed, An autonomous host-based intrusion detection system for android
tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests: mobile devices, Mob. Netw. Appl. 25 (1) (2020) 164–172.
 [12] I. Martins, J.S. Resende, P.R. Sousa, S. Silva, L. Antunes, J. Gama, Host-based
Zhiyan Chen has patent #US20220263842A1 pending to Ciena. Mu-
 IDS: A review and open issues of an anomaly detection system in IoT, Future
rat Simsek has patent #US20220263842A1 pending to Ciena. Burak Gener. Comput. Syst. (2022).
Kantarci has patent #US20220263842A1 pending to Ciena. Mehran [13] M. Rani, et al., A review of intrusion detection system in cloud computing,
Bagheri has patent #US20220263842A1 pending to Ciena. Petar Djukic in: Proceedings of International Conference on Sustainable Computing in Scihas patent #US20220263842A1 pending to Ciena. If there are other ence, Technology and Management (SUSCOM), Amity University Rajasthan,
 Jaipur-India, 2019.
authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial in-
 [14] A.V. Turukmane, R. Devendiran, M-MultiSVM: An efficient feature selection
terests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence assisted network intrusion detection system using machine learning, Comput.
the work reported in this paper. Secur. 137 (2024) 103587.
 [15] H. Yang, J. Xu, Y. Xiao, L. Hu, SPE-ACGAN: A resampling approach for class
Data availability imbalance problem in network intrusion detection systems, Electronics 12 (15)
 (2023) 3323.
 [16] D. Nashat, F.A. Hussain, Multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis based
 The data that was used was publicly available and was cited in the
 detection for SYN flooding attack, Comput. Secur. 107 (2021) 102315.
paper. [17] J. Liu, M. Simsek, B. Kantarci, M. Bagheri, P. Djukic, Collaborative feature
 maps of networks and hosts for AI-driven intrusion detection, in: GLOBECOM
Acknowledgment 2022-2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference, IEEE, 2022, pp. 2662–2667.
 [18] N.J. Prottasha, A.A. Sami, M. Kowsher, S.A. Murad, A.K. Bairagi, M. Masud,
 M. Baz, Transfer learning for sentiment analysis using BERT based supervised
 This work is supported in part by the Ontario Centre for Innovation
 fine-tuning, Sensors 22 (11) (2022) 4157.
(OCI), Canada under ENCQOR 5G Project #31993. Petar Djukic and [19] M. Kowsher, A.A. Sami, N.J. Prottasha, M.S. Arefin, P.K. Dhar, T. Koshiba,
Mehran Bagheri were with Ciena (Kanata, ON) when this work was Bangla-BERT: Transformer-based efficient model for transfer learning and
performed. language understanding, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 91855–91870.

 13
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

[20] J. Xu, F. Sun, Q. Chen, Network security, in: Introduction To the Smart Court [48] V.K. Prasad, A. Raval Abhishek, M. Bhavsar, HIDSC2: Host-based intrusion detec-
 System-of-Systems Engineering Project of China, Springer, 2022, pp. 343–384. tion system in cloud computing, in: Inventive Communication and Computational
[21] S. Kim, S. Yoon, J. Narantuya, H. Lim, Secure collecting, optimizing, and Technologies: Proceedings of ICICCT 2022, Springer, 2022, pp. 71–85.
 deploying of firewall rules in software-defined networks, IEEE Access 8 (2020) [49] Z.T. Sworna, Z. Mousavi, M.A. Babar, NLP methods in host-based intrusion
 15166–15177, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2967503. detection systems: A systematic review and future directions, J. Netw. Comput.
[22] J.R. Vacca, Network and System Security, Elsevier, 2013. Appl. (2023) 103761.
[23] J. Liu, M. Simsek, B. Kantarci, M. Erol-Kantarci, A. Malton, A. Walenstein, Risk- [50] S. Vinoth, H.L. Vemula, B. Haralayya, P. Mamgain, M.F. Hasan, M. Naved,
 aware fine-grained access control in cyber-physical contexts, 2021, arXiv preprint Application of cloud computing in banking and e-commerce and related security
 arXiv:2108.12739. threats, Mater. Today: Proc. 51 (2022) 2172–2175.
 [51] V. Kanimozhi, T.P. Jacob, Artificial intelligence based network intrusion detec-
[24] A.N. Özalp, Z. Albayrak, M. Çakmak, E. ÖzdoĞan, Layer-based examination
 tion with hyper-parameter optimization tuning on the realistic cyber dataset
 of cyber-attacks in IoT, in: 2022 International Congress on Human-Computer
 CSE-cic-IDS2018 using cloud computing, in: 2019 International Conference on
 Interaction, Optimization and Robotic Applications, HORA, IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–10.
 Communication and Signal Processing, ICCSP, IEEE, 2019, pp. 0033–0036.
[25] J.M. Kizza, Firewalls, in: Guide to Computer Network Security, Springer, 2024,
 [52] S. Roy, J. Li, B.-J. Choi, Y. Bai, A lightweight supervised intrusion detection
 pp. 265–294.
 mechanism for IoT networks, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 127 (2022) 276–285.
[26] U. Drakulić, E. Mujčić, A comparative performance analysis of various an- [53] T. Kim, W. Pak, Robust network intrusion detection system based on
 tivirus software, in: International Symposium on Innovative and Interdisciplinary machine-learning with early classification, IEEE Access 10 (2022) 10754–10767.
 Applications of Advanced Technologies, Springer, 2023, pp. 423–430. [54] R. Zuech, J. Hancock, T.M. Khoshgoftaar, A new feature popularity framework
[27] M. Khalid, S. Hameed, A. Qadir, S.A. Shah, D. Draheim, Towards SDN-based for detecting cyberattacks using popular features, J. Big Data 9 (1) (2022) 119.
 smart contract solution for IoT access control, Comput. Commun. 198 (2023) [55] F. Beer, T. Hofer, D. Karimi, U. Bühler, A new attack composition for network
 1–31. security, in: P. Müller, B. Neumair, H. Raiser, G. Dreo Rodosek (Eds.), 10.
[28] J. Tyav, S. Tufail, S. Roy, I. Parvez, A. Debnath, A. Sarwat, A comprehensive DFN-Forum Kommunikationstechnologien, Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V., Bonn,
 review on smart grid data security, in: SoutheastCon 2022, IEEE, 2022, pp. 8–15. 2017, pp. 11–20.
[29] O.A. Alghanam, W. Almobaideen, M. Saadeh, O. Adwan, An improved PIO [56] J. Liang, M. Ma, Co-maintained database based on blockchain for IDSs: A lifetime
 feature selection algorithm for IoT network intrusion detection system based learning framework, IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag. (2021).
 on ensemble learning, Expert Syst. Appl. 213 (2023) 118745. [57] N. Abiwinanda, M. Hanif, S.T. Hesaputra, A. Handayani, T.R. Mengko, Brain
[30] S. Tu, M. Waqas, A. Badshah, M. Yin, G. Abbas, Network intrusion detection tumor classification using convolutional neural network, in: World Congress on
 system (NIDS) based on pseudo-siamese stacked autoencoders in fog computing, Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering 2018, Springer, 2019, pp. 183–189.
 IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. (2023). [58] S. Albawi, T.A. Mohammed, S. Al-Zawi, Understanding of a convolutional neural
[31] M.A. Hossain, M.S. Islam, Ensuring network security with a robust intrusion network, in: 2017 International Conference on Engineering and Technology,
 detection system using ensemble-based machine learning, Array 19 (2023) ICET, Ieee, 2017, pp. 1–6.
 [59] K. Jiang, W. Wang, A. Wang, H. Wu, Network intrusion detection com-
 100306.
 bined hybrid sampling with deep hierarchical network, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
[32] A. El-Ghamry, A. Darwish, A.E. Hassanien, An optimized CNN-based intrusion
 32464–32476.
 detection system for reducing risks in smart farming, Internet Things 22 (2023)
 [60] L. Carson, P.F.L. Carson, B. Martin, Random Selection in Politics, Greenwood
 100709.
 Publishing Group, 1999.
[33] A.N. Özalp, Z. Albayrak, Detecting cyber attacks with high-frequency features [61] H. Abdi, L.J. Williams, Principal component analysis, Wiley Interdisc. Rev.:
 using machine learning algorithms, Acta Polytech. Hungarica 19 (7) (2022) Comput. Stat. 2 (4) (2010) 433–459.
 213–233. [62] I.F. Kilincer, F. Ertam, A. Sengur, Machine learning methods for cyber security
[34] Q.A. Al-Haija, A. Ishtaiwi, Multiclass classification of firewall log files using intrusion detection: Datasets and comparative study, Comput. Netw. 188 (2021)
 shallow neural network for network security applications, in: Soft Computing 107840.
 for Security Applications, Springer, 2022, pp. 27–41. [63] J. Kim, J. Kim, H. Kim, M. Shim, E. Choi, CNN-based network intrusion detection
[35] R.F. Fouladi, O. Ermiş, E. Anarim, A ddos attack detection and countermeasure against denial-of-service attacks, Electronics 9 (6) (2020) 916.
 scheme based on DWT and auto-encoder neural network for SDN, Comput. Netw. [64] V. Kanimozhi, T.P. Jacob, Calibration of various optimized machine learning
 214 (2022) 109140. classifiers in network intrusion detection system on the realistic cyber dataset
[36] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, M. Seltzer, Unicorn: Runtime CSE-CIC-IDS2018 using cloud computing, Int. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. Technol. 4 (6)
 provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats, 2020, arXiv preprint (2019) 209–213.
 arXiv:2001.01525.
[37] M.A. Talukder, K.F. Hasan, M.M. Islam, M.A. Uddin, A. Akhter, M.A. Yousuf, F.
 Alharbi, M.A. Moni, A dependable hybrid machine learning model for network Zhiyan Chen has completed her PhD candidate in the
 intrusion detection, J. Inform. Secur. Appl. 72 (2023) 103405. Smart Connected Vehicles Innovation Centre at the Uni-
[38] R.V. Mendonça, J.C. Silva, R.L. Rosa, M. Saadi, D.Z. Rodriguez, A. Farouk, A versity of Ottawa in 2023. Her research directions include
 lightweight intelligent intrusion detection system for industrial Internet of Things two streams: (1) Secure Mobile CrowdSensing systems via
 using deep learning algorithms, Expert Syst. 39 (5) (2022) e12917. machine learning-based methods; (2) Network intrusions
[39] V. Ravi, R. Chaganti, M. Alazab, Recurrent deep learning-based feature fusion detection based on AI methods. She was the founding Chair
 ensemble meta-classifier approach for intelligent network intrusion detection of the ACM Women in Computing Student Chapter at the
 system, Comput. Electr. Eng. 102 (2022) 108156. University of Ottawa (Jan.2021–Jan.2022), and a former
[40] J. Liu, B. Kantarci, C. Adams, Machine learning-driven intrusion detection for recipient of the N2Women Fellowship in IEEE ICC 2021. She
 contiki-NG-based IoT networks exposed to NSL-KDD dataset, in: Proceedings of is a student member of the IEEE Communications Society,
 the 2nd ACM Workshop on Wireless Security and Machine Learning, 2020, pp. and an active member of IEEE Communications Systems
 25–30. Integration and Modelling Technical Committee.
[41] A.L. Santos, C.A. Cervantes, M. Nogueira, B. Kantarci, Clustering and reliabilitydriven mitigation of routing attacks in massive IoT systems, J. Internet Serv.
 Appl. 10 (1) (2019) 1–17. Murat Simsek is currently a member of the Smart Con-
[42] Z. Chen, M. Simsek, B. Kantarci, P. Djukic, All predict wisest decides: A novel nected Vehicles Innovation Centre as a Senior Research
 ensemble method to detect intrusive traffic in IoT networks, in: 2021 IEEE Global Associate with the School of Electrical Engineering and
 Communications Conference, GLOBECOM, IEEE, 2021, pp. 01–06. Computer Science at the University of Ottawa. He received
[43] O. Friha, M.A. Ferrag, M. Benbouzid, T. Berghout, B. Kantarci, K.-K.R. Choo, 2DF- M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Department of Electronics and
 IDS: Decentralized and differentially private federated learning-based intrusion Communication Engineering from Istanbul Technical Unidetection system for industrial IoT, Comput. Secur. (2023) 103097. versity (ITU), Turkey in 2003 and 2012, respectively. During
 his Ph.D. study, he studied as a Visiting Scholar with
[44] A. El Khairi, M. Caselli, C. Knierim, A. Peter, A. Continella, Contextualizing
 Prof. Q.J. Zhang in Department of Electronics Engineering,
 system calls in containers for anomaly-based intrusion detection, in: Proceedings
 Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada between Aug’09–
 of the 2022 on Cloud Computing Security Workshop, 2022, pp. 9–21.
 Apr’10. He has served as the Technical Program Committee
[45] C.G. Harshitha, M.K. Rao, P.N. Kumar, A novel mechanism for host-based
 member of several IEEE conferences. His research interintrusion detection system, in: First International Conference on Sustainable
 ests include surrogate based modeling and optimization,
 Technologies for Computational Intelligence, Springer, 2020, pp. 527–536.
 artificial intelligence, machine learning, artificial neural
[46] Y. Kumar, B. Subba, Stacking ensemble-based HIDS framework for detecting
 networks, knowledge based modeling, cybersecurity, tabuanomalous system processes in windows based operating systems using multiple
 lar data recognition and extraction, smart and connected
 word embedding, Comput. Secur. 125 (2023) 102961.
 autonomous vehicles.
[47] C.V. Martinez, B. Vogel-Heuser, A host intrusion detection system architecture
 for embedded industrial devices, J. Franklin Inst. 358 (1) (2021) 210–236.

 14
Z. Chen et al. Computer Networks 250 (2024) 110576

 Burak Kantarci is a Full Professor and the Founding Di- chair, program chair or track chair in 30+ international
 rector of the Smart Connected Vehicles Innovation Centre conferences. He is an Editor of the IEEE Communications
 (SCVIC) and Next Generation Communications and Com- Surveys and Tutorials, IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
 puting Networks (NEXTCON) Research Lab at uOttawa. He an Associate Editor for IEEE Networking Letters, and an
 holds a Ph.D. degree in computer engineering and is the Associate Editor for Elsevier Vehicular Communications.
 author/co-author of 250+ publications in established journals and conferences, and 15 book chapters. Continuously
 listed among the top-cited scientists in telecommunications Mehran Bagheri holds a Ph.D degree in computational
 and networking based on the data reported by Stanford biophysics from the University of Ottawa where he was a
 University since 2020, and since 2021, based on data postdoctoral research fellow from 2017 to 2019. From 2022
 collected from Microsoft Academic Graph, research.com has to 2023, he was with Ciena where he was a Data Scientist,
 listed Dr. Kantarci among Canada’s top computer scientists. and working closely with other teams to develop AI based
 Dr. Kantarci holds an Exemplary Editor Award from IEEE tools and build data stories. He is involved in a wide
 Communications Surveys and Tutorials (2021), and multiple range of AI & analytics tasks, from defecting detection for
 best paper awards from various conferences, most recently manufacturing teams to forecasting and root cause analysis
 from IEEE Globecom2021, Wireless World Research Forum software/hardware performance for software and design
 2022, and IEEE ICC2023, IEEE VCC2023. He is a recipient teams.
 of the Minister’s Award of Excellence from Ontario Ministry
 of Colleges and Universities (2021). He is the recipient
 Petar Djukic is currently with Nokia Bell Labs. When this
 of 2023 Technical Achievement Award of IEEE ComSoc
 work was performed, he was responsible for Ciena’s AI &
 Communications Software Technical Committee. He was
 Analytics team at the office of the CTO. Petar has completed
 a Distinguished Speaker of the Association of Computing
 his B.A.Sc, M.A.Sc and Ph.D. at the University of Toronto.
 Machinery (ACM) in 2019–2021. Currently he is a Dis-
 During his Ph.D. studies, Petar has used mathematics and
 tinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Communications Society
 engineering to solve networking problems. During his Ph.D.
 and IEEE Systems Council. He has been a keynote/invited
 and later as a postdoctoral fellow, Petar has published over
 speaker or panelist in 40 events. In 2019–2020, Dr. Kantarci
 30 papers with combined 2000 citations. Continuing in
 chaired the Communications Systems Integration and Modindustry, Petar now has 47 patents with another 20 pending
 eling Technical Committee of the Institute of Electrical
 patents. At Ciena, Petar and his team were on a mission to
 and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). He has been a general
 apply AI to networking and supply chain use cases, to make
 both Ciena and its more efficient.

 15