IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024 3891

 MAG: A Novel Approach for Effective Anomaly
 Detection in Spacecraft Telemetry Data
 Bing Yu , Student Member, IEEE, Yang Yu , Senior Member, IEEE, Jiakai Xu , Gang Xiang ,
 and Zhiming Yang , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is a crucial matter to en- I. INTRODUCTION
sure the spacecraft stability. During the spacecraft opera-
 NSURING the safety of spacecraft systems holds immense
tion, sensors and controllers generate a large volume of
multidimensional time series telemetry data with long periodicity, and one key point to detect the anomaly inside
 E importance due to their complexity and magnitude [1]. In
 particular, even a minor malfunction can result in catastrophic
the spacecraft timely and precisely is to extract essential destruction of the spacecraft. Hence, early detection of anomafeatures from the sheer amount of telemetry data. However, great challenges exist owing to the complex coupling lous behavior in the spacecraft system during the development
relationships and the temporal characteristics inside the of a fault becomes critical to prevent it from exacerbating into a
telemetry data. To address this issue, we propose a novel catastrophic failure.
approach called maximum information coefficient attention Due to the complexity of dimension interrelationships and
graph network (MAG). The basic frame is a graph neural high-dimensional nature of spacecraft telemetry data, traditional
network, which utilizes embedding vectors to describe the
intrinsic properties of each dimension, correlation anal- modeling techniques encounter challenges in anomaly detection.
ysis to investigate long-term dependencies, an attention As a result, data-driven methods that rely on telemetry data
mechanism to determine short-term interactions among di- have gained significant attraction [2]. Given that anomalies are
mensions, and long short term memory (LSTM) to extract usually rare and few in number, unsupervised learning solely
temporal features. The fusion of these modules through a using normal telemetry data to uncover inherent patterns holds
graph neural network results in the construction of the MAG
model, allowing for a comprehensive analysis of complex greater value. The key to anomaly detection using only norvariable relationships and temporal characteristics lead- mal telemetry data lies in extracting essential characteristics
ing to successful detection of various types of anomalies. of spacecraft normal operation states from multidimensional
Since telemetry data has heterogeneous characteristics, time series data. However, due to the complex interrelationships
we adapt the loss function and design an unsupervised and temporal characteristics of telemetry data, this presents a
anomaly scoring method suitable for MAG. To verify the
effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, we conducted ex- significant challenge.
periments using two publicly and two new available space- In response to this challenge, numerous scholars have procraft telemetry datasets, and the results demonstrate that posed various classic unsupervised anomaly detection modour algorithm is more efficient and accurate in detecting els that have demonstrated excellent performance in varispacecraft data anomalies than several other state-of-the- ous fields. These include local outlier factor (LOF) [3], oneart methods.
 class support vector machine (OC-SVM) [4], and support
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, anomaly score, graph vector data description (SVDD) [5], etc. [6]. Moreover, conneural network (GNN), multivariate time series, spacecraft ventional machine learning methods are insufficient to adtelemetry data.
 dress the challenge of handling high-dimensional and largescale data. As artificial intelligence has developed, deep learning has increasingly addressed this issue [7]. For instance,
 Su et al. [8] and Song et al. [9] proposed anomaly detection methods based on the GRU-VAE and ST-GAN, respec-
 Manuscript received 20 July 2023; revised 29 August 2023; accepted
6 September 2023. Date of publication 3 October 2023; date of current tively. These methods exhibited solid performance on publicly
version 23 February 2024. This work was supported in part by the available datasets.
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62071150. However, those previously mentioned are primarily designed
Paper no. TII-23-2687. (Corresponding author: Zhiming Yang.)
 Bing Yu, Yang Yu, Jiakai Xu, and Zhiming Yang are with the School for Euclidean domain data with translational invariance, while
of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Tech- the telemetry data are better mapped to non-Euclidean domain
nology, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: yubing_hit@163.com; yuyanghit data, such as graph structures [10]. For this reason, graph neural
@hit.edu.cn; 22B905048@stu.hit.edu.cn; yangzm@hit.edu.cn).
 Gang Xiang is with the Department of System Engineering, Beijing networks are well suited for telemetry data, where graph nodes
Aerospace Automatic Control Institute, Beijing 100854, China (e-mail: represent the features of variables within the detection window,
Hit-xianggang@163.com). and graph edges describe the correlations between dimensions.
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3314852. Indeed, Deng et al. [11] proposed a bias score-based anomaly
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2023.3314852 detection algorithm, and Xie et al. [12] suggested an anomaly

 1551-3203 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3892 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

detection method that combines wavelet transform and graph
neural networks, both with commendable performance on industrial datasets.
 Nonetheless, these methods above are not entirely suitable
for our problem. In the case of complex, multidimensional, and
time-sensitive telemetry data, it is vital to accurately capture
the intrinsic and temporal characteristics of each variable within
each detection window, while extensively examining their intricate nonlinear interdependencies. Furthermore, telemetry data
characterize long-period properties, making methods that rely
solely on short-term windows for extracting correlation capabilities insufficient. Moreover, telemetry data obtained from spacecraft systems contain two heterogeneous data types: analog and
state variables (analog variables are continuous and state variables are binary), which render a single loss function inadequate.
 Based on the above analysis, this article proposes a novel
graph neural network framework. The inherent and temporal
characteristics of each variable are represented as nodes, while
the long-term association analysis and attention within the shortterm window are depicted as edges. Ultimately, the entirety of
the graph structure undergoes updates to finalize the anomaly
detection process. The main contributions and advantages of
our work are as follows.
 1) This article aims to represent the effective features in the
 telemetry data detection window from three angles: by
 utilizing embedding vectors to describe the properties of
 each dimension, demonstrating the relationships between
 dimensions using graph structures, extracting temporal
 features using LSTM, and fusing the various components
 via a graph neural network.
 2) To account for telemetry data’s long periodicity, this
 article uses maximum information coefficient (MIC) to
 investigate the long-term relationships of variables, an Fig. 1. Illustrative examples of anomalies in spacecraft telemetry data.
 attention mechanism to capture the short-term associa- (a) Telemetry analog variables. (b) Telemetry of analog variables and
 state variables.
 tions of windows, and ultimately combines both methods
 to construct edges in the graph that represent the associations.
 3) This article tackles the heterogeneity of telemetry data contextual anomalies, and multiset anomalies. In Fig. 1(a),
 along with the feature of edge fusion construction and puts there are inconsistencies in the periods among the variables.
 forward a novel loss function. Additionally, a threshold Variable 1, in particular, exhibits a longer period that may
 score appropriate for the network structure is devised. exceed the window length used for detection. This feature also
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II de- highlights the inadequacy of analyzing correlation solely within
scribes the problem of spacecraft system telemetry data anomaly the length of the detected time window. Thus, it is imperative to
detection. Section III presents the overall framework of our conduct association analysis of the entire sequence. The anomaly
approach to anomaly detection. Section IV describes the pro- consisting of analog variables and state variables is shown in
posed maximum information coefficient attention graph network Fig. 1(b). State 1 to State 4 are commands sent or received by the
(MAG) algorithm in detail. The experimental results are reported console. During the anomaly interval, trend anomalies and point
in Section V. Finally, Section VI concludes the article. anomalies were observed for the analog variables, which were
 obtained by ground testers actively entering incorrect module
 commands.
 II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION The method for achieving real-time anomaly detection in-
 The types of spacecraft telemetry data can be classified into volves utilizing sliding window data to make real-time predicanalog variables (e.g., piezoelectric voltages, acceleration quan- tions for multivariate time series, and then determining whether
tities) and state variables (e.g., module control commands). the prediction results deviate excessively from the observed
Anomalies are typically indicated as either outliers or subseries values. If the deviation is too large, the prediction is deemed
of multiple telemetry variables in the telemetry data, encom- to be anomalous. Defining X = {x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(T ) } as the
passing point anomalies, shapelet anomalies, trend anomalies, original time series with time span T , x̂(T +1) as the forecast
YU et al.: MAG: A NOVEL APPROACH FOR EFFECTIVE ANOMALY DETECTION IN SPACECRAFT TELEMETRY DATA 3893

 3) Graph Aggregation: The correlation coefficient matrix
 and attention coefficient matrix are integrated as edges,
 while the time feature nodes and embedding vectors are
 incorporated as node features to construct a graph. Subsequently, the entire network is aggregated and updated
 through iterative processes.
 4) Anomaly Evaluation: Ultimately, the MAG network predicts the next variable value and compares it with the
 observed value, generating an error score. This score is
 then used to determine the presence of abnormalities.

 IV. DETAILS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD
 A. Data Preprocessing
 Partitioning the multivariate telemetry data is imperative
 for real-time calculations, which requires the establishment of
 real-time calculation detection windows. First, split multivariate
 telemetry data Φ ⊂ RT ×N . The data have a total length of
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed framework.
 T , consist of N variables, a set of training data is denoted
 Φtrain ⊆ RT1 ×N , and a set of test data is denoted Φtest ⊆ RT2 ×N .
value of this time series at the moment T + 1 after the model, Note that all the data points in the training data set must be
and x(T +1) as the true telemetry value at the moment T + 1, normal.
then whether it is anomalous can be expressed by Next, the training dataset Φtrain ⊆ RT1 ×N is segmented into
   a series of subsequences Xtrain = {Xtrain i
 , i = 1, 2, . . . , m} ⊆
  (T +1)  R Sw ×N
 by a sliding window, where Xtrain i
 means Xt−sw :t when
 x − x̂(T +1)  > τ (1)
 the window size is set to sw . Given step length st , the number
where  •  denotes the rule to calculate the deviation between of subsequences can be calculated by m = (T1 − sw )/st  + 1.
x̂(T +1) and x(T +1) , τ is a predefined anomaly threshold. The Similarly, the testing dataset Φtest ⊆ RT2 ×N is divided into subj
larger the deviation between x̂(T +1) and x(T +1) , the higher the sequences Xtest = {Xtest , j = 1, 2, . . . , n} by a sliding window,
anomaly probability of x(T +1) . As shown by the anomalies of where n = (T2 − sw )/st  + 1. For validation purposes, each
the data in Fig. 1, the key to problem is to find the temporal and point in the test dataset is marked with a binary number (0 for
variable correlations of the data. We propose the model MAG normal and 1 for abnormal).
to solve this problem and predict x̂(T +1) , and propose a new
formula to find the threshold τ . B. Variable Correlation Analysis
 Due to the inconsistent periodic nature of telemetry variables,
 III. PROPOSED FRAMEWORK the data detection window cannot cover the entire period. It is
 necessary to perform correlation analysis on the original training
 The proposed MAG framework aims to capture the correlation data before sliding the data window. The MIC [13] is an effective
and temporal characteristics among telemetry data variables, method for measuring the correlation between two variables.
integrating them into a graph. Subsequently, the framework For a given training dataset Φtrain ⊆ RT1 ×N , for any two
utilizes the aggregated updates from the graph to predict future discrete variables with T1 elements, the MIC values between
variable outcomes and detect anomalies by comparing them with A = {ai | i = 1, . . . , T1 } and B = {bi | i = 1, . . . , T1 } can be
the observed values. obtained by the following equation:
 The overall structure of the proposed framework is shown in
  p(a, b)
Fig. 2. It consists of the following four main parts. M I(A, B) = p(a, b) log (2)
 1) Variable Correlation Analysis: The telemetry data ob- p(a)p(b)
 a∈A b∈B
 tained from the spacecraft system are analyzed using the
 where p(a, b) is the joint probability density of variables a
 MIC algorithm to obtain the correlation coefficient maand b, and p(a) and p(b) are the marginal probability densities
 trix, reflecting the correlations between variables during
 of variables a and b, respectively, computed by the histogram
 normal working conditions.
 estimation method.
 2) Temporal Analysis and Attention Mechanism: The data
 For a finite set D = {(ai , bi ), i = 1, . . . , n}, given a grid G,
 are subjected to sliding window segmentation. LSTM
 we can partition the ai values of D into the a bin and the bi
 is employed to extract temporal features from the winvalues of D into the b bin. The MIC is given by
 dowed time series, while employing embedding vectors
 to capture the inherent attributes of each dimension. The M I ∗ (D, x, y) = max M I(D | G) (3)
 attention mechanism is utilized to obtain the attention
 MIC(D) = max {M (D)x,y } . (4)
 coefficient matrix. xy<B(T1 )
3894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 The maximum information coefficient is the highest normal- (t)
 where y i ∈ Rw is the temporal input feature of node i, N (i) =
ized M I value obtained in the feature matrix. where ω(1) < {j | eij > 0} is the set of neighbors to node i, and W ∈ Rd×w
B(T1 ) < O(T11−ε ) and 0 < ε < 1. In general, MIC works well is the trainable weight matrix of the shared linear transformation
in practice when B(T1 ) = T10.6 . After the calculation, the MIC for each node.
values between N telemetry variables and the correlation ma- From the above feature extractor, we obtain a representation
trix M can be obtained. mij denotes the correlation between (t) (t) (t)
 of all N nodes as {z 1 , . . . , z N }. For each z i , we multiply it
telemetry variable i and telemetry variable j, and it has a value by the proceeding elements of the corresponding time series of
between 0 and 1. embedding vi (denoted as ◦). Then, we use the results across all
 nodes as input to a stacked fully connected layer with output di-
C. MAG Model mension N to predict the vector of telemetry values at time step t
 During the training phase, each telemetry variable within  
 (t) (t)
a time window exhibits both temporal and intrinsic property x̂(t) = fθ v 1 ◦ z 1 , . . . , v N ◦ z N . (10)
features. Representing the intrinsic properties of each telemetry
variable using embedding vectors enables subsequent feedback, The predicted output of the model is denoted as x̂(t) . We
performance differentiation, and updates. Moreover, the atten- denote the analog variables and state variables described in
tion mechanism can be employed to express the relationships be- (t) (t)
 Section II as xa and xs , respectively. Considering the hettween variables within the window more effectively. Therefore,
 erogeneity between these two types, different loss functions
we introduce an embedding vector for each telemetry variable
 are adopted. The analog variables utilize mean square error,
to represent its features vi ∈ Rd , for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }. These (t)
embeddings are randomly initialized and then trained together minimizing the discrepancy between the predicted output x̂a
 (t)
with the rest of the model. The similarity between these em- and the observed data xa . On the other hand, for state variables,
beddings vi represents the intrinsic properties of the telemetry binary cross-entropy loss is used. In order to mitigate overfitting
variables. and to ensure appropriate sizing of the final edges within the
 In the MAG model, for a subseries combination of Xtrain or sliding window, we introduce a constraint term. This term takes
Xtest , define the model input as the historical subseries data into account the acyclicity of the corresponding graph [14], and
x(t) := [x(t−w) , x(t−w+1) , . . . , x(t−1) ] for a sliding window of incorporates the findings of correlation analysis. The final loss
size w at time t. The calculation of the attention coefficient αi,j function is as follows:
is as follows: Na  2
     1   (t) (t) 
 π(i, j) = ReL U vi ⊕ W xi
 (t)
 ⊕ vi ⊕ W xi
 (t)
 (5) LMSE = x̂ai − xai  (11)
 Na i=1 2

 exp(π(i, j)) Ns 
 αi,j =  . (6) 1  (t) (t)
 k∈N (i)∪{i} exp(π(i, k)) LBCE = − x log x̂si
 Ns i=1 si
 After computing the attention coefficient αi,j , it is combined    
 (t) (t)
with the correlation coefficient mij to form each edge eij and + 1 − xsi log 1 − x̂si (12)
construct adjacency matrix E  
 h(E) = tr eE◦E − tr eM ◦M (13)
 eij = αi,j · mij . (7)
 c
 Following the construction of the edges, we employ LSTM Ltotal = LMSE + LBCE + λh(E) + |h(E)|2 (14)
 2
technique to extract temporal association features. x(t) is subjected to LSTM network to extract the temporal features. Tempo- where λ and c represent Lagrangian multipliers and penalty paral features can be extracted through the LSTM network denoted rameters, and are solved by augmented Lagrangian method [15].
as Ns represents the dimensionality of the state variables, and
   Na represents the dimensionality of the analog variables. The
 y (t) := y (t−w) , y (t−w+1) , . . . , y (t−1) . (8) network structure of the MAG is shown in Fig. 3.
 Finally, a graph neural network is employed to integrate the
temporal and spatial associations within the subsequence. The D. Abnormal Scores
constructed graph model utilizes the previously mentioned ei,j After the graph structure is acquired by the network, detection
to form the adjacency matrix. The temporal feature y (t) is used of the anomalies that deviate from normal patterns is the next
as input for the graph neural network, enabling the aggregation step. The model achieves this by computing separate outliers
and update of information from each node and its neighbors, for each telemetry and then amalgamating them into a solitary
 (t)
ultimately producing the output of node i represented z i as outlier per timestamp. Since our detection algorithm chooses
follows: an MAG-based model, it is also necessary to design outlier
 ⎛ ⎞
  determination rules specifically based on the characteristics of
 (t) (t) (t) (t) (t)
 z i = ReL U ⎝ei,i W i y i + ei,j W j y j ⎠ (9) that model. The anomaly score compares the expected behavior
 j∈N (i) at moment t with the observed behavior and calculates the error
YU et al.: MAG: A NOVEL APPROACH FOR EFFECTIVE ANOMALY DETECTION IN SPACECRAFT TELEMETRY DATA 3895

Fig. 3. Overall architecture of the proposed MAG anomaly detection algorithm.

value Err(t) between moment t and the true telemetry value value theory, which assumes that the peaks in the time series
 satisfy the generalized Patoli distribution (GPD). Nonetheless,
 Ns   Na  
 1   (t) (t)  1   (t) (t)  the suitability of the POT method may be limited when the
 Err(t) = xsi − x̂si  + xai − x̂ai  . (15)
 Ns i=1 Na i=1 distribution characteristics of the data are at variance with the
 GPD. For telemetry data of spacecraft systems, the experiments
 In order to prevent any one telemetry value from producing in the next section show that our approach is more adaptable.
a deviation too high above the other telemetry values, we nor- The process of the MAG-based model algorithm is shown in
malize the error value Err(t) for each telemetry value to obtain Algorithm 1.
a(t).
 In the threshold selection part, to avoid introducing additional
hyperparameters, we propose in our experiments a method that is V. EXPERIMENTS
more computationally convenient. By calculating the deviation
 A. Datasets and Performance Index
atrain (t) of each timestamp on the training set, we can calculate
the threshold value by the following equation to obtain: We conducted experiments on two new telemetry datasets
  1  and two public datasets. The two new datasets, SCC-1 and
 τ = max cv2 (atrain (t) − μ̃) (16) SCC-2, come from the telemetry data of two different satellite
 systems. The two public telemetry datasets are provided by
 μ̃ NASA for the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) satellite
 cv = (17)
 σ̃ and the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover [17]. The details
where cv is the coefficient of variation, which is a statistical of four datasets are shown in Table I. For these datasets, normal
measure of the degree of variation in the telemetry data. μ̃ and data points are marked as 0 and outliers are marked as 1. Then,
σ̃ are the median and interquartile range (IQR) of the values 10% of the training dataset is divided for the validation dataset.
atrain (t), respectively. We use the median and IQR instead of Note that the training dataset contains only normal time series.
the mean and standard deviation needed in the coefficient of We use commonly used metrics to evaluate the performance of
variation because they do not assume data distribution and are our proposed MAG algorithm, which are Precision, Recall, and
more robust to the exception scores of the model. Finally, if the F1 score
Err(t) of the test set exceeds any fixed threshold τ , then time t
is marked as an exception. TP
 Precision = (18)
 Many published anomaly detection algorithms [16] use the 3σ TP + FP
algorithm and the peak over threshold (POT) algorithm to mine TP
the threshold τ . POT is a threshold mining method using extreme Recall = (19)
 TP + FN
3896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 Algorithm 1: Calculate MAG-Based Model.
 Variable Correlation Analysis:
 The training dataset Φtrain is calculated using MIC
 analysis to obtain the correlation coefficient matrix M .
 Train Stage:
 for lth epoch in train epochs do
 1. The attention mechanism applied to the fused the
 subsequence Xtrain and node embedding vector Vtrain
 to obtain attention coefficient matrix Att, which is
 combined with M to get edges E.
 2. Compute the temporal feature Ytrain of Xtrain .
 3. Ytrain and E are fed into the graph neural network for
 message passing, node aggregation, and node update to
 Fig. 4. Relationship between F1 scores and window length for the four
 calculate output Ztrain . datasets.
 4. Multiply Ztrain and Vtrain point by point to get
 X̂train and calculate LM SE and LBCE to get Ltotal .
 5. Update the parameters in the neural network by Ltotal . tuning strategy [19], [20]: if a certain time point in a continuous
 end for anomaly segment is detected, all anomalies in that segment are
 Threshold Calculation: considered to be correctly detected. Based on the observation
 for Xtrain
 i
 in Xtrain do that the time point of the anomaly will raise an alert and further
 Utilize the real value x(t) and the trained network to make the whole segment noticed in realistic applications, this
 compute the predicted value x̂(t) and the error Err(t). strategy is reasonable. We implemented our approach and its
 end for variants in PyTorch [21] version 1.9.1 using CUDA 11.6 and
 Normalize Err(t) to get a(t) and calculate the anomaly PyTorch Geometric Library [22]. We set the training model to
 threshold τ . 100 cycles and used 10 as an early stop. To obtain reliable
 Testing Stage: results and reduce the randomness of the training phase, the
 for Xtest
 i
 in Xtest do samples were trained and tested ten times separately, and then the
 1. Utilize the real value x(t) and the trained network to standard deviation of the performance metrics was calculated.
 compute the predicted value x̂(t) and the error Err(t). Finally, our algorithm is trained and tested on a server with
 2.The outlier value is obtained by making a difference Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2690 v4 @ 2.60 GHz and NVIDIA
 comparison with the threshold τ . RTX 3090 graphics card.
 end for

 TABLE I C. Results and Comparisons
 DETAILS OF DATA
 1) Window Size: To determine the appropriate window size
 Sw , we conducted experiments on three datasets by selecting a
 portion of small datasets. The window sizes were set to 20, 30,
 50, 80, 100, 150, and 200.
 The F1 scores for the four datasets are depicted in Fig. 4.
 Opting for an excessively long window can result in redundant
 information, slow response, and increased computational complexity. Conversely, selecting a window length that is too short
 2 · Recall · Precision will result in an inadequate capture of temporal features, leading
 F1 = (20)
 Recall + Precision to insufficient stability. The experimental results from the four
where T P is the number of predicted actual anomalies, F P is small datasets imply that a window length of 50 is optimal.
the number of the false positive samples, and F N is the number 2) Baseline Comparison: To exhibit the effectiveness of our
of the false negative samples. proposed algorithm, we conduct a comparative analysis of its
 performance with other benchmark unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms. These include deep learning based mod-
B. Experimental Settings and Platform els such as AnomalyTransformer [19], ST-GAN [9], InterFu-
 In the data preprocessing stage, we set the window size sion [23], GDN [11], and GRU-VAE [8]; clustering-based techsw = 50 and the step size st = 1, and then split the original time niques such as Deep-SVDD [24]; as well as classical methods
series into the desired subsequences. In the network structure, such as OC-SVM [25] and IsolationForest [26]. Notably, STwe set the embedding vector dimension to 128 and set the hidden GAN and AnomalyTransformer represent the most sophisticated
layer to 128. We are utilizing the Adam optimizer [18] with a deep models. We evaluate the average Precision, Recall, and
learning rate of 1 × 10−3 to train the model. We use a widely used F1-score after ten rounds on the SCC-1, SCC-2, SMAP, and
YU et al.: MAG: A NOVEL APPROACH FOR EFFECTIVE ANOMALY DETECTION IN SPACECRAFT TELEMETRY DATA 3897

 TABLE II
 QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF MAG (OURS) ACROSS FOUR REAL TELEMETRY DATASETS. HEREIN, P, R, AND F1 SIGNIFY
 THE PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1-SCORE, RESPECTIVELY

 TABLE III
 RESULTS OF ABLATION AND COMPARISON EXPERIMENTS

MSL datasets. The comparative results of the four algorithms Furthermore, we used the Pearson and Spearman methare showcased in Table II. ods [27] for comparing correlations. The experimental results
 According to Table II, our methodology attains the highest indicate that the MIC outperforms the Pearson and Spearman
F1 scores across all four datasets, demonstrating optimal correlation coefficients. This discrepancy arises because the
performance in balancing false alarm and missed alarm rates. Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients assume linear
Moreover, our approach exhibits the most satisfactory results correlation, causing inaccuracies when analyzing nonlinear rein recall rate on the SCC-1 and SMAP datasets, indicating lationships. On the contrary, MIC does not rely on such asa minimal likelihood of producing false alarms on these two sumptions and can accurately capture both linear and nonlinear
datasets. correlations over extended periods.
 3) Ablation Comparison: To investigate the necessity of each Regarding the temporal relationship analysis, we compared
component of our method, we gradually excluded and substi- linear, RNN, and GRU layer connections [28], using ablation
tuted these components and monitored how the model perfor- experiments. The findings indicate that employing the network
mance degraded. The experimental results are shown in Table III. layer or a linear layer results in less effectiveness, primarily due
 To compare the effectiveness of the edge mechanism, we to the inability to extract temporal features. In contrast, incorpoconducted separate experiments by eliminating either the corre- rating layer connections of RNN, GRU, or LSTM yields more
lation analysis or attention mechanism. The experiment showed effective findings. Specifically, LSTM, with a more intricate and
that the fusion of both mechanisms yielded the most favorable robust structure than GRU and RNN, provides better control over
outcome, as the introduction of the attention mechanism after the the flow of information and enables the capture of long-term
correlation analysis effectively enhances the model’s adaptabil- dependencies. Therefore, LSTM can extract superior temporal
ity. However, solely relying on the attention mechanism and the features, resulting in better outcomes.
data within the window is inadequate for effectively capturing As for the loss function, we applied the mean squared error
the extent of correlation and dependency over prolonged periods. (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) [29] and compared
3898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 20, NO. 3, MARCH 2024

 features. Finally, by fusing these modules through a graph neural
 network, the model effectively integrated the coupling relationships between the dimensions and temporal characteristics of
 these sequences, allowing for the successful detection of various
 types of anomalies. To determine anomalies, an anomaly score
 adapted to the network structure was introduced.
 To ascertain the effectiveness and superiority of our proposed
 anomaly detection algorithm, we conducted experiments on four
 genuine telemetry datasets and compared our approach with
 other state-of-the-art algorithms, achieving the optimal results.
 Moreover, the ablation experiments provided further evidence
 of the effectiveness of our model components. Our proposed
 anomaly thresholds showcase superior accuracy and closely
 approximate the optimum thresholds when compared to other
 widely used techniques.
 However, although it does not affect the efficiency of real-time
 anomaly detection, the computational cost increased with the increase in data volume during the computation of correlation anal-
Fig. 5. Illustrative relationship between threshold and F1 score. ysis, warranting optimization of the computational efficiency
(a) MSL dataset. (b) SMAP dataset. (c) SCC-1 dataset. (d) SCC-2
dataset. of MIC. Additionally, investigating more MAG-based anomaly
 detection algorithms for various anomaly types and advancing
 into fault diagnosis presented promising research topics.
them with our method. Experimental findings demonstrate that
employing two mixed loss functions for two different types of
data can significantly enhance the model’s effectiveness. REFERENCES
 4) Threshold Comparison: We also evaluated the impact of [1] J. Marzat, H. Piet-Lahanier, F. Damongeot, and E. Walter, “Model-based
the threshold value τ on the F1-score of the four datasets. As fault diagnosis for aerospace systems: A survey,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Engineers, Part G: J. Aerosp. Eng., vol. 226, no. 10, pp. 1329–1360, 2012.
shown in Fig. 5, when the threshold is too small, the Recall [2] X. Dai and Z. Gao, “From model, signal to knowledge: A data-driven
value will be low, resulting in a decreased F1-score. While if perspective of fault detection and diagnosis,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
the threshold is set too high, the Precision value will decrease, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2226–2238, Nov. 2013.
 [3] Z. Cheng, C. Zou, and J. Dong, “Outlier detection using isolation forest
causing a drop in F1-score. Therefore, it is crucial to set the and local outlier factor,” in Proc. Conf. Res. Adaptive Convergent Syst.,
threshold appropriately to ensure the optimal F1-score. 2019, pp. 161–168.
 We conducted a comparison between two thresholding meth- [4] S. M. Erfani, S. Rajasegarar, S. Karunasekera, and C. Leckie, “Highdimensional and large-scale anomaly detection using a linear oneods: 3σ thresholding based on the Gaussian distribution and class svm with deep learning,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 58, pp. 121–134,
extreme value theory thresholding (EVT). The impact of these 2016.
thresholds on the F1 scores of the four test datasets is illustrated [5] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly detection
 and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 375–390.
in Fig. 5. The results reveal that, as the threshold (τ ) increases, [6] S. Omar, A. Ngadi, and H. H. Jebur, “Machine learning techniques for
the F1 score initially reaches its peak and then declines. Our anomaly detection: An overview,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 79, no. 2,
proposed thresholding method closely approximates the optimal pp. 33–41, 2013.
 [7] X. Zhou, Y. Hu, W. Liang, J. Ma, and Q. Jin, “Variational LSTM enhanced
threshold acquired through exhaustive search, thus demonstrat- anomaly detection for industrial Big Data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
ing the effectiveness of our anomaly threshold determination vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3469–3477, May 2021.
rule. This is likely because the 3σ thresholding and EVT methods [8] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
both assume prior data distributions which are not applicable to network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
telemetry data. Conversely, our method, which employs formu- Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
las utilizing the median and interquartile range, is more robust [9] J. Yu, Y. Song, D. Tang, D. Han, and J. Dai, “Telemetry data-based
 spacecraft anomaly detection with spatial-temporal generative adversarial
and unaffected by the shape of the data distribution. networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, 2021, Art. no. 3515209.
 [10] N. A. Asif et al., “Graph neural network: A comprehensive review on
 non-euclidean space,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 60588–60606, 2021.
 VI. CONCLUSION [11] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 This article proposed a telemetry data anomaly detection pp. 4027–4035.
algorithm based on the MAG structural model. Specifically, [12] L. Xie, D. Pi, X. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Luo, and W. Yu, “Graph neural
 network approach for anomaly detection,” Measurement, vol. 180, 2021,
the algorithm constructed a graph-structured model that used Art. no. 109546.
embedding vectors to describe the intrinsic properties of each [13] J. B. Kinney and G. S. Atwal, “Equitability, mutual information, and
dimension, correlation analysis to investigate long-term de- the maximal information coefficient,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 111,
 pp. 3354–3359, 2013.
pendencies, an attention mechanism to determine short-term [14] X. Zheng, B. Aragam, P. Ravikumar, and E. P. Xing, “Dags with no tears:
interactions among dimensions, and LSTM to extract temporal Continuous optimization for structure learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 9492–9503.
YU et al.: MAG: A NOVEL APPROACH FOR EFFECTIVE ANOMALY DETECTION IN SPACECRAFT TELEMETRY DATA 3899

[15] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly de- Yang Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 tection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in instrument sci-
 2022, pp. 1–16. ence and technology from the Department of
[16] T.-W. Weng et al., “Evaluating the robustness of neural networks: An ex- Automatic Test and Control, Harbin Institute of
 treme value theory approach,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Technology, Harbin, China, in 2002, 2004, and
 2018, pp. 1–18. 2008, respectively.
[17] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söder- She is currently a Professor with the Departström, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric ment of Test and Control Engineering, School
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. of Electronics and Information Engineering, HIT.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. From 2015 to 2016, she was a Visiting Scholar
[18] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” with Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. She
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–15. holds more than 30 granted China patents and has authored more than
[19] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time series 50 publications in major journals and conference proceedings on elecanomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. tronic test technology. Her current research interests include automatic
 Representations, 2021, pp. 1–20. testing, test technology for 3-D ICs, and diagnostic and prognostics for
[20] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal electronics and electrical systems.
 hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 2020, pp. 13016–13026.
[21] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance Jiakai Xu was born in Harbin, Heilongjiang
 deep learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, Province, China, in 2000. He received the B.S.
 pp. 8026–8037. degree in measurement Science and Technol-
[22] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch ogy in 2022 from the School of Instrumentation,
 geometric,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations Workshop Graphs Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China,
 Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9. where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
[23] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation degree in information and communication engiusing hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th neering.
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230. His current research interests mainly include
[24] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. abnormal detection, neural networks, and do-
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. main adaptation.
[25] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
 Learn., vol. 54, pp. 45–66, 2004.
[26] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
 8th Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422. Gang Xiang received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. de-
[27] R. Eisinga, M. T. Grotenhuis, and B. Pelzer, “The reliability of a two-item grees from the Harbin Institution of Technology,
 scale: Pearson, Cronbach, or Spearman-Brown?,” Int. J. Public Health, Harbin, China, in 2009 and 2011, respectively,
 vol. 58, pp. 637–642, 2013. both in automatic test and control.
[28] A. Sherstinsky, “Fundamentals of recurrent neural network (RNN) and Since 2011, he has been a Senior Engineer
 long short-term memory (LSTM) network,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phe- with the Beijing Aerospace Automatic Control
 nomena, vol. 404, 2018, Art. no. 132306. Institute, Beijing, China. His current research in-
[29] D. Chicco, M. J. Warrens, and G. Jurman, “The coefficient of determination terests include deep learning, intelligent control,
 R-squared is more informative than SMAPE, MAE, MAPE, MSE and fault diagnosis, and PHM.
 RMSE in regression analysis evaluation,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 7, 2021,
 Art. no. e623.
 Zhiming Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 the B.S., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in instrument
 science and technology from the Department of
 Automatic Test and Control, Harbin Institute of
 Technology, Harbin, China, in 2002, 2004, and
 2009, respectively.
 Bing Yu (Student Member, IEEE) received the He is currently an Associate Professor with
 B.S. degree in electronics and information tech- the Department of Test and Control Engineernology in 2020 from the Harbin Institute of Tech- ing, School of Electronics and Information Ennology, Harbin, China, where he is currently gineering, HIT. From 2016 to 2017, he was a
 working toward the Ph.D. degree in information Visiting Scholar with Arizona State University,
 and communication engineering. Tempe, AZ, USA. He holds more than ten granted China patents and
 His current research interests include fault di- has authored more than 20 publications in major journals and conferagnosis, anomaly detection, and deep learning ence proceedings on electronic test technology. His current research inalgorithms for electronic systems. terests include automatic test technologies, diagnosis, and fault-tolerant
 control approach for electronic systems