IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 2773

 Marina: Realizing ML-Driven Real-Time Network
 Traffic Monitoring at Terabit Scale
 Michael Seufert , Senior Member, IEEE, Katharina Dietz , Nikolas Wehner , Stefan Geißler ,
 Joshua Schüler, Manuel Wolz, Andreas Hotho, Pedro Casas , Member, IEEE,
 Tobias Hoßfeld , Senior Member, IEEE, and Anja Feldmann

 Abstract—Network operators require real-time traffic monitoring insights to provide high performance and security to
their customers. It has been shown that artificial intelligence and
machine learning (ML) can improve the visibility of telemetry
systems, especially with encrypted traffic. However, current
solutions cannot cope with high traffic rates and volumes in largescale networks. To realize the ML-driven network intelligence
paradigm at terabit scale, we design Marina, a system that
spreads monitoring over a highly efficient data plane, which
can extract traffic statistics at line rate, and a powerful ML
server, which can run monitoring inference using complex ML
models. We apply temporal microaggregation into sub-second
time slots and extract moment-based statistics. These allow to
flexibly obtain accurate ML-based monitoring decisions during
the next time slot. To demonstrate the scalability of our design,
we implement and evaluate a Marina data plane prototype on
a Barefoot Wedge 100BF-65X P4 switch, which can monitor
more than 520,000 concurrent flows at full switching capacity of
6.4 Tbps. We validate the analytics capabilities enabled by our Fig. 1. Design principles for the deployment of ML-based network telemetry
Marina implementation for four ML-driven real-time monitoring systems.
tasks with a broad set of standard ML models, achieving
comparable or better than state-of-the-art results.
 Index Terms—Network monitoring, artificial intelligence, networks, push network operators to deploy broader and
machine learning, encrypted traffic, real-time monitoring, P4, more efficient network monitoring solutions to improve
programmable data plane.
 their visibility, to quickly detect and resolve performance
 or security issues, as well as to optimize resources. While
 I. I NTRODUCTION flow-level network telemetry approaches (e.g., NetFlow [1],
 HE GROWING number of users, devices, and sFlow [2], IPFIX [3]) provide valuable insights on how a
T applications, as well as the increasing complexity of network is operating, they are limited with respect to the
 monitoring capacity (amount of traffic/flows), expressiveness
 Manuscript received 26 May 2023; revised 18 December 2023; accepted (set of monitored statistics), and accuracy (sampling). In
13 March 2024. Date of publication 27 March 2024; date of current version addition, their coarse temporal granularity (typically, export
12 July 2024. This work was partly funded by the German Research
Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG) under grant SE 3163/3- intervals are 1 minute or higher) does not align well with
1, project number: 500105691 (UserNet). The associate editor coordinating real-time monitoring tasks. Thus, packet-level monitoring
the review of this article and approving it for publication was R. Birke. capabilities and small temporal granularity are desired for
(Corresponding author: Michael Seufert.)
 Michael Seufert was with the Chair of Communication Networks, deriving actionable management decisions in real-time.
University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. He is now with the Chair Traditionally, deep packet inspection (DPI) has been used
of Networked Embedded Systems and Communication Systems, University on the full packet stream to identify applications or threats in
of Augsburg, 86159 Augsburg, Germany (e-mail: michael.seufert@uni-a.de).
 Katharina Dietz, Nikolas Wehner, Stefan Geißler, Manuel Wolz, the network, and even to obtain application-layer information
Andreas Hotho, and Tobias Hoßfeld are with the Chair of Communication regarding the health of applications such as voice or video
Networks, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. streaming. However, the increasing network and application
 Joshua Schüler was with the Chair of Communication Networks, University
of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. He is now with Tesat-Spacecom complexity and the wide adoption of end-to-end traffic encryp-
GmbH & Co. KG, 71522 Backnang, Germany. tion are drastically limiting the visibility of operators on the
 Andreas Hotho is with the Chair of Data Science, University of Würzburg, performance of services consumed by their customers. This
97074 Würzburg, Germany.
 Pedro Casas is with the Center for Digital Safety & Security, Competence has given rise to a wider adoption of artificial intelligence
Unit Data Science & Artificial Intelligence, AIT Austrian Institute of and machine learning (ML) technology to improve traffic
Technology, 1210 Vienna, Austria. monitoring at scale. These approaches have been successfully
 Anja Feldmann is with the Department Internet Architecture, Max Planck
Institute for Informatics, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. applied to flow-level data [4], [5], [6] and packet-level (time
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3382393 series) data [7], [8], [9], even for the case of encrypted
 
 c 2024 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
 For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
2774 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

network traffic [10], [11], [12], [13]. Still, running ML- programmable hardware, losing flexibility in terms of feature
driven monitoring applications in real-time and at line rate and ML analytics capabilities.
is challenging. The combination of fine-grained, per-flow and To effectively manage large-scale traffic while offering rich
per-session monitoring requirements with the high volume analytics capabilities, our focus is on efficient in-network
of data observed in modern wide area networks (WANs), extraction of monitoring information and out-of-band processdata center networks (DCNs), or enterprise networks impose ing on a powerful server, as shown in the middle part of
difficult-to-meet targets, and the performance of deployable Figure 1. However, in contrast to existing network telemetry
solutions often falls short in large-scale networks. systems, we design our system Marina (MAchine-learning-
 In general terms, a typical ML-driven network traffic based Real-time Network traffic Analytics) explicitly for
monitoring workflow consists of three consecutive steps, as ML-based real-time network traffic monitoring at terabit scale.
depicted in Figure 1. It starts by analyzing the (encrypted) The rationale of Marina is to devote and max out the limited
network traffic, followed by a feature extraction of this data plane resources to extract statistics, which are useful for
data into a vector representation, which serves as input to ML-based traffic analytics, even in case of encrypted traffic.
the ML data analytics model. Different design principles All subsequent and more complex workflow tasks, i.e., feature
are applied in the literature to integrate this ML workflow generation from the extracted statistics and model inference,
with traditional network telemetry approaches. Offline or out- are executed on a powerful ML server. This is possible,
of-band processing (top part of Figure 1) is typically the as ML models can be trained to leverage the generated
starting point for model development and academic endeavors feature sets to achieve excellent performance for different
(e.g., [14], [15]). For this, the monitored traffic has to be captured real-time traffic monitoring tasks. This includes traffic/device
or mirrored, and forwarded on an external server. Stream classification, application health (e.g., Quality of Experience),
processors are software-based and provide high flexibility in and fault/anomaly detection (e.g., intrusion detection), which
terms of features and analytics. They can reach excellent we demonstrate in this work.
monitoring performance given sufficient compute resources and We distinguish from existing solutions, which often apply
time for computing features, as well as training and applying techniques like sampling (e.g., [1], [2], [27], [28]), sketching
complex models. However, limited traffic processing capacities (e.g., [29], [30], [31]), or filtering/querying (e.g., [19], [20],
and absence of real-time monitoring capabilities typically [21], [32], [33]), and do not explicitly consider the ML-based
make this approach infeasible for deployment in operational network intelligence paradigm. Instead, Marina implements
networks. a temporal microaggregation of packets using sub-second
 Many current network telemetry approaches leverage time slots and extracts moment-based traffic statistics. This
novel capabilities in softwarized and virtualized networks allows a fine-grained tracing of traffic characteristics for each
(SDN/NFV), using sophisticated software packet process- monitored flow at sub-second granularity. These statistics can
ing technologies [16] and programmable data planes subsequently be mapped into a high-dimensional feature space,
(PDP) [17], [18]. They have opened the door for the con- which offers high visibility and discriminative power to the
ception of more flexible, real-time monitoring capabilities downstream analytics and provides high flexibility for applyusing programmable switches [19], [20] or commodity hard- ing arbitrarily complex ML models for different monitoring
ware [21]. These systems can analyze the massive traffic tasks. By controlling placement and compute resources of the
volumes in real-time, i.e., at line rate without impacting packet ML server, we can obtain actionable results for all monitored
forwarding, and thus, network performance. At the same time, flows within the next time slot, i.e., with sub-second delay.
they can be used to implement in-network feature extraction The contributions of this paper are as follows:
to reduce the amount of data forwarded to an out-of-band 1 Marina system design (Section 2): we present a novel
stream processor (middle part of Figure 1). By deploying a concept for data plane extraction of moment-based statistics at
powerful server, the data analysis can be scaled to support line rate in combination with ML-based analytics on a powcomplex models in real-time, and can, in theory, leverage the erful server. Our design relies on temporal microaggregation
full analytics flexibility of software-based stream processors. of packets into sub-second time slots and allows to flexibly
In practice, however, this flexibility in terms of number and realize different ML-driven real-time monitoring tasks with
types of realizable monitoring tasks is limited or dictated by high accuracy at scale, even for encrypted traffic.
the extracted feature set. Here, hardware and processing con- 2 Marina data plane implementation (Section 3) and
straints of the network device and potential service disruption evaluation (Section 4): our implementation of the Marina data
during reprogramming of the device significantly reduce the plane on a Barefoot Wedge 100BF-65X P4 switch maxes out
feature flexibility. Therefore, the in-network feature extraction the data plane resources to monitor up to 6.4 Tbps of traffic
system has a pivotal role. in 524,288 concurrent flows over 65 QSFP 100 Gbps ports. It
 In-network ML (bottom part of Figure 1) integrates the ML generates less than 385 Mbps monitoring traffic, and can keep
model directly into the data plane, either offloading feature monitoring granularity and delay until obtaining monitoring
extraction to an external system [22], [23], or by integrating both results for all flows as low as 500 ms. For the sake of reprothe feature extraction process and the ML model [24], [25], [26], ducibility and as an additional contribution, we make Marina’s
in which case the monitoring system might provide high code publicly available at: https://github.com/lsinfo3/Marina
capacities and real-time capabilities. However, in-network ML 3 Marina ML-based real-time traffic monitoring
requires heavy tailoring and simplification of the specific ML (Section 5): we validate the analysis capabilities enabled by
model, given the limited operations supported by high-speed Marina for four different use cases, namely, encrypted traffic
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2775

classification, video streaming application health/Quality of in a trade-off with the monitoring granularity and real-time
Experience, intrusion detection, and IoT device classification. capabilities of our system. We investigate these trade-offs in
We achieve comparable or better than state-of-the-art results Section 4.
with standard ML models.

 II. Marina S YSTEM D ESIGN A. Design Principles
 Monitoring large networks with high traffic volumes and We design our system Marina for real-time traffic monitorrates, such as ISP, data center, or enterprise networks, faces ing at terabit scale by implementing three design principles:
well known challenges (e.g., [33], [34], [35]). In particular, 1 The data plane must do the heavy lifting work and
our system design addresses the following challenges to enable carry most of the monitoring burden. Its task is to reduce
ML-driven real-time traffic monitoring at terabit scale. the data volume as early as possible, but at the same time
 Scalability: the monitoring system must be able to cope extract valuable information. To be able to observe Tbps
with high traffic volumes in a large number of flows within traffic, our system is designed to be deployed at a core network
its hardware resources. Extracting the monitored information element or gateway where many high speed links interconnect.
from packets must happen at line rate, while ensuring that the Data planes are built to forward high volumes of traffic, but
monitoring does not negatively impact the basic forwarding offer limited computational or storage resources. Nevertheless,
mechanism, and thus, the network performance or stability. specialized devices (e.g., programmable switches, FPGAs, or
 Overhead: the telemetry system must keep the monitoring ASICs) can execute packet operations at line rate, such as
overhead as low as possible. Resource allocation of the arithmetic calculations, without affecting the forwarding and
system should be constant, i.e., constant memory per flow, the network performance. We require such a specialized device
and independent of the traffic load. Traffic generated by the for Marina and install a data plane program to efficiently
monitoring system must not overload the management network forward and monitor at line rate for all ports. We allocate
or any out-of-band consumer of the monitored data, such as constant memory to each flow, aiming to max out the data
compute or storage servers. plane resources to monitor as many flows in parallel as
 Expressiveness: the monitoring system must provide suf- possible. The controller should be located on the same device
ficient compute resources to support a wide range of for efficient communication with the data plane. It instructs
performance- and security-related telemetry tasks with high the data plane which flows to monitor and where to forward
accuracy. It must be able to provide monitoring results on packets by installing appropriate flow rules, and exports the
different time scales like real-time insights, records of termi- monitored data.
nated flows, or periodic aggregate reports. Moreover, it must 2 We move all complex operations to a powerful server.
allow to consider relationships between flows and provide It can efficiently take over the more sophisticated work
monitoring results for sets of related flows, e.g., a browser on the reduced data, namely, generating feature sets and
session using several connections. As traffic encryption hides running model inference for a large number of monitored
important information contained in inner protocol header fields flows and ML-based monitoring models. The server can
and payloads, the monitoring system must make the best use be equipped with appropriate and specialized compute and
of information that is always available (i.e., information which storage resources, which allows to further speedup tasks on
cannot be hidden by encryption). Consequently, monitoring many CPUs or GPUs in parallel. To avoid overloading the
must be independent of traffic encryption by design, providing server, its service rate (processing of transmitted data and
the same accurate insights if the traffic is encrypted or not. ML inference) has to be higher than the arrival rate (export
Nevertheless, aiming to overcome the limited visibility due to of monitored data from the data plane). Controlling server
encryption, it must allow to obtain valuable monitoring results placement, server resources, and complexity of features and
for many different monitoring tasks. models allows to enforce an upper bound on the service
 Flexibility: network operators require network telemetry to time, and thus, makes real-time monitoring possible. A single
be flexible, such that they can add or change monitoring tasks server can serve one or more data planes, or multiple servers
at any time without affecting the network. They need to be able can be combined into a server cluster. This allows to merge
to deploy Marina at different vantage points and combine the data from multiple vantage points and obtain network-wide
monitoring results to obtain network-wide insights. Moreover, insights. Finally, the server (cluster) allows to offer a rich
it must be possible to store monitored information, e.g., to re- API for network operators to inspect and visualize the stored
visit or analyze the historical state of the network, to detect data and monitoring results, as well as to flexibly change or
changes, or to forecast trends. add monitoring tasks. As the monitoring flexibility is on the
 Trade-offs: while scalability and extracted monitoring controller or server side, we avoid having to restart the data
data are limited by the data plane capabilities, there is plane device to change the data plane program, which would
a trade-off between the number of monitored flows and result in network downtime. The monitoring results can then
the generated traffic and load at the server. Additionally, be sent to, e.g., a network management system. Note that
the number and complexity of generated features and exe- the development of a server API and the selection of traffic
cuted ML models impact the processing time at the server, engineering decisions based on the inferred results are beyond
depending on the server’s compute resources. This results the scope of this work.
2776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 3 The key to the success of our system is how to link the total number of packets. Note that this computation naturally
first two design principles. In particular, we need to extract allows to obtain packet count and traffic volume. These
a small amount of valuable information, which allows to raw moments may then be converted into central moments
realize the monitoring tasks with high accuracy. To achieve and standardized moments, allowing to compute the most
this, we perform temporal microaggregation on the data plane. important named properties of the distribution (mean, variance,
We temporally divide the packets per flow into fixed-length standard deviation, coefficient of variation, skewness). It also
time slots. We use statistical descriptors to characterize the allows to accurately approximate the observed distributions
traffic within each time slot in constant memory. We read (cf. truncated Hausdorff moment problem [36]).
out and reset the descriptors after each time slot, and export While higher-order moments are computationally expensive,
them to the server. The stream of descriptors provides a especially when considering the limited resources on
fine-granular approximation of the observed traffic, which the data plane, we advocate for computing at least the
allows the ML models at the server to accurately infer the first three moments. The reason is that skewness (third
monitoring metrics. However, it is important to configure the standardized moment) describes where the distribution
time slot duration appropriately. As discussed above, to avoid mass is concentrated, e.g., towards small/large packets or
overloading the server and allow for real-time monitoring, towards bursty/isolated packets. Skewness plays an important
the time slot duration has to be higher than the end-to- role in many monitoring scenarios, also being one of the
end monitoring delay consisting of data plane register read, reasons why sketching emerged decades ago (cf. AMS
transmission between controller and server, feature generation, sketches [37]). The suitability and generality of considering
and ML inference. Additionally, the time slot duration not sample moments and derived features is also confirmed when
only defines the real-time capability of the entire monitoring looking at related work, where they are widely adopted for
system, but it also impacts the temporal granularity of the a multitude of use cases, such as real-time anomaly/intrusion
stream of descriptors, and consequently, the accuracy of the detection [38], [39], [40], traffic classification [41],
monitoring. Thus, we minimize the slot length to below 1 s. QoE inference [10], [12], or IoT device fingerprinting
 [15], [42], [43].
 We are not limited to use only the meta-information (times-
B. Monitoring of Encrypted Traffic tamp, src/dst IP address and port number, protocol type) and
 As end-to-end encryption of Internet applications is becom- statistics (moments and derived features) of a single time slot
ing the norm, enabled by protocols such as transport layer and flow as input for the ML-based monitoring prediction.
security (TLS), we have no longer access to application-layer Instead, we can perform derivations/augmentations (e.g., infer
information. This renders DPI ineffective without requiring IP ranges, domain name, or service type from the metaadditional privacy-invasive methods (e.g., TLS interception), information in the 5-tuple) and aggregations at the server
and thus, substantially limits the visibility of many network side. Considering the temporal dimension, for example, we
telemetry systems. Traffic encryption allows to only extract can aggregate the statistics of consecutive time slots (e.g., in
information from the IP and transport protocol (TCP/UDP) a sliding window fashion [12]) to cover larger time spans.
headers. Available information includes the flow 5-tuple For this, the corresponding moments have to be multiplied
(src/dst IP addresses and port numbers plus protocol type), with their packet counter to obtain summed powers again,
packet size, TCP flags, or header options. In addition, a which can then be added together. Moreover, we can consider
network element can track the inter-arrival time (IAT) of a time series of statistics from consecutive time slots as
packets, i.e., the time since the last packet of the same flow has input to sequential ML models, such as popular recurrent
been forwarded. Despite this limited information, we can still neural networks (RNNs). Besides the temporal dimensions,
derive temporal and volumetric traffic information on a per- aggregations can also be performed in the spatial dimension.
flow basis, i.e., how much traffic is transmitted over time. For For example, the summation statistics of a matching pair
this, it is sufficient to inspect the 5-tuple and track packet sizes of unidirectional flows can be added or combined to derive
and IATs. This information is highly valuable for performance- features for bidirectional traffic, e.g., ratio of uplink/downlink
and security-related network monitoring, as it allows, for packets or volume, or total traffic volume. It is also possible
example, to identify characteristic device/application traffic to merge or concatenate feature sets of a larger set of
patterns or to detect when device/application traffic patterns related flows, such as multiple TCP connections of a single
deviate from normal. application having the same source IP address (e.g., using
 Since extracting and storing full time series of packet sizes hierarchical embeddings [44]). Similarly, feature sets from
and IATs is infeasible at terabit scale, we employ temporal different vantage points, e.g., considering the same flows or
microaggregation as discussed above and characterize their the same types of service, can be merged or concatenated to
distributions within each time slot using statistical descriptors. infer network-wide insights. In short, as all data is gathered
We decide to use moments, i.e., sample moments about on the server, we can process the collected meta-information
the origin, as they provide valuable insights and can be and statistics as well as derived and augmented information
computed on the data plane in constant memory using only from single/multiple time slots, single/multiple flows, and/or
simple arithmetic operations. To compute the k-th sample single/multiple vantage points on the server as needed in
moment, it is required to raise the observed values to the order to obtain accurate monitoring results for our desired
power of k, sum the resulting powers, and divide by the monitoring tasks.
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2777

 interface, offering minimal delay and a throughput of up to
 31 Gbps (PCIe Gen3 x4). For TCP, new flows can be easily
 detected based on TCP SYN flags. For UDP, we need to track
 which flows have been already seen. We employ a combination
 of a partitioned Bloom filter [49], [50] in the data plane and a
 counting Bloom filter [51] at the controller. They ensure that
 we can efficiently identify previously seen, but irrelevant UDP
 flows with an acceptably small false positive rate of below 1%,
 when packets of 400,000 irrelevant UDP flows are present.
 This is expected, due to the probabilistic nature of the applied
Fig. 2. Implementation of Marina prototype. Bloom filter. A false positive hit results in missed relevant
 flows that are falsely classified as irrelevant by the Bloom
 filter. Finally, all TCP SYN packets and the first packets of
 Depending on the generated features, many ML models can
 unknown UDP flows are forwarded to the controller.
be applied to realize the monitoring task. This ranges from
 For each new flow, the controller checks whether it is
shallow ML (e.g., decision trees) to elaborate methods such
 relevant for monitoring. If so, it assigns a flow id, inserts
as deep learning (DL), or (deep) reinforcement learning (RL),
 the corresponding rules into the data plane Classification
which can provide accurate traffic insights. The limitations
 TCAM, and allocates register slots for the statistic computo feature generation and model inference are given by the
 tation. Additionally, it stores the mapping between 5-tuple
expressiveness of the extracted statistics and the time conand register slots, such that the 5-tuple can be exported
sumption for processing on the ML server, which adds to the
 together with the corresponding statistics as meta-information.
end-to-end monitoring delay, and thus, affects time slot length.
 Likewise, flow ids and allocated register slots are freed when
 a flow is considered ended. The removal of TCP flows is
 III. Marina DATA P LANE P ROTOTYPE straightforward, based on the tracking of packets with the
 Figure 2 gives an overview of the Marina implementation. TCP FIN flag or a flow timeout. To remove a UDP flow
To fulfill the hardware requirements of the Marina data from the counting Bloom filter, we use a probabilistic aging
plane, we implement the prototype on a Barefoot Wedge technique [52]. It decrements the corresponding entries of the
100BF-65X P4-enabled Tofino switch. As current P4 hardware counting Bloom filter with an eviction probability that controls
exhibits several limitations in terms of stateful processing, the retention time. We configured it to obtain an average flow
memory capacity, and the complexity of available operations, retention time of 25 s. Any changes in the counting Bloom
we highlight workarounds and approximations that went into filter are mirrored to the binary Bloom filter on the data
developing the prototype implementation. plane.
 Packet Forwarding: the switch performs statistics extrac- The controller decides on the relevance of flows in the
tion in addition to (a) bridging the traffic, (b) L2 switching, or Flow Instantiation module, e.g., based on flow 5-tuple or
(c) L3 routing. To do this, the Packet Forwarding component IP range. Additionally, we might be interested to selectively
(depicted at the bottom left) uses the Forwarding TCAM monitor the traffic of a certain application, e.g., to monitor
(depicted above the packet forwarding component) or metadata application health. To identify which flows may belong to
information attached to the ingress ports to identify the cor- these applications, we rely on the hostnames of the contacted
responding egress port. The available TCAM memory limits servers, which we obtain from parsing DNS requests [53].
the number of forwarding flow rules to roughly 1.5 million Therefore, all DNS responses are forwarded to the controller’s
flow rules. If the switch is used as a bridge (man-in-the-middle DNS to IP Mapping module, where an IP Database with
device), the number of forwarding rules is of no concern, relevant IP addresses is constructed. For example, to monitor
but the number of available ports is halved. Note that the YouTube, the database is filled with all IP addresses for
installation of forwarding rules is not part of the P4 controller googlevideo.com – the domain used by YouTube’s video chunk
developed in this work. HTTP requests. In case of DNS over TLS (DoT) or DNS over
 Packet Classification and Flow Instantiation: after iden- HTTPS (DoH), where we no longer can leverage the clear
tification of the egress ports, packets pass through the Packet text from DNS requests and responses to differentiate between
Classification module, which uses the Classification TCAM to flows, we use the Server Name Indication (SNI) field of TLS.
identify flows requiring further processing. For this, we reuse For this purpose, we forward TLS Client Hello packets to the
concepts known from reactive OpenFlow [45] applications. controller’s SNI to IP mapping module. As a result, we obtain
We maintain the set of relevant flows to be monitored in the a similar database as for DNS. For example for YouTube
Classification TCAM. If a packet is not matched, it either with DoT or DoH enabled, we therefore look for TLS Client
belongs to an irrelevant flow and can be ignored, or is part Hello packets having a SNI, which contain googlevideo.com.
of a new flow. In the latter case, it needs to be sent to the As some applications like video streaming use several flows
controller. Our design is not impacted by the well known in parallel, we additionally implement a session mode, which
problems of reactive flow processing [46], [47], [48], as the assigns all flows with the same source IP to the same registers.
controller application runs on the switch’s host controller, This allows to monitor the aggregated application traffic,
which communicates with the data plane over the internal PCIe which saves data plane resources and facilitates downstream
2778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE I
 S TATISTICS AND M ETA -I NFORMATION T HAT C AN BE C OMPUTED AT L INE R ATE BY Marina ON A BAREFOOT W EDGE
 100BF-65X. log∗ D ENOTES THE A PPROXIMATION OF THE L OGARITHM BASED ON L OOKUP TABLES

 which allows to derive the variance, would overflow after
 just around 2000 packets of size 1500 B. Additionally, as the
 data plane supports only 32 bit addition and subtraction, we
 also need to approximate multiplications by pre-computing
 TCAM rules as shown in [54]. Although the P4 compiler supports 64 bit registers, we cannot perform arithmetic operations
 on them. Implementing 64 bit arithmetic would be possible
 using multiple registers with intermediate overflow detection.
 However, we decided for a simpler approach, based on the
Fig. 3. Data plane stages: register/table allocation. Support registers are assumption that the magnitude of packet sizes and IATs could
shown in gray. still provide valuable information.
 This was realized by using the logarithm of the packet sizes
 and IATs instead of the actual value. This way, a 32 bit register
analytics. The controller can seamlessly switch between flow is sufficient to record the summed powers of logarithmic
and session mode during runtime. values. As the logarithm is not natively supported by the ALUs
 Statistic Computation: following our design principle, we of the switch, it is computed using a ternary match table in
implement the calculation of sample moments for the distribu- TCAM, constructed as described in [54], mapping input values
tion of packet size and packet inter-arrival time, while maxing using a longest prefix match on the binary representation
out the data plane resources. Figure 3 shows the allocation of to their approximate logarithm. Hence, the implementation
registers and matching tables on the data plane stages. The column in Table I denotes the approximated logarithm as log ∗ .
packet first traverses the ingress pipeline (top), is switched to Note that register overflows can still occur on long-running
the correct egress port, and finally traverses the corresponding or large volume flows for these statistics. We investigate the
egress pipeline (bottom). The statistic computation is limited impact of these approximations on the performance of the
by the number of stages of the switch – in total 24, 12 on monitoring tasks in Section 5.
ingress and 12 on egress – and by the computation capabilities Monitored Flows: The number of concurrent flows that can
of the ALUs at each stage. Resources are further limited be monitored is effectively limited by the memory capacity of
by the stages required for Packet Forwarding and Packet the data plane and the selected statistics. The Barefoot Wedge
Classification. Thus, we are able to realize only the first 100BF-65X has 4 parallel pipelines with 12 stages. Each
three moments of the packet size and IAT distribution on our stage contains 80 blocks of SRAM with 128 kbit each. 48 of
P4 switch. More specifically, as detailed in Table I, we count those blocks, i.e., 6 Mbit, are available as stateful memory. A
the number of packets and compute (for both distributions) register always occupies whole blocks, at most 35 blocks, and
the sums of (a) the raw values, the (b) square of the values, requires one additional block for organizational purposes. If
and (c) the cubes of the values. We also track the timestamp the selected statistics are 32 bit values, the maximum number
of the last arrival as a support statistic for the computation of of slots in a register is 35· 128·1024
 32 = 143, 360. This is then the
the inter-arrival times. theoretical maximum number of flows that can be monitored
 Here again, the hardware limitations of the switch forced us in a single pipeline. However, there is a trade-off between
to resort to certain abstractions for the computation process. the number of monitored flows and the number of selected
Consider computing the statistical moments of the packet size statistics.
distribution, i.e., the summed powers of the packet size. The To simplify register addressing we use a power of two,
packet size can be easily computed by subtracting various resulting in a flow capacity of 217 = 131, 072 flows per
header lengths from the total packet size. However, recording data plane pipeline, thus, 4 · 217 = 524, 288 unidirectional
the sum of packet sizes using byte granularity in a 32 bit flows at most, as the switch has four independent data plane
register is likely to result in overflows, e.g., a flow sending pipelines. In session mode, we summarize all uplink/downlink
at 100 Gbps would overflow the register more than three flows together by recording separate values for the aggregated
times per second. Moreover, the sum of squared packet sizes, uplink/downlink traffic only. This allows us to monitor 218 =
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2779

262, 144 bidirectional sessions in parallel. These numbers are
derived using the memory capacities of the Intel Tofino 1
chipset. Next generation devices are expected to be equipped
with more memory for both SRAM and TCAM, and could
hence monitor more flows or compute additional statistics.
 Export Module: the controller reads all data plane statistics
registers at regular time intervals, appends the corresponding
meta-information (5-tuple in flow mode, 3-tuple in session
 Fig. 4. Blocking probability for different mean session durations for
mode), and transmits them via the 1 Gbps management increasing session arrival rates.
interface of the switch to an external ML server. This results in
328 bit generated monitoring data per flow per time slot. Our
first approach of using the Apache Thrift interface provided
by the Tofino SDE failed, as it needed on average 3 s for predictions. As described above, we deploy the Marina data
a complete read of all registers. Thus, we implemented a plane on a Barefoot Wedge 100BF-65X P4-enabled Tofino
custom controller library with access to internal functions switch with 65 QSFP 100 Gbps ports for a total data rate of
based on the suggestions of Yu et al. [55]. This allows us to 6.4 Tbps. The controller application runs on the switch’s host
circumvent the Thrift layer and achieve a much smaller read controller – an 8-core Intel Xenon CPU with 32 GB of memory
duration of 268 ms, independently of the number of monitored running Ubuntu 18.04. Note that we do not validate the total
flows. Nevertheless, the number of monitored flows affects data rate of the switch through dedicated measurements as it
the transmitted data volume, and thus, the minimal end-to-end is a technical specification of the device. Instead, we focus
monitoring delay. As the end-to-end monitoring delay has to only on the performance of the controller and data plane
be smaller than the time slot length for real-time monitoring, applications as well as the ML pipeline, as their operations
there is a trade-off on how small the time slot can be set, will ultimately limit the performance of the entire Marina
which we analyze in Section IV. system to accurately monitor all relevant flows. Thus, for the
 Feature Generation and ML Inference: the server evaluations in our testbed, the switch was connected to two
receives the extracted statistics and meta-information collected servers – each equipped with 10-core Intel Xenon CPUs, a
from the data plane and generates feature sets as input to ML Mellanox ConnectX-5 series NIC offering two 100Gbps ports,
models. Depending on the monitoring task, different features 200 GB of memory, and running Ubuntu 18.04. The Marina
can be derived as discussed in Section II-B and depicted in ML server is equipped with a 64 core Xenon CPU, 8 GPUs
Table I. The computed features are assembled into feature (RTX 2080Ti 11GB), and 768 GB RAM and is connected via
sets and forwarded to ML models to infer the monitoring the 1 Gbps network management interface of the switch.
predictions. In this work, we adopt the majority of features, Flow Arrival Rate: the P4 switch has enough memory
which have also been computed in [12], because they cover the for Marina to support up to 524,288 unidirectional flows (or
most important characteristics of the packet stream and can be 262,144 bidirectional sessions) in parallel. We explore the
computed in an online fashion [12]. Note that, although there is impact of this limitation by assessing the probability to drop
basically no limit to what and how many features and models incoming sessions when the system is in a steady state, given
can be used, the feature generation and model inference times a certain arrival rate of new, relevant sessions, for an average
impact the end-to-end monitoring delay. To preserve the real- flow duration ranging from 30 s to 600 s, see Figure 4.
time properties of the entire monitoring system, the server We assume that the arrival process of new flows is a
enforces a fixed upper bound on the end-to-end monitoring superposition of multiple independent renewal processes that
delay to be less than the time slot length, which can be easily can be modeled as a Poisson process with a total arrival rate λ,
achieved by controlling server placement, compute resources, according to the Palm-Khintchine theorem [56], [57]. Using λ
feature generation, and model complexity. Using a powerful and the amount of available memory, we compute the blocking
server also ensures that the resulting ML predictions for all probability of the system using the Erlang-B formula [56].
sessions can be forwarded in real-time, e.g., to a network Thereby, we assume that the arrival rate to the four individual
management system. In addition, the server can offer an API pipelines of the switch is equally distributed.
for network operators to inspect and visualize the stored data For a mean session duration of 60/600 seconds, Marina
and monitoring results, as well as to flexibly change or add can handle 4411/441 new sessions per second while ensuring
monitoring tasks at any time. This would instruct the Marina a blocking probability below 1%. To put these results into
controller to change which flows are classified as relevant, or perspective, we use the data obtained in [58] on YouTube video
it would deploy another ML model on the server. streaming characteristics, and assume a session duration of
 600 seconds. This translates into approximately 14.2 million
 users that can be handled by a single P4 data plane device
 IV. P ERFORMANCE OF Marina S YSTEM assuming an average request rate, and 3.5 million users when
 To showcase the real-world performance of Marina, we first considering the peak request rate reported in [58].
highlight the isolated performance of all involved components Controller Operations: to ensure real-time capabilities of
and subsequently demonstrate the total end-to-end monitoring the control plane, we explore each involved operation in
delay from collecting data plane statistics to obtaining ML isolation. To achieve this, we conducted stress tests on both the
2780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 5. Mean operations per second for critical controller and data plane
operations. Fig. 6. Random forest inference time on single GPU.

P4 switch control plane API and the controller. We employed
custom benchmark scripts written in C to execute the same
type of operation repeatedly in a loop. This allows us to
identify the maximum number of operations of a specific
type that can be supported per second, as shown in Figure 5.
Controller operations are evaluated on the left side – meaning
operations that do not involve the data plane (cf. Figure 2).
The DNS to IP Mapping component is able to parse 2.3 ·
106 DNS responses per second. The Bloom filter used for Fig. 7. Total end-to-end monitoring delay from data plane statistics extraction
the Flow Instantiation component is able to handle 2.2 · 106 to ML inference.
operations per second. The packet handler of Marina, which
is responsible for processing incoming packets of new flows,
is able to handle almost 4.2 · 106 packets per second, showing results in Figure 6 show that, even when using a large set of
that none of the benchmarked operations form a bottleneck for 100 features and an expensive model with 100 trees of depth
the system. 10, we can obtain monitoring predictions for one million flows
 Data/Control Plane Interactions: regarding interactions in less than 350 ms on just one GPU. In the following, we
with the data plane – Figure 5 on the right – the controller is assume the performance of this model to perform a worst-case
able to perform around 260,000 Bloom filter write operations analysis of the end-to-end monitoring delay.
per second. Moreover, it can execute up to 63,000 match table End-to-End Monitoring Delay: the total time to read
insertions and 94,000 remove operations per second. Thus, the statistics from the data plane, to transmit them to the
63,000 match table insertions per second are the bottleneck ML server, to generate features, and finally, obtain the ML
of the data plane API. Similarly, we evaluate the maximum predictions is shown in Figure 7. Note again that this endrate at which flow modifications can be performed at runtime to-end monitoring delay defines the real-time capabilities of
to determine the maximum burst arrival rate of new flows. Marina and provides a lower bound on the monitoring time
For this, we used a sequence of TCP SYN and FIN packets, slot duration at the data plane. Thus, it is the most important
which forced the continuous creation and removal of flows on system parameter, which we need to minimize to improve the
the data plane, and sent it over the switch at increasing rates. monitoring granularity and accuracy of Marina. The register
Our benchmarks show that the controller is able to process read operation is performed by the controller through an API
50,000 flow changes per second. This means that the total call to the data plane and is independent of the number of
set of 524,288 flows that can be monitored by the switch in flows present in the system, as every call polls all registers
parallel can be replaced roughly every 20 seconds. that have been defined at compile time. Naturally, the time to
 ML Inference Speed: the inference speed depends on the transmit the polled statistics to the ML server scales with the
number, type, and complexity of used ML models as well number of available flows, shown along the x-axis. We include
as the compute resources of the server. The specific model, measurement values for one million flows to put the scalability
which provides the highest accuracy, depends on the actual of our approach into perspective, even if current hardware only
monitoring task at hand, cf. results in Section 5. As random supports 524,288 flows. Note that the register read duration
forest models proved to provide a good trade-off between high will actually be different when supporting one million flows
accuracy and fast inference speed, we evaluate the time to on a different hardware, which we do not reflect in the figure
infer predictions for a specific number of flows on a single for comparison purposes. In addition to the register read, we
GPU depending on the model complexity. To be able to run investigate the transmission duration depending on the RTT
the trained scikit-learn model on GPU, we use Microsoft’s between the controller and the ML server to assess the need for
Python library Hummingbird,1 which converts the Random optimal server placement. Finally, the ML server augments the
Forest model to a PyTorch model under the hood. For the raw statistics by computing a set of 100 derived features and
analysis, we vary the number of input features (F), number applies the pretrained random forest model. Here, we use all
of trees (T), and tree depth (D) compared to a baseline. The available resources of our ML server, i.e., 64 cores for feature
 generation and 8 GPUs for ML inference. The data shows that
 1 https://github.com/microsoft/hummingbird the transmission between controller and ML server contributes
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2781

a significant fraction of the total end-to-end monitoring delay,
while simultaneously being one parameter for optimization. It
can be seen that even with an RTT of 100 ms, we are able
to perform sub-second predictions, while predictions in less
than 500 ms are possible for a local server. Specifically, when
monitoring 524,288 flows, Marina transmits a total of 21.5 MB
for every time slot and can achieve a minimum time slot length
of 429 ms. Thus, when using a round-number time slot length
of 500 ms, Marina generates 385 Mbps of monitoring traffic
(including protocol overhead) per P4 switch towards the ML
server. Fig. 8. Hit rates for ISCXVPN2016 traffic classification into 14 applications/traffic types.

 V. Marina’ S ML-BASED R EAL -T IME
 M ONITORING P ERFORMANCE but overcoming current feature computation limitations. We
 We study the resulting monitoring performance, which can will compare the performance of both feature sets to the best
be realized based on our Marina prototype, for four different state-of-the-art (SOTA) results from literature, which were
real-time traffic monitoring use cases, namely, traffic classifi- obtained using the same data sets. We are aware that ML
cation, application health (video streaming), security/anomaly results from literature are never perfectly comparable since
detection (intrusion detection), and device classification (IoT). they are influenced by data set splits (training, validation,
As different ML models can benefit differently from the test set), feature selection and preprocessing, search space
extracted statistical features, we compare the performance for model selection and hyperparameter tuning, as well as
of several widely used ML models. The ML Inferencing time budget for model training. Still, SOTA results provide
component uses either a shallow model, e.g., Decision Tree a numerical anchor, which helps to sort in the utility of our
(DT), Random Forest (RF), Extremely Randomized Trees Marina system for real-time traffic monitoring. All numerical
(ERT), Gradient Boosting (GB), XGBoost (XGB), or K- results are detailed in Tables III-VI in Appendix-B.
nearest neighbor (KNN), or a Deep Neural Network (DNN), 1 Encrypted Traffic Classification: a vital part of network
namely, a simple feedforward network with three to eight hid- management is the identification of ongoing network traffic,
den layers with 64 to 1024 neurons each and ReLU activation. as it enables more advanced tasks such as ensuring QoS and
Model hyper-parameters are optimized during training, using anomaly detection [61]. It can be carried out with varying
either sklearn’s GridSearch [59] for the shallow models, or granularity, such as identifying a specific application (e.g.,
Optuna [60] for the DNN. We split the data sets into 80% Spotify versus Skype) or the traffic type (e.g., video versus
training, 10% validation, and 10% test data, balancing the chat) [61], [62], [63]. We utilize the ISCXVPN2016 data
training data set by oversampling. set [64] (only non-VPN traffic), which contains traces for
 We use the features as described in Table I with Marina various encrypted traffic types like email, chatting, file transmonitoring time slot set to 1 s. We additionally perform fer, but also for various applications like Spotify, YouTube,
macroaggregations of time slots to consider these features on Skype, and Facebook. To investigate a more challenging and
three different time scales. We use features for the current fine-grained classification task, we also differentiate between
time slot, a trend macro time slot consisting of the three last audio, chat, file transfer, and video traffic for the applications
time slots, and a session macro time slot consisting of all Facebook, Hangouts, and Skype. We exclude some of the
time slots since the beginning of the flow or session. Note applications like FTPS and SCP, because their single traces
that we deliberately choose to use minimal feature engineering are too short, not allowing us to generate a sufficient number
and standard model selection to showcase a lower bound on of valid training and test slots. We split the time slots into
the ML performance that can be realized with Marina with short consecutive sequences of 30 -120 s, and distribute the
publicly available data sets. When deploying Marina in an sequences such that 80% of the time slots are training data,
operational network, the ML workflow (feature generation, 10% validation data, and 10% test data. As SOTA comparison
model development) can easily be optimized for the actual we choose the results reported by Xie et al. [63]. The SOTA
monitoring tasks at hand considering the available compute approach here is DL-based, and instead of extracting features,
resources at the server. This can be expected to further improve packet traces are treated like a sentence and information is
the performance results presented here. extracted similar to NLP tasks.
 We will investigate the performance for two versions of The performance of the various ML models is depicted in
the feature set. First, we take the actual features as generated Figure 8, where the hit rate, i.e., true positive rate, for each
from the statistics extracted by Marina. Since the prototype traffic type and application is shown for ideal Marina and
has to use approximations due to the lack of certain ALU implemented Marina. For each monitoring interval, Marina
operations and 64-bit arithmetic, we also consider an ideal performs a real-time prediction. The shown hit rate is comversion with the same features, but without approximations. puted based on these predictions after the flow has ended.
Thus, this version indicates what performance Marina could Our system targets the lowest monitoring interval possible.
achieve on future data plane hardware using the same features, Therefore, we do not investigate the relationship between hit
2782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 average F1 score independent of the number of available
 samples. For bit rate regression, we show root mean square
 error (RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). Overall, results
 for the ideal Marina feature set are on a par with SOTA
 results. For all stalling and resolution classes, multiple models
 can reach similar performance to the SOTA models using
 both ideal and implemented Marina. When considering the
 bit rate regression, the performance of ideal and implemented
 Marina is again close for DNN, but slightly worse than
Fig. 9. F1 scores for stalling/resolution classification, error scores (RMSE SOTA. In general, the performance difference between ideal
and MAE) for bit rate inference. and implemented Marina is marginal. These results confirm
 that Marina allows network operators to accurately trace the
 application health and subjective QoE of a large number of
rate and slot size/number of slots in this work, but leave this video streaming users in real-time, while fully preserving the
for future work. encryption, and therefore, protecting end users’ privacy.
 We observe that all ML models perform excellent on the 3 Intrusion Detection: the ever-growing number and comtask and that the differences between ideal and implemented plexity of cyberattacks [71] pushes network operators beyond
are only marginal, i.e., the approximations did not cause static defenses, such as firewalls, to deeper Intrusion Detection
any performance loss. We also observe that our models’ Systems (IDSs) [72], [73], relying on DPI technology to detect
performance is on a par or even better (e.g., RF, XGB) than and potentially block known malicious traffic. Despite the
SOTA [63]. The results show that Marina can be effectively complexities and limitations of ML in the networking security
used by network operators to monitor network traffic types realm [74], there is a growing interest on ML for malicious
and applications. traffic detection, in particular as a countermeasure against
 2 Video Streaming Application Health/Quality of attacks hiding in encrypted traffic [38], [75], [76]. We use the
Experience: video streaming is a prime example of an CIC-IDS2017 data set [77], [78], featuring a small network
application, for which prevailing traffic encryption has sub- with a wide variety of attacks, labeled on a per-flow basis.
stantially limited the visibility of DPI-based network telemetry We are aware of the well-known limitations and issues with
systems [65]. To win back visibility into video streaming this data set [79]. However, we chose to consider it, as it is
application health or Quality of Experience (QoE), ML- widely used and allows for comparison with SOTA results.
based approaches have been conceived that seamlessly operate For the SOTA comparison, we use the results reported by
on traffic features extracted from the encrypted stream Ho et al. [80], which uses a DNN-based approach, utilizing
of bytes [10], [11], [12], [14], [66], [67]. In particular, the original 78 flow-based features provided by the publishers
standardized video streaming Quality of Experience (QoE) of the CIC-IDS2017 dataset in addition to the raw packet
models, such as ITU-T P.1203 [68] or P.1204 [69], consider captures. In our case and after processing the packet captures,
application-layer key performance indicators for visual quality, the data set contains more than 20,000,000 time slots with
such as resolution and bit rate, as well as critical playback labels from 15 classes: benign or attack, including, e.g.,
events such as stalling/re-buffering [70]. Accordingly, we brute force, denial of service, and Web attack. For the ML
tackle three separate ML tasks, i.e., stalling and resolution – training, we require a balanced dataset, where benign and
binary classification, and bit rate – regression. We compare malicious slots appear equally likely so that the model is
to the SOTA results in [12] using an extended data set that able to capture the underlying relationships. As it would be
was provided by the authors. It contains the encrypted traffic unmanageable to oversample all attacks to the size of the
of more than 16,000 YouTube video sessions labelled with majority class “benign” in this highly imbalanced dataset,
ground truth information obtained at the client side. It was it is common practice to undersample the majority class
recorded on laptop devices from 2018 to 2019, at different instead. Thus, we first undersample the benign slots by using
geographical locations and different networks. Note that the only 10% of the original slots. To obtain a balanced dataset,
authors retrained the model on this extended dataset compared we then oversample the attack slots such that their count
to the initial paper. The feature set is similar to ours and the equals the number of benign slots. We assign sequences of
authors trained a multitude of ML models (e.g., DT, RF, KNN, consecutive time slots of 30 -300 s length into 80% training,
and many more). The data set contains more than 5,000,000 10% validation, and 10% test data.
time slots of 1 s, annotated with ground truth information Figure 10 summarizes the results for this multi-class clasobtained at the client side. We split into 80% training, 10% sification problem, reporting the hit rate per attack for all
validation, and 10% test data on a per-session basis, balancing ML models and both feature sets. Except for the cross-site
the training data set by oversampling. scripting (XSS) Web attack, Marina detects all attacks equally
 Figure 9 summarizes the results. For stalling and video well, reaching an outstanding hit rate of above 99%, which
resolution classification, we show the F1 score for the indi- is on a par with SOTA results [80]. In this use case, we also
vidual classes (no stalling/stalling and standard (SD) and high observe that the restrictions imposed by the P4 hardware have
definition (HD)) as well as the macro-averaged F1 scores, hardly any impact, i.e., using the implemented Marina is close
where the F1 score of each class accounts equally to the overall to the performance of the ideal Marina variant. Additionally,
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2783

 Fig. 11. Distributions and mean () of per-class hit rate for CIC-IOT2022
 classification into 37 devices.

Fig. 10. Hit rates for CIC-IDS2017 intrusion detection using 14 attacks.
 able to identify some devices perfectly, but it fails to recognize
 others entirely, which also causes the high difference between
 median and mean. Thus, Marina shows a more consistent
evaluations indicate that most ML models perform equally
 performance regarding all classes. It can also be seen that
good for all attack classes. All in all, we see that Marina
 for this use case implemented Marina often outperforms ideal
realizes high detection performance for different types of
 Marina, which seems kind of contradictory as the features are
attacks. Together with its high capacity, it is thus well suited to
 supposed to become more inaccurate due to the approximasupport network operators’ security management, monitoring
 tions and transformations. The transformations, however, are
and detecting intrusions at large, on high-speed links. As
 the root cause why implemented Marina performs better here.
intrusion detection is both a security and an anomaly detection
 They change the underlying distribution of the features, e.g.,
task, we expect results to transfer also to other anomaly
 the variance inside the features, and simultaneously change the
detection tasks, such as detecting faults or changes in the
 co-variances in a beneficial way for the prediction in this case.
network.
 Note that while the transformations had a positive effect here,
 4 IoT Device Classification: the increasing number of
 it can also negatively affect the performance in other cases.
non-standard computing devices communicating with each
 Additionally, providing hit rates of at least 91% for each of
other on the Internet of Things (IoT) poses security and privacy
 the 37 IoT devices and considering its high capacity, Marina
risks. Device classification can help network administrators
 is an appropriate tool for network operators to classify devices
to improve the network security by gaining an overview of
 on the growing Internet of Things.
the network inventory [81], [82]. ML-based solutions have
seen great success for IoT device classification [15], [83],
[84], [85]. We use the CIC-IOT2022 data set [86], in which VI. D ISCUSSION
60 different IoT devices have been monitored in different Denial of Service: using the controller to classify unknown
scenarios and over many hours. Here, we focus on the idle and flows into flows that are relevant or irrelevant for monitoring,
active experiments with 37 distinct devices only. The goal is to forwarding the first packet of each flow to the controller,
identify the IoT devices based on their traffic characteristics. has the potential to make the system susceptible to denial of
This is relevant in scenarios where IP addresses change service attacks. For example, an attack may use SYN flooding
dynamically, or when multiple devices jointly communicate to overload the controller. While our prototype currently does
over a single public IP address using NAT. The considered IoT not implement any mitigation strategy, SYN flood detection
devices in this data set include various audio devices, camera strategies are well known and can be implemented. Moreover,
devices, home automation devices, etc., which are based on a load dependent sampling mechanism for new flows can
different protocols like IEEE 802.11, Zigbee, and Z-Wave. be added to avoid controller overload. Note that due to the
We split the traffic captures by MAC address to obtain traffic use of the PCIe interface, there is ample network bandwidth
flows per IoT device. We further ignore all empty time slots between the data plane and the controller, and the controller
where devices were inactive. We split the time slots into 80% is a reasonably powerful system by itself.
training, 10% validation, and 10% test data. For ML training, Traffic Completeness: Marina assumes that all traffic of
we randomly sample only 5% of the original time slots and a user session is observed. Thus, performance might degrade
then balance the IoT devices using oversampling. We compare due to multi-path routing in combination with packet by
our approach to the SOTA results reported by Ma et al. [85], packet multiplexing, asymmetric routing, or other form of link
which utilizes a DL-based approach using packet sequences. aggregation splitting the traffic. Assessing the impact of traffic
 Figure 11 depicts the hit rate distributions of the 37 classes (in)completeness is beyond the scope of this paper.
for the various ML models in the form of boxplots. Results DNS Poisoning and Encrypted DNS: the prototype can
show that the multi-class problem of device identification rely on a database of IP addresses to decide which flows to
can be adequately solved with Marina, achieving average hit selectively monitor for a given use case. This database can
rates above 93% for RF and ERT, for both the ideal and be either hard coded or dynamically updated using a mapping
implemented Marina feature sets. Compared to SOTA [85], of IP addresses to specific domain names of the application,
which proposes a flow-based approach based on embeddings which are extracted from unencrypted DNS responses. DNS
of packet sequences, Marina provides a superior performance. poisoning, which may insert irrelevant IP addresses into the
Notably, the variance of the SOTA approach is a lot higher. It is IP database, may negatively impact the monitoring system.
2784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE II
 R ELATED ML-D RIVEN M ONITORING S YSTEMS . (TC – T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION , Q O E – A PPLICATION H EALTH /Q UALITY OF E XPERIENCE , ID –
 I NTRUSION D ETECTION , I OT – I NTERNET OF T HINGS , UCA – U SE C ASE AGNOSTIC , HW/SW – H ARDWARE /S OFTWARE P LATFORM , CA – C ODE
 AVAILABLE , FE – F EATURE E XTRACTION , ✔ – F ULFILLED , ✘ – N OT F ULFILLED , (✔) – PARTIALLY F ULFILLED , (✘) – U NKNOWN )

In addition, the current implementation does not support but practical implementations often do not allow for finer
encrypted DNS, such as DNS over HTTPS (DoH) or DNS granularities <30 s [89]. Additionally, they often rely on
over TLS (DoT). Still, the assumption that a network operator sampling techniques, as monitoring the whole traffic at line
has a way to identify relevant IP addresses seems reasonable, rate is impossible, possibly skewing/falsifying the traffic obsereven if DoH or DoT is used within their network, since most vations.
use cases involve well known services. Sketch-based Solutions: to gain a more fine-grained insight
 Concept Drift: Marina relies on ML models which are into the network, sketching algorithms have been popularized
trained on labelled data sets for monitoring purposes. The [29], [30], [31], [90], [91], [92], [93], [94], [95], [96], utilizing
challenge is on the availability of such data sets. They need customized data structures, e.g., for DDoS mitigation [97].
to be representative and available offline for training, while at Sketches generally depict a trade-off between resource conthe same time there is a need to detect and handle concept sumption and accuracy [30], may only serve a special purpose,
drift during operation, i.e., long-term changes to the data and are not designed with ML-based traffic analytics in
distributions over time. Possible examples for such changes are mind.
updates of the application or the end user device, or changes In-band Network Telemetry: orthogonal to sketching,
to network configuration. This may require the collection of INT [98] and extensions, e.g., Probabilistic INT (PINT) [28]
new labeled data sets and re-training of the ML models, emerged. Instead of approximations, INT makes use of
e.g., [87]. We note that this is not a problem specific to Marina, piggybacking strategies and dumps meta-data onto the
but a generic problem involving ML models in operational packets. As this imposes a significant overhead, newer
networks. As such, we did not evaluate the impact of concept proposals [99] revert back to using lightweight sketchlets with
drift in this work. INT.
 Hardware Requirements: although the Marina data plane Query-driven Languages: often building on INT and/or
prototype was implemented on a P4-based Tofino switch, our sketches, query-driven languages [19], [20], [33], [100] aim
design can be ported to any data plane device (programmable to provide expressive interfaces to run flexible streaming
switch, FPGA, or ASICs), which provides line rate forwarding queries. However, providing these interfaces often comes with
and arithmetic packet operations. Thus, in contrast to other significant overhead, e.g., Sonata [20] renders short (<3 s) time
approaches, we are not affected by Intel’s recent cut of Tofino slots undesirable due to updates of filter rules.
network solutions [88]. Software-based Solutions: to realize the above discussed telemetry systems, either software- or hardware-based
 implementations are possible. With Marina, we opt for a
 VII. R ELATED W ORK hardware-based solution. Though, several software-based aca-
 Traditional Solutions: classical flow-based telemetry demic (e.g., Retina [21]), commercial (e.g., Corelight [101]),
approaches such as NetFlow [1], sFlow [2], or IPFIX [3] only or open-source (e.g., Zeek [102], nProbe [103], Tstat [104])
provide coarse-grained monitoring, as they collect statistics solutions exist. While some of them are capable of monitoring
over the whole flow, unsuitable for real-time applications. multi-Gbps traffic, they do not scale to Tbps traffic, and/or
In detail, NetFlow timeouts are configured in seconds, are tailored to a specific use case. Zhang et al. [105] provide
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2785

 TABLE III
 ML P ERFORMANCE OF Marina FOR E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION . H IT R ATES FOR T RAFFIC C LASSES

 TABLE IV
 ML P ERFORMANCE OF Marina FOR V IDEO S TREAMING A PPLICATION H EALTH /Q UALITY OF E XPERIENCE M ONITORING F ROM E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC .
 F1 S CORES FOR B INARY S TALLING AND R ESOLUTION C LASSIFICATION , RMSE AND MAE FOR B IT R ATE R EGRESSION . *SOTA R ESULTS A RE N OT
 E XACTLY AS G IVEN IN [12] AS AUTHORS P ROVIDED AN E XTENDED DATA S ET AND R ETRAINED T HEIR M ODEL TO O BTAIN C OMPARABLE R ESULTS

an overview of such software-based solutions that operate on while minimizing the monitoring overhead and providing
a Gigabit scale, but as mentioned by Sonchack et al. [106] high flexibility, expressiveness, and accuracy for performancescaling these solutions to huge networks on a Terabit scale and security-related traffic monitoring tasks, even in case
requires a rack full of servers. of encrypted traffic. The design of Marina is based on
 ML-driven Solutions: some monitoring solutions imple- spreading the monitoring over a highly efficient data plane on
ment the ML network intelligence paradigm, aiming to deploy a programmable switch, FPGA, or ASIC, which can extract
ML models or feature extraction on commodity hardware or monitoring data at line rates, and a powerful ML server,
programmable switches. Nevertheless, after a vast review of which can run monitoring inference using diverse ML models.
related literature (see Table II in Appendix-A for the full We link both parts by applying temporal microaggregation
taxonomy), we conclude that existing ML-based solutions are of packets per flow into sub-second time slots. We extract
not ready for deployment, as they have unclear performance, a stream of sample moments of the packet size and intere.g., in terms of overall latency of the whole ecosystem. arrival time distributions. This information is available even
Additionally, related works often only operate on data for a for encrypted traffic and provides a valuable description of the
specific use case, i.e., while some approaches might theoret- traffic in each time slot that can be leveraged by ML-based
ically be applicable for more than the described use case, it monitoring models. The time slot duration both defines the
was not evaluated in the corresponding paper. real-time capabilities and the monitoring accuracy of Marina,
 and thus, must be kept as short as possible.
 We implemented a Marina data plane prototype on a
 VIII. C ONCLUSION Barefoot Wedge 100BF-65X P4 switch and made the code
 We introduced Marina, a system for realizing ML-driven publicly available. As current P4 hardware exhibits several
real-time traffic monitoring in large scale networks. Marina limitations, we had to utilize a P4 bag of tricks to realize
addresses the challenges of scalability up to terabit scale Marina and to approximate the extracted statistics. The Marina
2786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE V
ML P ERFORMANCE OF Marina FOR I NTRUSION D ETECTION . H IT R ATES FOR ATTACK D ETECTION (B OT – B OTNET, FTP-P. – FTP-PATATOR , SSH-P. –
 SSH-PATATOR , DD O S – D ISTRIBUTED D ENIAL OF S ERVICE , GE – D O S G OLDEN E YE , H ULK – D O S H ULK , SH – D O S S LOW HTTP, SL - D O S
 S LOWLORIS , H EARTB . – H EARTBLEED , I NFIL . – I NFILTRATION , P ORT – P ORT S CAN , XSS - C ROSS -S ITE S CRIPTING ,
 BF - B RUTE F ORCE , SQL – SQL I NJECTION )

 TABLE VI
 ML P ERFORMANCE OF Marina FOR I OT D EVICE C LASSIFICATION . M EAN AND P ERCENTILES OF THE H IT
 R ATE D ISTRIBUTION FOR THE D ETECTION OF 37 I OT D EVICES (C LASSES )

prototype maxes out the data plane resources to monitor up speed. However, in an operational deployment, the best ML
to 6.4 Tbps of traffic in 524,288 concurrent flows. It generates models can be selected and optimized depending on the
less than 385 Mbps of monitoring traffic, and, in combination actual monitoring tasks and the available compute resources,
with a powerful ML server, it can achieve a monitoring which can be expected to further improve the monitoring
granularity and end-to-end delay until obtaining monitoring performance. Considering its monitoring capacity at terabit
results for all flows as low as 500 ms. scale, this confirms that Marina allows to realize different ML-
 We validated the analysis capabilities provided by Marina driven real-time monitoring tasks in large-scale networks with
for four different and challenging ML-driven real-time mon- high accuracy.
itoring applications – encrypted traffic classification, video
streaming application health/Quality of Experience monitoring
from encrypted traffic, intrusion detection, IoT device classi- A PPENDIX
fication – with a broad set of ML models. For all investigated A. Appendix – Taxonomy of ML-driven Solutions
tasks, despite the approximations required due to P4 hardware See Table II.
limitations, the ML inference results enabled by the Marina
prototype are on a par or better than state-of-the-art results.
We found that random forest models provide a good trade-off B. Appendix – ML Benchmark Results
between high monitoring accuracy and fast model inference See Tables III–VI.
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2787

 R EFERENCES [26] Z. Xiong and N. Zilberman, “Do switches dream of machine learning?:
 Toward in-network classification,” in Proc. 18th ACM Workshop Hot
 [1] B. Claise, “Cisco systems NetFlow services export version 9,” Topics Netw., 2019, pp. 25–33.
 Internet Res. Task Force, RFC 3954, Oct. 2004. [Online]. Available: [27] V. Sekar, M. K. Reiter, and H. Zhang, “Revisiting the case for a
 http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3954.txt minimalist approach for network flow monitoring,” in Proc. 10th ACM
 [2] M. Wang, B. Li, and Z. Li, “sFlow: Towards resource-efficient and SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2010, pp. 328–341.
 agile service federation in service overlay networks,” in Proc. 24th Int.
 [28] R. Ben Basat, S. Ramanathan, Y. Li, G. Antichi, M. Yu, and
 Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., Proc, 2004, pp. 628–635.
 M. Mitzenmacher, “PINT: Probabilistic in-band network teleme-
 [3] B. Claise, B. Trammell, and P. Aitken, “Specification of the IP
 try,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data Commun.
 flow information export (IPFIX) protocol for the exchange of flow
 Appl., Technol., Archit., Protoc. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 662–680.
 information,” Internet Res. Task Force, RFC 7011, Sep. 2013. [Online].
 Available: http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7011.txt [29] M. Yu, L. Jose, and R. Miao, “Software defined traffic measurement
 with OpenSketch,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Design
 [4] M. F. Umer, M. Sher, and Y. Bi, “Flow-based intrusion detection:
 Implement., 2013, pp. 29–42.
 Techniques and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 70, pp. 238–254,
 Sep. 2017. [30] Z. Liu, A. Manousis, G. Vorsanger, V. Sekar, and V. Braverman, “One
 [5] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted sketch to rule them all: Rethinking network flow monitoring with
 network traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. UnivMon,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2016, pp. 101–114.
 Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023. [31] T. Yang et al., “Elastic sketch: Adaptive and fast network-wide
 [6] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A flow- measurements,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2018, pp. 561–575.
 based relation network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. [32] Y. Zhu et al., “Packet-level telemetry in large datacenter
 Web Conf., 2020, pp. 13–22. networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2015, pp. 479–491.
 [7] T. Kim and W. Pak, “Real-time network intrusion detection using [33] C. Misa, W. O’Connor, R. Durairajan, R. Rejaie, and W. Willinger,
 deferred decision and hybrid classifier,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., “Dynamic scheduling of approximate telemetry queries,” in Proc.
 vol. 132, pp. 51–66, Jul. 2022. 19th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Design Implement. (NSDI), 2022,
 [8] N. Borgioli, L. T. X. Phan, F. Aromolo, A. Biondi, and G. Buttazzo, pp. 701–717.
 “Real-time packet-based intrusion detection on edge devices,” in Proc. [34] M. Yu, “Network telemetry: Towards a top-down approach,” in Proc.
 Cyber-Phys. Syst. Internet Things Week, 2023, pp. 234–240. ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 11–17,
 [9] J. Kampeas, A. Cohen, and O. Gurewitz, “Traffic classification based 2019.
 on zero-length packets,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 15, [35] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. Ramos,
 no. 3, pp. 1049–1062, Sep. 2018. and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
 [10] M. H. Mazhar and M. Z. Shafiq, “Real-time video quality of experience ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 monitoring for HTTPS and QUIC,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Secur., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 Commun., 2018, pp. 1331–1339. [36] J. A. Shohat and J. D. Tamarkin, The Problem of Moments, vol. 1.
 [11] C. Gutterman et al., “Requet: Real-time QoE detection for encrypted Providence, RI, USA: Amer. Math. Soc., 1950.
 YouTube traffic,” in Proc. ACM Multimedia Syst. Conf., 2019, [37] N. Alon, Y. Matias, and M. Szegedy, “The space complexity of
 pp. 48–59. approximating the frequency moments,” in Proc. 28th Annu. ACM
 [12] S. Wassermann, M. Seufert, P. Casas, L. Gang, and K. Li, “ViCrypt to Symp. Theory Comput., 1996, pp. 20–29.
 the rescue: Real-time, machine-learning-driven video-QoE monitoring [38] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune:
 for encrypted streaming traffic,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detecvol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2007–2023, Dec. 2020. tion,” in Proc. 25th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS),
 [13] P. Casas, S. Wassermann, M. Seufert, N. Wehner, O. Dinica, and 2018, pp. 1–15.
 T. Hoßfeld, “X-ray goggles for the ISP: Improving in-network web and [39] F. Musumeci, V. Ionata, F. Paolucci, F. Cugini, and M. Tornatore,
 App QoE monitoring with deep learning,” in Proc. 6th Netw. Traffic “Machine-learning-assisted DDoS attack detection with P4 lan-
 Meas. Anal. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–10. guage,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2020, pp. 1–6.
 [14] G. Dimopoulos, I. Leontiadis, P. Barlet-Ros, and K. Papagiannaki, [40] F. Musumeci, A. C. Fidanci, F. Paolucci, F. Cugini, and M. Tornatore,
 “Measuring video QoE from encrypted traffic,” in Proc. ACM Internet “Machine-learning-enabled DDoS attacks detection in P4 pro-
 Meas. Conf. (IMC), Santa Monica, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 513–526. grammable networks,” J. Netw. Syst. Manage., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1–27,
 [15] A. Acar et al., “Peek-a-boo: I see your smart home activities, even 2022.
 encrypted!” in Proc. 13th ACM Conf. Secur. Priv. Wireless Mobile [41] M. H. Pathmaperuma, Y. Rahulamathavan, S. Dogan, and
 Netw., 2020, pp. 207–218. A. M. Kondoz, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification and
 [16] D. Cerović, V. Del Piccolo, A. Amamou, K. Haddadou, and G. Pujolle, unknown data detection,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, p. 7643, 2022.
 “Fast packet processing: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 [42] A. J. Pinheiro, J. d. M. Bezerra, C. A. Burgardt, and D. R. Campelo,
 vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3645–3676, 4th Quart., 2018.
 “Identifying IoT devices and events based on packet length from
 [17] P. Bosshart et al., “P4: Programming protocol-independent packet
 encrypted traffic,” Comput. Commun., vol. 144, pp. 8–17, Aug. 2019.
 processors,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 44, no. 3,
 pp. 87–95, 2014. [43] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, and V. Sivaraman, “Managing
 [18] O. Michel, R. Bifulco, G. Rétvári, and S. Schmid, “The pro- IoT cyber-security using programmable telemetry and machine learngrammable data plane: Abstractions, architectures, algorithms, and ing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 60–74,
 applications,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1–36, 2021. Mar. 2020.
 [19] S. Narayana et al., “Language-directed hardware design for network [44] N. Wehner, M. Ring, J. Schüler, A. Hotho, T. Hoßfeld, and M. Seufert,
 performance monitoring,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2017, “On learning hierarchical Embeddings from encrypted network trafpp. 85–98. fic,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper. Manage. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–7.
 [20] A. Gupta, R. Harrison, M. Canini, N. Feamster, J. Rexford, and [45] N. McKeown et al., “OpenFlow: Enabling innovation in campus
 W. Willinger, “Sonata: Query-driven streaming network teleme- networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 38, no. 2,
 try,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2018, pp. 357–371. pp. 69–74, 2008.
 [21] G. Wan, F. Gong, T. Barbette, and Z. Durumeric, “Retina: Analyzing [46] W. Braun and M. Menth, “Software-defined networking using
 100GbE traffic on commodity hardware,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM OpenFlow: Protocols, applications and architectural design
 Conf., 2022, pp. 530–544. choices,” Future Internet, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 302–336, 2014.
 [22] C. Zheng et al., “Automating in-network machine learning,” 2022, [47] M. P. Fernandez, “Comparing OpenFlow controller paradigms scalaarXiv:2205.08824. bility: Reactive and proactive,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Adv. Inf.
 [23] G. Siracusano et al., “Running neural networks on the NIC,” 2020, Netw. Appl. (AINA) 2013, pp. 1009–1016.
 arXiv:2009.02353. [48] B. Isyaku, M. S. M. Zahid, M. Bte Kamat, K. Abu Bakar, and
 [24] C. Busse-Grawitz, R. Meier, A. Dietmüller, T. Bühler, and F. A. Ghaleb, “Software defined networking flow table management
 L. Vanbever, “pForest: In-network inference with random forests,” of OpenFlow switches performance and security challenges: A sur-
 2019, arXiv:1909.05680. vey,” Future Internet, vol. 12, no. 9, p. 147, 2020.
 [25] C. Zheng et al., “IIsy: Practical in-network classification,” 2022, [49] B. H. Bloom, “Space/time trade-offs in hash coding with allowable
 arXiv:2205.08243. errors,” Commun. ACM, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 422–426, 1970.
2788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 [50] A. Kirsch and M. Mitzenmacher, “Less hashing, same performance: approaches,” Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 493–501,
 Building a better bloom filter,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Algorithms, 2006, 2019.
 pp. 456–467. [73] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
 [51] L. Fan, P. Cao, J. Almeida, and A. Z. Broder, “Summary cache: A of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
 scalable wide-area web cache sharing protocol,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2019.
 Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 281–293, Jun. 2000. [74] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using
 [52] J.-J. Lim and K. G. Shin, “Gradient-ascending routing via footprints machine learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
 in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Real-Time Syst. Security Privacy, 2010, pp. 305–316.
 Symp., 2005, p. 10. [75] P. Sangkatsanee, N. Wattanapongsakorn, and C. Charnsripinyo,
 [53] I. N. Bermudez, M. Mellia, M. M. Munafo, R. Keralapura, and “Practical real-time intrusion detection using machine learning
 A. Nucci, “DNS to the rescue: Discerning content and services in a approaches,” Comput. Commun., vol. 34, no. 18, pp. 2227–2235, 2011.
 tangled web,” in Proc. Internet Meas. Conf., 2012, pp. 413–426. [76] N. Gray, K. Dietz, M. Seufert, and T. Hossfeld, “High performance
 [54] N. K. Sharma, A. Kaufmann, T. Anderson, A. Krishnamurthy, network metadata extraction using P4 for ML-based intrusion detection
 J. Nelson, and S. Peter, “Evaluating the power of flexible packet systems,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. High Perform. Switch. Rout.
 processing for network resource allocation,” in Proc. 14th USENIX (HPSR), 2021, pp. 1–7.
 Symp. Netw. Syst. Design Implement., 2017, pp. 67–82.
 [77] (Can. Inst. Cybersecur., Fredericton, NB, Canada). Intrusion Detection
 [55] L. Yu, J. Sonchack, and V. Liu, “Mantis: Reactive programmable
 Evaluation Dataset (CIC-IDS2017). (2017). Accessed: Feb. 8, 2023.
 switches,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2020, pp. 296–309.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
 [56] L. Kleinrock, Queueing Systems, Volume I: Theory. Hoboken, NJ,
 USA: Wiley, 1975. [78] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 [57] D. P. Heyman and M. J. Sobel, Stochastic Models in Operations a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 Research: Stochastic Processes and Operating Characteristics. Garden in Proc. ICISSp, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 City, NY, USA: Dover Publ., 2003. [79] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion
 [58] M. Zink, K. Suh, Y. Gu, and J. Kurose, “Characteristics of YouTube detection dataset: The CICIDS2017 case study,” in Proc. IEEE Security
 network traffic at a campus network–measurements, models, and Privacy Workshops (SPW), 2021, pp. 7–12.
 implications,” Comput. Netw., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 501–514, 2009. [80] S. Ho, S. Al Jufout, K. Dajani, and M. Mozumdar, “A novel intrusion
 [59] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” J. Mach. detection model for detecting known and innovative cyberattacks using
 Learn. Res., vol. 12, no. 85, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. [Online]. Available: convolutional neural network,” IEEE Open J. Comput. Soc., vol. 2,
 http://jmlr.org/papers/v12/pedregosa11a.html pp. 14–25, Jan. 2021.
 [60] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: [81] C. Kuzniar, M. Neves, V. Gurevich, and I. Haque, “IoT device
 A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proc. fingerprinting on commodity switches,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Oper.
 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min., 2019, Manag. Symp. (NOMS), 2022, pp. 1–9.
 pp. 2623–2631. [82] H. Jmila, G. Blanc, M. R. Shahid, and M. Lazrag, “A survey of smart
 [61] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep home IoT device classification using machine learning-based traffic
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 97117–97141, 2022.
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. [83] M. Miettinen, S. Marchal, I. Hafeez, N. Asokan, A.-R. Sadeghi, and
 [62] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classifi- S. Tarkoma, “IoT sentinel: Automated device-type identification for
 cation is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. security enforcement in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Distrib.
 Commun. Workshops, 2019, pp. 680–687. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), 2017, pp. 2177–2184.
 [63] G. Xie et al., “Sam: Self-attention based deep learning method for [84] L. Yu, B. Luo, J. Ma, Z. Zhou, and Q. Liu, “You are what you
 online traffic classification,” in Proc. Workshop Netw. Meets AI ML, broadcast: Identification of mobile and IoT devices from (public) Wi-
 2020, pp. 14–20. Fi,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2020,
 [64] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, pp. 55–72.
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” [85] J. Ma, Y. Sang, Y. Zhang, X. Xu, B. Feng, and Y. Zeng, “An adaptive
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016, ensembled neural network-based approach to IoT device identification,”
 pp. 407–414. in Proc. 18th EAI Int. Conf., Collaborat. Comput., Netw., Appl.
 [65] P. Casas, M. Seufert, and R. Schatz, “YOUQMON: A system for on- Workshar., (CollaborateCom), Hangzhou, China, 2023, pp. 214–230.
 line monitoring of YouTube QoE in operational 3G networks,” ACM [86] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
 SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 44–46, 2013. and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic
 [66] V. Aggarwal, E. Halepovic, J. Pang, S. Venkataraman, and H. Yan, multidimensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf.
 “Prometheus: Toward quality-of-experience estimation for mobile apps Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2022, pp. 1–11.
 from passive network measurements,” in Proc. 15th Workshop Mobile [87] J. Gama, I. Žliobaitė, A. Bifet, M. Pechenizkiy, and A. Bouchachia,
 Comput. Syst. Appl. (HotMobile), Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 2014, “A survey on concept drift adaptation,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 46,
 pp. 1–6. no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2014.
 [67] I. Orsolic, D. Pevec, M. Suznjevic, and L. Skorin-Kapov, “A
 [88] D. Harris, “Time to save: Intel stopped development of network
 machine learning approach to classifying YouTube QoE based on
 switches and ended the support program for chip designers on RISC-V.”
 encrypted network traffic,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 76, no. 21,
 Tech News Space. 2023. Accessed: Feb. 7, 2023. [Online]. Available:
 pp. 22267–22301, 2017.
 https://technewsspace.com/time-to-save-intel-stopped-development-
 [68] Parametric Bitstream-Based Quality Assessment of Progressive
 of-network-switches-and-ended-the-support-program-for-chip-
 Download and Adaptive Audiovisual Streaming Services Over Reliable
 designers-on-risc-v/
 Transport, ITU-Rec. P. 1203, Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva,
 Switzerland, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC- [89] J. Suh, T. T. Kwon, C. Dixon, W. Felter, and J. Carter, “OpenSample:
 P.1203/en A low-latency, sampling-based measurement platform for commodity
 [69] Video Quality Assessment of Streaming Services Over Reliable SDN,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst., 2014,
 Transport for Resolutions Up to 4K, ITU-Rec. P. 1204, Int. pp. 228–237.
 Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, 2020. [Online]. Available: [90] Q. Huang et al., “SketchVisor: Robust network measurement for
 https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.1204-202001-P/en software packet processing,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2017,
 [70] M. Seufert, S. Egger, M. Slanina, T. Zinner, T. Hoßfeld, and P. Tran- pp. 113–126.
 Gia, “A survey on quality of experience of HTTP adaptive streaming,” [91] Q. Huang, P. P. Lee, and Y. Bao, “SketchLearn: Relieving user burdens
 IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 469–492, 1st Quart., in approximate measurement with automated statistical inference,” in
 2015. Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2018, pp. 576–590.
 [71] (Check Point Res., San Carlos, CA, USA). Cyber Security [92] Z. Liu et al., “NitroSketch: Robust and general sketch-based moni-
 Report 2022, (2022). Accessed: Feb. 8, 2023. [Online]. Available: toring in software switches,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2019,
 https://www.checkpoint.com/downloads/resources/cyber-security- pp. 334–350.
 report-2022.pdf [93] Y. Zhang et al., “CocoSketch: High-performance sketch-based mea-
 [72] N. Sultana, N. Chilamkurti, W. Peng, and R. Alhadad, “Survey on surement over arbitrary partial key query,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM
 SDN based network intrusion detection system using machine learning Conf., 2021, pp. 207–222.
SEUFERT et al.: MARINA: REALIZING ML-DRIVEN REAL-TIME NETWORK TRAFFIC MONITORING AT TERABIT SCALE 2789

 [94] H. Zheng et al., “FlyMon: Enabling on-the-fly task reconfiguration [118] Q. Qin, K. Poularakis, and L. Tassiulas, “A learning approach with
 for network measurement,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2022, programmable data plane towards IoT security,” in Proc. IEEE 40th
 pp. 486–502. Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. (ICDCS), 2020, pp. 410–420.
 [95] Q. Huang et al., “Toward nearly-zero-error sketching via compressive [119] J.-H. Lee and K. Singh, “SwitchTree: In-network computing and traffic
 sensing,” in Proc. 18th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Implement. analyses with random forests,” Neural Comput. Appl., 2020, to be
 (NSDI), 2021, pp. 1027–1044. published.
 [96] H. Namkung, Z. Liu, D. Kim, V. Sekar, and P. Steenkiste, “SketchLib: [120] M. Zang, C. Zheng, R. Stoyanov, L. Dittmann, and N. Zilberman,
 Enabling efficient sketch-based monitoring on programmable “P4Pir: In-network analysis for smart IoT gateways,” in Proc.
 switches,” in Proc. 19th USENIX Symp. Netw. Syst. Des. Implement. SIGCOMM Poster Demo Sessions, 2022, pp. 46–48.
 (NSDI), Renton, WA, USA, 2022, pp. 743–759. [Online]. Available: [121] A. T.-J. Akem, B. Bütün, M. Gucciardo, and M. Fiore, “Henna:
 https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi22/presentation/namkung Hierarchical machine learning inference in programmable switches,” in
 [97] M. Zhang et al., “Poseidon: Mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with Proc. 1st Int. Workshop Native Netw. Intell., 2022, pp. 1–7.
 programmable switches,” in Proc. 27th Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. [122] D. Sanvito, G. Siracusano, and R. Bifulco, “Can the network be the
 (NDSS), 2020, pp. 1–18. AI accelerator?” in Proc. Morning Workshop In-Netw. Comput., 2018,
 [98] C. Kim, A. Sivaraman, N. Katta, A. Bas, A. Dixit, and L. J. Wobker, pp. 20–25.
 “In-band network telemetry via programmable dataplanes,” in Proc. [123] C. Zheng and N. Zilberman, “Planter: Seeding trees within switches,”
 ACM SIGCOMM Conf., 2015, pp. 1–2. in Proc. SIGCOMM Poster Demo Sessions, 2021, pp. 12–14.
 [99] Y. Zhao et al., “LightGuardian: A full-visibility, lightweight, in-band [124] X.-H. Nguyen, X.-D. Nguyen, H.-H. Huynh, and K.-H. Le, “Realguard:
 telemetry system using sketchlets,” in Proc. NSDI, 2021, pp. 991–1010. A lightweight network intrusion detection system for IoT gateways,”
 Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 432, 2022.
[100] Q. Huang, H. Sun, P. P. Lee, W. Bai, F. Zhu, and Y. Bao, “OmniMon:
 [125] A. Ahmim, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, and H. Janicke, “A
 Re-architecting network telemetry with resource efficiency and full
 novel hierarchical intrusion detection system based on decision tree and
 accuracy,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. ACM Spec. Interest Group Data
 rules-based models,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Sensor
 Commun. Appl., Technol., Archit., Protocols Comput. Commun., 2020,
 Syst. (DCOSS), 2019, pp. 228–233.
 pp. 404–421.
 [126] L. Reuter, O. Jung, and J. Magin, “Neural network based anomaly
[101] “Corelight.” Corelight. 2022. Accessed: Feb. 8, 2023. [Online]. detection for SCADA systems,” in Proc. 23rd Conf. Innovat. Clouds,
 Available: https://corelight.com/ Internet Netw. Workshops (ICIN), 2020, pp. 194–201.
[102] “Zeek.” Zeek. 2022. Accessed: Feb. 8, 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://zeek.org/
[103] “nProbe.” ntop. 1998. Accessed: Feb. 8, 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.ntop.org/products/netflow/nprobe/
[104] T. N. G. P. di Torino, “Tstat TCP STatistic and analysis tool.” 2008.
 Accessed: Dec. 6, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://tstat.polito.it/ Michael Seufert (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[105] T. Zhang, L. Linguaglossa, M. Gallo, P. Giaccone, and D. Rossi, the Diploma and Ph.D. degrees in computer science,
 “FloWatcher-DPDK: Lightweight line-rate flow-level monitoring in the bachelor’s degree in economathematics, and
 software,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 16, no. 3, the Habilitation degree in computer science from
 pp. 1143–1156, Sep. 2019. the University of Würzburg, Germany, in 2011,
[106] J. Sonchack, A. J. Aviv, E. Keller, and J. M. Smith, “TurboFlow: 2017, 2018, and 2023, respectively. He also received
 Information rich flow record generation on commodity switches,” in the First State Examination degree in mathematics,
 Proc. 13th EuroSys Conf., 2018, pp. 1–16. computer science, and education for teaching in
[107] J. Bai, M. Zhang, G. Li, C. Liu, M. Xu, and H. Hu, “FastFE: secondary schools in 2011. He is a Full Professor
 Accelerating ML-based traffic analysis with programmable switches,” with the University of Augsburg, Germany, heading
 in Proc. Workshop Secure Program. Netw. Infrastruct., 2020, pp. 1–7. the Chair of Networked Embedded Systems and
 Communication Systems. His research focuses on user-centric communication
[108] C. Hardegen, “Scope-based flow monitoring to improve traffic analysis
 networks, including QoE of Internet applications, AI/ML for QoE-aware
 in programmable networks,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Netw. Service
 network management, as well as group-based communications.
 Manage. (CNSM), 2022, pp. 254–260.
[109] P. Schmitt, F. Bronzino, R. Teixeira, T. Chattopadhyay, and
 N. Feamster, “Enhancing transparency: Internet video quality inference
 from network traffic,” in Proc. TPRC, 2018, pp. 1–12.
[110] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello,
 “Programmable switches for in-networking classification,” in Proc. Katharina Dietz received the master’s degree in
 INFOCOM IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–10. computer science from the University of Würzbrug,
[111] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello, Germany, in 2020, where she is pursuing the
 “MAP4: A pragmatic framework for in-network machine learning Ph.D. degree. She is a Research Assistant with the
 traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, Chair of Communication Networks, University of
 pp. 4176–4188, Dec. 2022. Würzburg. Her research mainly focuses on man-
[112] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of aging and securing communication networks with
 intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. machine learning-based approaches, ranging from
 (USENIX Secur.), Anaheim, CA, USA, 2023, pp. 1–18. performance prediction to anomaly detection.
[113] R. Kamath and K. M. Sivalingam, “Machine learning based flow
 classification in DCNs using P4 switches,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.
 Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), 2021, pp. 1–10.
[114] T.-N. Dao and H. J. Lee, “Stacked autoencoder-based probabilistic
 feature extraction for on-device network intrusion detection,” IEEE
 Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 16, pp. 14438–14451, Aug. 2022. Nikolas Wehner received the master’s degree
[115] T.-N. Dao, V.-P. Hoang, C. H. Ta, and V. S. Vu, “Development of in computer science from the University of
 lightweight and accurate intrusion detection on programmable data Würzburg, Germany. In 2018, he started to work
 plane,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun. (ATC), 2021, as a Research Engineer with the Center for
 pp. 99–103. Technology Experience, AIT Austrian Institute of
[116] A. T.-J. Akem, M. Gucciardo, and M. Fiore, “Flowrest: Practical flow- Technology, Vienna, Austria. Since October 2019,
 level inference in programmable switches with random forests,” in he has been a Doctoral Researcher with the
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 1–10. Chair of Communication Networks, University of
[117] G. Xie, Q. Li, Y. Dong, G. Duan, Y. Jiang, and J. Duan, “Mousika: Würzburg. His interests are user-centric communi-
 Enable general in-network intelligence in programmable switches by cation networks, focusing on the QoE of Internet
 knowledge distillation,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. applications, and machine learning for networks in
 Commun., 2022, pp. 1938–1947. general.
2790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 Stefan Geißler received the Ph.D. degree for his Pedro Casas (Member, IEEE) received the electrithesis “Performance Evaluation of Next-Generation cal engineering degree from the Universidad de la
 Data Plane Architectures and their Components” República, Uruguay, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree
 from the University of Würzburg, Würzburg, in computer science from Télécom Bretagne in
 Germany, in 2022. He is a Research Associate with 2010. He is currently a Senior Scientist in AI/ML
 the Chair of Communication Networks, University for Networking with the AIT Austrian Institute
 of Würzburg, where he leads the Cloud Applications of Technology, Vienna. He was a Postdoctoral
 and Networks Research Group. His current research Researcher with LAAS-CNRS, Toulouse, from
 is focused on the analytical and simulative 2010 to 2011, and a Senior Researcher with
 performance evaluation and optimization of next- Telecommunications Research Center Vienna from
 generation communication technologies, including 2011 to 2015. His work focuses on machine
TSN, 5G, and Internet of Things. learning-based approaches for networking, big data analytics and platforms,
 Internet network measurements, network security, and anomaly detection, as
 well as Internet QoE monitoring. He has published more than 200 networking
 research papers in major international conferences and journals, and received
 18 awards for his work, including eight Best Paper Awards. He is the General
 Joshua Schüler received the master’s degree in Chair for different actions in network measurement and analysis, including
 computer science from the University of Würzburg, the IEEE ComSoc ITC Special Interest Group on Network Measurements and
 Würzburg, Germany, where he also worked as Analytics.
 a Student Research Assistant with the Chair of
 Communication Networks. He is currently a Digital
 Systems Engineer with Tesat-Spacecom GmbH &
 Co. KG, Backnang, Germany, where he works
 on network equipment for satellites. His research Tobias Hoßfeld (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 interests include artificial intelligence applications the Ph.D. degree in 2009, and the Habilitation
 in computer networks and fault tolerant embedded degree with the professorial thesis ”Modeling and
 systems. Analysis of Internet Applications and Services” from
 the University of Würzburg in 2013, where he
 was also heading the “Future Internet Applications
 and Overlays” research group. He has been
 a Professor with the Chair of Communication
 Networks, University of Würzburg, Germany, since
 Manuel Wolz received the bachelor’s degree in 2018. From 2014 to 2018, he was Head of the
 computer science from the University of Würzburg, Chair “Modeling of Adaptive Systems” with the
 Würzburg, Germany, in 2020. He is currently pur- University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany. He has published more than 100
 suing the master’s degree. Since 2018, he has been research papers in major conferences and journals, receiving several best
 working as a Student Research Assistant with the conference paper awards, three awards for his Ph.D. thesis, and the Fred W.
 Chair of Communication Networks, University of Ellersick Prize 2013 (IEEE Communications Society) for one of his articles
 Würzburg, with a focus on network simulation, on QoE. He is a member of the editorial board of IEEE Communications
 benchmarking, and P4. Surveys and Tutorials, Quality and User Experience (Springer), and ACM
 SIGMM Records, and the Elected Chairperson of the ITG/VDE Expert Group
 “Communication Networks and Systems” within the German Society of
 Information Technology.

 Andreas Hotho holds the Chair of Data Science,
 Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg and is the Anja Feldmann received the Ph.D. degree from
 spokesperson of the Centre for Artificial Intelligence Carnegie Mellon University in 1995. From 1996
 and Data Science, University of Würzburg. In recent to 2000, she did research work with AT&T Labs
 years, he has conducted research in various areas Research, before taking professor positions with
 of data science. His core research areas include Saarland University, TU Munich, and TU Berlin.
 NLP with the integration of knowledge into language From 2012 to 2018, she served on Supervisory
 models, the study of historical novels in cooperation Board of SAP SE. Since the beginning of 2018, she
 with the digital humanities, the analysis of corporate has been the Director of the Max Planck Institute
 data for recommendation systems or anomaly detec- for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany. She is a
 tion, e.g., the analysis of network flow data, as well member of multiple academies and on the steering
as studies based on sensor data on air pollution, climate modelling, and bee committees of CoNEXT and IMC. She was the TPCbehavior. Chair of Sigcomm, IMC, CoNEXT, as well as HotNets.