IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 133

 MCRe: A Unified Framework for Handling
 Malicious Traffic With Noise Labels Based on
 Multidimensional Constraint Representation
 Qingjun Yuan , Gaopeng Gou, Yanbei Zhu, Yuefei Zhu , Gang Xiong, and Yongjuan Wang

 Abstract— Due to the limitations of the existing annotation of data cascading [1] on deep learning-based intrusion
methods, the prevalence of label noise can be caused in realistic detection systems (IDS). However, malicious traffic often
malicious traffic datasets, which has a significant impact on uses encryption and redundancy to obfuscate itself [2],
the training and evaluation of deep learning-based intrusion
detection models. Recently, various methods have been proposed so annotators cannot accurately characterize the behavior
to deal with noise-containing labeled datasets, and they can be of novel attacks (i.e., 0day attacks), making the existing
roughly divided into two categories: data cleaning and robust annotation methods prone to mislabeling [3].
training. However, the different processing ideas lead these However, deep learning models are highly dependent on
two types of methods to ignore the information in different large-scale, accurate-labeled data [4], [5], [6], [7]. The noisy
components of the dataset, resulting in a cliff-like drop in
performance under high noise conditions. To this end, this
 labels in real traffic datasets make them difficult to be used for
study proposes a unified framework for handling noise malicious intrusion detection models [8]. To this end, various approaches
traffic based on the multidimensional constrained representations have been proposed to handle noisy labels, and they can be
named MCRe, which unifies data cleaning and robust training roughly divided into two categories: data cleaning [9], [10],
into an ideal representation function approximation. According to [11], [12] and robust training [13], [14], [15], [16]. These
the properties of the ideal representation function, information
 two categories differ in their objectives, as shown in Tab. I.
integrity constraints, cluster separability constraints and core
proximity constraints are defined to drive MCRe to approximate Particularly, data cleaning aims to output a purer dataset, while
the ideal representation during iteration. These constraints robust training aims to output an accurate classification model
led MCRe to learn the individual, intra-class, and global directly.
levels of distributed knowledge, thus avoiding irrational domain In the above approaches, optimization constraints consistent
knowledge extraction and ensuring strong label noise robustness with the task objectives are usually designed to help the
of the representation network. We validated MCRe on a dataset
that includes 22 types of realistic malicious traffic. Experimental
 network achieve the preset goal, which could be referred to
results show that MCRe can outperform the state-of-the-art as task-guided training. Such task-guided training allows the
methods in both data cleaning and robust training downstream network to ignore part of the domain knowledge in the dataset,
tasks, achieving 85% pure sample rate and 82% classification resulting in locking the model potential [17]. The details are
accuracy even under the condition of up to 90% noise labels. as follows:
In addition, the generalizability of MCRe was verified on several In general, in order to obtain a purer dataset, data
public datasets. Finally, MCRe was also well-extended to enhance
other data cleaning and robust training approaches. cleaning focuses more on simple samples, resulting in a
 large number of hard samples being discarded, making the
 Index Terms— Malicious traffic detection, noise labels, data distributional properties of the cleaned dataset worse. For
cleaning, robust training, deep learning.
 instance, INCV [9] selects simple samples to update the
 network in multiple iterations, and ULDC [12] determines
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 the label confidence of hard samples based on the locations

T RAINING models using realistic malicious traffic is
 considered an effective way to reduce the impact
 of simple samples, but is prone to misclassifying and
 discarding hard samples. Such discarding of hard samples
 leads to poor generalization of classifiers trained on cleaned
 Manuscript received 26 May 2023; revised 29 August
2023 and 14 September 2023; accepted 18 September 2023. Date of
 datasets [12].
publication 25 September 2023; date of current version 20 November In contrast, robust training focuses more on acquiring
2023. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and global domain knowledge from hard samples, resulting in a
Development Program of China under Grant 2021YFB3101400 and in part
by the Blockchain System Security Key Technology Research of Henan
 model with high accuracy [17]. For example, Co-teaching+
Province Major Public Welfare Project under Grant 2013002102000. The [15] selects the hard samples with disagreement in the
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving iterations to update network parameters efficiently and prevent
it for publication was Prof. Ghassan Karame. (Corresponding author: performance degradation. Unicon [19], on the other hand,
Yongjuan Wang.)
 Qingjun Yuan, Yanbei Zhu, Yuefei Zhu, and Yongjuan Wang are with the selects hard samples by the performance of simple samples
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Zhengzhou in the iteration. However, the models obtained by the robust
450001, China (e-mail: pinkywyj@163.com). training approach are generally affected by noise labels, and
 Gaopeng Gou and Gang Xiong are with the Institute of Information
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China. the accuracy of classifiers is generally poor when the noise
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2023.3318962 level is high [12].
 1556-6021 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
134 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF T WO WAYS TO H ANDLE N OISE L ABELS

 To solve the aforementioned problem, a simple idea is to distance-based data cleaning and training algorithm based
transform the task-guided training process [9], [10], [11], [12], on vector distribution in the decision space.
[13], [14], [15], [16] into an objective attribute-guided process, • We proposed a novel perspective to solve the probthus avoiding selective learning of knowledge. We refer to lem of handling noise labels: attribute-guided ideal
attribute-guided process, which is a method to guide the representation approximation. We theoretically analysed
updating of neural network parameters by measuring the the attributes of the ideal function and designed three
difference in attributes between that neural network and an different levels of constraints to help the representation
ideal data cleaning and robust training model. During training, network learn individual, intra-class and global distributhe neural network is guided to approximate the ideal model by tions simultaneously, guiding the representation network
narrowing the differences in attributes from the ideal target, to approximate the ideal representation during iteration,
making the resulting neural network suitable for both data thus achieving a robust representation of the traffic.
cleaning and robust training tasks. We theoretically analyzed • Numerical results showed that MCRe outperforms other
and summarized the attributes of ideal data cleaning and robust state-of-the-art approaches in data cleaning and robust
training models, and translated them into a unified attribute- classification model training under high noise conditions.
guided framework. In addition, MCRe also had good generalisability and
 Specifically, we propose MCRe, a unified framework extensibility.
based on Multidimensional Constraint Representation that is The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
compatible with both data cleaning and robust training tasks. we discuss the current status of noisy labels in traffic
MCRe theoretically transforms the problems of data cleaning data and summarize existing methods for handling noisy
and robust training into a unified problem of approximating the labels. In Section III, we analyze the attributes of the ideal
ideal representation function of traffic, which can be simply representation function theoretically and introduce the three
formulated as follows. constraints we proposed. In Section IV, we detail the proposed
 MCRe. In Section V, we present the experiments and their
 G → Gidl . (1) results. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VI.

 By ideal representation Gidl , we mean a function that can
perfectly reconstruct samples in a low-dimensional decision II. R ELATED W ORK
space and can project samples belonging to the same class
 A. Noise Labels in Traffic Datasets
to similar positions on the decision space, thus achieving
ideal data cleaning or robust classification. To enable the Training intrusion detection models that use realistic
representation network G to approximate Gidl in iterations, malicious traffic can ensure better model generalization and
three types of attribute constraints are defined, namely has become a common approach in the industry. However,
information integrity constraint, cluster separability constraint, due to the limited accuracy of existing annotation methods
and core proximity constraint, based on the nature of the [20], the completeness of annotation strategies [21] and the
ideal representation function. In this way, a unified and misperception of traffic distribution by different annotators
efficient framework for malicious traffic data cleaning and [22], the dataset is prone to mislabeling. In addition, frequent
robust training is designed. In training, the three attribute zero-day attacks pose a severe challenge to the accurate
constraints collaborate to guide the network parameters update, labeling of realistic traffic [23]. These attacks are beyond the
where the cluster separability constraint and the core proximity knowledge of annotators and annotation systems, so traffic
constraint focus on learning from difficult and simple samples, is often difficult to label correctly. Similarly, variants of
respectively, helping MCRe to maintain higher performance known attacks, due to variations in certain attributes, can
under high noise conditions. easily interfere with the judgment of rule-based or IDS-based
 To the best of our knowledge, MCRe is the first framework automatic labeling systems.
that combines data cleaning and robust training. The main Mislabeling is common in traffic datasets collected from
contributions are as follows: real networks. Models trained with such data are prone
 • We proposed a unified framework for handling the to performance degradation during online detection, with a
 noise labels of malicious traffic, MCRe, consisting of a possibility of generating a large number of false positives and
 representation solver and two downstream tasks. MCRe misses, limiting the application of deep learning models to
 first represented all traffic uniformly as vectors that realistic IDS [24]. Specifically, the impacts on real systems
 are robust enough to label noise, and then designed a can be summarized as follows:
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 135

 Model Evaluation and Selection: Evaluation of deep and excluding samples that cannot be identified. In contrast,
learning models requires accurately labeled traffic that has for robust training, noise samples are introduced more
the same or similar distribution to the target environment aggressively during model training to ensure the generalization
[25]. Traffic labelled incorrectly or obtained from isolated of the model and accurate decision boundaries, and the impact
environments cannot accurately assess and evaluate model of noise samples is mitigated by relying on the robustness of
performance, so correct feedback cannot be provided to model the model itself [29]. However, knowledge selectivity leads to
evaluators, which results in inappropriate models coming a dramatic drop in performance when these approaches face
online. Therefore, it is crucial to clean noisy traffic dataset high noise levels.
and obtain a purer dataset that can help IDS to assess and To this end, we propose a unified noise processing
evaluate the models accurately. framework named MCRe, which converts the problems of
 Domain Knowledge Extraction: Extracting domain knowl- data cleaning and robust training into an ideal function
edge also requires accurately labeled traffic. Inaccurately approximation problem from an alternative perspective.
labeled datasets can easily drive the model to learn something In addition, cluster separability and core proximity constraints
wrong during iterations, ignoring some important features for MCRe are defined to help the representation network learn
or knowledge and thus affecting subsequent analysis and individual and global knowledge in iterations, respectively,
predictions. However, models trained on complex and diverse thus maintaining good performance of MCRe under high-noise
traffic collected in real networks have superior generalization conditions.
ability compared with models trained on closed datasets.
Therefore, it is also an important task to train accurate and
robust classifier models on realistic traffic data containing III. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION & ATTRIBUTE
noise labels. C ONSTRAINTS D ESIGN
 In this section, the problem of representing traffic with noisy
B. Noisy Labels Handling labels is formulated.
 Consider a C-classes traffic dataset with noisy labels and let
 Inaccurate ground truth and non-stationary distribution of D := {(xi , ỹi )} N be a traffic dataset containing noisy labels,
traffic make it difficult for deep learning-based IDSs to identify where (xi , ỹi ) is a labeled sample, xi represents the i-th sample
malware, leading to various cyber security incidents [8]. and ỹi is the observed label corresponding to xi . For each xi ,
Therefore, it has become important for the real world to deal there is one and only one latent true label denoted by yi∗ , and
with noisy labels in traffic datasets to form cleaner datasets ỹi , yi∗ ∈ {1, 2, · · · , C}.
or to train robust traffic identification models. Depending on The main goal is to derive a representation function G that
the objectives, the existing methods can be divided into two can reconstruct traffic while creating a useful and meaningful
categories. latent representation. G should avoid using noisy labels and
 1) Data Cleaning: Distinguishe noise and pure samples handle noisy labels appropriately, which helps to clean the
in the traffic dataset by identifying and evaluating instances labels and train powerful classifiers with noisy labels.
and labels, and output a dataset consisting of pure samples. First, the ideal representation under noisy labels is defined.
The evaluation of labels is mainly performed by measuring Definition 1: Ideal Representation: For D, the ideal reprethe consistency in features of the samples [26] or density sentation is a mapping Gidl (x) := Rm → Rs such that for
distribution [10], [11] after the representation with the all sample pairs xi , x j , there exists a constant ε > 0 that
observed labels. Although the above approaches have been satisfies the following condition:
successful in reducing the proportion of noise labels in the
dataset, the data cleaning process often discards a large number d Gidl (xi ) , Gidl x j ≤ ε ⇔ yi∗ = y ∗j ,
 
 (2)
of outlier samples as well. However, the absence of these
samples can shift the global distribution, making it difficult where d is a function that measures the distance between two
to accurately assess the generalisability of models with the samples. Common distance measurement functions include l1 ,
cleaned dataset. l2 , l p , l∞ , and cosine distance.
 2) Robust Training: Reduce the impact of untrustworthy Traffic belonging to the same category, with similar
labels on model parameter updating by selective learning of the behavioral patterns, is distributed with certain a similarity in
global distribution, resulting in more accurate classifiers. The the feature space. Under ideal conditions, the mapping distance
performance of these models is improved mainly by designing in the decision space is closer (≤ ε) for samples with the same
robust loss functions [27], [28] or network architectures true labels, but farther (> ε) for samples that do not belong
[14], [15], [19] that prevent supervised neural networks from to the same class. Furthermore, ε is used as a boundary to
overfitting the noisy labels. However, when noise levels are divide clusters in the decision space, thus forming an ideal
high, these models can struggle to acquire correct domain decision boundary. Obviously, in this ideal situation, accurate
knowledge, making it difficult to obtain positive feedback on identification of all individuals in the dataset can be achieved,
model parameter updates. realizing ideal data cleaning.
 Due to the different objectives, there are certain differences Therefore, to construct a function G that is as close to
in the way the above approaches deal with noise labels. Gidl as possible, we propose three conditional constraints from
For data cleaning, in order to improve the purity of the a mathematical perspective to help G converge towards Gidl
dataset, more emphasis is often put on screening individuals during training.
136 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Constraint 1 Information Integrity Constraint: For any and classification layers are connected to the representation
xi ∈ D, there is network and the corresponding dataset or classification model
 is output. In this section, the details and meaning of these
 G ← arg min (H (xi ) − H (G (xi ))) , xi ∈ D, (3)
 G components will be explained.
where H (·) represents information entropy.
 We argue that a good representation function should be as A. Deep Representation
informative as possible. Generally, however, the represented The goal of representation is to reconstruct traffic in a
traffic, which has lower dimensions, prompts the neural low-dimensional decision space, aggregating similar samples
network to learn the most informative features. In practice, and separating dissimilar samples to provide a more intuitive
the dimension of the representation is usually set manually view for downstream tasks, such as traffic cleaning and
as a hyperparameter. As G compresses the dimensionality of identification. In this study, a 7-layer, fully-connected encoder
traffic, some information will be inevitably lost. is used as the deep representation. It has a simple structure
 Constraint 2 Cluster Separability Constraint: For any and strong plasticity, and is more receptive to feedback from
xi , x j , xk ∈ D, if yi∗ = y ∗j ̸ = yk∗ , then it holds that the three constraints.
 The deep representation is defined as follows.
 d G (xi ) , G x j ≤ d (G (xi ) , G (xk )) .
 
 (4)
 ui = G(xi ; θG ), (6)
 The cluster separability constraint is essentially a variant
of the ideal representation. By Eq. 2, it is clear that yi∗ ̸= where θG represents the parameters corresponding to G and ui
yk∗ ⇔ d (G (xi ) , G (xk )) ≥ ε. Together with yi∗ = y ∗j ⇔ represents the representation of xi in the decision space.
d G (xi ) , G x j ≤ ε, it is easy to obtain Eq. 4.
  The feedback of each of the three constraints on the network
 A good representation function should be able to reconstruct is determined by measuring the distribution of u in the decision
samples belonging to the same class as individuals with space. In each iteration, G will update θG according to the
spatial similarity in the decision space, making them far from integration loss generated by the three constraints, as follows.
the other categories, which in turn helps to construct well- θG ← θG − η∇L D; θG ,
 
 (7)
distinguished decision boundaries.
 Constraint 3 Core Proximity Constraint: For every xi ∈ D, where η denotes the learning rate and L is defined by:
there exists a virtual full confidence sample x(yi ) , such that
 ∗
 L = Liic + Lcsc + Lcpc +Lcls , (8)
 XC X   
 G ← arg min d G (xi ) , G x(k) where Liic is given by Eq. 19, Lcsc is defined by Eq. 26, Lcpc
 G k=1 xi wher e yi =k
 ∗
 is obtained by Eq. 30, and
 (5)
 Lcls = C E ỹ, F (u) ,
 
 (9)
 A full confidence sample is a sample that is credibly
attributed to a specified class. A good representation function where C E denotes the cross-entropy loss, and F is a
should make each sample as close as possible to the projection fully connected classifier head. It has been shown that the
of the full confidence sample of the class, so that the samples representation network before the classification head does not
are better aggregated in the decision space. significantly overfit to the label noise [30], [31]. Therefore,
 We believe that to construct a suitable representation the use of noise labels (or even random labels [32]) can also
function, the above three constraints must be satisfied, have a facilitating effect on the representation network.
or satisfied as far as possible.
 B. Network of Information Integrity Constraint
 IV. A RCHITECTURE OF MCR E As given in Eq. 3, the information integrity constraint
 The architecture of MCRe is shown in Fig. 1 and consists of requires that the transformations have as small information
a noise traffic characterization network and two corresponding lost as possible. To satisfy the information integrity constraint,
downstream task layers. The former is the central component we design a decoding network G −1 that is symmetric with the
where MCRe constructs a mapping function G that satisfies representation network, and it forms a classic self-encoder
the multidimensional constraints. The representation network structure with the representation network.
should have the following properties: 1) feature representations For a given G and G −1 , the information reduced by G can
should retain as much input information as possible; be quantified as
2) samples with the same true labels are should be closer
 H (x) − H (u) = I (x; u) − H (u |x ) , (10)
to each other while farther away from classes with different
labels; and 3) samples with the same true labels should be where I (x; u) denotes the mutual information between u and
closer to the full confidence samples within the class. In order x.
to help the representation network obtain the above properties, And since both x and G are deterministic, H (u |x ) = 0, so
we design the corresponding constraint generating networks
to measure and adjust the current representation network, and H (x) − H (u) = I (x; u) , (11)
optimize the parameters of the feature representation function Further, it can be obtained that
by back propagation. As for the two downstream tasks of    
data cleaning and robust training, the distance-based cleaning H (u) − H G −1 (u) = I u; G −1 (u) . (12)
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 137

 Fig. 1. Architecture of MCRe.

 Then In summary, the goal of the information integrity constraint
     is to minimize the value of Eq. 17, which
 H (x) − H G −1
 (u) = I (x; u) + I u; G −1 (u) . (13)   
 G ← arg min H x, G −1 (u) . (18)
 In addition, since I (·) ≥ 0, it can be written that
   
min H (x) − H G −1 (u) However, for traffic vectors in a high-dimensional space,
    calculating their cross-entropy is a challenging task; therefore,
 = min (I (x; u)) + min I u; G −1 (u) in this study, the Binary Cross-Entropy is adopted, and the
    information integrity loss of samples in each iteration is
 = min (H (x) − H (u)) + min I u; G −1 (u) . (14) calculated by
 Therefore, H (x) − H G −1 (u) has a minimal value when Liic D; θG , θG −1
  

and only when both H (x) − H (u) and I u; G −1 (u) have n |D|
 1 XX
 xi j log x̂i j + 1 − xi j log 1 − x̂i j , (19)
  
their minimum  Thus, it
 values. can be written that =
  |D|
arg min H (x)−H G −1 (u) =arg min (H (x) − H (u)) . i=1 j=1
 G ,G −1 G ,G −1
 (15) where xi j is the j-th component of xi , and x̂ = G −1 (G (x)).

 In addition, since G and G −1 are symmetric, G −1 (u) can be C. Network of Cluster Separability Constraint
considered as an estimate of the distribution of x. Therefore,
it holds that According to Eq. 4, the goal of the cluster separability
     constraint is to separate the mixed samples near the cluster
 arg min (H (x)−H (u))=arg min H x, G −1 (u) + H (x) boundaries to form clear and accurate decision boundaries.
 G ,G−1 G ,G −1
 Therefore, as shown in Fig. 2, the representation function
 (16) should achieve two goals: (1) compress the distance between
 Again, since H (x) is necessarily >0 and for a given D, the samples attributed to the same cluster, reducing the radius of
value of H (x) is constant. the cluster; (2) expand the distance between samples attributed
    to different clusters, increasing the distance between clusters,
 arg min (H (x)− H (u))= arg min H x, G −1 (u) . First, the samples are divided into different clusters in the
 G ,G −1 G ,G −1 decision space based on their projection distances, which are
 (17) denoted by {clus1 , clus2 , · · · , clusC }. Similar to FINE [11],
138 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 2. Cluster separability constraint.

the Euclidean distance is selected in this study to measure the
separability. The distance between xi and x j is calculated by

 d xi , x j = ui − u j 2
 
 (20)
 Fig. 3. Core proximity constraint.
 To achieve the first goal, the average distance of each sample
to other samples in the same cluster is calculated. Assume that
 D. Network of Core Proximity Constraint
xi ∈ clusk ; then, the average distance from xi to the other
samples in the cluster can be expressed as follows: Eq. 5 shows that the core proximity constraint requires
 G to project every sample as close as possible to the full
 1 X confident sample of the class to which the sample truly
 dxini = d xi , x j .
 
 (21)
 |clusk | − 1 belongs. Therefore, the representation function should drive
 x j ∈clusk
 the projection of the sample close to its full confidence sample.
 To achieve the second goal, the closest distance of each The corresponding constraint is related to two following steps:
sample to the other cluster boundaries is calculated. For full confidence sample selection and constraint generation.
computational purposes, we calculate the distance from the 1) Full Confidence Sample Selection: A full confidence
sample to the nearest sample that does not belong to the sample is a sample that is fully identified as belonging to
cluster. Then the distances to other clusters can be expressed a particular class. In this subsection, we identify the center
as of the simple sample as the full confidence sample for this
 class, as shown in Fig. 3. Unlike the unlabeled clustering
 dxout / clusk .
 = min d xi , x j x j ∈
  
 i
 (22) centers generated in Sec. IV-C, the full confidence samples
 in this section denote the cores of the classes with observed
 From a practical perspective, using absolute distances to labels. First, the simple samples are selected in each class
measure cluster separability is not completely consistent with according to their distribution in the decision space; then, the
the goal of formulating an ideal representation. Therefore, the full confidence samples in each class are calculated according
two goals are unified as a ratio of the difference to measure to the distribution of the simple samples. It has been a common
to the deviation of each sample from the ideal representation, strategy for obtaining label information to avoid the effect of
as follows: labels on the construction of the representation function under
 high noise conditions.
 dxout − dxini Simple samples represent samples that are far from
 δxi = i
 (23)
 dxout
 i boundaries, belong to a certain class with a high probability,
 and tend to have a small loss in classification tasks. Cowhere δxi denotes the difference between the distance of xi teaching [14] and Co-teaching+ [15] select simple samples
to the other clusters and the distance to the current cluster; it using supervised classifiers, and a similar idea is adopted
indicates how easily xi can be correctly distinguished under in this study. Specifically, a fully-connected classifier F is
the representation of G. In order to ensure convergence of the defined in the decision space, and it is determined whether
above equation, it is normalized as follows the sample is a simple sample based on its output as follows.
 δxnor m
 = N or m δxi .
 
 i
 (24) xi ∈ Sim k , i f ỹi = arg max Fk (ui ) , (27)
 k
 Therefore, at each iteration, the cluster separability where Sim k is the set of simple samples labeled with k, and
constraint for G can be expressed by Fk (ui ) is the score classified by xi as k. That is, we consider
   a sample to be a simple sample when the original label has a
 1 X nor m
 G ← arg max δxi ; G (25) higher score than the other labels. In fact, there could be some
 |D| outlier samples classified in Sim k , but because their number
 Furthermore, the loss of cluster separability can be obtained is usually relatively small, they do not affect the classification
by result.
 Further, samples in Sim k are projected into a lower
 1 X nor m dimensional space z to reduce the computational cost of full
 Lcsc D; θG =1 − δxi
 
 (26) confidence samples computing and improve the robustness
 |D|
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 139

of sample representations. The second projection on the V. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
representation layer has been a common scheme and is widely In this section, the effectiveness and robustness of
used in classical models such as MoCo [33]. The experimental MCRe were verified by comparison with other comparative
results have been available to demonstrate the effectiveness. approaches in the two downstream tasks.
We use the momentum prototype of all samples in Sim k as
the full confidence sample zk of the flow for category k, which A. Datasets and Noise Settings
is defined by 1) Private Dataset: A dataset containing 22 types of
 encrypted malicious traffic named Malicious_TLS was
  
 zk ← N or m mzk + (1 − m) zi , zi ∈ Sim k , (28)
 constructed to evaluate the performance of MCRe. In this
where zi is the projection of ui in the z-space. In this paper, m dataset, all traffic was encrypted with TLS and thus behaved
is set to 0.999. In each iteration, the full confidence samples similarly. Consequently, cleaning and identifying such TLS
are updated to the mean of weighted samples in the z-space. traffic would also be a more difficult task when noise labels
 2) Constraint Generation: The main goal is to search were present. In addition, all malicious traffic was collected
for an embedding space where samples belonging to the from real edge network devices. The traffic was captured
same class cluster are around their full confidence samples; over a four-year period from 2018 to 2021 and labeled with
namely, samples closer to zk have lower losses when network precise threat intelligence to ensure Ground Truth. Also, all
parameters are updated, thus driving samples towards the full benign traffic was encrypted using TLS. Note that no public
confidence samples. dataset currently contained such a wide variety of realistic
 At each iteration, the core proximity constraint of can be malicious encrypted traffic. Anyone can fetch the dataset by
expressed by visiting https://github.com/gcx-Yuan/Malicious_TLS. In par-
 1 X  ticular, to prevent privacy, we erased IPs, ports, timestamps,
 G ← arg min min zi − zk . (29) payloads, etc. from the traffic. Semantic, statistical and spatio-
 G ,F |D| 2
 temporal features of these traffic are also extracted.
 Then, in each iteration, the core proximity loss of G can be 2) Public Datasets: We also verified the effectiveness
quantified as of MCRe on the CICIDS-2017 [36] intrusion detection
 1 X   dataset. Specifically, rather than extracting features from raw
 Lcpc = min C E zi , zk (30)
 |D| traffic, we use the features offered. In addition, to evaluate
 the generalizability of MCRe, we validated it on several
E. Downstream Tasks public malicious traffic datasets, including NSL-KDD [34],
 In general, downstream tasks include data cleaning and UNSW-NB15 [35], LITNET-2020 [37], IOT-23 [38], and
robust training. In Tab. I, these two tasks are described in CICMalDroid-2020 [39].
detail. For the two tasks, a simple data cleaning method named 3) Noise Settings: Similar to ULDC [12], we set up
MCRe-dc and a robust training method named MCRe-cls two types of scenarios: asymmetric scenarios and symmetric
are designed based on the distance metric of samples in the scenarios, based on different traffic labeling strategies in the
decision space constructed by MCRe. real world.
 1) MCRe-dc: According to the distance distribution of Asymmetric noise was usually labeled by multiple indesamples in the decision space constructed by MCRe, the pendent labeling entities that determine the labels of samples
suspected noise samples are determined, and sample removal through strategies such as voting. Different labeling strategies
and label correction are performed. In this study, the will result in different distributions of label noise. Of these,
confidence of labels is calculated using the difference in labeling strategies that reduce false positives [24] have been
distance between the samples and the full confidence samples. the most common because they maximize the availability of
During data cleaning, the mislabeling of samples with high the system. In this case, a large amount of malicious traffic will
confidence values is considered, and samples without high be labeled as benign, and only a small amount of benign traffic
confidence attribution classes are discarded. will be labeled as malicious. We defined this as an asymmetric
 Specifically, we set a fixed sample discard ratio and discard scenario, where only a portion of the malicious traffic labels
samples that are far from the full confidence samples (i.e., was flipped to benign.
samples with low label confidence). This is one of the simplest Symmetrical noise is usually labeled by a single or few
data cleaning methods and is widely adopted [40]. In this entities, and in that case, a large amount of malicious traffic
paper, we focus on whether MCRe based on multidimensional will be labeled as benign, but also, a large amount of benign
constrained representations has the potential to perform well in traffic will be labeled as malicious. The quality of labels
data cleaning, and therefore only the simplest fixed threshold depends entirely on the capacity of entities and results in
scheme is adopted. In practice, more effective data cleaning different ratios of noise labels. In short, in symmetric noise
schemes can be selected based on specific objectives. scenarios, all traffic labels have a certain probability of
 2) MCRe-Cls: MCRe-cls accesses and trains a classification flipping.
layer on the representation layer of MCRe and then outputs In this study, the range of noise label ratios was set to
a classification model. In this study, a simple Kmeans [0.1,0.9] to explore the robustness of different approaches
classifier is used to divide traffic into clusters. The traffic is under harsh high noise conditions. Fig. 4 shows the label
identified using the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm, which matches conversion matrix for the 40% noise ratio case for both
the clusters to their corresponding labels. scenarios. The horizontal axis represents observed noise labels
140 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE II
 P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

 calculated the distances of the samples from the full
 confidence sample in each class on the decision space.
 Then, based on the distance ratio, the confidence of the
 labels was calculated. Finally, a fixed threshold was set,
 and all samples with confidence below the threshold were
 removed.
 MCRe-dc was compared with the following state-of-the-art
 data cleaning methods:
 • INCV [9]: INCV trained a supervised classifier on the
 noisy dataset, and then cleared the samples which the
 classifier determined were different from their observed
Fig. 4. Label conversion matrix of 40% asymmetric (left) and symmetric
(right) noise. labels;
 • CL [10]: CL trained a supervised classifier on the noisy
and the vertical axis represents latent true labels. The first dataset and judged the confidence of each sample label
row and column are labeled as benign and the other rows and based on the output of the classifier, and then removed
columns are labeled as certain malicious traffic. The left is the the samples with low confidence;
asymmetric noise scenario, where 40% of the samples in each • FINE [11]: FINE was based on metric learning and
class of malicious traffic are randomly selected and their labels removed samples suspected of having noisy labels;
are set to benign. The right represents the symmetric noise • ULDC [12]: ULDC was based on an unsupervised neural
scenario, where in addition to flipping the malicious traffic network that evaluated the confidence of sample labels
labels as in the asymmetric noise scenario, 40% of the benign and removed samples with low confidence.
traffic is selected and its label is randomly set to certain kind Tab. II, III, IV and V show the performance of MCRe-dc for
of malicious traffic. cleaning datasets with different noise ratios in asymmetric and
 4) Experimental Setup: We evaluated the performance of symmetric scenarios on Malicious_TLS and CICIDS-2017,
two typical downstream tasks on the datasets injected with respectively. Based on the results, the following conclusions
noise. In the data cleaning task, the entire dataset was injected could be drawn:
with noise and then fed to MCRe to output a dataset with 1. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc achieved the best noisy
a reduced percentage of noise. In the robust training task, label cleaning results: Looking longitudinally at each column,
the dataset was divided into training and validation sets there was a significant advantage in the percentage of pure
according to the ratio of 7:3; labels of some of the sample data in the dataset cleaned by MCRe-dc when the noise
labels in the training set were flipped and fed to MCRe for level was above 20%. In particular, the percentage of pure
training; meanwhile, the samples in the validation set were not data was above 85% in both scenarios when the noise level
involved in training and did not contain noise labels, so they reached 90%, which was more than 25% higher than results
were used only to evaluate the performance of the output of the other approaches. In the other comparative approaches,
classifier. In all experiments, five independent experiments (a) INCV, CL, and FINE’s effectiveness depended on the
were conducted, in which the training and validation sets performance of the supervised classifier, again was limited
were randomly divided. Specifically, in each experiment, the by the label quality; (b) although ULDC was based on an
average of the final five epochs was taken as the ultimate unsupervised network, its label confidence assessment process
result. relied on label information. As a result, their performance
 All experiments were carried out on the same platform dropped significantly at high noise levels. In contrast, MCRe
equipped with an Intel 9700K@3.60GHz, 32GB RAM, and employed a conservative label trust strategy to ensure stable
an NVIDA GeForce RTX 3090. performance.
 2. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc exhibited the best
B. Experimental Analysis of Data Cleaning robustness: Looking at each row of the table horizontally, all
 MCRe-dc cleaned the dataset based on the projected the approaches reduced the effectiveness of data cleaning as
distance of the traffic in the decision space. First, MCRe-dc the percentage of noise increased. Of these, MCRe-dc showed
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 141

 TABLE III
 P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

 TABLE IV
 P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

 TABLE V
 P ERCENTAGE OF P URE S AMPLES IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

the most consistent performance with only an 12% decrease, C. Experimental Analysis of Robust Training
compared with the other approaches that showed a decrease
of at least 40%. As the proportion of noise labels increased, In this subsection, we will identify traffic and output a
the overly open strategy of adopting label information led to a classifier based on its projected distance in the decision
stronger influence on the other related approaches, resulting in space. MCRe-cls was compared with several traffic identia significant reduction in the quality of data cleaning. MCRe- fication models trained by other approaches, which were as
dc, on the other hand, reduced the dependence on labels follows.
through three different levels of constraints, which provided • INCV, CL, FINE, and ULDC: Retrain a supervised
it with superior robustness. classifier with the cleaned training set, and then identify
 3. Of all the approaches, MCRe-dc was found to be the most the traffic in the validation set;
statistically significant: We conducted a T-test on the results • MentorNet [13]: Select some pure samples to train a small
of data cleaning. T-test is frequently employed to analyzing guidance network to guide classifier training;
the significance of differences between two statistical sets. • Co-Teaching [14]: Train two networks with different
Tab. VI presents the T-test results of MCRe-dc compared to all initial states in parallel and make them select pure
other methods under a 90% noise level, where a larger t and a samples from each other;
smaller p indicate a more significant difference. In all cases, • Co-Teaching+ [15]: Similar to Co-Teaching, but more
the p-value was below 0.001, demonstrating a statistically inclined to select disagreement samples for another
significant deviation of MCRe-dc from the other methods. network;
Given that the mean values of MCRe are consistently higher, • Co-Learning [16]: Train a two-headed encoder that avoids
it can be inferred that MCRe is statistically superior to the fitting noise labels to the network by means of consistency
other methods. constraints on both heads.
142 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VI
 T-T EST R ESULTS FOR MCRe- DC

 TABLE VII
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

 TABLE VIII
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON M ALICOUS _TLS

 Tab. VII, VIII, IX and X show the performance of MCRe- 2. At high noise levels (>asym-10% or >sym-20%), MCRecls in asymmetric and symmetric scenarios on Malicious_TLS cls performed significantly better than the other approaches:
and CICIDS-2017, respectively. From the classification results, In particular, when noise levels reached 90% in both scenarios
the following conclusions could be drawn: and datasets, MCRe-cls achieved the highest accuracy,
 1. At low noise levels (≤asym-10% or ≤sym-20%), MCRe- which was 20% higher than the other approaches. The
cls was only slightly lower at most only 1.4% than that above results demonstrated the effectiveness of the multiple
of the best-performing approach: The design strategy of constraints designed in this study; this allowed the trained
MCRe’s careful acquisition of labels caused that its backbone representation function to approximate the ideal function
acquired less information than the other supervised methods better and helped the classifier to identify malicious traffic
at low noise levels, which resulted in a slightly lower under label noise conditions. We also assessed the statistical
performance as well; this result was in line with our design significance of MCRe-cls results compared to other methods
expectations. at a noise level of 90%, as presented in Tab. XI. Similar to
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 143

 TABLE IX
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

 TABLE X
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS ON CICIDS-2017

MCRe-dc, MCRe-cls exhibited a p-value below 0.001 for all constraint, named MCRe∼iic, (3) the MCRe that does not
cases, demonstrating superior performance compared to other satisfy the cluster separability constraint, named MCRe∼csc,
methods. and (4) the MCRe that does not satisfy the core proximity
 3. MCRe-cls exhibited the best robustness to label noise: constraint, named MCRe∼cpc.
Looking at each row of the table horizontally, the MCRe- Fig. 5 shows the performance of MCRe and its variants
cls decreased the least as the percentage of noise increased. for six different scenes, including asym-0.2, asym-0.5, asym-
In particular, when the noise level increased to 70%, the 0.8, sym-0.2, sym-0.5 and sym-0.8, where each corner of the
accuracy of MCRe-cls decreased by 4%. When the noise level radar plot represents a corresponding scene, and the center
increased to 90%, the accuracy of MCRe-cls was reduced and edge correspond to 50% and 100%, respectively. By the
by up to 18%, which was much smaller than that of the difference in the area of the four hexagons, we can easily
best-performing comparison approach. Due to the fact that compare the importance of the three constraints and analyze
MCRe-cls selected an unsupervised distance-based classifier the roles they play in different scenarios and tasks. We can
that relied on representation functions rather than observed draw the following conclusions:
labels to classify traffic, the impact of noisy labels on classifier 1. All three constraints were beneficial for noise traffic
accuracy was mitigated. In addition, full confidence samples representation: Of all the models, the complete MCRe
were constructed based on simple samples (rather than all achieved the best results in all scenarios and tasks. The
samples), which also reduced the effect of noisy labels. proposed three constraints were designed to compress the
 value space of G in terms of information integrity, cluster
 separability and core proximity, driving the samples toward
D. Ablation Analysis the correct cluster in the decision space, thus mitigating the
 In this subsection, we will check whether the three effect of noisy labels.
constraints designed for MCRe are necessary by ablation 2. The core proximity constraint was the most helpful among
analysis. Specifically, we compared the performance of MCRe all constraints for MCRe to tolerate noisy labels: As the
and its variants, including (1) the complete MCRe, (2) proportion of noisy labels increased, the performance of all
the MCRe that does not satisfy the information integrity three MCRe variants showed significant degradation of varying
144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE XI
 T-T EST R ESULTS FOR MCRe-C LS

 Fig. 5. Ablation results. (a) Percentage of pure samples in data cleaning tasks. (b) Accuracy in robust training tasks.

 TABLE XII in both asym-0.8 and sym-0.8 scenarios, the information loss
 C OMPARISON OF MCRe AND I TS VARIANTS decreased with the epoch, which ensured better performance
 of MCRe (see Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6c and Fig. 6d show the variation curves of the
 normalized mutual information (NMI) and adjusted rand index
 (ARI) of the traffic representations, respectively. The ARI
 and NMI have been commonly used as metrics for clustering
 algorithms. Their values closer to one indicate that clusters
 are more effective and can group more similar samples into
 the same clusters. In this experiment, the ARI and NMI
 were adopted to measure the cluster separability of MCRe.
degrees. MCRe cpc had the greatest degradation among all As shown in Fig. 6c and Fig. 6d, the ARI and NMI gradually
variations, with a classification accuracy of only about 70%. increased with epoch, proving that the representation model of
The results were in line with our design expectations, as Lcpc MCRe gradually converged and produced clusters with good
was only relevant to simple samples, and a conservative separability.
adoption strategy was used for labels to maintain higher The results in Fig. 6e show the trend of the average distance
classification accuracy in high-level noise scenarios. of the traffic to the corresponding full confidence samples
 To represent the effect of the three constraints on the in the z-space. The smaller the distance was, the closer the
directed optimization of the representation network more samples reconstructed by MCRe were to the core of the
intuitively, we plotted Fig. 6 to show the process of MCRe class and the further they were from the decision boundary.
approximation to the ideal representation function during In addition, as displayed in Fig. 6e, the mean distance showed
training. In particular, in this experiment, two high-level noise a decreasing trend with the epoch increases, indicating that
scenarios, asym-0.8 and sym-0.8, were selected. As presented the projection of the traffic into the decision space was closer
in Fig. 6a, the accuracy of the model increased with to the full confidence samples within the class, which helped
epoch, and the representation network of MCRe increasingly MCRe to identify mislabeling better.
approximated the ideal representation function.
 The binary cross-entropy curves between the original input E. Generalizability Analysis
and the output of the decoder are shown in Fig.6b. The In this subsection, we trained classifiers on several public
curve indicated changes in information loss during MCRe malicious traffic datasets to evaluate the generalization of
representation, and the lower the entropy was, the smaller the MCRe. The results in Tab. II, III, VII, and VIII showed
information loss was, but the better the information integrity that the classification accuracy of MCRe was positively
of the representation network was. As shown in Fig. 6b, correlated with data cleaning, so the generalization of MCRe
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 145

 TABLE XIII
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF MCRe-C LS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS IN A SYMMETRIC S CENARIOS

 TABLE XIV
 C LASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF MCRe-C LS ON D IFFERENT DATASETS IN S YMMETRIC S CENARIOS

 TABLE XV
 CL V S . MCRe+CL

 TABLE XVI
 C O -T EACHING V S . MCRe+C O -T EACHING

could be evaluated based on by its classification accuracy. F. Extensibility Analysis
The datasets used in this subsection included: (1) traditional
Internet traffic datasets such as NSL-KDD [34], UNSW- In this subsection, we examined whether MCRe has
NB15 [35], and LITNET-2020 [37]; (2) IoT traffic datasets excellent extensibility. That is, whether MCRe is compatible
such as IoT-23 [38]; and (3) mobile Internet datasets such as with other classical models, and enhances their data cleaning
CICMalDroid-2020 [39]. and traffic identification performance. Due to the excellent
 Tab. XIII and XIV show the accuracy of MCRe on different code integration of CL and Co-teaching, they were selected
datasets. Due to the small variety in some of the datasets, for validation. Specifically, the representation layer of MCRe
the upper limits for the proportion of noise in asymmetrical was plugged into the input layers of CL and Co-teaching
and symmetrical scenarios were set to 80% and 50%, respectively, and their output results were evaluated.
respectively. Experimental results demonstrated that MCRe Tab. XV and XVI respectively show the results of MCRe
achieved high accuracy on all datasets. In particular, MCRe for the two models in different scenarios for the corresponding
achieved an accuracy of higher than 87% when the proportion tasks. We can conclude as follows.
of asymmetric noise was as high as 80% or the proportion of 1. MCRe had good extensibility: By simply concatenating
symmetric noise was as high as 50%. The results showed that models, MCRe could be used in combination with other
MCRe had good generalisability and could identify not only models, such as CL and Co-teaching, to process noise traffic.
encrypted malicious traffic, but also unencrypted and mixed In fact, MCRe could be considerd as a data pre-processing
malicious traffic. process for other models. MCRe represented raw traffic as a
146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 training, which balances individual and global knowledge
 acquisition, resulting in a more robust performance ceiling for
 high-level label noise scenarios. Even at 90% noise labels,
 MCRe can achieve a pure sample percentage of 85% and a
 classification accuracy of 82%. In addition, MCRe is highly
 generalizable and capable of handling noise labels in various
 scenarios, including traditional and novel Internet scenarios.
 Finally, MCRe is also extensible, allowing connectivity to
 other data cleaning and robust training models and enhancing
 their performance.
 In the future, we will focus on the application of MCRe
 in specific scenarios and special conditions, such as online
 environment detection, few-shot detection, and unknown
 attack detection.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their
 valuable comments that helped to improve this manuscript.

 R EFERENCES
 [1] N. Sambasivan, S. Kapania, and H. Highfill, “Everyone wants to do the
 model work, not the data work: Data cascades in high-stakes AI,” in
 Proc. CHI Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst., 2021, pp. 1–15.
 [2] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing, “Machine learning for
 encrypted malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study,” Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102542.
 [3] J. Zhang, F. Li, and F. Ye, “Autonomous unknown-application filtering
 and labeling for dl-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
 [4] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram
 representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic
Fig. 6. Variations of MCRe metrics vs epoch. (a) Classification accuracy; classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.
(b) Binary cross-entropy; (c) Normalized mutual information; (d) Adjusted [5] P. Lin, K. Ye, and Y. Hu, “A novel multimodal deep learning framework
rand index; (e) Mean distance to the core of the class. for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2022.
 [6] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
more robust feature vector and passed it on to other models application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph
for data cleaning or model training. In future work, we may neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
consider encapsulating MCRe into a callable API to provide [7] C. Dong, Z. Lu, Z. Cui, B. Liu, and K. Chen, “MBTree: Detecting
supports for other models more conveniently. encryption RATs communication using malicious behavior tree,” IEEE
 2. At high noise levels, MCRe showed a significant Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3589–3603, 2021.
enhancement to CL and Co-teaching: The MCRe enhanced [8] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,”
approaches were more effective than the original when the in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
noise levels exceeded 20% and 50%, respectively. In particular, 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
for CL, the percentage of pure data increased by more than [9] P. Chen, B. Liao, and G. Chen, “Understanding and utilizing deep neural
 networks trained with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
40% when the noise level was 90%; meanwhile, for Co- 2019, pp. 1062–1070.
teaching, traffic was identified with a 16% improvement [10] C. Northcutt, L. Jiang, and I. Chuang, “Confident learning: Estiin accuracy. The above results indicated that robust traffic mating uncertainty in dataset labels,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 70,
representation could help other models handle noise labels pp. 1373–1411, Apr. 2021.
 [11] T. Kim et al., “Fine samples for learning with noisy labels,” in Proc.
better, reduce reliance on label quality, ensure stable Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021, pp. 24137–24149.
performance under high noise conditions, and output cleaner [12] Q. Yuan et al., “ULDC: Unsupervised learning-based data cleaning
datasets or more accurate identification models. for malicious traffic with high noise,” Comput. J., Apr. 2023,
 Art. no. bxad036, doi: 10.1093/COMJNL/BXAD036.
 [13] L. Jiang et al., “MentorNet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very
 VI. C ONCLUSION deep neural networks on corrupted labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 In this paper, a unified framework for data cleaning Learn., 2018, pp. 2304–2313.
 [14] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks
and robust training named MCRe is proposed for realistic with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
malicious traffic. MCRe drove the representation network vol. 31, 2018, pp. 8536–8546.
to approximate the ideal representation in iterations by [15] X. Yu et al., “How does disagreement help generalization against label
 corruption?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 7164–7173.
applying information integrity constraints, cluster separability
 [16] C. Tan et al., “Co-learning: Learning from noisy labels with selfconstraints and core proximity constraints. Compared to the supervision,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2021,
state-of-the-art approaches, MCRe employs attribute-guided pp. 1405–1413.
YUAN et al.: MCRe: A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR HANDLING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC 147

[17] H. Song et al., “Learning from noisy labels with deep neural networks: Qingjun Yuan received the M.Eng. degree from
 A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Strategic Support Force Information Engineering
 Mar. 7, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3152527. University, China, in 2016. He is currently with the
[18] H. Wei et al., “Open-set label noise can improve robustness against Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
 inherent label noise,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, Technology. His research interests include network
 2021, pp. 7978–7992. security and side channel attack.
[19] N. Karim et al., “UNICON: Combating label noise through uniform
 selection and contrastive learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, pp. 9676–9686.
[20] A. Fahad, A. Almalawi, Z. Tari, K. Alharthi, F. S. Al Qahtani,
 and M. Cheriet, “SemTra: A semi-supervised approach to traffic
 flow labeling with minimal human effort,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 91,
 pp. 1–12, Jul. 2019.
[21] Z. Yang et al., “WTAGRAPH: Web tracking and advertising detection Gaopeng Gou received the bachelor’s, M.Eng., and
 using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University in 2005,
 May 2022, pp. 1540–1557. 2008, and 2014, respectively. He is currently a
[22] M. Kim and I. Lee, “Human-guided auto-labeling for network traffic Full Professor with the Institute of Information
 data: The GELM approach,” Neural Netw., vol. 152, pp. 510–526, Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
 Aug. 2022. His research interests include network security and
[23] J. Zhang et al., “Autonomous unknown-application filtering and labeling network anomaly detection.
 for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Commun. (INFOCOM), Jun. 2020, pp. 397–405.
[24] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
 qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,”
 in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Security), 2022,
 pp. 2783–2800.
[25] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust Yanbei Zhu received the M.A.S. degree from the
 network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2019.
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023. She is currently with the Henan Key Laboratory
[26] Z. Zhu, Z. Dong, and Y. Liu, “Detecting corrupted labels without of Network Cryptography Technology. Her research
 training a model to predict,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, interests include network security and complex data
 pp. 27412–27427. analysis.
[27] R. Wang, T. Liu, and D. Tao, “Multiclass learning with partially
 corrupted labels,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 6,
 pp. 2568–2580, Jun. 2018.
[28] E. Arazo et al., “Unsupervised label noise modeling and loss correction,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (PMLR), 2019, pp. 312–321.
[29] D. Arpit et al., “A closer look at memorization in deep networks,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 233–242.
[30] A. Iscen et al., “Learning with neighbor consistency for noisy labels,” Yuefei Zhu received the Ph.D. degree from the
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2022, Zhengzhou Information Science Technology Instipp. 4672–4681. tute, China, in 1990. He is currently a Professor with
[31] D. Ortego et al., “Multi-objective interpolation training for robustness to the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
 label noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Technology, China. He is the Main Designer of
 Jun. 2021, pp. 6606–6615. the Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Public-
[32] H. Maennel et al., “What do neural networks learn when trained with Key Algorithm SM2. His research interests include
 random labels?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, cryptography and network security.
 pp. 19693–19704.
[33] K. He et al., “Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
[34] L. Dhanabal and S. P. Shantharajah, “A study on NSL-KDD dataset
 for intrusion detection system based on classification algorithms,” Int. Gang Xiong is currently a Full Professor and a
 J. Adv. Res. Comput. Commun. Eng., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 446–452, Ph.D. Supervisor with the Institute of Information
 2015. Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
[35] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for He has authored more than 60 papers in refereed
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” journals and conference proceedings. His research
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), 2015, pp. 1–6. interests include network and information security.
[36] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating He is a member of the 3rd Communication Security
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” Technical Committee of the China Institute of
 in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116. Communications.
[37] R. Damasevicius et al., “LITNET-2020: An annotated real-world
 network flow dataset for network intrusion detection,” Electronics, vol. 9,
 no. 5, p. 800, May 2020.
[38] A. Parmisano, S. Garcia, and M. Erquiaga. (2020). A Labeled Dataset
 With Malicious and Benign IoT Network Traffic. [Online]. Available: Yongjuan Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
 https://mcfp.felk.cvut.cz/publicDatasets/IoT-23-Dataset Information Engineering University in 2009. She
[39] D. S. Keyes et al., “EntropLyzer: Android malware classification and is currently with the Henan Key Laboratory
 characterization using entropy analysis of dynamic characteristics,” in of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main
 Proc. Reconciling Data Analytics, Autom., Privacy, Secur., Big Data research interests include cryptographic analysis and
 Challenge (RDAAPS), 2021, pp. 1–12. cyberspace security.
[40] K. M. Al-Gethami, M. T. Al-Akhras, and M. Alawairdhi, “Empirical
 evaluation of noise influence on supervised machine learning algorithms
 using intrusion detection datasets,” Secur. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021,
 pp. 1–28, Jan. 2021.