IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 3829

 MetaCluster: A Universal Interpretable
 Classification Framework
 for Cybersecurity
 Wenhan Ge , Zeyuan Cui , Junfeng Wang , Binhui Tang , and Xiaohui Li , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Rising cyber threats have created an immediate Fortinet’s report [1], ransomware variants saw a nearly 100%
demand for Deep Learning (DL) in cybersecurity. Nevertheless, increase in 2022 compared to 2021, resulting in losses of $600
the opaque nature of DL models poses challenges in deploying, million in the first half of 2021. The primary impediment to
collaborating, and assessing their effectiveness in less reliable
cybersecurity environments. Despite eXplainable Artificial Intel- efficient and effective cyber threat analysis lies in the disparity
ligence (XAI) playing a role in enhancing cybersecurity analytics, and asymmetry between cyber attackers and defenders. This
the limited task scope, the propensity for data overfitting, and the inequity is evident in the discrepancies in time and cost,
stochastic explanations hinder its broader application. To fill the the uncertainty surrounding attack occurrences, and cognitive
gap, this paper introduces a generic interpretable classification biases [2]. It’s worth highlighting that Deep Learning (DL)
framework, named MetaCluster. MetaCluster generates semantic prototypes for features, patterns, and domains at varying approaches can rectify this imbalance. They can automate
granular levels by following three fundamental steps: embedding processes to reduce costs, enhance threat perception, and leverrepresentations, acquiring prototypes, and aggregating semantics. age multi-source Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) to enrich
These mechanisms guarantee that MetaCluster achieves critical insights [3], [4]. However, there are advantages and disadvaninformation extraction and reliable classification at minimal tages just as there are two sides to the sword. Adversaries can
cost. The experiments encompass cybersecurity classification
tasks and assess the interpretability of the framework. These employ countermeasures, such as using adversarial samples
tasks encompass malware family classification, threat behavior to evade detection [5], [6], or injecting backdoor samples to
analysis, and malicious traffic identification. In particular, when compromise and steal data [7]. Therefore, there is an urgent
compared to other DL models, MetaCluster exhibits a significant demand for cybersecurity methods that can be detected,
reduction in parameter consumption by 79.52% to 91.78%, and
 monitored, and trusted [8].
boosts operational speed up to 71.37%, while its F1 scores remain
stable or slightly increase. Additionally, MetaCluster possesses Researches in the field of explainable cybersecurity analysis
the ability to assess and visually represent the significance of typically involve three methodologies: reliance on general
image, text, and statistical features. This capability leads to a frameworks, the use of attention mechanisms, and the
reduction of Mean Squared Error (MSE) between expected and application of rule generation. General frameworks in
actual predictions by 0.0101 to 0.1020.
 cybersecurity [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] often
 Index Terms— eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI), cyber- consist of simplified network approximations like LIME [16]
security, interpretable classification, model lightweight, general and SHAP [17]. These frameworks may also incorporate
framework.
 adversarial-based feature sampling [18], [19]. General frameworks offer versatility across multiple tasks but may yield
 I. I NTRODUCTION unstable outcomes, reduced precision, and the need for additional parameters or training. Attention mechanisms [20],
T HE escalating cyber threat landscape has inflicted substantial losses on internet applications, ranging from data
breaches and service outages to facility failures. According to
 [21], [22], utilizing attention networks, focus on the influence
 of distinct features on subsequent tasks. They often require
 supplementary visualization tools to clarify the extent of
 Manuscript received 27 October 2023; revised 26 January 2024; feature focus [23], [24], [25], [26]. Unlike general frameworks,
accepted 22 February 2024. Date of publication 4 March 2024; date of attention mechanisms are relatively straightforward, as their
current version 2 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U2133208 and Grant
 interpretability is inherent within the original model. However,
62101368, in part by the Sichuan Youth Science and Technology Innovation complex models like GPT [27] and GLM [28] can lose inter-
Team under Grant 2022JDTD0014, and in part by the Sichuan Science pretability, leading to epistemic illusions. Rule generation
and Technology Program under Grant 2022YFG0168. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
 is an intuitive approach involving the translation of features
was Dr. Andrew Clark. (Corresponding author: Junfeng Wang.) into human-readable language rules to formulate security
 Wenhan Ge, Zeyuan Cui, and Junfeng Wang are with the College of decisions. Decision Trees (DT) [29], [30], [31] and detection
Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail:
wangjf@scu.edu.cn). rules [32], [33], [34], [35] fall into this category. While rule
 Binhui Tang and Xiaohui Li are with the School of Cyber Science and generation is transparent, the alignment with human com-
Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China. prehension may not always match machine suitability [36].
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2024.3372808, provided by the authors. Consequently, rule generation often leads to precision loss
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3372808 and issues related to boundary ambiguity. Additionally, prior
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3830 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

knowledge of engineering significantly influences the method’s 2) A set of assessment methods is designed to verify the
performance. quality of the results produced. By forming prototypes of
 Based on the aforementioned summary, it indicates that the the categories, we validate the ability of models to differinterpretability of cybersecurity is still in its early stages of entiate key information. And, by inputting blank noise,
development. There are three main reasons for this: the models have been tested to resist noise interference.
a) Single-Task Limitation: Some explanation models may 3) We conduct experiments with multiple data sources from
 not be universally applicable to multi-tasks, as they pri- multiple scenarios. The results show that our model
 marily focus on interpreting the specific data structures in compresses a large portion of computational space and
 input features. Even the most generalized versions of LIME time while guaranteeing highly accurate recognition. It is
 and SHAP may pose challenges and mistakes when using believed that the method in this paper can be adopted for
 the TensorFlow2.0 framework. richer scenarios.
b) Data Overfitting: Issues such as data imbalance and the The paper is structured as follows: Section I provides
 black-box nature of neural networks can introduce noisy an overview of the need for interpretative analysis in
 semantics along unknown pathways, disrupting the clas- network security and outlines the study’s contributions.
 sification of normal semantics and leading to parameter Section II explores the relevant literature on prototype netredundancy, causing the model to become overfitted to the works and similar models in the context of interpretability
 current dataset [37]. research. Section III elaborates on the methodology and
c) Stochastic Explanation: Due to factors like stochas- its implementation in this study. Section IV covers the
 tic gradient descent and stochastic initialization, existing empirical experimentation phase, including classification and
 explanation methods may not always yield reliable and explication tasks across various network security analysis
 stable results [38]. At the same time, a large number of scenarios. Finally, Section V summarizes the entire manuscript
 explanations rest on human identification [25], [39] and comprehensively.
 lack quantitative assessment indicators.
Therefore, it is imperative to prioritize a generalizable II. R ELATED W ORK
framework ensuring the lightweight and highly accurate clas- A. Explainable Artificial Intelligence
sification and quantitative interpretation for cybersecurity
 Before diving into a detailed presentation of relevant
interpretive analysis.
 work, it’s essential to clarify the concept of eXplainable
 To address this gap, this paper introduces MetaClus-
 Artificial Intelligence (XAI). XAI can be broadly categoter, a general classification framework based on semantic
 rized into two key aspects: global interpretability and local
prototype aggregation. MetaCluster is designed to enhance
 explainability [41].
interpretability across various cybersecurity tasks and address
 Global interpretability entails understanding the algoriththe following Research Questions (RQ):
 mic logic underlying a neural network model. This type of
RQ1. How to establish a lightweight, highly accurate, gen- interpretability aligns with natural laws and human reasoneralizable, and interpretable framework for all kinds ing processes. Models like Decision Trees (DT) [42], naive
 of cybersecurity classifications? Bayes [36], [43], Markov decision processes [44], and Monte
RQ2. How to quantitatively assess the interpretation Carlo decision-making [45] adhere to this approach.
 of results for a more reliable model that meets Local explainability, on the other hand, focuses on explainexpectations? ing individual examples by assessing the importance and
 Firstly, MetaCluster transforms any input data type into
 contribution of features and highlighting the relationship
3-dimensional vectors through embedding operations to
 between features and the model’s decision. Local explainabilanswer RQ1. Secondly, inspired by the Prototype Network
 ity emphasizes the input-output relationship, often neglecting
(PN) [40] of meta-learning, MetaCluster assumes that there
 the internal logic of the network’s decision-making proexists a set of semantic prototypes of each granularity feature
 cess. This makes it well-suited for most black-box models.
to guide its contribution to the classification process. There-
 However, this focus on individual instances can introduce chalfore, MetaCluster repeats the three basic steps of “embedding
 lenges such as result instability, dependence on sample quality
features, finding prototypes, and aggregating similar features”
 and difficulty in establishing a unified basis for generalizato filter and merge the features of each network layer in the
 tion [18], [19], [20]. Typical methods for local explainability
classification process into high-level features, forming a proinclude LIME [16], which modifies feature representations to
totype decision process. Finally, to answer RQ2, MetaCluster
 observe corresponding changes in outcomes, and SHAP [17],
provides the Mean Squared Error (MSE) as a measure of the
 which explores the contribution of groups of features to
gap between the model prediction and the standard expectation
 outcomes through feature games.
when using main and none semantics. The contributions of this
paper are as follows:
 1) This paper proposes a generalized interpretive framework B. XAI for Cybersecurity
 for explaining most of the cybersecurity classification As discussed in Section I, current efforts in interpreting
 tasks, which can be used to derive the contribution of cybersecurity can be broadly categorized into three cases.
 arbitrary input features to the classification results and These include: the Case explanations using a general explanaproduce highly accurate and efficient recognition results. tory framework, the Attention mechanisms with embedded
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3831

feature attention modules, and the Rule generation that pro- domains, guiding inputs with varying distributions into difduces rules comprehensible to humans. The first two methods ferent branches for classification.
of these are currently the mainstream approaches, as they are While rule generation allows neural networks to cateeffective and do not necessitate complex expert knowledge gorize feature combinations with similarities, this tree-like
integration. partitioning can affect the model’s decision-making process,
 1) Case Explanation: In the field of cybersecurity, the especially in cases of sequences with varying lengths and
primary XAI frameworks are mainly LIME and SHAP. For image categorization, particularly in multi-label classificainstance, Alani [9] and Kinkead [10] respectively applied tion. ProtoPNeT [51] introduces semantic prototypes to filter
SHAP and LIME in malware analysis. Suryotrisongko [12] features and replace strongly segmented regions of input
used both LIME and SHAP for botnet identification, while features, resulting in softer importance scores and improved
Psychoula [13] employed LIME and SHAP for fraud detection. model applicability and generalization. ProtoTree [52] and
Moreover, LIME and SHAP have found applications in other ViT-NeT [22] extend ProtoPNeT’s single-level semantic prodomains such as spam file retrieval [11] and network intrusion totype comparison into a binary comparison tree to distinguish
detection [15], [46], where their explainability features have between critical and minor features. This deepens the model’s
been leveraged. decision pathways but also increases resource consumption.
 Further, more researches have been done to emphasize 4) Summary: Although the XAI in cybersecurity analysis
information variability based on LIME and SHAP. TRUST- is in its early stages, the integration of deep learning and
XAI [37] statistically counts the most important variables by interpretability methodologies has become a pivotal aspect
assuming Gaussian distributions and input-output information of XAI research. This paves the way for the exploration of
entropy. SeqMask [25] measures the impact of different feature multifaceted cybersecurity XAI frameworks as an inevitable
masks on the classification results by counting the change in trajectory in this field.
KL scatter. SATG [20] and Aditya [47] respectively use an The core concept of MetaCluster lies in its bottom-up
adversarial-based approach to explore and explain the bound- one-way decision graph with granularity-by-granularity generaries of understanding attack cases and textual semantics. alization. In contrast to traditional DT structures, this approach
 While the utilization of a nested XAI framework provides permits the sharing of sibling nodes. It places a greater
explanatory foundations for most tasks, its instability often emphasis on preserving the matching and filtering of feature
necessitates additional expert analytical procedures [18], [19], prototypes at each level, rather than relying on the common
[20]. Therefore, there exists a growing demand for an XAI attention mechanism. Differing from expert matching rules,
framework that enables the transfer of explanatory assessment MetaCluster generates a step-by-step granularity of feature
feedback to the original model. importance distribution for DL.
 2) Attention Mechanism: Self-interpretable attention mechanisms present another avenue in XAI. The integration of III. M ETHODOLOGY
attention empowers neural networks to naturally revisit con- As discussed in Sect. I, MetaCluster primarily addresses the
textual relationships and determine feature importance. questions related to RQ1: Universal Classification Framework
 The Transformer methodology [23], [24], [26] introduced and RQ2: Quantitative Interpretation Assessment. The RQ1
attention to the analysis of malware and CTI, resulting in will be addressed in Sect. III-A, while the RQ2 will be
improved accuracy. SATG [20] explores the contributions of answered in Sect. III-B.
the self-adversarial central attention mechanism in recognizing
sufficient and necessary behavioral patterns during attacks.
ViT-NeT [22] integrates prototype match into visual transform- A. MetaCluster Model
ers to facilitate the segmentation of salient features in images. Ensuring interpretability of the process entails making every
 Attention mechanisms introduce a bias in feature selection, neural network layer interpretable, while the lightweight model
but an excessive accumulation of attention layers can com- requires minimizing noise semantics as feasible. By combining
plicate subsequent explanations. Large-scale language models the characteristics of graph learning and PN, MetaCluster
like GPT [27] and GLM [28], which adhere to the Transformer converts all embedding operations throughout the classificaarchitecture, are still in the early stages of determining their tion process into prototypical network operations. It utilizes
underlying reasoning processes. the similarity of “layer prototypes” as guidance for “graph
 3) Rule Generation: Rule generation is a method that aggregation”, creating aggregated features that are involved in
can represent the model’s decision-making process compre- subsequent embedding transformations. As a result, each layer
hensively, with the DT being a prominent example of the of the MetaCluster neural network comprises three core steps:
way. Mahbooba [29] utilized DT as an explanatory approach feature embedding, meta-generation, and meta-aggregation.
in intrusion detection systems. Similarly, Wang et al. [30] The structure of the MetaCluster Model is in Fig. 1. The
employed the DT method for mobile malware traffic detection. formal expressions for these steps are as follows:
Verkerken et al. [48] also used Random Forests (RF) as a 
 f t (lt (xt−1 , pt ) · xt−1 ) (1a)
layered detector in unknown attack detection. xt = gt (xt−1 ) =
 lt (xt−1 , pt ) · f t (xt−1 ) (1b)
 More advanced approaches such as Neural DT [49],
Deep Neural DT [31], and Neural Decision Forest [50] use where xt ∈ R|xt |×vt represents the output of layer t as well as
neural networks to determine the decision tree’s partition the input for layer t +1. f t (·) : R|xt−1 |×vt−1 → R|xt |×vt denotes
3832 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 1. MetaCluster model structure. MetaCluster accepts many types of input, such as images, text, and tables. It transforms the input into a formal input
model in the form of Rw×v . Each layer of MetaCluster follows the three basic steps of “feature embedding, prototype finding, and semantic aggregation” to
form a progressively constrained feature filtering mechanism to predict categories.

the embedding method, which can be any standard neural (where w denotes width, h denotes height, and c denotes the
network layer. pt ∈ R|xt |×vt−1 corresponds to the semantic number of channels), convolution and flattening operations
prototype for each layer. In the original PN, semantic pro- will be employed for transformation. When the input X ∈
totypes are obtained by averaging sample features. However, Ns represents sequences (with s being the sequence length),
in MetaCluster, as the exact number of semantic prototypes is transformation is accomplished through word embedding or
unknown, pt is randomized and requires adjustments through sentence embedding. When the input X ∈ Rv corresponds to
forward propagation. feature sets (with v denoting the number of vectors), reshaping
 
 pt · xt−1 T is utilized to convert Rv into R1×v .
 (2a) The output of MetaCluster consists of a probability set PY ∈
 
 
 
  ∥x ∥ · ∥ p ∥
 lt (xt−1 , pt ) = σ ◦
 t−1 t R|Y | for classification labels Y . Assuming this output is from
 (t)
 
  LN( pt Wk · (xt−1 Wq(t) )T ) + bt (2b) the n-th layer of the MetaCluster, there are two methods to
 
 obtain PY (in Formula (4a) and Formula (4b)). Both of them
  −∥ p −x ⊗W ∥/τ +b
 e t t−1 t t (2c)
 can be activated using σ (·), with available activation options
 lt (xt−1 , pt ) : R|xt−1 |×vt−1 × R|xt |×vt−1 → R|xt |×|xt−1 | rep- including identity, sigmoid, softmax, or others.
resents the process of establishing “meta-aggregation,” which
 ln (xn−1 , pY ),
 
can be achieved through cosine similarity (eq. (2a)), attention if |xn−1 | = 1 (4a)
 PY = σ ◦
mechanisms (eq. (2b), LN is short for Layer Normalization), f n (ln (xn−1 , pY ) · xn−1 ), if |xn−1 | > 1 (4b)
or L2 norm distance (eq. (2c)), among other techniques. Where
 (t) The first method is the original PN approach, where,
τ represents the temperature coefficient. Wq ∈ Rvn−1 ×dk and
 (t) v ×d
 assuming the penultimate layer contains only one semantic
Wk ∈ R n−1 k are query and key weights for attentions. prototype, xn−1 ∈ R1×vn , the labels that surpass a certain
Wt ∈ Rvt−1 denote the weight matrices for the xn−1 ’s vectors threshold are determined solely by comparing the similarity
respectively. bt ∈ R is the bias. ⊗ is the element-wise multiply between the input features xn−1 of the last layer and the
function. σ could be any kind of activation methods like relu, prototypes pY ∈ R|Y |×vn corresponding to the labels in Y .
min-max-scale, tanh, softmax, or none. The second method does not necessitate the assumption of
 The complete MetaCluster model is constructed through the having only one prototype but instead employs a function
stacking of MetaCluster layers, with slight modifications to the f n (·) : R|Y |×vn−1 → R|Y |×1 to transform the features into
input of the first layer and the output of the final layer. The probability outputs. Here, pY ∈ R|Y |×vn−1 is still the label
following formula is responsible for transforming any input X prototypes set.
into an acceptable form x0 ∈ R|x0 |×v0 .
 w×h×c
 
  Flatten(Conv2D(X )), X ∈ R
  (3a)
 B. Interpretability & Explainability
 x0 = Embedding(X ), X ∈N s (3b)
 
 v
 The answer to RQ2 implies the need to design metrics
 ReshapeRv →R1×v (X ), X ∈ R (3c)
 
 to measure the reliability and stability of the interpretation
 There are generally three input modalities for cybersecu- results. In fact, the interpretation process of MetaCluster can
rity classification problems: images, sequences, and feature be decomposed into two stages: feature explanation and pattern
sets. When the input X ∈ Rw×h×c represents images interpretation. The feature explanation is used to get the
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3833

Fig. 2. The interpretation process of MetaCluster. Since semantic aggregation occurs in each MetaCluster layer, the structure of the model with softmax
activation can be equated to a tree structure with level-by-level feature upward aggregation in the global view. The structure possesses both explainable and
Interpretable properties. Explanation indicates that any feature can obtain a contribution to the classification result. Interpretation indicates that an invariant
inference path can be obtained for any classification task.

interpretation results and the pattern interpretation is used the following equation:
to measure the reliability and stability of the interpretation 
 g1 (xY ), if t = 1 (6a)
results. The difference between this two explanations will be plt =
 gt ( plt−1 ), otherwise (6b)
taken as an example of a simple two-layer model as shown in
Fig. 2. where xY ∈ R|Y |×w×v is the feature prototype of each label Y .
 Feature explanation is the process of transforming all Unlike label prototype pY in the last layer, X Y emphasizes
lt (xt−1 , pt ) by individually abstracting them and continuously the feature prototypes obtained in the embedding space corlinking them to form x0 → xn . Although there is an embed- responding to the original x0 without any embedding and
ding operation f t (·) in the original MetaCluster model, the aggregation. This concept is similar to the “average face” [53]
elements before and after the embedding can correspond to in the field of face recognition, which can reflect the “average”
each other since each embedding only modifies the vector characteristics of a classification. Because the number of xY
vt and not the number of features |xt−1 | or | pt |. Then a and the number of labels Y are the same, as well as to
one-way feature interpretation tree or graph with xt as the build |Y | decision paths to |Y | categories, the model output
node and lt (xt−1 , pt ) as the edge can be obtained. It is also pln ∈ R|Y |×|Y | of the xY prototypes is expected to be close to
possible to obtain an arbitrary label Y on the x0 attention score the unit matrix I|Y |×|Y | . At this time, each feature prototype
s(x0 ) ∈ R|x0 |×|Y | , here the PY ∈ R|Y |×1 is the predictions of has been precisely matched to each classification. Thus it exists
the model: MSE: eq. (7) so that the smaller loss pl is, the more accurate
 the xY and the model are.
 s(x0 ) = l1 (x0 , p1 ) · · · lt (xt−1 , pt ) · · · ln (xn−1 , pY )PY (5) ∥ pln − I|Y |×|Y | ∥2
 loss pl = (7)
 |Y |
 Pattern interpretation achieves quantitative interpretability In particular, plt can also accept inputs of all-0 vectors or
by constructing links to decision patterns. A simple approach matrices, i.e., [0]w×v . In this case, the default is that the model
to obtain highly reliable and stable interpretation measure- accepts the task of predicting the null semantics and should
ments is to verify that the model can categorize feature output an all-0 prediction. Then the loss pl at this point will
prototypes for each class into the correct belongings. Also, be adjusted to the following prediction process. The smaller
considering that the explanation cannot be far-fetched, empty (0)
 loss pl is, the greater the model’s immunity to interference.
feature prototypes must be recognized as empty labels.
 g1 ([0]w×v ), if t = 1
 
 It is worth noting that for a given MetaCluster prediction (0) (8a)
 plt =
model, where pt , f t (·), lt (·) are not varying with samples. gt ( plt−1 ), otherwise (8b)
In this way, if the pt decision tree or graph can be con-
 (0)
structed by constructing the pt decision tree or graph for loss pl = ∥ pln(0) − [0]|Y | ∥2 = ∥ pln(0) ∥2 (9)
each layer of necklaces, it will be possible to represent the
 (0)
fundamentals and logic of the classification task. The formu- loss pl and loss pl can also serve as metrics for evaluating
lation plt is the edge connecting the pt samples and satisfies other classification models if they are not used in the training
3834 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE I TABLE II
 DATASETS FOR D IFFERENT C LASSIFICATION TASKS G ENERAL E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

process. When loss pl is smaller, the model is more able
to differentiate the core semantic prototypes into distinct
categories, proving a more reliable and believable prediction.
 (0)
A smaller loss pl signifies that the model is better able to resist
external interference and noise.
 attention maps or other visualization techniques by eq. (5)
 and eq. (8).
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 The DL and machine learning models in Table III will be
A. Experiment Settings used for experimental comparisons. The methods in the upper
 The experiments primarily focus on answering RQ1: half of the table are traditional methods, while the methods
Universal Classification Framework and RQ2: Quantitative in the lower half are XAIs. Due to the different types of
Interpretation Assessment. RQ1 requires classification analysis inputs in the three experiments, not all methods will be used
that is multi-tasked and multi-input. RQ2 demands that the as comparisons for the same set of experiments.
explanations and examinations in Sect. III-B exist for each
experimental species. Thus, the experiments will be partitioned B. Malware Classification
into several cybersecurity classification scenarios. They are
malware classification with image input, ATT&CK classifi- 1) Classification Analysis: As Drebin is processed as
cation with CTI text input, and malicious traffic classification Markov images for input, it primarily involves image classifiwith feature sets. The datasets for these three scenarios are cation techniques. The following methods have been selected
given in Table I. in this sub-section, with each method utilizing the sigmoid(·)
 For the malware classification task, we used the Drebin activation for outputting: ViT, MLP, MalPurifier, ResNet,
datasets. Drebin classification involves identifying malicious Conv-BiLSTM, ProtoTree, ProtoPNet, *-PN, *-DNDT, and
programs from Android packages, primarily in binary format. *-NeT.
To process the input data, we will utilize Markov image The classification results of the aforementioned comparative
processing [54] in conjunction with eq. (3a). methods and MetaCluster are presented in Table IV. In the
 ATT&CK classification dissects attack tactics and tech- case of MetaCluster, the implementation of f t (·) is indicated
niques defined by Mitre ATT&CK1 from unstructured Cyber within parentheses.
Threat Intelligence (CTI). To handle the unstructured CTIs, According to the results in the table, it can be observed that
we’ll employ a sequence-based approach and DistilBERT2 MetaCluster achieves a higher F1 score and less processing
embedding as outlined in eq. (3b). time. While most of the decision tree explanation models have
 For malicious traffic classification, the statistical feature reduced their accuracy compared to the original models. This
dataset of CIC-IDS-2017 [55] was selected. This dataset is advantage can be attributed to MetaCluster’s meta-aggregation
based on uniform features, and we’ll employ eq. (3c) as the mechanism. On one hand, it helps compress model size to
input processing method. In the data processing, we transform avoid redundant computation of similar features. On the other
it to exclude the BENIGN type of traffic in favor of one-hot hand, it ensures that the features generated by f t (·) can parcoding due to the excessive number and the lack of malicious- ticipate relatively “completely” in subsequent computations.
ness of BENIGN tags. Specifically, when the prediction result Simultaneously, it can be also observed that MetaCluster
is all zeros, it is considered consistent with the BENIGN label. using Conv1D outperforms the model using Dense layers.
 The experiments’ general settings are summarized in Referring to the definitions of Query and Key in ViT, this
Table II. The meta-cluster-layers’ settings like “Meta num difference may be attributed to MetaCluster’s feature fusion
|xt |”, “Meta-cluster-layer num”, and “Meta weight vt ” are based on the similarity of features, while Conv1D’s fusion
chosen by the hyper-parameter optimization framework for relies on spatial connectivity. In this classification task, a single
TensorFlow models named keras_tuner.3 We will assess the pass of spatial correlation in image input may not indepenclassification results using metrics such as Precision, Recall, dently provide all the necessary features for classification.
and F1, while also considering the model’s size and process- Therefore, using Conv1D can better leverage the cooperative
ing speed. The interpretation of results will involve feature advantage of neighboring local features, leading to an improvement in classification performance.
 1 https://attack.mitre.org/ 2) Feature Explanation: Fig. 3 provides explanations of
 2 https://huggingface.co/distilbert-base-uncased Drebin’s features when using MetaCluster (Dense), Conv-
 3 https://tensorflow.google.cn/tutorials/keras/keras_tuner DNDT, ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, Conv-NeT and ViT-NeT.
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3835

 TABLE III
 T HE E XPERIMENTAL C OMPARISON M ETHODS

 TABLE IV Each row in the subgraphs represents the feature focus of
D REBIN C LASSIFICATION R ESULT A FTER M ARKOV I MAGE P ROCESSING . the model on a class of samples. Different rows correspond
 T HE S PEED I S M EASURED IN M S /S TEP. S OME OF THE NAMES H AVE
 B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE S PACE , T HEY A RE : CRNN FOR
 to the results of the seven malware classes as “Plankton,
 C ONV-B I LSTM AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER GinMaster, FakeDoc, FakeInstaller, Opfake, BaseBridge, and
 Kmin”. The more stable the interpretation method, the more
 similar the area of the feature interests in the same class, and
 the more significant the discrepancy between the patterns over
 different classes. Based on this hypothesis, it can be found that
 MetaCluster’s explanation possesses significant variability.
 Although there is more than one feature attention under the
 same class, MetaCluster has more different distributions of
 features of interest for any class than Conv-DNDT, ProtoP-
 Net, ProtoTree, and Conv-NeT. And the feature distributions
 between classes are highly consistent. Even based on prototype
 similarity measures, the feature maps of Conv-DNDT, ProtoP-
 Net, and ProtoTree are not intuitive and easy to differentiate.
 This may be due to the fact that the prototypes of these three
 are only related to the convolved feature x0 , which makes
The figure uses the feature attention maps to show the output the attention relatively distracting and the visualization not
(eq. (5)) of the models for part of the classifications. obvious. On the contrary, ConvNeT and ViT-NeT’s attentions
3836 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 3. The feature explanation for Drebin. Each row shows a type of different examples of image feature attention. A good feature attention is the one with
large differences between classes and small differences within classes. This is reflected in the graph by the similarity of peers and significant differences in
the same column. In this way, it seems that MetaCluster has relatively good feature attention.

are focused while the feature attention differentiation across direct, which conforms to the repeatability principle of
classes is not as clear as MetaCluster. interpretability.
 This indicates that MetaCluster can better categorize fea- 3) Pattern Interpretation: The xY used here is the result of
tures and generate a direct mapping of features to classification averaging by class for samples in the training and testing sets:
results, which has both between-class variation and within- x
 xY = [ |x| |x ∈ X, model(x) = y] y∈Y . For MetaCluster the
class uniformity. Therefore, it can be considered that the output y is pln , and pln is replaced by model(xY ) for other
decision process generated by MetaCluster is stable and models. eq. (7) also applies to other models as well. When
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3837

 TABLE V C. ATT&CK Classification
 T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR M ALWARE
 C LASSIFICATIONS . I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0, 1) Classification Analysis: The primary task in utilizing
 I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR the ATT&CK textual dataset revolves around the generation
 E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE U NIT M ATRIX , of word vectors through the application of text embedding
 I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE IN
 S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION techniques. In this regard, DistilBERT4 is employed as the
 chosen method for text embedding. Given that sequences serve
 as input, conventional text classification methodologies are
 typically considered as baseline approaches for comparative
 purposes, including CNN, BiLSTM, TextRCNN, BiLSTM-
 MHA, Transformer, SATG, *-NeT, ProtoTree, ProtoPNet,
 *-DNDT.
 Due to the different abstraction levels of tactics and
 techniques, MetaCluster will respectively participate in the
 experiment using Dense, Conv1D, and Gated Recurrent Unit
 (GRU) as its f t (·). Since GRU causes all semantics to
 be displaced, only the aggregation-after-embedding approach
 (eq. (1a)) is considered for the implementation of MetaCluster
 when GRU is used as f t (·).
 The results of the experiments are shown in Table VII.
 It can be found that MetaCluster is able to achieve higher
 F1 values using fewer parameters and at a faster speed, both
 when it comes to tactics and techniques categorization. The
 TABLE VI possible reason for this is that the use of prototype aggregation
 (0) can change the reasoning process to be simpler and more
loss pl FOR D IFFERENT M ODELS IN M ALWARE C LASSIFICATION .
 (0)
 efficient. Among them, when classifying tactics, it can be
 A S MALLER loss pl S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER E QUIPPED
 found that TextRCNN-NeT and MetaCluster (GRU) using
 TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE . S OME OF THE M ODEL
 NAMES H AVE B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE S PACE . T HEY A RE cyclic recursion and aggregation ideas are able to achieve
 CRNN FOR C ONV-B I LSTM AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER higher F1, suggesting that models that aggregate full-text
 contextual semantics are able to express the abstraction of
 tactics more fully. On the contrary, MetaCluster with Conv1D
 and BiLSTM-MHA-NeT are able to obtain better results when
 categorizing technologies, suggesting that localized information is more able to dominate the recognition of technologies.
 2) Feature Explanation: We enumerate the keyword extraction of a specific CTI text by various models. The keywords
 are identified by the rule that the normalized score is higher
 than 50%. The results are shown in Table VIII. The statements
 in the table are from the CTI report [68], and the TTPs tags
 to which it belongs are T1071: Application Layer Protocol
eq. (7) is small, the resulting matrix should look more like the
 and TA0011: Command and Control (C2). According to the
unit matrix, so it is only necessary to compare this matrix to
 semantic constraints of the tags provided by Mitre,5 the
get an idea of how well the model fits xY .
 manually extracted keywords mainly contain DNS and C2.
 Table V shows the loss pl for different models. The loss pl
 From the results in the table, although most of the models
measures the ability of the model to correctly predict xY .
 provide sufficient attention to DNS and C2, some of the
The smaller loss pl is, the more the model is able to predict
 models that classify well, such as TextRCNN-Net, BiLSTMthe corresponding categorization using the standard, desired
 MHA-Net, Conv-Net, etc., all produce redundant attention to
semantics. In this example, MetaCluster obtains relatively
 other non-important words. The reason for this may be the
small results, signaling MetaCluster’s outstanding ability to
 use of CNN or RNN structures. Although complex models
grasp standard semantics in images. At the same time, Metaare able to synthesize the context, the semantics are shifted
Cluster’s loss difference between the training and testing
 imperceptibly, thus making unimportant information tainted
datasets is small, which can be assumed that MetaCluster has
 with important semantics as well.
the ability to find core semantics and extensions.
 (0) Among the explanations of all models, SATG, Transformer-
 Table VI is the loss pl prediction of each model for all
 (0) NeT, and MetaCluster do not focus on redundant information
classes in Drebin with all-zero matrix. The loss pl of ViT-PN, and have relatively good classification results, indicating that
ProtoPNet, ProtoTree, and MetaCluster is below 0.5, while the methods based on the attention mechanism are able to
the other models are greater than 0.5. Meanwhile, the standard
deviation of MetaCluster (Dense) is the smallest. It shows that 4 https://huggingface.co/distilbert-base-uncased
MetaCluster is more resistant to noise interference. 5 https://attack.mitre.org/versions/v8/ techniques/T1071/004/
3838 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE VII
 ATT&CK C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS FOR C YBER T HREAT I NTELLIGENCE . T HE S PEED I S M EASURED IN M S /S TEP

 TABLE VIII
T HE N ORMALIZED W ORDS S CORES ( EQ . (5)) FOR A S ENTENCE IN [68]. T HE L ABELS FOR THE S ENTENCE A RE T1071: A PPLICATION L AYER P ROTOCOL
 AND TA0011: C OMMAND AND C ONTROL (C2). T HE B OLDER S CORES OF W ORDS A RE H IGHER T HAN 50%. MSE I S THE M EAN S QUARED
 E RROR B ETWEEN THE H UMAN AND THE M ODEL . I F THE G AP OR MSE B ETWEEN THE H UMAN ’ S P REDICTION AND THE M ODEL’ S
 P REDICTION I S S MALL , I T M EANS T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER A BLE TO ACQUIRE K EYWORDS
 T HAT A RE R ECOGNIZED AS O FFENSIVE BY H UMANS

form explanations efficiently and understandably. Throughout, MetaCluster obtains relatively small results, indicating that
MetaCluster’s attention to all non-important words is almost MetaCluster has mastered the standard definition of ATT&CK.
 (0)
0.0, indicating that MetaCluster is able to form better expla- Table X shows the loss pl results of predicting all-zero
nations for text categorization. inputs to tactics using different models. From the results,
 More instances in text explanation of MetaCluster can be we can see that *-NeT’s model can partially suppress
found in Fig. 4. the abnormal prediction of the original model, for exam-
 (0)
 3) Pattern Interpretation: To obtain the average text xY for ple, the average loss pl of BiLSTM-MHA is 0.7153, while
CTI, we counted the TF-IDF scores of the words (DistilBert’s BiLSTM-MHA-NeT’s is 0.3669. However, the prediction of
tokens) in all tactical categorizations and selected the top |X | MetaCluster for all classifications is close to 0, reaching a
 (0)
words in each category as the result. The tactical category loss pl of 0.0070. This indicates that MetaCluster can suppress
was chosen because the number of samples in the tactical the expression of classification without semantic input, making
category is much larger than the technical, which would make the model more reliable.
the sampling results more natural.
 Table IX shows the loss pl of the different models for the
classification of tactics. The loss pl measures the ability of the D. Traffic Classification
model to correctly predict xY . The smaller loss pl is, the more 1) Classification Analysis: Due to the temporal statistical
the model is able to translate standard, expected CTI semantics characteristics provided by the malicious traffic dataset, the
into corresponding behavioral categories. In this example, following models with sigmoid activation will be chosen for
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3839

 Fig. 4. Other examples for explanations of MetaCluster (Dense).

 TABLE IX TABLE X
 T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR ATT&CK TACTICS (0)
 loss pl FOR D IFFERENT M ODELS IN ATT&CK C LASSIFICATION .
 C LASSIFICATIONS . I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0, (0)
 I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR A S MALLER loss pl S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER
 E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE U NIT M ATRIX , E QUIPPED TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE . S OME OF
 I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE THE M ODEL NAMES H AVE B EEN S HORTENED TO S AVE
 IN S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION S PACE , T HEY A RE RCNN FOR T EXT RCNN, RANN FOR
 B I LSTM-MHA, AND MC FOR M ETAC LUSTER

 TABLE XI
 T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS . T HE S PEED I S M EASURED
 BY M S /S TEP. MC I S S HORT FOR M ETAC LUSTER

comparison: DT, RF, LinerSVC, MLP, CtxAtt, DNDT and
*-NeT.
 Table XI shows the prediction metrics of different models.
From the results in the table, it can be seen that DT and
RF are the most powerful models for this dataset, followed
by MetaCluster. The reason for this may be that DT is
more suitable for distinguishing the decision boundaries of maintains higher F1, lower space and time consumption among
the features. MetaCluster, although not as good as DT, still other deep learning methods.
3840 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 5. The importance of categorical features in traffic dataset. The different colored bars are how much attention the model pays to different features of
the same classification. If the score is much greater than 0, it means that the feature is relevant and more important to the classification.

 2) Feature Explanation: Since MetaCluster will reshape results in the use of the original x0 with only one score left.
X ∈ Rv to become x0 ∈ R1×v , and eq. (5) will place all This will lead to not being able to get the attention of the
of the attention on the first dimension of x0 , this inevitably features in v, and therefore the x0 transformation is needed.
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3841

One approach, like in LIME [16], is to break up the features TABLE XII
into different sets and use these sets to see if the predictions are T HE PATTERN I NTERPRETATION ’ S loss pl FOR T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATIONS .
 I F loss pl OF A M ODEL I S C LOSER TO 0, I TS P REDICTIONS OF THE
correct. Therefore, we use the Mask unit matrix Iv×v and the C ATEGORY P ROTOTYPES FOR E ACH C LASS A RE C LOSER TO THE
original x0 to multiply by element, and the individual features U NIT M ATRIX , I NDICATING T HAT I T I S THE M ORE S UITABLE
of x0 are broken up into different sets x f ∈ Rv×v to achieve IN S TABLE S EMANTIC G ENERALIZATION

the selection of important features. The formula is as follows:
  (1) 
 x0 ··· 0
 x f = x0 ⊗ Iv×v =  ... ..
 .
 .. 
 .  (10)
 
 (v)
 0 ··· x0
 At this point, we then substitute both x0 and x f into
MetaCluster to obtain the desired classification y0 ∈ R1×l and
the classification results of independent features y f ∈ Rv×l ,
as shown in eq. (11). We want that the y f of the high
importance x f should be as close as possible to y0 , so the
score s P v×1 for each feature is calculated using eq. (12).
 f ∈R
 v (y f )
where v ∈ R1×l is the base score for each class (cf. the TABLE XIII
ybase definition in [17]). abs(·) takes absolute values for the (0)
 loss pl FOR D IFFERENT M ODELS IN T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION .
normalized x0 . Under this requirement, when s f is positive and (0)
 A S MALLER loss pl S IGNIFIES T HAT THE M ODEL I S B ETTER
has a large absolute value, it means that the feature is effective E QUIPPED TO R ESIST E XTERNAL I NTERFERENCE
for y0 classification. When s f is close to 0, it means that the
feature has no effect. When s f is negative and the absolute
value is large, the feature may helpful for non-y0 classification.
 y0 = MetaCluster(x0 ), y f = MetaCluster(x f ) (11)
 (y ) (y )
 P P
 s f = abs(LN(x f ))ReLU(y f − v
 f 0 T
 )(y0 − l )
 v l
 (12)
 Fig. 5 shows how much attention LIME and MetaCluster
pay to each feature. The left and right columns respectively V. C ONCLUSION
show the average feature importance for each category for Addressing the need for a universal, stable, convenient,
the 0th to 500th and the 500th to 1000th test samples. The and efficient interpretable framework in cybersecurity, this
top, middle and bottom rows are the feature importance scores paper introduces MetaCluster, a generic classification interobtained using the LIME [16] on MLP, LIME on MetaCluster preter framework based on prototype semantic aggregation.
and MetaCluster itself. It can be found that compared to LIME, MetaCluster filters, combines, and expresses classification
the method in this paper is able to obtain a more obvious and semantics by generating feature prototypes at different granustable level of feature attention, as well as a more obvious larity levels and constructing dynamic graph learning layers.
differentiation of features in different classes. It shows that We validate the applicability of MetaCluster to multiple interthe feature explanation of MetaCluster is stable and obvious. pretable classification tasks through three sets of experiments:
 3) Pattern Interpretation: Since a statistical feature dataset malware, ATT&CK, and malicious traffic classification.
was chosen, it is assumed that the features of each classifica- According to the experimental results, MetaCluster outpertion obey a polynomial normal distribution. The expectation forms other deep learning models by achieving more accurate,
of the distribution, i.e., the average of the features of each stable, and explanatory classification predictions with lower
sample, is considered as the “average feature prototype” xY time and space consumption. Specifically, in the classifications
for each classification. Bringing this feature prototype into the of malware, attack tactics, attack techniques, and malicious
model prediction yields the degree of model fitness for each traffic, MetaCluster improves F1 values by 0.0148, 0.0275,
class of features. The closer the prediction is to a unit matrix, 0.0023, and −0.0093, reduces parameter count consumption
the more robust and reliable the model is. by 91.78%, 88.54%, 79.52%, and 88.57%, and increases oper-
 Table XII shows the loss pl profile of the traffic. The smaller ation speed by 0.0%, 64.00%, 71.37%, and 0.0%, respectively.
the loss pl , the more the model is able to correspond the Additionally, MetaCluster can provide the importance of
average features from the normal distribution to the malicious image, text, and statistical features, and it effectively resists
categorized species. In this case, MetaCluster unsurprisingly noise interference on classification. On the malware, the tacobtains relatively small results, demonstrating the ability to tics, and the traffic dataset, the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of
understand standard semantics. prediction and expectation for the standard category prototypes
 (0)
 From Table XIII, it can be seen that MetaCluster’s loss pl is reduced by an average of 0.0099, 0.1020, and 0.0903,
is the closest to 0 when predicting null semantics. indicating respectively. And the MSE on non-semantic predictions is
that MetaCluster can resist the noise effect well. reduced by 0.0157, 0.0872, and 0.0101.
3842 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 In summary, MetaCluster is a self-interpreting lightweight [22] S. Kim, J. Nam, and B. C. Ko, “ViT-NeT: Interpretable vision transclassification model designed to offer interpretation and sta- formers with neural tree decoder,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 vol. 162, K. Chaudhuri, S. Jegelka, L. Song, C. Szepesvari, G. Niu, and
bility testing for various cybersecurity tasks. It is well-suited S. Sabato, Eds. Jul. 2022, pp. 11162–11172.
for deployment in low-reliability cyberattack scenarios. [23] F. Ullah, A. Alsirhani, M. M. Alshahrani, A. Alomari, H. Naeem, and
 S. A. Shah, “Explainable malware detection system using transformersbased transfer learning and multi-model visual representation,” Sensors,
 R EFERENCES vol. 22, no. 18, p. 6766, Sep. 2022.
 [1] Fortinet. (Nov. 2023). Cyber Threat Predictions for 2023. [Online]. [24] M. Q. Li, B. C. M. Fung, P. Charland, and S. H. H. Ding, “I-MAD: Inter-
 Available: https://www.fortinet.com/content/dam/fortinet/assets/white- pretable malware detector using galaxy transformer,” Comput. Secur.,
 papers/wp-threat-prediction-2023.pdf vol. 108, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102371.
 [2] J. Zhao, M. Shao, H. Wang, X. Yu, B. Li, and X. Liu, “Cyber threat [25] W. Ge and J. Wang, “SeqMask: Behavior extraction over cyber threat
 prediction using dynamic heterogeneous graph learning,” Knowledge- intelligence via multi-instance learning,” Comput. J., vol. 67, no. 1,
 Based Syst., vol. 240, Mar. 2022, Art. no. 108086. pp. 253–273, Jan. 2024.
 [3] N. Sun et al., “Cyber threat intelligence mining for proactive cybersecu- [26] C. Liu, J. Wang, and X. Chen, “Threat intelligence ATT&CK extracrity defense: A survey and new perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surveys tion based on the attention transformer hierarchical recurrent neural
 Tuts., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1748–1774, 3rd Quart., 2023. network,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 122, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 108826.
 [4] B. Tang et al., “Advanced persistent threat intelligent profiling technique: [27] T. Brown et al., “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Advances
 A survey,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 103, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108261. in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, H. Larochelle,
 [5] D. Li, Q. Li, Y. Ye, and S. Xu, “Arms race in adversarial malware M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds. Red Hook, NY,
 detection: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surveys, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 1–35, USA: Curran Associates, 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
 Nov. 2021. [28] Z. Du et al., “GLM: General language model pretraining with autore-
 [6] Y. Jakhotiya, H. Patil, J. Rawlani, and D. S. B. Mane, “Adver- gressive blank infilling,” in Proc. 60th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput.
 sarial attacks on transformers-based malware detectors,” 2022, Linguistics. Dublin, Ireland: Association for Computational Linguistics,
 arXiv:2210.00008. May 2022, pp. 320–335.
 [7] Y. Du, B. Prebot, X. Xi, and C. Gonzalez, “A cyber-war between bots: [29] B. Mahbooba, M. Timilsina, R. Sahal, and M. Serrano, “Explainable
 Human-like attackers are more challenging for defenders than deter- artificial intelligence (XAI) to enhance trust management in intrusion
 ministic attackers,” in Proc. Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2023, detection systems using decision tree model,” Complexity, vol. 2021,
 pp. 856–865. pp. 1–11, Jan. 2021.
 [8] M. Beechey, K. G. Kyriakopoulos, and S. Lambotharan, “Evidential [30] S. Wang et al., “TrafficAV: An effective and explainable detection of
 classification and feature selection for cyber-threat hunting,” Knowledge- mobile malware behavior using network traffic,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
 Based Syst., vol. 226, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 107120. 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6.
 [9] M. M. Alani and A. I. Awad, “PAIRED: An explainable lightweight [31] Y. Yang, I. G. Morillo, and T. M. Hospedales, “Deep neural decision
 Android malware detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, trees,” 2018, arXiv:1806.06988.
 pp. 73214–73228, 2022. [32] H. Asad and I. Gashi, “Dynamical analysis of diversity in rule-based
[10] M. Kinkead, S. Millar, N. McLaughlin, and P. O’Kane, “Towards open source network intrusion detection systems,” Empirical Softw. Eng.,
 explainable CNNs for Android malware detection,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 27, no. 1, p. 4, Jan. 2022.
 vol. 184, pp. 959–965, 2021. [33] S. Guruprasad and R. D’Souza, “Development of an evolutionary
[11] J. C. S. Reis, A. Correia, F. Murai, A. Veloso, and F. Benevenuto, framework for autonomous rule creation for intrusion detection,” in Proc.
 “Explainable machine learning for fake news detection,” in Proc. 10th IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. (IACC), Feb. 2016, pp. 534–538.
 ACM Conf. Web Sci. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing [34] N. Fallahi, A. Sami, and M. Tajbakhsh, “Automated flow-based rule
 Machinery, 2019, pp. 17–26. generation for network intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. 24th
[12] H. Suryotrisongko, Y. Musashi, A. Tsuneda, and K. Sugitani, “Robust Iranian Conf. Electr. Eng. (ICEE), May 2016, pp. 1948–1953.
 botnet DGA detection: Blending XAI and OSINT for cyber threat
 [35] R. Muthuregunathan and S. R. Rajesh, “Efficient snort rule generaintelligence sharing,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 34613–34624, 2022.
 tion using evolutionary computing for network intrusion detection,” in
[13] I. Psychoula, A. Gutmann, P. Mainali, S. H. Lee, P. Dunphy, and Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Comput. Intell., Commun. Syst. Netw., Jul. 2009,
 F. Petitcolas, “Explainable machine learning for fraud detection,” Com- pp. 336–341.
 puter, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 49–59, Oct. 2021.
 [36] F. Charmet et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence for cybersecurity: A
[14] P. R. G. Hernandes et al., “Phishing detection using URL-based XAI
 literature survey,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 77, pp. 789–812, Oct. 2022.
 techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Series Comput. Intell. (SSCI), 2021,
 pp. 1–6. [37] M. Zolanvari, Z. Yang, K. Khan, R. Jain, and N. Meskin, “TRUST XAI:
 Model-agnostic explanations for AI with a case study on IIoT security,”
[15] Z. A. E. Houda, B. Brik, and L. Khoukhi, “‘Why should i trust your
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2967–2978, Feb. 2023.
 IDS?’: An explainable deep learning framework for intrusion detection
 systems in Internet of Things networks,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., [38] E. Tjoa and C. Guan, “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence
 vol. 3, pp. 1164–1176, 2022. (XAI): Toward medical XAI,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
[16] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?’: vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 4793–4813, Nov. 2021.
 Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. 22nd ACM [39] M. Al-Shouha and G. Szucs, “PIC-XAI: Post-hoc image captioning
 SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining. New York, NY, explanation using segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Symp. Appl.
 USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. Comput. Intell. Informat. (SACI), May 2023, pp. 000033–000038.
[17] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model [40] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for fewpredictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Red Hook, shot learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 NY, USA: Curran Associates, 2017, pp. 4768–4777. vol. 30, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus,
[18] B. Mittelstadt, C. Russell, and S. Wachter, “Explaining explanations S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran
 in AI,” in Proc. Conf. Fairness, Accountability, Transparency. New Associates, 2017.
 York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Jan. 2019, [41] Y. Zhang, P. Tino, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A survey on neural
 pp. 279–288. network interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell.,
[19] C. Rudin, “Stop explaining black box machine learning models for vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 726–742, Oct. 2021.
 high stakes decisions and use interpretable models instead,” Nature [42] A. J. Myles, R. N. Feudale, Y. Liu, N. A. Woody, and S. D. Brown,
 Mach. Intell., vol. 1, no. 5, pp. 206–215, May 2019. “An introduction to decision tree modeling,” J. Chemometrics, vol. 18,
[20] W. Ge, J. Wang, T. Lin, B. Tang, and X. Li, “Explainable cyber no. 6, pp. 275–285, Jun. 2004.
 threat behavior identification based on self-adversarial topic generation,” [43] K. P. Murphy, “Naive Bayes classifiers,” Univ. Brit. Columbia, vol. 18,
 Comput. Secur., vol. 132, Sep. 2023, Art. no. 103369. no. 60, pp. 1–8, 2006.
[21] S. Islam et al., “A comprehensive survey on applications of transform- [44] M. L. Puterman, “Chapter 8 Markov decision processes,” in Stochastic
 ers for deep learning tasks,” Exp. Syst. Appl., vol. 241, May 2024, Models (Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science),
 Art. no. 122666. vol. 2. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1990, pp. 331–434.
GE et al.: MetaCluster: A UNIVERSAL INTERPRETABLE CLASSIFICATION FRAMEWORK 3843

[45] F. James, “Monte Carlo theory and practice,” Rep. Prog. Phys., vol. 43, Wenhan Ge received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 no. 9, p. 1145, Sep. 1980. in computer science and technology from Sichuan
[46] P. Barnard, N. Marchetti, and L. A. DaSilva, “Robust network intrusion University, China, where he is currently pursuing the
 detection through explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),” IEEE Netw. Ph.D. degree. His research interests include cyber
 Lett., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 167–171, Sep. 2022. threat intelligence, natural language processing, and
[47] A. Kuppa and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Adversarial XAI methods in cybersecu- explainable artificial intelligence.
 rity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 4924–4938, 2021.
[48] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3,
 pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023.
[49] R. Balestriero, “Neural decision trees,” 2017, arXiv:1702.07360.
[50] S. R. Bulo and P. Kontschieder, “Neural decision forests for semantic
 image labelling,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 Jun. 2014, pp. 81–88.
[51] C. Chen, O. Li, A. Barnett, J. Su, and C. Rudin, “This looks Zeyuan Cui is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
 like that: deep learning for interpretable image recognition,” 2018, with Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. His
 arXiv:1806.10574. research interests include cyber threat analysis,
[52] M. Nauta, R. van Bree, and C. Seifert, “Neural prototype trees for machine learning in security contexts, and intelligent
 interpretable fine-grained image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. decision-making.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14933–14943.
[53] T. Valentine, “A unified account of the effects of distinctiveness, inversion, and race in face recognition,” Quart. J. Experim. Psychol. Sect. A,
 vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 161–204, May 1991.
[54] B. Yuan, J. Wang, P. Wu, and X. Qing, “IoT malware classification based
 on lightweight convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3770–3783, Mar. 2022.
[55] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, Junfeng Wang received the M.S. degree in
 pp. 108–116. computer application technology from Chongqing
[56] D. Arp, M. Spreitzenbarth, M. Hübner, H. Gascon, and K. Rieck, University of Posts and Telecommunications,
 “DREBIN: Effective and explainable detection of Android malware in Chongqing, in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree in
 your pocket,” in Proc. NDSS, Feb. 2014, pp. 1–15. computer science from the University of Electronic
 Science and Technology of China, Chengdu,
[57] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, Z. Chen, and S. Yu, “MalPurifier: Enhancing
 in 2004. From July 2004 to August 2006, he was
 Android malware detection with adversarial purification against evasion
 a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Institute of
 attacks,” 2023, arXiv:2312.06423.
 Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Since
[58] M. Hearst, S. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Scholkopf, “Support
 August 2006, he has been a Professor with the
 vector machines,” IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 18–28,
 College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
 Aug. 1998.
 His recent research interests include network and information security, spatial
[59] H. Taud and J. Mas, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). Cham, Switzerland: information networks, and data mining. He serves as an associate editor for
 Springer, 2018, pp. 451–455. several international journals.
[60] K. Grosse, N. Papernot, P. Manoharan, M. Backes, and P. McDaniel,
 “Adversarial examples for malware detection,” in Proc. Comput. Secur.
 ESORICS, S. N. Foley, D. Gollmann, and E. Snekkenes, Eds. Cham,
 Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 62–79.
[61] Y. Kim, “Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification,” Binhui Tang is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
 A. Moschitti, B. Pang, and W. Daelemans, Eds. Doha, Qatar: Association Sichuan University. She is an Associate Professor
 for Computational Linguistics, Oct. 2014, pp. 1746–1751. [Online]. with Chengdu Jincheng College. Her recent research
 Available: https://aclanthology.org/D14-1181 interests include APT analysis, cyber threat intel-
[62] Y. You et al., “TIM: Threat context-enhanced TTP intelligence mining ligence mining, cyber-space attacks, and defensive
 on unstructured threat data,” Cybersecurity, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 3, Dec. 2022. confrontation.
[63] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[64] N. Rani, B. Saha, V. Maurya, and S. K. Shukla, “TTPHunter: Automated
 extraction of actionable intelligence as TTPs from narrative threat
 reports,” in Proc. Australas. Comput. Sci. Week. New York, NY, USA:
 Association for Computing Machinery, Jan. 2023, pp. 126–134.
[65] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers Xiaohui Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and
 for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929. Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the College
[66] X. Sun, L. Li, L. Bo, X. Wu, Y. Wei, and B. Li, “Automatic software of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
 vulnerability classification by extracting vulnerability triggers,” J. Soft- China, in 2012 and 2017, respectively. She is curware, Evol. Process, vol. 36, no. 2, Feb. 2024, Art. no. e2508. rently a Teacher with the School of Cyber Science
[67] H. Alkahtani and T. H. H. Aldhyani, “Botnet attack detection by using and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research
 CNN-LSTM model for Internet of Things applications,” Secur. Commun. interests include network and information security,
 Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Sep. 2021. such as wireless networks, satellite networks, the
[68] R. Falcone and B. Lee. (Mar. 2017). The Oilrig Campaign: Attacks Internet of Things, and cyber threat intelligence,
 on Saudi Arabian Organizations Deliver Helminth Backdoor. [Online]. with an emphasis on the design of efficient trans-
 Available: https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/the-oilrig-campaign- port protocols, routing protocols, and intelligence
 attacks-on-saudi-arabian-organizations-deliver-helminth-backdoor/ analysis.