4518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 MLaD2: A Semi-Supervised Money Laundering
 Detection Framework Based on
 Decoupling Training
 Xuejiao Luo , Xiaohui Han , Member, IEEE, Wenbo Zuo, Xiaoming Wu,
 and Wenyin Liu , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Money laundering (ML) poses a severe threat to Index Terms— Money laundering detection, contrastive selffinancial stability and social security. Various money launder- supervised learning, graph neural network.
ing detection methods have emerged in the past two decades.
Among these methods, some semi-supervised ones based on graph
neural networks (GNNs) have achieved impressive performance. I. I NTRODUCTION
However, the homogeneity hypothesis of GNN-based methods
does not fit the ML detection scenario, affecting the detection
performance. This paper presents a semi-supervised money
laundering detection framework based on decoupling training
 M ONEY laundering (ML) refers to activities aimed at
 turning dirty money (i.e., funds obtained by illegal
 activities such as fraud, drug trafficking, and gambling) into
(MLaD2 ). MLaD2 constructs a transaction relationship network lawful money [1]. It can feed back into these illegal activities,
based on node similarity (TRNNS) to model account interactions.
Performing on TRNNS, MLaD2 learns the representation of
 negatively affecting financial stability and social security.
accounts using a GNN. The weighting mechanism of TRNNS According to an International Monetary Fund survey, the
can overcome the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis. amount of money laundered is 2% to 5% of global GDP [2].
Based on the learned account representations, MLaD2 adopts Thus, ML detection techniques have attracted great attention
a decoupling training mechanism to build an ML accounts from both industry and academia.
detection model, reducing its dependence on annotated data.
 Early ML detection solutions employ a set of heuristic rules
The pre-training phase of the decoupling training employs a
contrastive self-supervised learning model to learn the intrinsic generated by human experts to identify suspicious transaccharacteristics of accounts. The fine-tuning phase extracts dis- tions or accounts [3], [4]. The disadvantages of rule-based
criminative features between ML accounts and benign accounts solutions are the high false-positive rate, the need for human
with labeled data. Comprehensive evaluations and comparisons resources, and the inability to recognize new ML patterns.
on a real-world ML dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 yields
 More recent ML techniques have leveraged machine learning
results that surpass existing methods, especially when training
with a small scale of labeled samples. or deep learning models to improve detection accuracy and
 generalization while reducing reliance on expert knowledge.
 These techniques mainly fall into three categories: supervised,
 Manuscript received 14 August 2023; revised 20 December 2023; semi-supervised, and unsupervised methods.
accepted 13 March 2024. Date of publication 25 March 2024; date of Supervised methods [5], [6], [7], [8] need a large quantity of
current version 6 May 2024. This work was supported in part by Shandong
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant ZR2022MF295 labeled data to train a classifier for money laundering identifiand Grant ZR2022MF257; in part by the Key Project of Quancheng Provincial cation. However, obtaining ground-truth labels for transactions
Laboratory under Grant QCLZD202303; in part by the Fundamental Research is still labor-intensive. In contrast, unsupervised methods adopt
Promotion Plan of Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
of Sciences) under Grant 2021JC02020; in part by the Pilot Project for strategies that do not require any ground-truth information,
Integrated Innovation of Science, Education and Industry of Qilu University such as reconstruction error computation [9], graph density
of Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences) under Grant 2022JBZ01-01; estimation [10], and outlier detection [11], [12]. However,
and in part by the Joint Open Project of Shandong Computer Society and
Provincial Key Laboratory under Grant SKLCN2021-03. The associate editor these methods show unsatisfactory detection performance on
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication real-world data due to inappropriate measurements of anomawas Dr. Angelo Spognardi. (Corresponding author: Xiaohui Han.) lies and the lack of supervision. Semi-supervised methods,
 Xuejiao Luo, Xiaohui Han, Wenbo Zuo, and Xiaoming Wu are with the Key
Laboratory of Computing Power Network and Information Security, Ministry which fall between supervised and unsupervised methods, use
of Education, Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer both a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of
Center in Jinan), Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy of unlabeled data during training. A branch of semi-supervised
Sciences), Jinan 250014, China, and also with Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Computer Networks, Shandong Fundamental Research Center methods, grounded in the principle of active learning [13],
for Computer Science, Jinan 250353, China (e-mail: luoxj0116@gmail.com; iteratively uses unsupervised learning to select a small-scale of
xiaohhan@gmail.com; zuowbo@sdas.org; wuxm@sdas.org). data for expert annotation and then trains a supervised detec-
 Wenyin Liu is with Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100086, China
(e-mail: liuwy@gdut.edu.cn). tion model with the annotated data [14]. Another branch of
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3380262 semi-supervised methods focuses on designing sophisticated
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4519

 is a weighted undirected graph, where nodes and edges represent accounts and money transfer relationships, respectively.
 An edge connecting two nodes means that money transfers
 have occurred between the corresponding two accounts. The
 weight of the edge is calculated based on the similarity
 between the two accounts. Performing on TRNNS, MLaD2
 learns the representations of accounts using a GNN. During
 the information aggregation process of GNN, the contribution
 of each neighbor to a node’s representation is controlled
Fig. 1. Examples of the aggregation process on a transaction relationship according to the weight of the edge connecting them. This
network. (a) The aggregation process between a BA V1 and its neighbors. All strategy can reduce the noise information from dissimilar
the neighbors of V1 are also BAs. The representation vector of V1 is updated
by receiving the information from its neighbors. (b) The aggregation process neighbors. Based on the representations of accounts, MLaD2
between an MLA V2 and its neighbors. The neighbors of V2 contain both adopts a decoupling training mechanism [18] to build an
BAs and MLAs. The representation vector of V2 after the aggregation looks MLA detection model. The decoupling training consists of a
similar to that of V1 due to receiving information from its BA neighbors.
 pre-training phase and a fine-tuning phase. In the pre-training
 phase, MLaD2 learns the intrinsic features of accounts with
 a contrastive self-supervised learning model, which gains disalgorithms to accurately predict the categories of unlabeled criminative knowledge from the contrast of elaborate instance
samples using a small labeled dataset. Some recent methods pairs instead of labels. Then, MLaD2 further learns category
in this branch based on graph neural networks (GNNs) have features between MLAs and BAs with labeled data in the fineshown impressive detection performance. tuning phase.
 GNN-based semi-supervised methods typically model the In summary, we make the following contributions to ML
transaction relationships between bank accounts as a graph. detection research.
They learn the representation of an account (i.e., a node in the • We propose a novel semi-supervised ML detection framegraph) by aggregating information from its neighbors, includ- work, MLaD2 . The novelty of MLaD2 is that we
ing labeled and unlabeled samples. The learned representation introduce the principle of decoupling training in its
determines whether the account is an ML participant [15], learning process. Existing GNN-based semi-supervised
[16]. The underlying hypothesis is that a node in the graph methods learn node representations through a single
shares similar characteristics and labels with its neighbors training process. The training process takes ground-truth
(i.e., the homogeneity hypothesis). For example, individuals labels as supervision and performs information aggrein social networks may share similar interests with their gation to update node representations iteratively. Unlike
friends; in citation networks, neighboring nodes (i.e., papers) these methods, we decoupled the learning process of
usually share similar topics. Hence, information obtained from MLaD2 into two phases. A pre-training phase learns
neighbors can enhance the representation of a node. node representations by iteratively performing informa-
 However, the homogeneity hypothesis does not fit the ML tion aggregation and contrastive self-supervised learning
detection scenario. Through the analysis of our experimental without the supervision of ground-truth labels. A finedataset (see Section IV-A), we observed that ML participants tuning phase further updates the node representations
often carry out transactions with both their accomplices and under the supervision of ground-truth labels. Benefiting
benign accounts (BAs) to hide the trace of ML. Some other from a decoupling training design, MLaD2 can effectively
studies have also observed this phenomenon [10], [17]. There- leverage the discriminative knowledge in the intrinsic
fore, in the transaction relation graph, the neighbors of an properties of accounts and the limited labeled data to mit-
ML account (MLA) are composed of both MLAs and BAs. igate the impacts of insufficient and imbalanced labeled
Under this condition, the aggregation mechanism of GNNs samples.
also brings the information of BA nodes into the representation • We reform GNN’s information aggregation process by
of MLA, which is equivalent to introducing a type of noise. introducing a transaction relationship network TRNNS.
Moreover, the noise can dominate the aggregated information In TRNNS, an edge connecting two nodes is weighted
if BAs are more than MLAs. For example, in Figure 1, using their similarity. In the pre-training phase of
V1 is a BA, whose neighbors are all BAs, while V2 is an MLaD2 , GNN information aggregations are performed on
MLA, whose neighbors contain both BAs and MLAs. Before TRNNS. The contribution of each neighbor to a node’s
aggregation, the original representations of V1 and V2 are representation is differentiated based on the weight of the
different. However, after aggregation, the representation of V2 edge connecting them. As a result, MLaD2 can selectively
is influenced by its BA neighbors and becomes similar to those bring more information to a node from neighbors similar
of V1 . to it, reducing the noise aggregated from dissimilar neigh-
 To tackle the above issue, we propose a Semi- bors. The reformed information aggregation process can
supervised Money Laundering Detection Framework Based on overcome the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis
Decoupling Training (MLaD2 ) in this study. MLaD2 constructs of GNN in the ML detection scenario.
a Transaction Relationship Network based on Node Similarity • We introduce a novel type of contrastive instance pair,
(TRNNS) to model the interactions between accounts. TRNNS called “structure view versus behavior view” (SvB), for
4520 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 contrastive self-supervised learning in the pre-training Supervised ML detection approaches need a large number of
 phase of MLaD2 . Conventional contrastive learning meth- labeled training samples to achieve satisfactory performance.
 ods for graph data commonly use “node versus subgraph” However, acquiring such a quantity of labeled data is typically
 or “graph versus graph” as instance pairs; each sample impossible due to the high labor cost. To tackle this issue,
 has a single information view. Since MLaD2 considers some researchers built ML detection models based on unsuperan account’s behavior and structure features, SvB uses vised learning. Chen et al. [9] designed an automatic encoder
 two different views to describe these two aspects of (AE) and used the reconstruction error of transaction statistics
 information. The two views of the same account are to identify ML transactions. Li et al. [10] detected MLAs by
 considered a positive instance pair, while two views of searching dense money transfer flows. Sun et al. [11] used the
 different accounts are considered a negative instance pair. statistical deviation of account balances to recognize MLAs.
 By performing contrastive self-supervised learning with Lee et al. [12] detected the “smurfing” pattern of ML by mini-
 SvB pairs, MLaD2 can learn fine-grained discriminative mizing the minimum adjacency matrix description length [27]
 information between MLAs and BAs, reducing its depen- of the adjacency matrix of a time-evolving accounting graph.
 dency on labeled training data. Although unsupervised ML detection approaches do not need
 Comprehensive evaluations and comparisons on a labeled data, their detection performance on real-world data
real-world ML dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 yields is unsatisfactory due to the lack of supervision. In addition,
results that surpass existing methods, especially when using finding an appropriate measurement of anomalies to identify
a small scale of labeled samples. ML transactions or accounts is typically tricky.
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II To leverage the strengths of supervised and unsupervised
briefly reviews the related work. Section III presents the details approaches and mitigate their weaknesses, many studies
of MLaD2 . Section IV presents and analyzes our experimental designed ML detection models based on semi-supervised
results. Section V discusses the limitations of MLaD2 . Finally, learning paradigms, which utilize labeled and unlabeled data
Section VI concludes this paper. for training. A branch of these studies adopts active learning
 to select a small-scale of the most informative samples for
 labeling iteratively [13]. For example, Labanca et al. [14]
 II. R ELATED W ORK proposed an active learning framework for ML detection that
 leverages an unsupervised model to select the most suspicious
A. Money Laundering Detection transactions for expert investigation and trains a supervised
 ML detection technology has made significant progress in ML detection model on experts’ feedback (i.e., the labeled
the past two decades. Early ML detection techniques are dataset). One drawback of active learning-based methods
generally rule-based, which screen suspicious entities using is that their entire training process requires expert involverules (e.g., a threshold on the amount of money transferred) ment. Another branch of semi-supervised methods explores
predefined by domain experts [6]. Rule-based techniques can ingenious algorithms to accurately predict the categories of
accurately identify known ML patterns. However, they have unlabeled samples with a small scale of labeled data. Several
disadvantages like high investigation costs and false positives. methods based on GNNs in this branch have shown impressive
Moreover, money launderers can easily bypass the detection detection performance. Weber et al. [15] proposed an MLA
using new ML patterns. detection approach based on the evolved graph convolutional
 Recent ML research has increasingly employed machine neural network (EvolveGCN). Assumpção et al. [28] leverlearning and deep learning models. Several works consider ML aged GraphSAGE [29] and a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
detection a supervised learning problem and build classifiers generate embeddings of nodes and edges in a money transto identify ML transactions or accounts. Alkhalili et al. [19] fer network to detect MLAs. Most existing semi-supervised
took statistics of money transfer behavior (e.g., the number attempts employ GNNs or graph embedding-based models as
and amount of money transferred) as features and trained their base model, aggregating neighborhood information to
support vector machine (SVM), decision tree (DT), and naive learn node embeddings. However, these approaches ignore the
bayesian (NB) as ML recognizers. Gu et al. [20] used a long inconsistency problem between a node and its neighbors in
short-term memory (LSTM) network to build an anomalous ML scenarios (see Figure 1), which hinders their ability to
transaction detection model on the time sequences of behavior capture anomalous information of MLAs effectively. In constatistics. Similarly, Jensen and Iosifidis [21] built an ML trast, MLaD2 uses a novel TRNNS to address the above issue.
detection model using a bidirectional gated recurrent unit (bi- It can assign greater weight to the information of neighbors
GRU) instead of LSTM. Some studies combine account profile exhibiting high similarity with the target node.
attributes (e.g., gender, location, age, and the number of used Another characteristic of MLaD2 is that it decouples the
services) with behavior statistics as features to build classi- training process. Existing semi-supervised methods jointly
fiers [17], [22], [23], [24]. Besides, the structural importance learn node representations and an ML detector in a unified
metrics (e.g., degree, betweenness, closeness, and transitivity) process. MLaD2 decouples the learning of node intrinof an account in a money transfer relationship network are also sic features and the learning of the MLA detector into
commonly employed as features [5], [25], [26]. For example, two separate phases, which can reduce the dependency
Jullum et al. [26] used an XGBoost to alarm ML entities based on labeled training data and mitigate sensitivity to class
on behavior statistics, structural metrics, and account profiles. imbalance [30].
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4521

Fig. 2. Illustration of MLaD2 . MLaD2 consists of four modules, i.e., the data processing module, the feature encoder module, the contrastive learning
module, and the money laundering detection module. The MLaD2 workflow has two phases, i.e., the pre-training phase and the fine-tuning phase.

B. Contrastive Self-Supervised Learning TABLE I
 N OTATIONS
 Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a type of unsupervised
learning, and contrastive self-supervised learning (CSSL) is
an essential branch of SSL. CSSL learns data representations
by discriminating positive and negative instance pairs [18].
It has dramatically progressed in visual processing methods,
such as MoCo [31] and SimCLR [32]. Some recent works
have extended CSSL to GNNs. Velivckovic et al. [33] took
a node’s representation and a graph’s representation as a
contrastive instance pair (i.e., node versus subgraph) and generated negative instances by graph corruption. Wang et al. [34]
suggested an anomaly detection framework DCI. DCI treats
the feature representation of a node as the positive sample
and its row-wise shuffled version as the negative sample.
Besides, Lo et al. [35] and Zhou et al. [36] also performed
graph-level CSSL and then used a linear layer or an RF to
detect suspicious entities.
 The above methods use “node versus subgraph” or “graph statistics and build TRNNS. The feature encoder module
versus graph” as instance pairs. They generate an embedding generates behavior and structure views for each account based
of a graph for contrastive learning by averaging the values of on the statistics and TRNNS. The contrastive learning module
all node representations in the graph. However, the averaging leverages the behavior and structure view information to
operation may result in a loss of fine-grained characteristics construct instance pairs and learns discriminative features by
of nodes in the graph, making it challenging to learn discrim- contrasting their corresponding embeddings. A pre-training
inative features. Unlike these methods, MLaD2 uses a novel process based on NT-Xent loss guides the representations
type of instance pair (i.e., SvB) for CSSL. It focuses more on of the two views of the same account to fall into nearby
the fine-grained discriminative characteristics between nodes. locations in the embedding space. After the pre-training, the
As a result, MLaD2 exhibits a more excellent capability in money laundering detection module combines the behavior
detecting inconspicuous suspicious features within accounts. view embedding with the structure view embedding and then
 predicts the category of the corresponding node. In the follow-
 III. P ROPOSED A PPROACH ing sections, we describe the details of each module. Table I
 lists the notations used in this paper.
 Figure 2 shows the framework of MLaD2 , which includes
four components: a data processing module, a feature encoder
module, a contrastive learning module, and a money launder- A. Data Processing Module
ing detection module. The data processing module processes The data processing module constructs behavior statistics
the raw transaction records to calculate transaction behavior and TRNNS based on the input transaction records.
4522 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE II
 D EFINITION OF S TATISTICAL VARIABLES

 1) Transaction Behavior Statistics Calculation: Let R =
[u sr c , u dst , time, amount] denote a transaction record, where
u sr c , u dst , time, and amount represent the sender, receiver,
timestamp, and transaction amount, respectively. We divide
the timeline of R into T slices with a 24-hour granularity
and design 32 statistical variables (i.e., {s1 , s2 , · · · , s32 }) to
track the transfer behavior characteristics of accounts. Table II
lists the statistical variables, the efficacy of which has been
demonstrated in our previous work [37]. For account u i , let
{Mi }i=1N ∈ Rd×T denote the transaction statistics during T
slices, where N is the number of accounts, and d is the number
of statistical variables.
 2) TRNNS Building: The basis of the aggregation mechanism of GNN is the homogeneity hypothesis, which considers
connected nodes in a graph to have similar characteristics.
 Fig. 3. Diagram of the TRNNS construction process. Building a TRNNS
Since the neighbors of an MLA typically contain both MLAs involves three steps: (1) category probability calculation, (2) similarity calcuand BAs, we should reduce the information from dissimi- lation, and (3) graph weighting. Sim(·) and w denote the similarity function
lar neighbors during the aggregation process. One possible and the weight of edges, respectively.
solution is to use the graph attention network (GAT) [38]
to compute weights for each node, but this method has two the two connected nodes. The construction of TRNNS consists
issues: (1) GAT is sensitive to parameter initialization, and (2) of three steps, as shown in Figure 3.
the effect of GAT is negligible or even harmful on large and Step (1): Category Probability Calculation: Let u i be an
noisy graphs [39]. To address this issue, we build a TRNNS to unlabeled node in the TRNNS (e.g., the “node a” in Figure 3).
weigh the relationship between nodes. Let G = {V, E} denote We denote its 1-order neighbors as N(u i ) = {vi1 , vi2 , . . . , vin },
the TRNNS, where V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , v N } is the set of nodes where n is the number of u i ’s 1-order neighbors. The probarepresenting accounts, and E = {< i, j >| i, j ∈ V} is the set bility of u i belonging to class ck is:
of edges representing transfer interactions between accounts.
Each edge in E is weighted by the similarity scores between P(ck | u i ) ∝ P(ck | vi1 )P(ck | vi2 ) · · · P(ck | vin ). (1)
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4523

 j
According to conditional probability, P(ck | vi ) can be further
decomposed as:
 j
 j P(vi | ck )P(ck )
 P(ck | vi ) = j
 , j ∈ [1, n]. (2)
 P(vi )

Thus, P(ck | u i ) can be converted into the following formula:

 P(vi1 | ck )P(vi2 | ck ) · · · P(vin | ck )P(ck )n
 P(ck | u i ) ∝ , Fig. 4. Comparison between traditional Transformer and convolutional-based
 P(vi1 )P(vi2 ) · · · P(vin ) Transformer. (a) shows the architecture of traditional Transformer, where “W”
 n denotes the weight parameter matrix. (b) is the architecture of convolutionj
 Y
 ∝ P(vi | ck )P(ck )n . (3) al-based Transformer, where “Conv,1” and “Conv,k” represent convolution of
 kernel size 1×1 and k ×1 with stride 1, respectively. “MHA Layer” represents
 j=1
 the multi-head self-attention layer.
 j
P(ck ) and P(vi | ck ) can be obtained as follows:
 PNL 1) Behavior Feature Encoder: The target of the behavior
 I (yi = ck ) feature encoder is to capture both the long and short-term
 P(ck ) = i=1 , k ∈ {0, 1}, (4)
 NL dependencies of transaction behavior. Recurrent neural net-
 PNL j j works (RNNs), such as LSTM [40] and GRU [41], have
 j i=1 I (N(u i ) = vi , yi = ck )
 P(vi | ck ) = PNL , (5) been widely employed to capture the long-term characterisi=1 I (yi = ck ) tics of time series in many scenarios. However, they suffer
 from the problems of vanishing and exploding gradients and
where N L is the number of labeled nodes, I (·) is an indicator cannot handle long sequences very well. Some studies have
 j
function, and N(u i ) represents the j-th neighbor of u i . Finally, demonstrated that Transformer [42] performs much better than
the probability of u i belonging to class ck can be calculated LSTM in capturing fairly long-term dependencies [43]. Thus,
as: we adopt a Transformer-based approach to capture long-term
 n
 j
 patterns.
 P(ck )n P(vi | ck )
 Q
 Specifically, it contains two multi-head self-attention (MHA
 j=1
 P(ck | u i ) = n . (6) for abbreviation) layers. The MHA layers generate N H distinct
 j query, key, and value matrices from Mi , where N H denotes
 k={1,2} P(ck ) P(vi | ck )
 P n Q
 j=1 the number of attention heads. However, as shown in Figure 4
 (a), the traditional Transformer model calculates the similarity
The class probability distribution of all nodes forms a matrix between queries and keys based on their pointwise values,
P ∈ R N ×2 , in which the i-th row vector pi is the class prob- resulting in the losing of short-term features. To address
ability distribution of u i . The labeled node’s class probability this issue, we apply convolution on input values before the
distribution is according to its label information. For example, attention layers to capture short-term features, as shown in
if a node is an MLA, its probability of being anomalous will Figure 4 (b). More specifically, we use a 3 × 1 convolution
be 1, while the probability of it being benign will be 0. kernel with a stride of 1 on Mi to obtain the query matrix and
 Step (2): Similarity Calculation: Dot-product is a simple and the key matrix, respectively:
effective operator to measure the distance between two vectors,
 Nh
and has been demonstrated to be effective in link prediction H Q i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
 Q
 + b Q ))W Q , (8)
tasks. Thus, we perform a dot-product on P to measure the Nh
degree of similarity between two arbitrary accounts: H K i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
 K
 + b K ))W K , (9)
 Nh Nh T × dc
 W p = P · P⊤ , (7) where H Q i , H K i ∈ R N H , dc is the output dimension of
 convolution, ⊗ denotes the convolutional operation, and Nh i
where W p ∈ R N ×N is the similarity score of N accounts. is the h i -th attention head. The value matrix is calculated by
 Step (3): Graph Weighting: We weigh edges between nodes performing a convolution of kernel size 1 × 1 with stride 1 on
based on the similarity scores calculated in Step (2) and finally Mi :
obtain the well-built TRNNS G. Nh
 HV i = (tanh(Mi ⊗ Wconv
 V
 + bV ))WV , (10)
 Nh T × dc
B. Feature Encoder Module where HV i ∈ R N H . After these convolutional projections,
 the scaled dot-product attention computes the final outputs:
 As shown in the upper middle of Figure 2, we use a
behavior feature encoder f (·), a structure feature encoder Nh Nh
 Nh HQ i HK i Nh
g(·), and a feature projector to obtain the behavior and Ha i = so f tmax( √ )HV i . (11)
structure views of each account. dc
4524 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

In practice, we use two attention headers, i.e., N H = 2. positive instance pairs to neighboring locations within the
 Nh Nh
Then, we concatenate Ha 1 and Ha 2 and perform a linear embedding space, while mapping negative instance pairs to
projection: dissimilar positions.
 Nh Nh
 1) Instance Pairs: Given an account, we construct a positive
 H f = [Ha 1 ∥Ha 2 ]Wl + b f . (12) instance pair with its behavior view ei and structure view e j .
 The remaining 2(N − 1) behavior and structure views of the
By computing the similarity of queries and keys from their
 other N − 1 samples are treated as negative. We save the
local information rather than pointwise values, the behavior
 positive and negative pairs into their corresponding instance
feature encoder obtains the transaction behavior embeddings
 pair pools.
H f ∈ RT ×dc with both long and short-term patterns.
 2) Objective Function: The objective of the contrastive
 2) Structure Feature Encoder: This component aims to
 learning module is to minimize the distance between two
aggregate neighbor information to enhance the representation
 views of an account. Following [32], we adopt NT-Xent (the
of a node. We input the TRNNS G into a GNN with L
 normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy loss) as the loss
stacking layers to reduce the noise information from dissimilar
 function for a positive instance pair (ei , e j ). Let sim(ei , e j )
neighbors. The l-th layer can be computed as follows:
 denote the cosine similarity between ei and e j . The NT-Xent
 Hlg = G N N (A, Hl−1
 g ), (13) for (ei , e j ) is defined as:

where Hlg ∈ R N ×dg is the nodes’ embedding of G learned ex p(sim(ei , e j )/τ )
 l(i, j) = −log P2N , (17)
by the l-th layer, dg is the embedding size of this layer, and q=1 I (q ̸ = i)ex p(sim(ei , eq )/τ )
A ∈ R N ×N is the adjacency matrix of G. Similarly, Hl−1 ∈
 g where I (q ̸ = i) is an indicator function, whose value is
R N ×dg is the embedding of nodes learned by the (l − 1)-th
 1 if q ̸ = i and 0 otherwise. τ is hyperparameter called a
layer. We initialize Hlg with X when l = 1, where X ∈ R N ×d is
 temperature parameter. We discuss the impact of τ ’s value
the average values of d variables of T time slices. Since GCN
 on the performance of MLaD2 in Section IV-E. The overall
is efficient and effective for the node classification task [44],
 loss of the contrastive learning module is computed across all
we adopt a two-layer GCN as the GNN base model in practice.
 positive pairs, including both (ei , e j ) and (e j , ei ), as follows:
Thus, Eq.(13) can be specifically formulated as
 N
 Hg = ÂReLU (ÂXWg1 )Wg2 , (14) 1 X
 L SS L = [l(2q − 1, 2q) + l(2q, 2q − 1)]. (18)
 2N
 q=1
 e− 21 ee− 12
where Â = D AD . e A is the adjacency matrix with self-
 A = A + I N . I N ∈ R N ×N represents an
connections, i.e., e
P D ∈ R N ×N is the degree matrix with e
identity matrix. e Dii = D. Money Laundering Detection Module
 eA
 j ij . W g1 and W g2 are the learnable weight matrices of
 We employ an MLP with one hidden layer as the classifier
the 1-st and 2-nd graph convolutional layers, respectively. The
 for detecting MLAs. As the feature projector in the feature
output Hg ∈ R N ×dg is the embedding of nodes obtained by
 encoder module could remove some helpful information for
the structure feature encoder.
 classification, we feed the unmapped representations (i.e., H f
 3) Feature Projector: We use a multilayer perceptron with
 and Hg ) into the MLP. The class of accounts can be estimated
one hidden layer to obtain the behavior and structure views,
 as follows:
respectively, and map them into the same embedding space:
 Ŷ = σ ((ReLU ([H f ∥Hg ]Ws1 + bs1 ))Ws2 + bs2 ), (19)
 E f = W p2 (ReLU (H f W p1 + b p1 )) + b p2 , (15)
 Eg = W p2 (ReLU (Hg W p1 + b p1 )) + b p2 , (16) where σ (·) is the softmax function, ∥ denotes the concatenation operation, and Ŷ is the predicted class. The
where E f and Eg are the behavior view and structure view, training objective of the MLP is to minimize the following
respectively. The weight matrix W p∗ and the bias b p∗ are cross-entropy loss L S L :
shared by the structure view projector and behavior view
 L N
projector. 1 X
 LS L = − ((1 − yi )log(1 − ŷi ) + yi log(ŷi )), (20)
 We define the contrastive learning task on each account’s NL
 i=1
behavior and structure views, considering each view as an
individual sample, resulting in a total of 2N samples. where ŷi is the i-th value of Ŷ, and yi is the i-th account’s
 ground truth.
C. Contrastive Learning Module
 We use contrastive learning module to pre-train MLaD2 . E. Training Procedure of MLaD2
It helps the model learn discriminative representations by Algorithm 1 illustrates the training procedure of MLaD2 .
adjusting instance pairs’ distances in the latent space and Specifically, MLaD2 first builds TRNNS G by calculating
reduces its dependence on the labeled training data. Specif- account similarity and assigning edge weights (lines 3-5).
ically, we first construct contrastive instance pairs consisting In the pre-training phase, it acquires the behavior embedding
of behavior and structure views. Then, we employ a contrastive of nodes using the behavior feature encoder (line 8). Additionloss as the objective function to guide the model in mapping ally, it obtains the graph structure embedding of nodes based
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4525

Algorithm 1 Training Procedure of MLaD2 TABLE III
Input: C HARACTERISTICS OF BASELINE M ETHODS
 Transaction records, Node attribute: X, Transaction characteristics: {Mi }i=1N , Number of pre-training and finetuning epochs: e p , e f .
Output:
 The well-trained MLaD2 .
 1: Randomly initialize the parameters of MLaD2 .
 2: # Build the TRNNS G.
 3: Construct G = (V, E) based on transaction records.
 4: Calculate P(ck | u i ) via Eq.(2)-Eq.(6).
 5: Weight the E to obtain the well-built TRNNS.
 6: # Pre-training phase.
 7: for i = 1, 2, . . . , e p do
 8: Embed transaction behavior: H f = f ({Mi }i=1 N , ϕ).

 9: Embed graph structure: Hg = g(G, θ ).
10: Map behavior embedding: E f = Pr ojector (H f , ζ ).
 during the investigation of an illegal online gambling case in
11: Map structure embedding: Eg = Pr ojector (Hg , ζ ).
 which the operators of an illegal gambling platform attempted
12: Calculate L SS L via Eq.(18).
 to make their illegal profits “clean” through ML. The dataset
13: θ, ϕ, ζ ← Adam(L SS L ).
 includes several common simple ML topologies, such as “Fan-
14: end for
 In”, “Stacked Bipartite”, “Gather-Scatter”, and “Random” (see
15: # Fine-tuning phase.
 Figure 5(a)-5(d)). There are also more sophisticated ML pat-
16: for i = 1, 2, . . . , e f do
 terns composed of the above simple topologies (see Figure 5(e)
17: Predict class for accounts: Ŷ = cl f ([H f ∥Hg ], ξ ).
 for an example). Figure 6 shows the density distribution
18: Calculate L S L via Eq.(20).
 diagrams of some selected statistical variables. We can see
19: θ, ϕ, ξ ← Adam(L S L ).
 noticeable differences between MLAs and BAs regarding these
20: end for
 variables.
 We randomly selected 70%, 10%, and 20% of accounts
 in our dataset and used all their transaction records as the
 training, validation, and test data, respectively.

 B. Experimental Settings
 1) Baselines: Since we focus on the scenario where transaction records are the only data for analysis, we compared
 the MLaD2 performance with baselines that can take transaction records as input. Among them, EvolveGCN, ADMLA,
 FlowScope, XGBoost, and MonLAD are recent methods for
 ML detection, while GAT is a representative method of GNNs
Fig. 5. Examples of ML topologies within the evaluation dataset, where nodes for node classification tasks. Given that ML detection is
represent accounts and directed edges represent transaction relationships.
 a specific instance of anomaly detection, we also included
 two exceptional contrastive-learning-based anomaly detection
on G using the structure feature encoder (line 9). After that, methods as baselines, i.e., DCI and DGI. Table III shows the
MLaD2 applies the feature projector to transform the above characteristics of the baselines.
two views of embeddings to the same feature space (lines • DCI1 [34]: This method first builds an unweighted trans-
10-11). Then, it performs the Adam algorithm to minimize action network and obtains the node embeddings by
L SS L to optimize the feature encoder module (lines 12-13). analyzing their degrees in the network. Then, it splits
The fine-tuning phase uses a classifier to predict the account the unweighted transaction network into k subgraphs and
class (line 17). Then, MLaD2 computes L S L (line 18) and learns their embeddings. Finally, it applies contrastive
fine-tunes the parameters (θ, ϕ, and ξ ) through a backpropa- learning on node and subgraph embeddings to detect
gation process (line 19). After e p pre-training iterations and e f anomalous nodes.
fine-tuning iterations, we can obtain the well-trained MLaD2 . • DGI2 [33]: This method takes the whole unweighted
 transaction network and a single node as instance pair
 IV. E XPERIMENTS AND A NALYSIS for contrastive learning. The learned node embeddings
A. Dataset are input into an MLP to detect anomalous nodes.
 We evaluate MLaD2 with a real-world dataset from a 1 http://github.com/wyl7/DCI-pytorch
Chinese law enforcement agency. The dataset was collected 2 http://github.com/PetarV-/DGI
4526 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 6. The data distribution plot of selected statistical variables. The x-axis represents the variable’s value, and the y-axis represents the density. Due to the
significant differences in the magnitude of variables, we applied a logarithmic transformation to their original values for better visualization. We replaced the
minimum value 0 with 1e-10.

 • EvolveGCN [15]: This method is a semi-supervised GNN our scenario, we still use the account representations
 model for ML detection tasks. It aggregates neighboring generated by MLaD2 as its input.
 information using GCN to obtain node embeddings and • FlowScope4 [10]: This unsupervised method identifies
 captures the graph sequence’s dynamism using an RNN. MLAs by searching dense flows in a transaction network.
 In our implementation, we used transaction behavior • MonLAD5 [11]: This unsupervised method takes transstatistics as the initial attributes of nodes and generated action streams as input and exploits a statistical deviation
 graph sequences at the granularity of days. of the transaction amount to detect MLAs.
 • GAT3 [38]: This method is also semi-supervised. It adds 2) Evaluation Metrics: We employ the macro average of
 node-level attention compared to GCN. The node initial- precision, recall, F1 -score, accuracy, and False Positive Rate
 ization method is the same as EvolveGCN. (FPR) as the evaluation metrics. Previous works have widely
 • XGBoost [26]: This method efficiently implements the used these metrics to assess the performance of ML detecgradient boosting decision tree (GBDT). Jullum et al. [26] tion [9], [11], [15].
 have designed a supervised ML detection approach based 3) Implementation Details: We trained the supervised methon XGBoost. However, they use user profile features ods using 100% labeled accounts and their transaction records
 as representations of accounts. Due to our focus on in the training data (denoted as 100-LTD). We randomly
 scenarios where only transaction records are available, selected 10%-80% accounts from the training data and
 we replace the input of their approach with the account assigned labels to them (denoted as 10-LTD, 20-LTD, 40-LTD,
 representations generated by MLaD2 . 60-LTD, and 80-LTD, respectively), utilizing their transaction
 • ADMLA [17]: This supervised method detects suspicious records to train the semi-supervised methods. All experiments
 accounts based on transaction relationships and user were executed on a server with Xeon 6138 CPU and an
 profile information. As user profiles are unavailable in NVIDIA GeForce RTX3090 GPU. To ensure that the results
 4 http://github.com/csqjxiao/FlowScope
 3 http://github.com/Diego999/pyGAT 5 http://github.com/BGT-M/MonLAD
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4527

 TABLE IV
 PARAMETER S ETTINGS OF MLAD2 AND BASELINE M ETHODS

 Fig. 7. Training and inference time cost comparisons with baseline methods.

 MLaD2 considers the similarity between neighbors and
 the target node during the aggregation process, reducing
 the noise in the transferred neighbor information.
 • MLaD2 exhibits superior MLA discriminative ability
 than supervised learning-based baselines. Compared to
 XGBoost and ADMLA, the F1 - improvements are 2.71%
were not derived by chance, we repeated each experiment and 3.26%, respectively. The possible reason is that,
ten times, and the final performance of each method was the by employing CSSL on massive unlabeled data, MLaD2
average of the ten trials. Table IV lists the parameter settings can learn intrinsic discriminative features between MLAs
of MLaD2 and baseline methods. and BAs and better comprehend the data distribution.
 • MLaD2 achieves significant performance gains with a
 small quantity of labeled data compared to unsupervised
C. Performance Comparisons With Existing Methods
 learning-based baselines. When training with 10-LTD, the
 Table V presents the performance comparison of MLaD2 F1 -score and accuracy improvements of MLaD2 over the
with supervised and semi-supervised baselines. Table VI best one among FlowScope and MonLAD are 24.80%
reports the comparison results of MLaD2 trained on the and 6.93%, respectively. These gains can be attributed
10-LTD with unsupervised baselines. Based on the results, to the robust ability of MLaD2 to extract discriminative
we have the following observations. knowledge from the “SvB” instance pair. In contrast,
 • Among contrastive learning-based baselines, MLaD2 FlowScope and MonLAD judge the abnormalities of
 achieved a 3%-11% improvement in F1 -score compared accounts based on the statistical density of transaction
 to DCI and a 1.64%-8.92% improvement compared to flows and balance changes, respectively. Their strategies
 DGI. DCI and DGI used “node versus subgraph” and may miss the potential correlations and patterns among
 “graph versus graph” as instance pairs, respectively. They MLAs when dealing with complex transactional data.
 both calculated the average value of node embeddings • Figure 7 shows the training and inference time consumpto obtain the graph embedding for contrastive learning. tion of MLaD2 and baseline methods. We can see that the
 However, the averaging operation may cause the loss training time of MLaD2 is longer than all the baselines.
 of fine-grained node information, hindering the model’s However, its inference time is shorter than most of the
 ability to learn discriminative features between nodes. baseline models. Compared with the best supervised
 In contrast, MLaD2 adopts “SvB” as instance pairs, which learning-based baseline XGBoost and the best semifocus on the nodes’ fine-grained features and contribute to supervised learning-based baseline DGI, MLaD2 obtains
 extracting inconspicuous suspicious account information. 2.71% and 1.46%-8.92% improvements in F1 -score at the
 • Among semi-supervised learning-based baselines, cost of only 234.65s and 136.67s additional training time,
 MLaD2 outperforms EvolveGCN and GAT in terms respectively. Moreover, the training of MLaD2 on 51,326
 of F1 -score, with improvements of 1.64%-4.69% transactions was finished within 4 minutes, demonstrating
 and 3.93%-4.51%, respectively. The reason is that its feasibility for practical applications.
 EvolveGCN and GAT aggregate information from • MLaD2 keeps a zero FPR in all the comparisons in
 both MLA and BA neighbors, introducing noise to Table V and Table VI, which further demonstrate its
 the representation of the target node and impeding practicality in real-world ML detection scenarios. Some
 the model’s classification capability. It proves the other methods, such as GAT, EvolveGCN, and MonLAD,
 inconsistency problem is severe and considerable when also achieve zero FPR in all comparisons. The FPRs of
 applying GNNs to ML detection. On the contrary, DCI and DGI, while not being zero, are at a low level.
4528 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS W ITH S UPERVISED AND S EMI -S UPERVISED BASELINE M ETHODS

 TABLE VI In summary, MLaD2 achieves the best overall detection
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS W ITH U NSUPERVISED performance compared with baseline methods. Table VII
 BASELINE M ETHODS
 presents the p-values of paired t-test of the performance
 comparisons in terms of F1 -score. The results demonstrate that
 the improvements of MLaD2 over the baselines are statistically
 significant at α = 0.05.

 D. Ablation Study
 To verify the effectiveness of the TRNNS in MLaD2 ,
 we built a transaction network with equal edge weights and
 executed MLaD2 on it. We refer to this variant of MLaD2
 as MLaD2 /w. We first observed the loss variations of MLaD2
 FlowScope exhibits the highest FPR. The possible reason and MLaD2 /w during the pre-training and fine-tuning phases.
 is that the dense flows of money transfers identified by Figure 8 shows the observation results. We can see that MLaD2
 FlowScope may involve BAs, as MLAs often carry out exhibits a more stable optimization process and converges
 transactions with BAs to disguise their activities. faster when using TRNNS. It reveals the effectiveness of
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4529

 TABLE VII
 PAIRED t -T EST R ESULTS ON THE I MPROVEMENTS OF ML A D2 C OMPARED TO BASELINES IN T ERMS OF F1 -S CORE

Fig. 8. The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during pre-training and fine-tuning phase. (a) The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during
the pre-training phase. (b) The loss variation of MLaD2 and MLaD2 /w during the fine-tuning phase on the 80-LTD. (c) The loss variation of MLaD2 and
MLaD2 /w during the fine-tuning phase on the validation set.

TRNNS in accelerating model training by reducing the aggre- 1) Effect of the Batch Size: We discontinuously varied the
gation of noise information from dissimilar neighbors. training batch size from 128 to 2131 (i.e., the total number of
 Further, we compared the performance of MLaD2 /w with samples in the training set). Figure 9 (a) shows the F1 -score
those of MLaD2 . The second last row in Table V reports performance changes of MLaD2 using different batch sizes.
the performance of MLaD2 /w. We can see that MLaD2 As we can see, when the number of labeled training data is
has an average F1 -score gain of approximately 0.25% small (e.g., 10%), larger batch sizes have a significant advanacross various label fractions of training data compared with tage over smaller ones. A larger batch size can provide more
MLaD2 /w, indicating that assigning higher weights to informa- negative samples to facilitate the feature encoder’s learning
tion from similar neighbors improves detection performance. of helpful representation. When there is more labeled data,
The improvement is minor but significant because the number the performance improvement obtained with increasing batch
of accounts can be tens of thousands. size is no longer apparent. However, using a larger batch size
 To validate the effectiveness of fine-tuning in MLaD2 , can still get a better performance. Therefore, we finally chose
we remove the fine-tuning phase from MLaD2 and test its 2,131 as the batch size.
performance. We refer to this variant as MLaD2 /ft. The last 2) Effect of the Temperature: We further analyze the signifirow in Table V presents the performance results. Evidently, the cance of τ in L SS L of MLaD2 . Figure 9 (b) shows the F1 -score
fine-tuning phase can improve the model’s overall performance performance changes with different values of τ . We can see
on the training data with different proportions of labeled that MLaD2 can obtain a relatively good detection result when
samples, especially when the number of labeled samples is τ = 0.1. It can attribute to the role of τ in controlling
small. For example, MLaD2 improves by 4.58% in F1 -score the penalty strength on hard negative samples. Specifically,
on 10-LTD compared with MLaD2 /ft. MLaD2 with a small τ value tends to penalize hard negative
 Furthermore, as shown in Table V, MLaD2 /ft achieves samples more. Conversely, the model with a larger τ value is
competitive performance compared to MLaD2 and outper- less sensitive to hard negative samples [32]. We finally set τ
forms almost all baselines. The results indicate that during the as 0.1.
pre-training phase, the feature encoders learn discriminative 3) Effect of the Number of GNN Layers: We vary l from 1 to
knowledge from instance pairs rather than relying on labels, 4 to explore the sensitivity of MLaD2 to it. Figure 9 (c) shows
reducing MLaD2 ’s dependency on labeled data. the impact of l when MLaD2 trains on various proportions
 of labeled training data. As we can see, the F1 -score is
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis relatively worse when l is small (l = 1) due to insufficient
 Finally, we investigate the impacts of three hyperparameters neighboring information. As l increases, we can observe that
on the performance of MLaD2 , i.e., the training batch size, the the F1 -score first increases and then declines. A larger value
temperature τ in L SS L , and the number of GNN layers l. of l indicates that a node can aggregate information from
4530 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 9. Impact of hyper-parameters on the performance of MLaD2 in terms of F1 -score. (a) Impact of the training batch size. (b) Impact of τ . (c) Impact
of l.

higher-order neighbors. The results suggest that neighbors reveal the robustness of MLaD2 against adversarial samples
farther than two orders may introduce more noise to the node (i.e., ML strategies to evade detection). Its robustness may
representations learned by MLaD2 . We finally set l as 2. be attributed to the fine-grained discriminative information
 learned from the “SvB” instance pair.
F. Model Robustness
 To explore MLaD2 ’s robustness against evolving ML strate- G. Case Study on Model Interpretability
gies that malicious actors may employ to evade detection, The interpretability of MLaD2 decisions is crucial for
we evaluated its performance in a realistic attack scenario. its trust and transparency in financial applications. To gain
The attack scenario assumes that: (1) an attacker can infer deeper insight into the decision-making mechanism of MLaD2 ,
that MLaD2 utilizes a GNN-based approach, but they cannot we attempted to explain the prediction results of MLaD2 using
obtain the specific design and parameters of the model; (2) PGM-Explainer. PGM-Explainer [48] is an interpretability
the attacker has control over a set of accounts and can evade method using probabilistic graphic models to elucidate the
detection by manipulating transactions between the accounts. decisions made by GNN. By inputting the prediction results
 Based on the above assumptions, we employed a basic GCN of MLaD2 into PGM-Explainer, we can identify those samarchitecture [45] as the surrogate model Satt that attackers may ples that are most crucial for determining the category of a
build to generate adversarial samples. Then, we leveraged the particular node based on the output explanation.
Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [46] to generate adversar- We select two test samples that MLaD2 has correctly clasial samples for Satt . FGSM is a simple and effective technique sified for a case study. One sample is a BA (referred to as v1 ),
for generating adversarial samples to attack deep learning and the other is an MLA (referred to as v2 ). Figure 10 shows
models. The basic idea behind FGSM is to add a perturbation the two samples and their 1-order neighbors. The red dashed
in the direction of the gradient of the loss with respect to circles point out the neighbors most crucial for determining
the input, causing the model to make incorrect predictions. the categories of v1 and v2 . We can see that although the
The resulting new sample is very similar to the original but is neighbors of v1 and v2 include samples of different categories,
crafted to cause the model to make a misclassification. those determining their categories are all of the same category
 We selected 81 MLAs in our test dataset whose transaction as them due to TRNNS’s effect. We also computed the cosine
relationship can form a connected component in TRNNS. similarity between the vector representations of v1 (v2 ) and
These MLAs are assumed to be under the attacker’s control, all its neighbors. Figure 10 lists the respective five neighbors
and their data are input into FGSM. The generated adversarial most similar to v1 and v2 . It can be seen that those neighbors
samples are considered novel ML strategies. We replaced the determining the categories of v1 and v2 are the most similar
original data of the 81 MLAs with the adversarial samples to them. MLaD2 can find these samples by computing the
and used the tampered test data for to evaluate the robustness similarities between the target node and their neighbors.
of MLaD2 . Several studies have demonstrated that adversarial The above analysis provides an approximate explanation of
samples generated for one deep learning model may also be the decision-making process of MLaD2 .
misclassified by another model [47].
 Let Dot and Dtt denote the original and tampered test data,
respectively. Table VIII reports the performance comparison of V. L IMITATIONS
MLaD2 and XGBoost (i.e., the best baseline trained with 100- One obvious limitation of this work is that MLaD2 was eval-
LTD in terms of F1 ) on Dot and Dtt . We can see that MLaD2 ’s uated on a single dataset, and the evaluation dataset is small in
performance shows a slight decrease on Dtt compared with scale and a bit dated. Therefore, the performance of MLaD2 is
its performance on Dot . The F1 score of MLaD2 trained with not guaranteed to generalize to other datasets. Moreover, the
different proportions of labeled data drops 0.027-0.0687 on scalability of MLaD2 on large datasets or real-time detection
Dtt . In contrast, XGBoost exhibits a significant decrease of scenarios remains to be determined. Another limitation is that
0.5972 in F1 on Dtt compared to its F1 on Dot . The results the interpretability of MLaD2 needs to be improved. Although
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4531

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS ON O RIGINAL AND TAMPERED T EST DATA

Fig. 10. Prediction result explanations of (a) a BA and (b) an MLA. The blue nodes represent BAs, and the red nodes represent MLAs. The dashed red
circles highlight those samples that are most crucial for determining the category of the central node. The tables to the right of each subgraph enumerate the
five neighbors most similar to the central node and their respective cosine similarities with the central node.

we have explored its interpretability using PGM-Explainer, VI. C ONCLUSION
MLaD2 has weak inherent interpretability. In our future work, This study proposes MLaD2 , a semi-supervised framework
we will collect more extensive and real-time labeled data to based on decoupling training, for MLA detection. It overtrain and evaluate MLaD2 . We also will design an inherent comes the drawback of the homogeneity hypothesis of GNN
interpretable mechanism for it. in ML detection scenarios via the weighting mechanism of
 Users of MLaD2 can utilize a small set of labeled historical the proposed TRNNS. Additionally, the model successfully
data to train the framework to detect MLAs. However, there captures the discriminative features of accounts using CSSL
are two limitations of MLaD2 in daily use. First, as MLaD2 is based on the newly designed “SvB” instance pair, which
a semi-supervised-based framework, users need to perform its mitigates the model’s reliance on labeled information and the
training process periodically to detect MLAs in new coming adverse effects of class imbalance. Extensive experiments on
data. Second, if an MLA only conducts transactions with a real-world dataset demonstrate that MLaD2 achieves supevery few accomplices and almost all of their counter-parties rior detection performance with a small quantity of labeled
are BAs, MLaD2 may not pick out the MLA from BAs. training data. Besides, the ablation study verifies the effec-
However, most MLAs are unlikely to engage in transactions tiveness of TRNNS and the importance of the fine-tuning
with numerous benign accounts due to the labor and resources process in enhancing model performance. Experimental results
costs. Therefore, our method can work for most real-world also proved that MLaD2 has robustness against adversarial
scenarios. samples.
4532 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 R EFERENCES [24] J.-D.-J. Rocha-Salazar, M.-J. Segovia-Vargas, and
 M.-D.-M. Camacho-Miñano, “Money laundering and terrorism
 [1] A. Salehi, M. Ghazanfari, and M. Fathian, “Data mining techniques
 financing detection using neural networks and an abnormality
 for anti money laundering,” Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res., vol. 12, no. 20,
 indicator,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 169, May 2021, Art. no. 114470.
 pp. 10084–10094, 2017.
 [25] B. Dumitrescu, A. Baltoiu, and S. Budulan, “Anomaly detection in
 [2] S. N. F. S. M. Nazri, S. Zolkaflil, and N. Omar, “Mitigating financial
 graphs of bank transactions for anti money laundering applications,”
 leakages through effective money laundering investigation,” Managerial
 IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 47699–47714, 2022.
 Auditing J., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 189–207, Feb. 2019.
 [26] M. Jullum, A. Løland, R. B. Huseby, G. Ånonsen, and J. Lorentzen,
 [3] A. Verhage, “Between the hammer and the anvil? The anti-money
 “Detecting money laundering transactions with machine learning,”
 laundering-complex and its interactions with the compliance industry,”
 J. Money Laundering Control, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 173–186, Jan. 2020.
 Crime, Law Social Change, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 9–32, Jul. 2009.
 [27] J. Rissanen, “Modeling by shortest data description,” Automatica,
 [4] S. Gao, D. Xu, H. Wang, and P. Green, “Knowledge-based anti-money
 vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 465–471, 1978.
 laundering: A software agent bank application,” J. Knowl. Manage.,
 vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 63–75, Apr. 2009. [28] H. S. Assumpção, F. Souza, L. L. Campos, V. T. de Castro Pires,
 P. M. L. de Almeida, and F. Murai, “DELATOR: Money laundering
 [5] D. Savage, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Chou, and X. Yu, “Detection of
 detection via multi-task learning on large transaction graphs,” in Proc.
 money laundering groups: Supervised learning on small networks,” in
 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 709–714.
 Proc. Workshops 31st AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2017, pp. 43–49.
 [29] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 [6] Z. Chen, L. D. Van Khoa, E. N. Teoh, A. Nazir, E. K. Karuppiah,
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 1025–1035.
 and K. S. Lam, “Machine learning techniques for anti-money laundering
 (AML) solutions in suspicious transaction detection: A review,” Knowl. [30] B. Kang et al., “Decoupling representation and classifier for long-tailed
 Inf. Syst., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 245–285, Nov. 2018. recognition,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020,
 pp. 1–16.
 [7] L. Keyan and Y. Tingting, “An improved support-vector network model
 for anti-money laundering,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Manage. E-Commerce [31] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 E-Government, Nov. 2011, pp. 193–196. unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 [8] L.-T. Lv, N. Ji, and J.-L. Zhang, “A RBF neural network model for anti- Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
 money laundering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wavelet Anal. Pattern Recognit., [32] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple
 Aug. 2008, pp. 209–215. framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc.
 [9] Z. Chen, W. M. Soliman, A. Nazir, and M. Shorfuzzaman, “Varia- 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 tional autoencoders and wasserstein generative adversarial networks for [33] P. Veličković, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and
 improving the anti-money laundering process,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, R. D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Reppp. 83762–83785, 2021. resent. (ICLR), 2019, pp. 1–17.
[10] X. Li et al., “FlowScope: Spotting money laundering based on graphs,” [34] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Guo, H. Yin, C. Li, and H. Chen, “Decoupling
 in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 4731–4738. representation learning and classification for GNN-based anomaly detec-
[11] X. Sun et al., “MonLAD: Money laundering agents detection in trans- tion,” in Proc. 44th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.,
 action streams,” in Proc. 15th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Jul. 2021, pp. 1239–1248.
 Feb. 2022, pp. 976–986. [35] W. Weng Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, S. Layeghy, and
[12] M.-C. Lee et al., “AutoAudit: Mining accounting and time-evolving M. Portmann, “Inspection-L: Self-supervised GNN node embeddings for
 graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2020, money laundering detection in Bitcoin,” 2022, arXiv:2203.10465.
 pp. 950–956. [36] J. Zhou, C. Hu, J. Chi, J. Wu, M. Shen, and Q. Xuan, “Behavior-aware
[13] K. Veeramachaneni, I. Arnaldo, V. Korrapati, C. Bassias, and K. Li, account de-anonymization on Ethereum interaction graph,” IEEE Trans.
 “AI2 : Training a big data machine to defend,” in Proc. IEEE IEEE Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3433–3448, 2022.
 2nd Int. Conf. Big Data Secur. Cloud (BigDataSecurity) Int. Conf. High [37] X. Luo, X. Han, W. Zuo, Z. Xu, Z. Wang, and X. Wu, “A dynamic
 Perform. Smart Comput. (HPSC), IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Data Secur. transaction pattern aggregation neural network for money laundering
 (IDS), Apr. 2016, pp. 49–54. detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput.
[14] D. Labanca, L. Primerano, M. Markland-Montgomery, M. Polino, Commun. (TrustCom), Dec. 2022, pp. 818–826.
 M. Carminati, and S. Zanero, “Amaretto: An active learning frame- [38] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
 work for money laundering detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. 6th Int. Conf. Learn.
 pp. 41720–41739, 2022. Represent., 2018, pp. 1–12.
[15] M. Weber et al., “Anti-money laundering in Bitcoin: Experimenting with [39] B. Knyazev, G. W. Taylor, and M. Amer, “Understanding attention
 graph convolutional networks for financial forensics,” in Proc. KDD and generalization in graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Workshop Anomaly Detection Finance, 2019, p. 8. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 4202–4212.
[16] A. Pareja et al., “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks [40] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
 for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Apr. 2020, Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
 vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 5363–5370. [41] K. Cho, B. van Merrienboer, D. Bahdanau, and Y. Bengio, “On the
[17] Y. Zhou et al., “Analyzing and detecting money-laundering accounts properties of neural machine translation: Encoder-decoder approaches,”
 in online social networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 115–121, 2014, arXiv:1409.1259.
 May 2018. [42] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[18] Y. Xie, Z. Xu, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, and S. Ji, “Self-supervised learning Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
 of graph neural networks: A unified review,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. [43] S. Li, “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2412–2429, Feb. 2023. of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[19] M. Alkhalili, M. H. Qutqut, and F. Almasalha, “Investigation of applying Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 5243–5253.
 machine learning for watch-list filtering in anti-money laundering,” IEEE [44] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 18481–18496, 2021. detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learn-
[20] Z. Gu, D. Lin, and J. Wu, “On-chain analysis-based detection of ing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6,
 abnormal transaction amount on cryptocurrency exchanges,” Phys. A, pp. 2378–2392, Jun. 2022.
 Stat. Mech. Appl., vol. 604, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 127799. [45] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
[21] R. I. T. Jensen and A. Iosifidis, “Qualifying and raising anti-money convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2017,
 laundering alarms with deep learning,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 214, pp. 1–14.
 Mar. 2023, Art. no. 119037. [46] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
[22] U. G. Ketenci, T. Kurt, S. Önal, C. Erbil, S. Aktürkoglu, and adversarial examples,” in Proc. ICLR, 2015, pp. 1–11.
 H. S. Ilhan, “A time-frequency based suspicious activity detection for [47] Y. Liu, X. Chen, C. Liu, and D. Song, “Delving into
 anti-money laundering,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 59957–59967, 2021, transferable adversarial examples and black-box attacks,” 2016,
 doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3072114. arXiv:1611.02770.
[23] C. R. Alexandre and J. Balsa, “Incorporating machine learning and [48] M. Vu and M. T. Thai, “PGM-explainer: Probabilistic graphical model
 a risk-based strategy in an anti-money laundering multiagent system,” explanations for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 217, May 2023, Art. no. 119500. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 12225–12235.
LUO et al.: MLaD2 : A SEMI-SUPERVISED ML DETECTION FRAMEWORK BASED ON DECOUPLING TRAINING 4533

 Xuejiao Luo is currently pursuing the mas- Xiaoming Wu received the master’s degree in
 ter’s degree in computer science and technology computer science and technology from Shandong
 with Shandong Computer Science Center (National University and the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-
 Supercomputer Center, Jinan), Qilu University of ence and technology from Shandong University of
 Technology (Shandong Academy of Sciences), Science and Technology. He is currently a Pro-
 China. Her current research interests are in computer fessor with Shandong Computer Science Center
 forensics and data mining. (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu
 University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
 Sciences), China. His current research interests
 include industrial internet, big data analysis, and
 information security. He was selected as a young and
 middle-aged expert with outstanding contributions in Shandong Province.

 Xiaohui Han (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
 and Ph.D. degrees in computer science and technology from Shandong University, China, in 2006 and
 2012, respectively. From 2011 to 2012, he was
 a Visiting Scholar with the Artificial Intelligence
 Laboratory, MIS Department, The University of
 Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. He is currently a
 Professor with Shandong Computer Science Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan), Qilu
 University of Technology (Shandong Academy of
 Wenyin Liu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Sciences), China. He has coauthored more than
 B.Eng. and M.Eng. degrees in computer science
30 peer-reviewed articles. His research interests include cybersecurity, digital
 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, and the D.Sc.
forensics, data mining, and machine learning. He serves as a PC member for
 degree from the Technion—Israel Institute of Techseveral international conferences.
 nology, Haifa. He was a Professor with the School of
 Computer Science and Technology and the Director
 of the Web Identity Security Laboratory, Guangdong
 University of Technology, the Deputy Director of the
 Multimedia Software Engineering Research Centre,
 Wenbo Zuo received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees
 City University of Hong Kong, from 2013 to 2016,
 in astrophysics from the University of Chinese
 an Assistant Professor with the Department of Com-
 Academy of Sciences. He is currently an Assisputer Science, City University of Hong Kong, from 2002 to 2012, and a
 tant Researcher with Shandong Computer Science
 full-time Researcher at Microsoft Research China/Asia from 1999 to 2001.
 Center (National Supercomputer Center in Jinan),
 He is currently a full-time Researcher with Zhongguancun Laboratory. His
 Qilu University of Technology (Shandong Academy
 research interests include anti-phishing and web identity authentication and
 of Sciences), China. His current research interests
 management. He is a fellow of IAPR. In 2003, he was awarded the Internainclude cyber security, data mining, and machine
 tional Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition Outstanding Young
 learning.
 Researcher Award from the International Association for Pattern Recognition
 (IAPR). He was the TC10 Chair of IAPR from 2006 to 2010.