IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024 5520313

 MSNet: Self-Supervised Multiscale Network With
 Enhanced Separation Training for Hyperspectral
 Anomaly Detection
 Haijun Liu , Member, IEEE, Xi Su, Xiangfei Shen , and Xichuan Zhou , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) has
attracted increasing attention due to its economical and efficient ⊙ Element-wise multiplication over spatial
applications. The main challenge lies in the data-starved problem dimensions.
of hyperspectral images (HSIs) and the costliness of manual ∥ · ∥F Frobenius norm.
annotation, making it heavily reliant on the model’s adaptability
and robustness to unseen scenes under limited samples. Selfsupervised learning offers a solution to this urgency via mining I. I NTRODUCTION
meaningful representations from the data itself. One promising
paradigm is leveraging untrained neural networks to reconstruct
the background component for revealing anomalous information. Its capability stems from the network architecture and
 H YPERSPECTRAL imagery (HSI) has been receiving
 great attention in the field of remote sensing over the
 past decades and has been widely utilized in various tasks [1],
the training process rather than learning from expensive and [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Among these studies, hyperspectral
strongly domain-dependent data, which is naturally applicable to anomaly detection (HAD) stands out as a crucial technique
HAD. In this article, to handle the urgent requirement for selfsupervised learning in HAD, we propose a multiscale network
 for localizing targets of interest in HSIs without the need
(termed MSNet) that detects anomalies with enhanced separation for human supervision [7]. This is particularly relevant due
training. The network architecture consists of several multiscale to the data-starved problem of HSIs [8], [9] and the costconvolutional encoder–decoder (CED) layers, considering the liness of obtaining human labels. Therefore, HAD can be
spatial characteristics of the anomalies. To suppress the anomalies applied economically and efficiently for various civilian and
during background reconstruction, we adopt a new separation
training strategy by introducing a soft separator for better practi- military purposes [10], [11], [12]. Hyperspectral anomalies are
cality on larger datasets. Extensive experiments conducted on five defined as an extremely small number of pixels with spectral
commonly used datasets and the HAD100 dataset, demonstrate signatures that differ significantly from the surrounding or
the superiority of our method over its counterparts. Our code is global background [13]. Generally, the imbalance between
available at https://github.com/enter-i-username/MSNet. the samples of background and anomalies makes the direct
 Index Terms— Enhanced separation training, hyperspectral binary classification of abnormal pixels against background
anomaly detection (HAD), multiscale network, self-supervised pixels quite challenging [14]. More importantly, due to the
learning.
 diversity of spectral sensors and anomalous targets, achieving
 N OMENCLATURE consistent performance across different scenarios with a uni-
 X Network input hyperspectral image. fied learning model is difficult, placing high demands on the
 X̂ Network output background image. model’s adaptability and robustness. To date, various studies
 M Binary mask. Ones indicate the locations of have proposed solutions to address this difficult yet crucial
 anomalous pixels, while zeros represent the problem from different perspectives. These solutions can be
 background pixels. broadly categorized into four types: unsupervised background
 M̄ Boolean not operation on M. modeling, semi-supervised background reconstruction, weakly
 ϵ Small constant that prevents division by supervised discriminative learning, and self-supervised backzero. ground reconstruction.1
 S(·) Summation of all elements in the input Unsupervised methods model the background from the
 matrix. observed HSI in a model-driven manner, leveraging prior
 knowledge and assumptions from the background component.
 Manuscript received 17 May 2024; accepted 4 June 2024. Date of publi- They measure the abnormality of each pixel by calculating the
cation 7 June 2024; date of current version 20 June 2024. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
 difference between the original image and the background.
Grant U2133211, Grant 62001063, and Grant 61971072; and in part by In 1990s, Reed and Xiaoli proposed the RXD [15], which
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant
2023CDJXY-037. (Corresponding author: Xichuan Zhou.) 1 The methods of four types all possess an unsupervised nature since they do
 The authors are with the School of Microelectronics and Communica- not require human-annotated labels. In this article, we categorize them based
tion Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China (e-mail: on their respective methodologies. For example, the self-supervised methods
zxc@cqu.edu.cn). take the image itself as the supervision information, and the semi-supervised
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2024.3411009 methods only screen background pixels as training samples.
 1558-0644 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

assumes that the background pixels follow a multivariate
Gaussian distribution and utilizes the Mahalanobis distance
as a measure of the deviation of outliers from the background. Building upon this foundation, various enhancements
have been developed, such as the local information-based
RXD [16], the kernel trick-driven RXD [17], and other
representatives [18], [19], [20]. In addition to these probability distribution-based methods, some others model the
background using man-made image priors, also referred to as
representation-based methods [13]. They hold a fundamental
assumption that background pixels can be represented by background pixels locally or globally, whereas anomalous pixels
cannot [21]. For example, the collaborative representationbased detector (CRD) [22] considers each background pixel
as a linear combination of its neighboring pixels, which are
 Fig. 1. Feature maps of three downsampling scales on the Gulfport and
included in a local dual window. To exploit more character- Pavia datasets. The Gulfport and Pavia datasets shown in the left column,
istics of the HSI from a global view, two image priors, i.e., respectively, contain airplanes and vehicles as anomalies of interest (boxed in
the low-rank property and the sparsity, are discussed in many red) in the imaging scenes. Due to the differences in their spatial resolutions
 (for different images) and object sizes (for the same or different images), these
studies [23], [24], [25], [26]. While these unsupervised model- anomalies exhibit multiscale characteristics, posing a challenge to a unified
driven methods maintain ideal and simplistic assumptions single-scale learning model for background reconstruction. The downsampling
for background modeling, they may fail to accurately detect operation is used to eliminate the anomalies in the background. A single finer
 downsampling can eliminate most vehicles in the Pavia dataset shown in the
anomalies concealed within more complex scenes [27]. middle column, but it cannot handle the largest airplane in the Gulfport dataset.
 The remaining three types of methods conduct detection A single coarser downsampling can eliminate most anomalies as shown in
within a data-driven paradigm based on parameterized neural the right column, but it also removes the background details. To reconstruct a
 better background for anomaly detection, the most robust way is to efficiently
networks [28], [29], [30] rather than strongly relying on integrate all downsampled multiscale features to overcome these flaws.
handcrafted priors, which are more practical and adaptive
for handling different complex backgrounds. They train networks to learn low-level and abstract representations of the
image and detect anomalies through reconstruction errors. set, this detector may be trapped within the distribution [45].
The semi-supervised methods [31], [32] search for pure To make models more adaptive and robust to unseen scenes
background samples in the image before training using clus- when data are limited, a remedy is to use an untrained network
tering [33], [34] or distance measurement [35]. Different from in a self-supervised manner [45]. Specifically, its capability
semi-supervised ones, the weakly supervised group [27] auto- stems from the network architecture and the training process
matically generates supervision information for both anomaly (or objectives), but not from the network parameters that are
and background, holding a belief that the prior search is not randomly initialized before each test image instead of learning
accurate. It employs the generative adversarial network (GAN) from external domain-dependent data. Both of the factors are
[36] for discriminative learning between the coarsely annotated prior to unseen data and determine how to mine meaningful
background and anomalous pixels. To conclude, the goal of representations from the data itself. Therefore, careful designs
the above-mentioned two types is to “overfit” their networks for the network architecture and the training process are of
to a highly compact background boundary, exposing outliers vital importance.
far when testing [37]. Unfortunately, the boundary is not For the network architecture, the key is to find an optirobustly guaranteed, especially in cases where the initial coarse mal structure that “resonates” with the inherent structure of
searching mistakenly includes anomalies in the background set data [38], while also maintaining low computational comor vice versa. plexity. Currently, most AE-based methods [28], [41] mainly
 Self-supervised methods treat the entire image as supervi- concentrate on the spectral features of the scene, which do
sion information and aim to reconstruct the image itself using not make full use of the spatial information. To handle the
an untrained network beforehand, a similar way as in those spatial structure of anomalous targets, Auto-AD [42] assumes
image restoration tasks [9], [38], [39]. It operates under the the anomalies are extremely small in size and thus can be elimassumption that learning the background is a more straightfor- inated through the downscaling encoding during background
ward shortcut for the networks rather than outliers. Typically, reconstruction. However, anomalies of interest like airplanes
the training samples are all pixels (spectral vectors) in the test or vehicles, as shown in Fig. 1, often exhibit multiscale charac-
HSI for autoencoders (AEs) [28], [40], [41] and patches for teristics. This problem arises due to two primary factors: first,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [42], [43]. Recently, the anomalies may exhibit diverse shapes; second, imaging sensors
AETNet [44] introduced an image-level paradigm that takes may possess varying physical resolutions, resulting in inconnormal HSIs as external training samples, and trained a unified sistencies in the scale of anomalies across different images.
network with anomaly data augmentation. This method has an These factors pose a significant challenge to the model’s ability
incredibly high detection speed because it only needs inference to perform effectively across multiple scales. This inspired
when testing. However, due to limited diversity of the training us to consider a multiscale downsampling architecture, which
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

exploits the topological structures of different anomalies via Our contributions can be summarized as the following.
multiple scale branches. 1) We propose a multiscale network architecture, desig-
 For the training process, one main concern is that back- nated as MSNet, for the purpose of addressing the
ground reconstruction is a unguided process due to the intricate issue of multiscale anomaly shapes. The MSNet
ambiguity in determining when to stop the training [41]. How- framework incorporates multiple CED layers, each feaever, the detection performance via background reconstruction turing distinct spatial downscaling factors, aimed at
is sensitive to the timing of termination, rendering it unsuitable minimizing the influence of varying anomaly sizes.
for automated detection on test images. In this context, directly To facilitate efficient feature integration, we employ
taking the original image as the reconstructive target leads skip connections, which contributes significantly to the
to an identical mapping problem (IMP) [46], because the generation of accurate background images. Furthermore,
network has a risk of learning a trivial identity mapping to preserve the multiscale features throughout all layers,
when converged. The potential solution documented in [46] we incorporate a multiscale reconstruction loss as the
is that the network first estimates the threshold from the back- content loss, ensuring that information from various
ground and anomaly components and subsequently performs scales is effectively utilized and propagated within the
separation training until the network converges to a dynamic network.
equilibrium around the threshold. While the separation training 2) We develop an enhanced separation training algorithm
strategy can effectively suppress anomalies and avoid the IMP, that aims to address the IMP within the self-supervised
its effectiveness relies heavily on the availability of a precise learning framework. This algorithm offers greater flexithreshold value, which is hard to estimate and requires fine- bility and eliminates the need for threshold fine-tuning.
tuning for each specific image, and thus restricts its automated To mitigate the potential anomalies during background
detection. reconstruction, we incorporate an enhanced separation
 In this article, we present MSNet, a multiscale network fea- training loss. Additionally, to minimize the influence of
turing enhanced separation training for self-supervised HAD, the threshold parameter on the training process, we conto address the problem of multiscale anomalous targets and struct the update rule of the latent mask by introducing
the IMP without threshold fine-tuning. MSNet is composed of the soft mask paradigm, enabling a more gradual and
several stacked convolutional encoder–decoder (CED) layers, adaptive adjustment of the mask.
each of which serves as a different spatial downscaling feature We organize the rest of this article as follows: Section II
learner and eliminates the anomalies at its respective scale. The reviews the IMP and a potential solution, separation training,
encoded and decoded features are fused with skip connections. both highly relevant to our method. Section III presents our
Distinct from the classic multiscale network U-Net [47], method in detail, including the MSNet structure and the
we do not fuse the multiscale features using channel-wise enhanced separation training. Extensively conducted expericoncatenation, but use a summation for the fusion purpose. ments are described in Section IV. We conclude this article in
In addition, we keep the channel number of these features Section V.
equal to the input, and apply a fast and efficient band selection
algorithm OPBS [48] to the input HSI to further reduce total
convolution kernels while preserving the informativeness and II. P RELIMINARIES
distinctiveness of the HSI. To further preserve the multiscale Self-supervised methods regardless of their network struccharacteristics in both shallow and deep layers, similar to cer- tures, all suffer from unguided training due to their reconstructain deblurring approaches [49], [50], we utilize a multiscale tion nature, which may cause a severe performance decline
reconstruction loss as the content loss rather than the mean in detection. We first review this problem and introduce a
squared error (mse) loss. potential solution to it.
 Relying solely on the multiscale network cannot well
address the widespread IMP in self-supervised HAD [28],
[41], [42] because of the contamination of anomalous targets A. Identical Mapping Problem
during background reconstruction. Therefore, we introduce the Self-supervised detectors [28], [41], [42], [46] take the
separation training to address this problem and further enhance entire HSI as the supervision information, considering the
it for flexible and robust results. The enhanced separation background as valuable and easily learnable information for
training includes two components: the enhanced separation the network. By leveraging this understanding, these detectraining loss and the latent mask updating. The enhanced sep- tors efficiently filter out abnormality, focusing on learning
aration training loss relies on a latent mask to partition the HSI and identifying the underlying patterns in the background.
into background and anomaly parts, suppressing the anomaly However, such detectors often assimilate both background
while reconstructing the background to obtain an estimate and anomalies into the estimated background as the training
of pure background. The latent mask is periodically updated progresses, behaving like identity mapping functions. This
during training by soft thresholding to adaptively correct the phenomenon is referred to as the IMP [46], resulting in
separation results and prevent contamination by anomalous a significant decline in detection performance. It is mainly
targets. The softened updates remove the dependence on caused by the unguided training process that the complex
threshold parameters, resulting in more robust performance background is hardly reconstructed because of anomaly comon larger datasets. ponent included in the process.
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 Fortunately, this issue can be addressed by using differ- Algorithm 1 Separation Training Algorithm
ent reconstruction objectives. For example, the sparse AE Input: HSI data X, tradeoff hyperparameter λ > 0, proportion
method [28] constrained the sparsity of hidden codes, miti- threshold τ for binarization, number of training iterations
gating the IMP by limiting the model’s capacity. RGAE [41] K ≥ 1, number of epochs in one iteration E ≥ 1.
assumed the sparsity in anomalous targets, resulting in a Initialize: M(0) = 0.
slower convergence speed under the reconstruction with 1: for m = 1 : K do
the l2,1 -norm compared to the background. Similarly, Auto- 2: for n = 1 : E do
AD [42] introduced an adaptive-weighted loss to regulate the 3: Feed the network with X ⊙ M̄(m−1) as input and yield
convergence speed of pixels with larger reconstruction errors. X̂(m) ;
Differently, BiGSeT [46] shifted the objective to reconstruct- 4: Calculate L SeT using (3);
ing the background and completing potential anomalies with 5: Do backward propagation;
a process termed separation training. Rather than approxi- 6: end for
mating the input HSI, the separation training considers the 7: Calculate Ri,(m) (m) 2
 j = ∥X̂i, j,: − Xi, j,: ∥2 ;
 (m)
convergence as a dynamic equilibrium around a preestimated 8: Sort the elements in R in ascending order to create
threshold between the background and anomalies. However, r̃ (m) , and obtain the τ quantile r̃ (m)(τ ) from it;
this training strategy can efficiently prevent reconstructing the 9: Calculate M(m) using (6);
anomalies only when a precise threshold is obtained, thereby 10: end for
limiting its flexibility. Output: Detection map R(K ) .

B. Separation Training
 The latent variable M is predicted and periodically updated
 Different from the unguided training process, the separation in our training process. Specifically, we divide the whole
training algorithm introduces a latent binary mask explicitly training into K iterations. In the mth iteration, we first train
dividing the pixels in the reconstructed image into two mutu- the network for a small number of epochs E using LSeT with
ally exclusive parts, i.e., the potential anomaly part and the M(m−1) derived from the previous iteration. Then, the mask is
background part. By separately suppressing (i.e., removing and updated to M(m) by the following binarization:
completing) the anomaly part while reconstructing the back- (
ground part during training, the networks avoid anomalous 1, if Ri, j > r̃ (τ )
 Mi, j = (6)
component in the reconstructed image, and thus maintain high 0, otherwise
performance throughout the training.
 Concretely, we train the network using the separation train- where R denotes the reconstruction error matrix in this itering loss LSeT given below ation, obtained by Ri, j = ∥X̂i, j,: − Xi, j,: ∥22 ; vector r̃ contains
 values sorted in ascending order from the matrix R and
 LBR =
 1
 ∥(X̂ − X) ⊙ M̄∥2F (1) r̃ (τ ) represents the τ quantile with a predefined proportion
 S(M̄) threshold τ ∈ (0, 1]. The threshold parameter τ here means
 1 the proportion of anomalies over the total number of pixels
 LAS = ∥LoG(X̂) ⊙ M∥2F (2)
 S(M) + ϵ and represents ones in M. We set M(0) = 0 as an initial step,
 LSeT = LBR + λ · LAS (3) and the training algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.
 In conclusion, pixels below τ are well reconstructed and
where LBR and LAS , respectively, indicate the background those above τ will stay continuously suppressed, and thereby
reconstruction loss and anomaly suppression loss, and λ is a exists an equilibrium around τ . Although the termination
tradeoff parameter in (3); LoG(X̂) in (2) represents the second- condition is thus relaxed by fixing a proper K , the threshold
order Laplacian of Gaussian (LoG) operator applied to the has an unignorable impact on the performance and often needs
estimated image X̂, which is computed as follows: fine-tuning.
  
 −2 −4 −4 −4 −2
 III. P ROPOSED MSN ET
 −4 0 8 0 −4
 A. Overview
  
 L = −4
  8 24 8 −4  (4)
 −4 0 8 0 −4 Our proposed method works under a self-supervised
 −2 −4 −4 −4 −2 paradigm, whose detection performance is highly relevant to
 LoG(X̂) = L ∗ X̂ (5) the network structure and the training process. Considering
 the multiscale characteristics of the anomalies across different
where L is a 5 × 5 LoG template, and ∗ computes 2-D images, we build our network with multiple downscaling
convolutions over each band. The remaining notations in (1) branches to adapt to various possible scenes. In addition,
and (2) are comprehensively elucidated in Nomenclature. we enhance the separation training strategy as stated in
It can be known from LBR and LAS that we reconstruct Section II to improve its robustness to larger datasets,
the background pixels selected by M̄, and we suppress the by expanding the Boolean values of the latent mask to real
anomalous pixels selected by M by constraining the second- values and removing the threshold parameter. Fig. 2 illustrates
order spatial variation. the overall structure of our proposed method.
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

Fig. 2. Overview of our proposed MSNet method. Our detection consists of three steps. 1) Band selection, 2) multiscale network training, and 3) network
inference to obtain the detection result. We use OPBS before training to remove band redundancy from the input HSI while preserving its discriminability.
The MSNet architecture consists of L stacked multiscale layers, each of which serves as a downscaling feature learner at a different scale. Skip connections
in summation trunks are employed to fuse both encoding and decoding features. We train the network using two losses including the multiscale reconstruction
loss LMSR and the enhanced separation training loss LSeT+ . The output decoded features Dout are regarded as different scale levels of Xbs constrained by
LMSR as the content to retain both deep and shallow multiscale characteristics in the network. The topmost feature Dout1 is designated as the reconstructed
background and undergoes separation training with Xbs . In enhanced separation training, we use an adaptively updated soft latent mask to separately represent
background and anomaly regions, reconstructing the background part while suppressing the anomaly part without the need for threshold fine-tuning. The final
detection result is obtained by computing the error between the input image and the background computed from network inference.

 Our network consists of several stacked CED layers, each
serving as a background learner at a different scale. Under this
setting, anomalies of different sizes can be eliminated during
background reconstruction, rather than a single-scale architecture that might not be robust to various cases. Different from
the U-Net, we fuse multiscale features extracted by CED layers
through skip connections simply using summation, instead Fig. 3. lth CED layer. The input feature Elin of layer l first undergoes a
of channel-wise concatenation that might lead to catastrophic bottleneck module and residual skip processing, followed by a down block
 to obtain Zl . Subsequently, Zl splits into two branches: the first one passes
complexity. To further reduce the computational cost, we apply through the up block in the encoder part, producing Elout for lower layers; the
a fast and efficient band selection algorithm OPBS [48] as a second one goes through the up block in the decoder part, and after fusing
pretraining step. This algorithm quickly selects an informative with the decoder features Dlin from lower layers, it yields the output feature
 Dlout for layer l.
and distinctive subset of the original bands. Therefore, the
complexity of the network can be reduced while the detection
performance is maintained. our network for training. In the training phase, we use the
 To train our network, two loss functions are used. The multiscale reconstruction loss and the enhanced separation
first multiscale reconstruction loss is to retain multiscale training loss, following the separation training strategy. Finally,
features within the deep layers as our content loss. The the well-trained network is used to estimate a pure background
second enhanced separation training loss is to mitigate the X̂bs by inference, and the detection map is computed via
IMP, preserving the background and suppressing the anoma- reconstruction errors between X̂bs and Xbs .
lies, completely independent of any preestimated threshold
parameter.
 Our detecting procedure consists of the following three B. Network Architecture
steps: 1) band selection; 2) network training; and 3) net- The network architecture is depicted in Fig. 2. It consists of
work inference. Formally, let the observed HSI be denoted L CED layers that serve as multiscale feature extractors, with
as X ∈ R H ×W ×B , where H , W , and B represent height, each embedding a different spatial downsampling rate.
width, and spectral bands, respectively. After selecting a 1) CED Layer: One CED layer comprises an encoder and a
subset of Nbs bands out of B, we denote the subimage as decoder, as described in Fig. 3. Taking layer l as an example,
Xbs ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs . This subimage is subsequently fed into the input Elin ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs is fed through the cascaded
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

ED structure, being spatially downsampled and restored in 2) Enhanced Separation Training Loss: The separation
sequence, to output Dlout ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs of this layer. training strategy can effectively suppress anomalies through
 For the encoder, a spectral bottleneck consisting of two the utilization of a binary mask mechanism, but it, however,
convolution blocks, followed by a residual skip, is first used to relies heavily on the availability of a precise threshold value.
compress and restore input channels and pays more attention to On the one hand, the proportion of anomalous pixels in
distinctive spectral information. Next, there is a downsampling one image is extremely imbalanced, which causes accurate
block that reduces the features to Zl ∈ R(κl ·H )×(κl ·W )×Nbs prediction to be difficult. On the other hand, the distribution of
through average pooling, shrinking the spatial dimensions by background and anomalies varies significantly across different
a factor of κl . datasets, suggesting that we can hardly develop a unified
 For the decoder, an upsampling block using bilinear inter- threshold prediction method that generalizes well to unseen
polation and a convolution block is used to restore the spatial datasets. For this reason, here we propose an enhanced version
size. Then, a convolution block is finally appended that of the separation training algorithm in order to completely
outputs Dlout . remove the impact of any threshold-related parameter.
 For flexible interlayer connections that will be explained Our strategy is to “soften” the hard thresholding while
later, we add an extra upsampling block in the encoder that preserving the characteristics of separating anomalies from
takes Zl as input and outputs Elout ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs . Additionally, background during training. First, we calculate M by min–max
Dlin ∈ R H ×W ×Nbs from other layers is added in the decoder scaling to replace (6)
before the convolution block. Ri, j − Min(R)
 2) Stacking Multiscale Layers With Skip Connections: Mi, j = (10)
We fuse multiscale features extracted from the input image Max(R) − Min(R)
by integrating several layers with different κ values, which where Min(·) and Max(·) obtain the minimum and maximum
are respectively set to {1, 1/2, 1/4, . . . , 1/2 L−1 } for L layers. values of the matrix, respectively. Equation (10) indicates that
A simple and natural approach is to stack the layers up and we allow M to be a soft separator, where the separation
connect adjacent layers l and l + 1 by passing Elout to El+1 in
 between background and anomaly is less strict compared
 out in to the previous hard one, but no longer needs binarization.
and Dl+1 to Dl . Then, the input and output of the multiscale
network are defined as the topmost layer Ein 1 ≡ Xbs and
 Accordingly, the complementary term M̄ of M is extended as
X̂bs ≡ Dout1 , respectively. Based on this simple consideration,
 M̄ = 1 − M instead of Boolean operations. We denote the
we introduce interlayer skip connections that make multiscale softened separation training loss as LSeT+ , which is calculated
features flow more flexibly within the network, and contribute as follows:
to better background reconstruction. Concretely, for each layer
 LSeT+ = LBR + λ · LAS (11)
l, we have
 where LBR and λ · LAS are the background reconstruction
  Xbs ,
 
  l=1
 in f term and anomaly suppression term introduced in (1) and (2),
 El = X (7)
 k , l = 2, 3, . . . , L
 l − 1Eout
  Xbs +
  respectively. λ is a tradeoff parameter. The calculation of
 k=1 LSeT+ here is similar as LSeT in (3). The difference is that
  M and M̄ calculated by (10) here are real matrices, rather
  0,
  l=L
 than Boolean matrices.
 in L
 Dl = X (8)
 k , l = 1, 2, . . . , L − 1.
 
  Dout 3) Total Loss: The total loss function consists of the above
 k=l+1 two parts, given as the following:
 Clearly, (7) indicates that we input layer l not with the 1
 out
encoder output El−1 of the upper layer, but with Xbs Ltotal = (LMSR + LSeT+ ). (12)
 P adjacent
 out
 Nbs
and the sum of the outputs E
 k k of all previous layers.
Similarly, (8) shows that the decoder input receives the sum D. Training and Detection
of the outputs k Dout
 P
 k of all lower layers.
 The enhanced separation training algorithm is summarized
C. Loss Function in Algorithm 2. We set K and E to 5 and 150, respectively.
 ADAM is chosen as the optimizer, and the learning rate is set
 1) Multiscale Reconstruction Loss: To retain the multiscale to 0.001. After training, we can directly obtain X̂bs = Dout
 1 by
information from deeper layers, we utilize a multiscale recon- network inference. The detection result R is computed by the
struction loss as the content loss, which is given by following:
 L
 1X 1 2
 Dlout ↓κl − (Xbs )↓κl Ri, j = ∥(X̂bs )i, j,: − (Xbs )i, j,: ∥22
 
 LMSR = (9) (13)
 L l=1 S (Xbs )↓κl
 
 F
 where (·)i, j,: is the spectral vector at position (i, j).
where S(·) obtains the pixel number, and (·)↓κl downsamples
the image at rate κl over spatial dimensions. We treat all
decoder outputs as downsampled images of Xbs , so that those IV. E XPERIMENTS
deeper outputs will retain their multiscale nature. Note that In this section, we first give a brief introduction to the
when L = 1, LMSR degenerates to the mse loss. basic experimental settings we followed in Section IV-A.
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

Algorithm 2 Enhanced Separation Training Algorithm
Input: HSI data Xbs after band selection, tradeoff hyperparameter λ > 0, number of training iterations K ≥ 1,
 number of epochs in one iteration E ≥ 1.
Initialize: M(0) = 0.
 1: for m = 1 : K do
 2: for n = 1 : E do
 3: Feed the network with Xbs and yield X̂(m) bs ;
 4: Calculate the total loss using (12);
 5: Do backward propagation;
 Fig. 5. (Upper row) Pseudocolor images of the HAD100 dataset and (lower
 6: end for row) their corresponding ground truth maps. We only display scenes 10, 20,
 7: Calculate Ri,(m) (m) (m)
 j = ∥(X̂bs )i, j,: − (Xbs )i, j,: ∥2 ;
 2 30, 40, and 50 from the HAD100 dataset for visualization here.
 (m)
 8: Calculate M using (10);
 9: end for
Output: Detection map R(K ) . 5) Hydice was collected by the Hyperspectral Digital
 Imagery Collection Experiment (HYDICE) sensor. It has
 a spatial size of 100 × 80 and 162 spectral bands.
 6) HAD100 [44] was collected by the AVIRIS sensor.
 It contains 100 scenes of size 64 × 64 × 276 after
 removing bad bands from the original 425.
 3) Metrics: We used the receiver operating characteristic
 (ROC) curves of parameter pairs (Pd , P f ) and (P f , τ ), along
 with the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) values,
 to evaluate a detection algorithm. The former (Pd , P f ) curve
 contains detection probabilities Pd on all false alarm rates
 P f tested from 0 to 1. A model with stronger anomaly-
Fig. 4. (Upper row) Pseudocolor images of the classic datasets and (lower background separability exhibits a curve that approaches the
row) their corresponding ground truth maps. upper left corner, consequently yielding a higher AUC(Pd , P f )
 close to 1. Besides, an AUC(P f , τ ) closer to 0 suggests
 low false alarm rates over a range of threshold values τ ,
Then, comprehensive comparisons with competitors are pre- signifying fewer background pixels incorrectly classified as
sented in Section IV-B. To verify the individual effectiveness anomalous samples and thus reflecting a higher background
of the network structure and training process in our pro- reconstruction capability. In addition, we recorded the run
posed self-supervised method, we discuss them separately in times as another quantitative metric. For a more intuitive
Sections IV-C and IV-D. Finally, the analysis of important presentation, we visualized the detection maps of an included
hyperparameters is given in Section IV-E. method.

A. Experimental Settings B. Performance Comparisons
 1) Implementation: Our method was implemented using 1) Comparative Methods: We chose seven methods, includ-
PyTorch code, and run on a PC equipped with an Intel Core ing RXD [15], CRD [22], LRASR [23], LREN [40],
i7-11800H CPU at 2.30 GHz with 16 GB RAM, and an RGAE [41], Auto-AD [42], and BiGSeT [46] as bench-
NVIDIA 3070 GPU with 8 GB of memory. marks for comparison. RXD, CRD, and LRASR are the most
 2) Datasets: We used six datasets including five classic representative model-driven methods, while the remaining
datasets Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice, ones are data-driven detectors. The RXD is a probability
as well as the larger one HAD100 for evaluation. The pseu- distribution-based method; the CRD and LRASR are both
docolor images and ground truth maps of the classic datasets representation-based methods; LREN detects the anomalies
are shown in Fig. 4 and part of the HAD100 dataset is shown using encoded hidden features; and RGAE, Auto-AD, and
in Fig. 5. More detailed information is listed as follows. BiGSeT reconstruct the background in a self-supervised man-
 1) Gulfport was captured by the Airborne Visible/Infrared ner. For our method, we set the regularization parameter λ to
 Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) sensor. It has a size of 10−4 , 10−3 , 10−3 , 1 and 10−4 , respectively, for the Gulfport,
 100 × 100 × 191. Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice datasets, and fixed it to
 2) Pavia was collected using the Reflective Optics System 10−3 for all images in the HAD100. The band number Nbs
 Imaging Spectrometer (ROSIS-03) sensor. It has a size and layer number L were fixed at 64 and 3 for all datasets.
 of 150 × 150 × 102. 2) Quantitative Comparisons: Three quantitative metrics
 3) Coast was also acquired from the AVIRIS sensor. It con- for different methods on the classic datasets are listed in
 tains 100 × 100 pixels and 204 spectral bands. Table I. The best and second best results are marked in bold
 4) San Diego is a subset of size 100 × 100 × 189 selected and underlined, respectively. It can be seen that our method
 from an entire image obtained by the AVIRIS sensor. achieved the highest scores of AUC(Pd , P f ) on these datasets,
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE I
 AUC OF ( Pd , P f ), AUC OF ( P f , τ ), AND RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON C LASSIC DATASETS

 TABLE II
 AUC OF ( Pd , P f ), AUC OF ( P f , τ ), AND RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON HAD100 DATASET

which indicates superior probabilities of detection. The scores 3) Visual Comparisons: We display the detection maps for
of AUC(P f , τ ) for our method on Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, different methods on the classic datasets in Fig. 6. It can
and Hydice datasets are very close to 0, suggesting minimal be observed that our method highlighted the desired objects
false alarm rates across a broad range of threshold values. in different scenes clearly and accurately, while effectively
Additionally, the run times of our method are relatively low suppressing the background. However, other methods failed
and acceptable, compared to other representation-based and to do so. For example, the RXD, CRD, and RGAE failed to
deep learning-based methods. detect all airplanes on Gulfport dataset, while the LRASR,
 We conducted a similar experiment on the HAD100 dataset. LREN, and Auto-AD wrongly focused on most background
Before testing on each image, we applied the OPBS to reduce components. The ROC curves of (Pd , P f ) and (P f , τ ) for
the original channel number to 64 because it is too time- different methods on Pavia, Coast, and Hydice datasets are,
consuming for most methods. In this setting, each input image respectively, shown in Figs. 7 and 8. The curves of (Pd , P f )
has a size of 64 × 64 × 64. We computed the mean (±std) for our method (in black) cover all other methods, suggesting
values of AUC(Pd , P f ) and AUC(P f , τ ) of 100 images. The higher AUC(Pd , P f ) scores. Meanwhile, our false alarm rates
results are listed in Table II. It can be observed that our method are quite close to 0 across a wide range of threshold values
obtained the best values of AUC(Pd , P f ) and AUC(P f , τ ) as shown in Fig. 8, indicating very low AUC(P f , τ ) scores.
among others statistically. The average run time for ours is We present the separation performance between background
lower than the convolutional structure Auto-AD under the and anomalous targets in Fig. 9. The normalized separability
same settings. maps obtained by all methods on San Diego and Hydice
 To conclude, the performance comparisons on six datasets datasets are illustrated. A separability map reflects the disdemonstrate the superiority of our method over its counterparts tribution of the background and anomalies in a detection map.
in terms of detection performance under different scenes with The vertical dashed line spans the maximum and minimum
different anomalies, and architecture complexity. ranges of the numerical distribution. The box contains a data
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

Fig. 6. (First column) Ground truth maps of five datasets and (remaining columns) corresponding detection maps for different methods.

Fig. 7. ROC curves of (Pd , P f ) for different methods on (a) Pavia, (b) Coast, and (c) Hydice datasets.

range from 10% to 90%. The horizontal black line in the box network, and the latter is composed of a low-rank module and
represents the median of the data. The red and green colors a multiscale module. We set L = 3 and that means MSNet
denote the anomaly and background, respectively. Obviously, comprises three CED layers in this experiment. For a fair
a method has a superior separation performance when its comparison, we maintained all other variables constant, except
anomaly box leaves a large gap from the background box at for the network structure. For example, we did not include
the bottom. From Fig. 9, we can observe that the anomalies band selection in our method prior to training. And these three
are separated from at least 90% of the background on the networks were all trained using LSeT+ with λ = 10−2 . The
San Diego and Hydice datasets, while other methods cannot. AUC scores and run times are recorded in Table III. We can
Note that our maximum background value on the Hydice conclude from the table that our network can obtain the highest
dataset is the smallest among all methods, indicating the best AUC scores in most cases while requiring the lowest run times
background anomaly separability. at the same time.
 Furthermore, we conducted a comparative experiment on
C. Validation of Network Structure the HAD100 dataset. The well-known multiscale network
 We first validate the effectiveness of our proposed network architecture U-Net2 [47] was used in our discussion here.
structure MSNet on the classic datasets, by comparing it
with two convolutional HAD frameworks Auto-AD [42] and 2 A public PyTorch implementation is available at https://github.com/
MSBRNet [43]. The former is an encoder–decoder structured milesial/Pytorch-UNet.
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

Fig. 8. ROC curves of (P f , τ ) for different methods on (a) Pavia, (b) Coast, and (c) Hydice datasets.

Fig. 9. Background-anomaly separability results for different methods on (a) San Diego and (b) Hydice datasets.

 TABLE III TABLE IV
C OMPARISON OF N ETWORKS MSN ET, AUTO -AD, AND MSBRN ET ON C OMPARISON OF N ETWORKS MSN ET AND U-N ET ON HAD100 DATASET
 C LASSIC DATASETS U SING AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AND RUN
 T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) AS M ETRICS

 preserve more channel-related information, resulting in a large
 number of parameters that are unnecessary for HAD tasks.
 In conclusion, our multiscale network can perform better
 than other architectures across six datasets that contain different spectral sensors and anomalous targets, confirming its
We compared the performance of MSNet and U-Net with the adaptability and robustness while maintaining low computa-
LSeT+ under the same settings introduced in Section IV-B to tional complexity.
validate the effectiveness of our network. Comparing MSNet
with U-Net, as shown in Table IV, we observe that our
MSNet achieved a better AUC(Pd , P f ) value, indicating that D. Validation of Enhanced Separation Training
MSNet architecture is statistically more effective for HAD To focus on discussing the proposed enhanced version of
tasks than U-Net. On the other hand, the computational separation training, we set a vanilla AE structure as the
complexity of MSNet is smaller than U-Net. This is because detection network for both training Algorithms 1 (denoted as
MSNet retains the input channels throughout all downsampling LSeT for simplicity) and 2 (denoted as LSeT+ ), and compared
branches. In contrast, U-Net increases channel numbers to their detection performance. The AE comprises a linear layer
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

Fig. 10. Analysis of hyperparameters using AUC of (Pd , P f ) as metric on the classic datasets. (a) Regularization parameter λ. (b) Band number Nbs .
(c) Layer number L. Datasets Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San Diego, and Hydice are, respectively, shown as blue, orange, green, red, and purple curves.

 TABLE V E. Hyperparameter Analysis
C OMPARISON OF A LGORITHMS LSeT AND LSeT+ W HEN A PPLIED TO THE
 VANILLA AE ON C LASSIC DATASETS U SING In this section, we first analyze how hyperparameters includ-
 AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC ing λ, Nbs , and L impact the detection performance of our
 model. The scores of AUC(Pd , P f ) regarding these three
 factors are shown in Fig. 10(a)–(c). We then conduct an
 ablation study for other main components.
 1) Regularization Parameter λ: λ controls the effect of
 anomaly suppression. We set Nbs = 64 and L = 3 and
 chose λ values from {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1}. As shown
 TABLE VI in Fig. 10(a), the performance of five datasets starts to
C OMPARISON B ETWEEN W ITH AND W ITHOUT THE E NHANCED S EPARA - decrease after reaching the maximum, except for the San
 TION T RAINING W HEN A PPLIED TO MSN ET AND U-N ET ON HAD100
 DATASET U SING AUC OF ( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC
 Diego dataset (in red) which keeps on increasing. The optimal
 values for the five datasets are 10−4 , 10−3 , 10−3 , 1, and 10−4 ,
 respectively.
 2) Band Number Nbs : Nbs is the number of band subset
 selected by the OPBS [48], which also indicates the input
 channels of the network. We set λ to the optimal and fix L = 3,
 and compared Nbs values chosen from {16n}6n=1 , as well as
 the original band number without band selection (denoted as
 Orig., see Section IV-A). The AUC results are displayed in
 Fig. 10(b). It is evident that, across the five tested datasets,
with 100 hidden units, a ReLU activation function, and a linear a subset of the original bands (bands 64–96) can be adequate
layer that restores the input channels. The detection results to achieve high performance.
tested on five datasets including Gulfport, Pavia, Coast, San Moreover, it can be seen from Table VII that the run times
Diego, and Hydice are listed in Table V. It can be seen that increase as Nbs gets larger from 16 to 96. However, it is
the LSeT+ performs better than LSeT on average, indicating noteworthy that the run times for all these cases are still lower
that the enhanced version LSeT+ can efficiently suppress the than Orig. This is because OPBS can save time for the deep
anomalies while training. network by reducing the number of input channels, and the
 Additionally, we conducted experiments on the HAD100 process of performing OPBS itself does not require much time.
dataset, comparing the results with and without the enhanced In conclusion, band selection can help maintain (or improve)
separation training strategy when the detection networks are the AUC performance while reducing the time cost for the
set as MSNet and U-Net. The results are listed in Table VI. network.
We can find that enabling LSeT+ leads to significant per- We suggest a proper value of 64 for Nbs considering the
formance improvements for both networks, providing clear AUC performance and time cost.
evidence for the effectiveness of the enhanced separation 3) Layer Number L: L is the number of multiscale CED
training. Moreover, the training algorithm is convenient to layers that we stack. We set λ to the optimal and fix Nbs = 64,
use because we do not need to finely adjust the threshold and studied the effects of L chosen from 1 to 5. The trends of
hyperparameter for 100 images, which however is critical for AUC are shown in Fig. 10(c) and the run times are tabulated
the BiGSeT. in Table VIII. It can be observed that the AUC scores tend
 In conclusion, our enhanced separation training algorithm to increase as L gets larger. This is because more multiscale
exhibits its effectiveness and advantage over the original ver- features lead to better background estimation and thus improve
sion on six datasets, in terms of adaptability and automation. detection performance.
5520313 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 62, 2024

 TABLE VII situations. The network is trained by the multiscale recon-
 RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) OF BAND S ELECTION /T OTAL C OST FOR struction loss that retains the multiscale features, and the
 D IFFERENT BAND N UMBERS ON THE C LASSIC DATASETS
 enhanced separation training loss that suppresses potentially
 included anomalies in the estimated background in a more
 automated manner. We detect anomalies by performing a network inference and computing the reconstruction errors after
 training. Moreover, before training and detection, a fast and
 efficient band selection algorithm OPBS is adopted to reduce
 redundant bands and decrease the computational complexity.
 Extensive experiments conducted on six datasets show that
 our method surpasses some comparative methods in terms of
 overall detection performance and computational complexity.
 Hyperparameter analysis validates the effectiveness of the
 main components and provides a better understanding of them.
 TABLE VIII
RUN T IMES (I N S ECONDS ) FOR D IFFERENT L AYER N UMBERS ON THE
 R EFERENCES
 C LASSIC DATASETS [1] W. Chen, X. Zheng, and X. Lu, “Hyperspectral image super-resolution
 with self-supervised spectral–spatial residual network,” Remote Sens.,
 vol. 13, no. 7, p. 1260, Mar. 2021.
 [2] L. Mou, P. Ghamisi, and X. X. Zhu, “Deep recurrent neural networks for
 hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
 vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3639–3655, Jul. 2017.
 [3] X. Zheng, H. Sun, X. Lu, and W. Xie, “Rotation-invariant attention
 network for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image
 Process., vol. 31, pp. 4251–4265, 2022.
 [4] H. Sun, X. Zheng, and X. Lu, “A supervised segmentation network for
 hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30,
 TABLE IX pp. 2810–2825, 2021.
 [5] X. Shen, H. Liu, J. Qin, F. Ge, and X. Zhou, “Toward weak signal
A BLATION S TUDY FOR OTHER M AIN C OMPONENTS U SING AUC OF
 analysis in hyperspectral data: An efficient unmixing perspective,” IEEE
 ( Pd , P f ) AS M ETRIC
 Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5534314.
 [6] X. Shen, H. Liu, J. Nie, and X. Zhou, “Matrix factorization with framelet
 and saliency priors for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
 Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5504413.
 [7] S. Matteoli, M. Diani, and G. Corsini, “A tutorial overview of anomaly
 detection in hyperspectral images,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag.,
 vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 5–28, Jul. 2010.
 [8] Z. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Zhong, M. Shu, and C. Sun, “SiamHYPER:
 Learning a hyperspectral object tracker from an RGB-based tracker,”
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 31, pp. 7116–7129, 2022.
 [9] Y.-C. Miao, X.-L. Zhao, X. Fu, J.-L. Wang, and Y.-B. Zheng,
 “Hyperspectral denoising using unsupervised disentangled spatiospectral deep priors,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
 However, adding layers results in increases in computational Art. no. 5513916.
 [10] N. K. Patel, C. Patnaik, S. Dutta, A. M. Shekh, and A. J. Dave, “Study
cost, as shown in Table VIII, but does not lead to an unlimited of crop growth parameters using airborne imaging spectrometer data,”
improvement in detection performance. Notably, we do not Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2401–2411, Aug. 2001.
need more layers than three, because the AUC performance [11] G. Shaw and D. Manolakis, “Signal processing for hyperspectral image
 exploitation,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 12–16,
starts to get saturated when L ≥ 3. Jan. 2002.
 Therefore, we suggest an appropriate value of 3 for L as a [12] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “A robust nonlinear hyperspectral
good tradeoff between the AUC performance and time cost. anomaly detection approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ.
 Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2014.
 4) Other Main Components: The considered components [13] H. Su, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Q. Du, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection:
are two loss functions LSeT+ and LMSR , as well as the skip A survey,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 64–90,
connections (denoted as SC). We studied their effects by Mar. 2022.
 [14] X. Hu et al., “Hyperspectral anomaly detection using deep learning:
incorporating them into the model sequentially. The results are A review,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 9, p. 1973, Apr. 2022.
listed in Table IX. We can conclude that each one contributed [15] I. S. Reed and X. Yu, “Adaptive multiple-band CFAR detection of an
to an improved performance, thus validating their respective optical pattern with unknown spectral distribution,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
 Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1760–1770, Aug. 1990.
effectiveness.
 [16] J. M. Molero, E. M. Garzón, I. García, and A. Plaza, “Analysis and
 optimizations of global and local versions of the RX algorithm for
 V. C ONCLUSION anomaly detection in hyperspectral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
 Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 801–814, Apr. 2013.
 In this article, we propose a multiscale network architecture [17] H. Kwon and N. M. Nasrabadi, “Kernel RX-algorithm: A nonlinear
MSNet with enhanced separation training for self-supervised anomaly detector for hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
HAD. Considering the anomalies may exhibit different scales, Remote Sens., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 388–397, Feb. 2005.
 [18] W.-M. Liu and C.-I. Chang, “Multiple-window anomaly detection for
the network is built with several multiscale CED layers hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
and stacked up using skip connections to adapt to different Sens., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 644–658, Apr. 2013.
LIU et al.: MSNet: SELF-SUPERVISED MULTISCALE NETWORK WITH ENHANCED SEPARATION TRAINING 5520313

[19] Q. Guo, B. Zhang, Q. Ran, L. Gao, J. Li, and A. Plaza, “Weighted- [34] K. Li et al., “Spectral difference guided graph attention autoencoder for
 RXD and linear filter-based RXD: Improving background statistics hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
 estimation for anomaly detection in hyperspectral imagery,” IEEE J. Sel. pp. 1–17, 2023.
 Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2351–2366, [35] X. Wang, L. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Local spatial–spectral information-
 Jun. 2014. integrated semisupervised two-stream network for hyperspectral
[20] J. Zhou, C. Kwan, B. Ayhan, and M. T. Eismann, “A novel cluster anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60,
 kernel RX algorithm for anomaly and change detection using hyper- 2022, Art. no. 5535515.
 spectral images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 11, [36] Y. Hong, U. Hwang, J. Yoo, and S. Yoon, “How generative adversarial
 pp. 6497–6504, Nov. 2016. networks and their variants work: An overview,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
[21] J. Li, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Ma, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–43, Feb. 2019.
 by the use of background joint sparse representation,” IEEE J. Sel. [37] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
 Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2523–2533, Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
 Jun. 2015. [38] V. Lempitsky, A. Vedaldi, and D. Ulyanov, “Deep image prior,” in
[22] W. Li and Q. Du, “Collaborative representation for hyperspectral Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 9446–9454.
 pp. 1463–1474, Mar. 2015. [39] O. Sidorov and J. Y. Hardeberg, “Deep hyperspectral prior: Single-image
[23] Y. Xu, Z. Wu, J. Li, A. Plaza, and Z. Wei, “Anomaly detection in denoising, inpainting, super-resolution,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
 hyperspectral images based on low-rank and sparse representation,” Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 3844–3851.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1990–2000, [40] K. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, T. Jiang, and Y. Li, “LREN: Low-rank
 Apr. 2016. embedded network for sample-free hyperspectral anomaly detection,”
[24] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4139–4146.
 decomposition-based Mahalanobis distance method for hyperspectral [41] G. Fan, Y. Ma, X. Mei, F. Fan, J. Huang, and J. Ma, “Hyperspectral
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 54, no. 3, anomaly detection with robust graph autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
 pp. 1376–1389, Mar. 2016. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5511314.
[25] R. Zhao, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Hyperspectral anomaly detection via [42] S. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zhang, and Y. Zhong, “Auto-AD: Autonomous
 a sparsity score estimation framework,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote hyperspectral anomaly detection network based on fully convolu-
 Sens., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 3208–3222, Jun. 2017. tional autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
[26] N. Huyan, X. Zhang, H. Zhou, and L. Jiao, “Hyperspectral anomaly Art. no. 5503314.
 detection via background and potential anomaly dictionaries construc- [43] W. Cao, H. Zhang, W. He, H. Chen, and E. H. Tat, “MSBRNet: Multition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2263–2276, scale background reconstruction network with low-rank embedding for
 Apr. 2019. anomaly detection in hyperspectral images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Geosci.
[27] T. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Weakly supervised Remote Sens. Symp., Jul. 2022, pp. 3720–3723.
 discriminative learning with spectral constrained generative adversarial [44] Z. Li, Y. Wang, C. Xiao, Q. Ling, Z. Lin, and W. An, “You only
 network for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. train once: Learning a general anomaly enhancement network with ran-
 Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 6504–6517, Nov. 2022. dom masks for hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
[28] E. Bati, A. Calíškan, A. Koz, and A. A. Alatan, “Hyperspectral anomaly Remote Sens., vol. 61, 2023, Art. no. 5506718.
 detection method based on auto-encoder,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9643, [45] Y. Miao, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and D. Tao, “DDS2M: Self-supervised
 pp. 220–226, Oct. 2015. denoising diffusion spatio-spectral model for hyperspectral image
[29] B. Hosseiny and R. Shah-Hosseini, “A hyperspectral anomaly detection restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023,
 framework based on segmentation and convolutional neural network pp. 12086–12096.
 algorithms,” Int. J. Remote Sens., vol. 41, no. 18, pp. 6946–6975, [46] H. Liu, X. Su, X. Shen, L. Chen, and X. Zhou, “BiGSeT: Binary
 Sep. 2020. mask-guided separation training for DNN-based hyperspectral anomaly
[30] S. Xiao, T. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Qu, S. Hou, and W. Dong, “Anomaly detec- detection,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07428.
 tion of hyperspectral images based on transformer with spatial–spectral [47] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional netdual-window mask,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
 Sens., vol. 16, pp. 1414–1426, 2023. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351. Cham,
[31] K. Jiang, W. Xie, Y. Li, J. Lei, G. He, and Q. Du, “Semisupervised Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
 spectral learning with generative adversarial network for hyperspectral [48] W. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Dou, and L. Zhao, “A geometry-based band selection
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 7, approach for hyperspectral image analysis,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
 pp. 5224–5236, Jul. 2020. Sens., vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 4318–4333, Aug. 2018.
[32] Y. Li, T. Jiang, W. Xie, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Sparse coding-inspired GAN [49] S. Nah, T. H. Kim, and K. M. Lee, “Deep multi-scale convofor hyperspectral anomaly detection in weakly supervised learning,” lutional neural network for dynamic scene deblurring,” in Proc.
 IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5512811. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
[33] W. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Li, J. Lei, and Q. Du, “Autoencoder and adversarial- pp. 3883–3891.
 learning-based semisupervised background estimation for hyperspectral [50] S.-J. Cho, S.-W. Ji, J.-P. Hong, S.-W. Jung, and S.-J. Ko, “Rethinking
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 8, coarse-to-fine approach in single image deblurring,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 pp. 5416–5427, Aug. 2020. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4641–4650.