IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024 3583

 MTSecurity: Privacy-Preserving Malicious Traffic
 Classification Using Graph Neural
 Network and Transformer
 Jin Yang , Xinyun Jiang , Yulin Lei , Weiheng Liang , Zicheng Ma , and Siyu Li

 Abstract—Encrypting network traffic is an effective means of products and services [1]. Although applying encryption in
safeguarding user privacy and sensitive information. However, data transmission can effectively preserve data confidentiality
it also introduces potential vulnerabilities that can be exploited and integrity, this measure can also bring new security risks
by network attackers, posing significant security risks to the
Internet. In response to the challenge of low accuracy in existing and threats. By encrypted traffic, malicious software (such
methods for classifying encrypted malicious traffic, we propose a as phishing software, ransomware, trojans, and others) can
novel approach named MTSecurity, which leverages Transformer evade the security checks of firewalls and traditional intrusion
and Graph Neural Network technologies. This method auto- detection systems. Furthermore, network attackers can use
matically extracts raw byte features and graph-based traffic encryption techniques to conceal cyberattacks and conduct
interaction features from encrypted malicious flows, combining
them to substantially enhance the classification accuracy of data thefts undetected. In its annual hotspot threat report
encrypted malicious traffic. Furthermore, we introduce a graph released in 2019, Cisco pointed out that 63% of all threat
structure called the Malicious Traffic Interaction Graph (MTIG) incidents discovered by Cisco used encrypted traffic [2].
for representing encrypted malicious traffic. MTIG is based According to the encryption attack report released by the
on the client-server interaction process and incorporates multi- cloud security vendor Zscaler, there were more than 20 billion
dimensional traffic features. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed MTSecurity model consistently performs well HTTPS-based threats in 2021, an increase of 314% over 2020.
across different datasets, surpassing state-of-the-art methods. It Malware using encrypted channels has increased by 212%,
achieves an accuracy of 0.9946 and an F1 score of 0.9940 on the while ransomware is becoming the tool of choice for more
MCFP dataset, and an accuracy of 0.9948 with an F1 score of and more cyber-attackers seeking profit [3].
0.9934 on the USTC-TFC dataset. Unlike its unencrypted counterpart, encrypted malicious
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, encrypted mali- traffic detection is difficult. After the payload has been
cious traffic classification, deep learning, graph neural networks, encrypted, its upper layer becomes invisible, which renders
transformer. traditional security systems based on firewalls and deep packet
 inspection ineffective. However, decryption-based detection
 methods are costly and could be considered as violations
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 of user privacy. Therefore, detection and classification of
 S INTERNET users increasingly care about privacy
A protection and information security, more and more
applications employ encryption mechanisms to secure data
 malicious traffic under encryption is important and significant.
 There have been attempts to utilize statistical characterization
 of network flows, such as IP address, port, server name and
transmission. Browser vendors such as Google and Mozilla cipher in encrypted malicious traffic classification [4], [5],
have begun to force the use of secure transmission protocols [6], [7]. Statistical feature-based methods have low accuracy
such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), and and require human involvement for feature sampling. Recent
browsers issue warnings that communications are initiated studies have proposed a number of methods based on raw
without the use of such protocols. Moreover, Google has traffic data [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. These methods perform
announced plans to realize 100% encryption in all of its well by applying deep learning models such as convolutional
 neural network (CNN). However, most schemes mainly rely
 Manuscript received 30 September 2023; revised 22 January 2024; accepted
26 March 2024. Date of publication 1 April 2024; date of current version on packet payload, which have the potential to violate user
12 July 2024. This work is supported by the National Natural Science privacy. Unlike regular encrypted traffic, malicious traffic
Foundation of China under Grants No. 61872254 and No. 62162057; the such as ransomware and data theft may have access to the
Key Lab of Information Network Security of Ministry of Public Security
under Grant No. C20606, and the Sichuan Science and Technology Program user’s secret files, which are encrypted but still have the
under Grant No. 2021JDRC0004. The associate editor coordinating the review potential to be decrypted and utilized. Users may not want
of this article and approving it for publication was F. Valenza. (Jin Yang this information to be used by anyone when performing traffic
and Xinyun Jiang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author:
Yulin Lei.) analysis.
 The authors are with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, To address the above problems, in this paper we
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail: jinyangscu@163.com; propose MTSecurity, an encrypted malicious traffic classifijiangxinyun@stu.scu.edu.cn; yulinleiscu@163.com; liangweiheng@stu.scu.e
du.cn; mazicheng@stu.scu.edu.cn; lisiyu_real@stu.scu.edu.cn). cation method using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2024.3383851 Transformer. The proposed model can identify malicious
 1932-4537 
 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3584 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

traffic classes among a large number of benign traffic. We A. Methods Based on Statistical Features
use packet bytes without user payload for privacy-preserving Most existing encrypted traffic classification studies are
traffic analysis. In addition, we construct a malicious traffic aimed at statistical features of network traffic, such as packet
interaction graph (MTIG) to represent the interaction process length, packet time, etc. For example, Shekhawat et al. [4]
of client-server of malicious traffic flow, which is inspired exploited the statistical information such as IP address, port,
by Shen et al. [6]. The MTIG is constructed without involv- server name and cipher for encrypted malicious traffic analing sensitive information of users, and can reveal network ysis. Taylor et al. [5] utilized statistical features of packet
behavior patterns and multi-dimensional traffic characteristics length and Shen et al. [6] utilized statistical features of
of malicious traffic. The proposed method further enhances the accumulated packet length to train the random forest classifier
ability to represent encrypted malicious traffic by fusing the for encrypted traffic classification. Wang et al. [7] summarized
raw data features of the flow with the graph features of the the general features of encrypted traffic and obtained 113
flow, which results in significantly improved classification protocol-independent numerical features to identify malicious
accuracies. encrypted traffic. Barut et al. [27] used pre-extracted features
 The main contributions of this paper are threefold: and employed deep learning models. Several studies have used
 (1) We propose MTSecurity, which can detect encrypted SSL/TLS flags in encrypted traffic and applied Markov models
malicious traffic by fusing the byte features of traffic with to categorize different smartphone applications [33], [34].
the graph-based traffic interaction features. MTSecurity can The advantages of utilizing statistical feature-based methods
describe the behavior of malicious traffic more comprehen- lie in their quick training and efficient feature matching
sively than any individual analysis. In addition, MTSecurity capabilities. However, these methods exhibit drawbacks such
does not use traffic payload information and therefore does as low accuracy and the necessity for human involvement in
not compromise user privacy. feature selection. The selection of features has a direct impact
 (2) We construct a Malicious Traffic Interaction Graph on the model’s performance. Additionally, over time and with
(MTIG) to represent malicious traffic at the network alterations in the network environment, features that were once
interaction level. Using MTIG, the packet burst information, effective may become obsolete, prompting the need for their
traffic intrinsic characteristics and network interaction re-selection to train a new model.
information of malicious flows are preserved, which can
enhance flow representation and serve as discriminative fea- B. Methods Based on Raw Traffic Data
tures for classifiers learning.
 Encrypted traffic detection methods based on raw traffic
 (3) We design a Graph Neural Network (GNN) module
 have become a popular approach. This is attributed to the
to automatically extract graph representation features. It can
 fact that directly analyzing raw traffic data eliminates the
map the input MTIG to the high-dimensional embedding
 need for manual feature selection and design. Wang et al. [8]
space to form different representations to distinguish different
 preprocessed the raw traffic into IDX3 files that were fed
graph structures, avoiding the manual creation of features,
 to convolutional neural network to automatically extract
and therefore realizing efficient and accurate graph feature
 encrypted traffic representation. Shapira and Shavitt [9] transextraction. Meanwhile, we validate the performance of the
 formed flow data into pictures and adopted deep learning
method on publicly available real malicious traffic datasets.
 techniques to identify different encrypted traffic categories.
The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of
 Lotfollahi et al. [10] proposed Deeppacket to analyze raw
MTSecurity, which achieves a detection accuracy of 0.9949
 traffic payloads by using stacked autoencoder (SAE) and
on the MCFP dataset [30] and 0.9946 on the USTC-TFC
 convolution neural network, while Lin et al. [11] also exploited
dataset [31] using enhanced traffic characterization, outperraw traffic data by using convolution neural network and
forming the state-of-the-art methods.
 Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM). Last year, Lin et al. [12]
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
 introduced ET-BERT, which converted raw traffic into token
related work is summarized in Section II and the preliminaries
 representations to feed a bi-directional encoder representation
required in the understanding of our proposed scheme is
 transformer (BERT) for encrypted traffic and malicious traffic
presented in Section III. Then, the framework of the algorithm
 classification. Barut et al. [19] proposed a deep learning model
and each module are introduced in detail in Section IV. The
 that used raw traffic as input and processed the traffic to avoid
experimental setup is described in Section V. The performance
 user privacy leakage.
of MTSecurity is evaluated in Section VI and compared with
 However, although some researchers have considered priother state-of-the-art methods. Finally, the threats to validity
 vacy issues, most of these methods still use the payload of
are discussed in Section VII and the paper is concluded in
 the packets during the preprocessing phase thus potentially
Section VIII.
 violating the user’s privacy. Moreover, these methods focus
 only on the byte data of the captured packets, ignoring the
 II. R ELATED W ORK network interaction process, which contains multi-dimensional
 Encrypted malicious traffic detection and classification has traffic characteristics.
been a research hotspot in recent years. In this section, we
reviewed and summarized those methods that are closely C. Methods Based on Graph Representations
associated to our work, which can be sorted roughly into three Graph-based approaches have gradually attracted the
categories as below. attention of researchers because they can represent the
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3585

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF R ELEVANT L ITERATURE

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of MTSecurity model.

difference between normal and abnormal access without III. P RELIMINARIES
considering user payload. Wang et al. [14] constructed a Malicious traffic classification trying to associate specific
communication graph to achieve accurate detection of botnets abnormal traffic with the corresponding types. In this paper,
by observing the domains of normal and abnormal nodes. we try to construct a new method which trains the Transformer
Shen et al. [13] constructed a traffic graph structure from the and GNN models to extract features at the byte level and
server-client interaction (TIG). Using graph representations, network interaction level of network traffic, respectively, and
the traffic classification problem can be transformed into a fuses them to accurately distinguish encrypted malicious traffic
graph classification problem. Li et al. [15] converts malicious from benign encrypted traffic. In this section, we will briefly
traffic into endpoint traffic graphs by analyzing the relation- introduce some preliminaries to facilitate the understanding of
ships between packets and between flows in traffic, and learns the proposed approach.
to classify graph-structured DDoS attack patterns adaptively
through graph neural networks.
 Graph-based representations do not use packet data and A. Packet Byte Data
therefore do not reveal the sensitive information of users. But Network traffic consists of binary bytes of data. Traffic
the accuracy of graph-based malicious traffic classification packets encapsulate user information hierarchically according
methods is closely related to the pattern of the constructed to the network protocol. Given a network flow with n packets,
graph. When the malicious flows are short, different types of we denote it as:
malicious traffic will generate similar graph structures thus
causing this method to fail. To address this problem, this flow = [P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn ] (1)
paper proposes a new graph structure which can enhance the
 For any of these TLS protocol-based packets Pi , assume
representation of shorter malicious flows by embedding multithat the total number of bytes in the packet is l. Then Pi can
dimensional features into graph nodes, thereby significantly
 be denoted as:
improving the classification accuracy of malicious encrypted
traffic. Pi = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bl ] (2)
3586 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

Fig. 2. The client-server interaction of malicious traffic flow on packet-level.

 Fig. 4. The arithmetic procedure of Q, K, V.

 correlation between inputs, and has become the main choice
 for deep learning algorithms.
 Network traffic is usually continuous, and multiple packets
 are strongly correlated with each other in terms of content.
 This relationship needs to be extracted efficiently. The use
 of SA in malicious traffic classification can compute the
 correlation between the previous packet and the next packet
Fig. 3. Constructing Malicious Traffic Interaction Graph (MTIG) based on in terms of byte content, so that the relationship between
client-server interaction. packet contents can be fully extracted. Before SA, traffic
 classification usually used models like RNN, LSTM which can
 process packets chronologically, but these algorithms cannot
 Different malicious flows behave differently in terms of be parallelized and limit the performance. The formula for SA
byte content. These differences in byte content are related to is as follows:
specific traffic types. In specific practice, the bytes where the  
IP address and port are located are removed and the TLS QK T
 Attention(Q, K , V ) = SoftMax √ V (3)
payload portion is discarded to protect user privacy. d
 where Q, K, V are the query, key and value matrix, respec-
B. Network Interactions tively, and d is the dimension of query/key. Assuming that the
 When a TCP connection is created between a client and input matrix is X, Q, K, V can be expressed as follows (4)–(6):
a server, client will usually send some requests to the server Q = XW Q (4)
for requesting multiple resources. Fig. 2. illustrates the typical
 K = XW K (5)
client-server interaction process.
 Uplink-packet: Consider the packets sent from the client V = XW V (6)
to the server as uplink packets. When a long-lived TCP where WQ , WK and WV are three trainable parameter matrices.
connection is established by the client for more efficient data The input matrix X is multiplied with WQ , WK and WV
transmission, so that multiple continuous uplink packets can to generate Q, K and V, respectively, which is equivalent
be observed. The one-way continuous packets form a burst. to undergoing a linear transformation. Instead of using X
The burst [13], [16] is defined as a series of consecutive data directly, Attention uses these three trainable parameter matrices
packets transmitted in the same direction over a period of time. generated after matrix multiplication to enhance the fitting
 Downlink-packet: Consider the packets sent from the server ability of the model [39]. The arithmetic procedure of Q, K,
to the client as downlink packets. The downlink packet means V is shown in Fig. 4.
that the server starts transmitting the content required by the Usually, in order to get the results of SA in different
client. subspaces, multiple SAs are used in parallel, and then the
 When a malware client communicates with the malware results of each SA are concatenated to get the multi-head selfserver, the interaction process can be used to express resulting attention (MSA):
traffic trace. For example, constructing a malicious traffic interaction graph (the graph construction algorithm is MSA = Concat(head1 , . . . , headn )W O (7)
 where head i = Attention(QWiQ , KWiK , VWiV ).
described in Section IV-C).

C. Self-Attention D. Graph Neural Network
 Self-attention (SA) is popular in Transformers architec- Graph neural networks mainly deal with non-Euclidean
ture [17]. SA can be computed in parallel, remembering the data (e.g., chemical molecular structures, knowledge graphs,
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3587

 TABLE II
 L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS we illustrate the raw traffic characterization, where packet
 payloads are discarded to protect user privacy. Thirdly, we
 detail the process of constructing a malicious traffic interaction
 graph, which is inspired by the server-client interaction process and can represent multidimensional network features.
 After that, byte feature extraction module and graph feature
 extraction will be proposed separately. Finally, we propose the
 classification module.

 A. Method Overview
 The overall framework of our method is shown in Fig. 1.
 In the data generation phase, since the capture packet (PCAP)
 files usually composed of multiple flows, we first split the
 PCAP into independent bi-directional flows (bi-flows). After
 that, each bi-flows generates the original traffic representation and malicious flow interaction graph after the raw
 traffic characterization (Section IV-B) and MTIG construction
 (Section IV-C), respectively.
malicious traffic interaction graphs, etc.) to make up for the In the feature extraction phase, the raw traffic characterizashortcomings of deep learning algorithms such as Transformer, tion consisting of traffic byte data will be computed by the
CNN, etc., in extracting features from non-Euclidean data. transformer module to extract traffic byte level features, which
Inspired by convolutional neural networks, the concept of are related to specific traffic types. At the same time, our
graph convolution has been rapidly developed. The basic constructed malicious traffic interaction graph will be exported
idea of graph convolution is that a node v generates a to the GNN module to automatically extract traffic interaction
hidden representation of the node v by aggregating its own level features.
information xv and the information of its neighboring nodes In the traffic classification phase, the generated traffic
xu , where u ∈ N (v ). The notations used in this paper are byte-level features and network interaction-level features are
shown in Table II. fused to enhance the traffic characterization and go through
 A fundamental paradigm in convolutional graph neural a softmax layer for multi-task/multi-class malicious traffic
networks (e.g., GAT, GraphSAGE) is the message-passing classification.
neural network [18]. It treats graph convolution as a kind of
message passing process. In this process, messages are passed B. Raw Traffic Characterization
along edges from one node to another. The message is further 1) Raw Traffic Parsing and Anonymization: The serialized
propagated by running k-step message passing iterations. The bytes of data are obtained by parsing the traffic packets
message passing function is defined as: according to the network protocol layers. Since link-layer
 ⎛ ⎞
    headers contain only information about the physical con-
 (k ) (k −1) (k −1) (k −1) e ⎠
 hv = U k ⎝ hv , M k hv , hu , Xvu (8) nection between devices, we discard Ethernet frame headers
 u∈N (v ) containing MAC addresses and link information and start parsing at the IP layer. Although the migration from IPv4 to IPv6
 (0) e
where hv = xv , which denotes the feature on node v. Xuv is underway, most network traffic is still IPv4-based, so our
denotes the features on edge (u, v). Uk (·) and Mk (·) are approach uses IPv4 traffic. The IP addresses and port numbers
functions with learnable parameters. After deriving the hidden in the packets are anonymized to preserve user privacy and
 (k ) maintain the generalizability of the model. More specifically,
representation of each node, hv can be passed to the output
layer to perform node-level prediction tasks or to the readout we removed the bytes data where the source/destination IP
layer to perform graph-level prediction tasks. The readout addresses and source/destination ports are located. During
function generates a representation of the entire graph based the shift of malicious traffic to encrypted trend, some nonon the node hidden representation, which is defined as: encrypted malicious traffic still exists and the proposed method
   needs to be compatible with non-encrypted malicious traffic.
 (k )
 hG = R hv |v ∈ G (9) Thus, in addition to SSL/TLS flows, non-encrypted flows
 are also parsed. Specifically, for TLS session flows, only
where R(·) denotes a readout function with learnable the unencrypted handshake record of TLS flows was parsed
parameters. while the encrypted transmission data was discarded. For
 HTTP session flows, only the HTTP headers were parsed.
 IV. T HE P ROPOSED MTS ECURITY Specifically, it means that the data before the two Carriage
 In this section, we illustrate the procedure of the proposed Return and Line Feeds in the HTTP header is parsed, and
malicious traffic classification method named MTSecurity. We the data after that is discarded. Unlike TLS, HTTP protocols,
first describe the entire framework of MTSecurity. Secondly, DNS mainly implements the mapping between IP addresses
3588 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE III
 C HARACTERIZATION OF MTIG N ODE E MBEDDING

Fig. 5. The vectorization method of a traffic flow.

and domain names and does not directly transfer user data.
Referring to [19], we use DNS for all request and response
data. In addition, due to the richness of network protocols
in real network environments, e.g., File Transfer Protocol,
MySQL protocol, etc. To achieve scalability, we parse other
 Nodes. Taking the network flow in Fig. 2 as an example,
reliable transport-based protocols to the header of TCP, while
 Fig. 3 shows the corresponding generated MTIG. The nodes
TCP payloads are discarded. And we parse other unreliable
 in the MTIG represent the packets in the flow. In order to
transport-based protocols to the header of UDP, while UDP
 distinguish shorter encrypted malicious flows, each node is
payloads are discarded.
 associated with information such as the length of the packet,
 2) Raw Traffic Consistent: Since the packet length and the direction of the packet, BURST information and so on. The
size of individual packets in a network stream are not fixed, features embedded into the nodes and their detailed description
the first N packets are chosen to represent the entire data are listed in Table III.
flow to obtain a consistent data representation. If the value Edges. All packets in the flow will divide into
of N is assigned reasonably, the first few packets of a data groups according to burst (defined in Section III-B).
flow can generally contain the basic characteristics of the data For example, a traffic flow is formed as
flow [20]. Also, the first L bytes of the processed packet are (P1 , P2 , P3 , P4 , P5 , P6 , P7 , P8 , P9 , P10 , P11 ). In this flow,
used to represent the packet. At this point, the data packet the packets in a burst will be regarded as a group.
has been parsed and anonymized into a payload-independent Consequently, the traffic flow is divided into several small
byte sequence. If the length of processed packet is less than groups as ((P1 ), (P2 ), (P3 , P4 ), (P5 , P6 , P7 ), (P8 , P9 ),
the truncated value, we will pad the empty part with zeros. (P10 , P11 )). In the MTIG, inside a small group, undirected
Similarly, if the number of packets in a flow is fewer than edges are added to adjacent nodes; between groups, the head
N packets, data processing will be applied in the same way. and tail nodes of group i are connected to the head and tail
Fig. 5 illustrates a schematic diagram of a packet after length nodes of group i + 1, respectively. If there is only one node
consistency. in the group, the node acts as both the head and the tail node.
 After that, splice the byte data of N packets with a length To explain the MTIG construction process more clearly,
of L in chronological order. And a 1×M data vector was the pseudo code of the construction algorithm is shown in
obtained, where M = N × L. All bytes in the data vector Algorithm 1. MTIG takes raw traffic flow as its input. First,
will be converted to integers from 0 to 255. To make it easier a data packet interaction sequence S is created according
for model to train, all data are normalized by dividing by to the uplink and downlink packets of the flow (line 1).
255. Then the processed one-dimensional raw data vector will Second, construct groups according to the burst information
be transformed into a two-dimensional matrix as the input and initialize the node set V and edge set E (lines 2–3).
of Transformer module. Since the input to our Transformer Then, generate node set according to groups information and
module is set to x 2 , but M is not guaranteed to be squared. embed nine-dimensional features into nodes to enhance graph
To ensure that valid information
 √ is used and avoid more representation (lines 4–6). After that, add intra-group edges
padding with zeros, select M as an upper √ limit for the (lines 7–10) and inter-group edges (lines 11–16) according to
size of the input data (which means x ≤  M ), and the the conditional loop. Finally, the desired MTIG is generated.
 √ is discarded. And x usually takes an integer very close
excess The explanation below shows why MTIG is a powerto M . ful representation of multi-dimensional traffic characteristics.
 First, the nodes of the same layer in MTIG indicate the
 packets that constitute a burst, which represent the burst-
C. MTIG Construction level information of different malicious traffic. Second, the
 The MTIG is constructed based on the malicious traffic intrinsic characteristics of the flow (e.g., packet length, packet
interaction process. Given a specific network flow, a corre- direction, protocol, etc.) are embedded in the graph nodes. The
sponding MTIG can be generated. Each packet in the flow embedding of these features can enhance the representation of
represents a node in the graph. After determining the graph shorter malicious flows. Lastly, since the order of packets from
nodes, edges are added to connect these nodes. the starting of malicious flow to the end of data transmission
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3589

Algorithm 1 Construction of Malicious Traffic Interaction each patch will be flattened to a 1-dimensional vector, which
Graph is treated as a token. And each token will be mapped to
Input: A bidirectional traffic flow F /* (.pcap) */ specific dimension for embedding, as the Transformer Block
Output: The corresponding MTIG G receives the 1D sequence of token embeddings as input.
1: Generate packet interaction sequence S from flow F, S = After that, several Transformer blocks and patch merging
(P1 , . . . , PN ) layers are applied on these patch tokens. Fig. 6 illustrates the
2: Separate S into groups B = (g1 ,..., gK ) according to burst Transformer Block consists of the shifted window-based multiinformation head self-attention [21], and the two-layer MLP with GELU
3: Initialize V, E as empty sets nonlinearity [36] in between. A LayerNorm (LN) layer [37]
4: for gi ∈B do is adopted before each multi-head self-attention and each
5: for Pj ∈i do MLP, and each component is connected through the residual
6: Add a node with nine features of Pj to V structure. The main function of the patch merging layer is to
7: for gi ∈B do down-sampling the input tokens as the network gets deeper.
8: if len (gi ) > 1 then After the treatment of the patch merging, the length and width
9: for vj ∈i do of the input feature map is reduced to half of the original, and
10: Add an edge between vj and vj +1 to E the depth is doubled.
11: for gi ∈B do In this work, several successive Transformer blocks and
12: if len (gi ) = 1 and len (gi+1 ) = 1 then together with a patch merging layer are called “T-Layer” and
13: Add an edge between gi and gi+1 to E set to four. In particular, the fourth T-layer serves as the final
14: else layer for feature extraction without the patch merging layer.
15: Add an edge between the head node of gi and the Each T-Layer uses one Transformer Block [21], except for
 head node of gi+1 to E the third T-Layer, which uses nine Transformer Blocks. These
16: Add an edge between the tail node of gi and the tail T-Layers jointly produce a hierarchical representation, which
 node of gi+1 to E has the same feature map resolutions like those of typical
17: return G convolutional networks (e.g., VGG [22], EfficientNet [23]).

 E. Graph Feature Extraction Module
 For each flow, the Algorithm 1 in Section III-C is used to
 generate the corresponding MTIG. The graph neural network
 become the natural tool of choice, as they can extract features from input graphs automatically. The proposed Graph
 Feature Extraction module (i.e., GNN module) is composed of
 two graph attention network (GAT) blocks, two GraphSAGE
Fig. 6. Transformer module detail diagram. blocks and a readout layer, as shown in Fig. 1. GAT uses
 the attention mechanism to distinguish the importance of
can be represented by MTIG, the interaction process between different adjacent nodes, so that it can better capture the local
client and server is naturally included. In summary, MTIG information and structural information of the graph. However,
can contains features of packet burst information, intrinsic GAT may face challenges in computing resources when
features of flows, and network interaction information of flows, processing large-scale graphs. GraphSAGE can reduce comeach of them has been certified to be valuable for traffic putational overhead by randomly sampling neighbor nodes,
classification [6]. thereby processing large-scale graphs more efficiently. By
 combining GAT with GraphSAGE, we can not only distinguish
D. Byte Feature Extraction Module the importance of different nodes, but also reduce computing
 and storage overhead while considering global graph features
 Our approach uses the Transformer architecture that can be
 and local node information, making the model more adaptable
computed in parallel rather than CNN or RNN architecture
 to graph data of different sizes and densities.
to extract byte-level features. This is because self-attention
 1) GAT Block: When we determine whether a graph is a
in the Transformer calculates the correlation between inputs.
 malicious traffic sample, the entire graph structure is consid-
In malicious traffic classification, self-attention can establish
 ered. We assume that in malicious traffic samples, different
correlations for different parts of the input, so that the
 nodes contribute differently to the entire graph structure,
information of previous network packets is associated with
 and therefore, we introduce the graph attention network
that of subsequent network packets, and this relationship is
 (GAT [24]). GAT employs the attention mechanism to learn
considered when doing feature extraction.
 the relative weights between two connecting nodes. The graph
 The overview of our byte features extraction module (i.e.,
 convolution operation of GAT is defined as:
Transformer module) is presented in Fig. 6. It first partitions ⎛ ⎞
the input 2D data matrix into non-overlapping patches by
 (k )
  (k ) (k −1) ⎠
a patch partition layer. Fig. 6 Shows an example when the hv = σ ⎝ αvu W (k ) hu (10)
patch size is set to 2 × 2. Through a patch projection layer, u∈N (v )∪v
3590 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 (0) (k )
where hv = Xv .αvu is the attention weight, and it measures V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
the connection strength of node v and its neighbor u: A. Datasets
   
 (k ) (k −1) (k −1) To comprehensively evaluate the performance of the
αvu = softmax g a T W (k ) hv |W (k ) hu (11) proposed method, two datasets are used to conduct experiments, both of which are representative and publicly accessible
where g(.) is the LeakyReLU activation function and a for encrypted malicious traffic analysis. The Malware Capture
represents a vector of learnable parameters. The softmax Facility Project (MCFP) dataset includes dozens of malware
function ensures that the attention weights add up to one in traffic, such as Yakes, HTBot, etc. The USTC-TFC includes
all neighbors of node v. More specifically, we use three GAT twenty categories of malicious and benign traffic.
layers in one GAT Block. The first GAT layer and the second 1) The MCFP dataset [30] is collected by the Stratosphere
one contains six-head attention and the third GAT layer uses Lab’s Malware Capture Facility Project, which continuously
one-head attention. obtains both normal and malware traffic captures, and in
 2) GraphSAGE Block: GCN [25] usually requires saving particular includes the well-known CTU-13 [33]. As MCFP
the entire graph and intermediate update data of all nodes into is a normal and malware traffic repository, we utilized the
computer memory. As the graph scale increases, the algorithm subset of it. We selected nineteen different malware traffic
consumes more computing and storage resources. Moreover, types such as Artemis, BitCoinMiner, HTBot, and Ramit
since the number of a node’s neighbors can range from one to a etc. And we selected three normal PCAP files (e.g., “CTUhundred or even more, it is not efficient to obtain all neighbors Normal-30”, “CTU-Normal-31” and “CTU-Normal-32”) to
of the node. To solve this problem, GraphSAGE [26] proposed construct benign traffic category. A total of 284,868 benign and
a new node update method, which limited the number of malicious flows were used. The unique identifier (botnet-id)
neighboring nodes participating in the calculation by randomly in the MCFP dataset for each class of traffic used (including
sampling the neighbors of each node instead of performing malware traffic and normal software traffic) is shown in
calculations on all nodes. It conducts graph convolution by Table IV.
     2) The USTC-TFC dataset [31] provides original PCAP files
 (k ) (k −1) (k −1)
 hv = σ W (k ) · fk hv , hu ∀u ∈ SN (v ) (12) of ten types of malicious traffic (e.g., Geodo, Neris, Nsis-ay,
 (0) etc.) and ten types of benign traffic (e.g., Gmail, Outlook,
where hv = xv , fk (·) is the aggregation function, and SN (v ) Skype, etc.). It has a total size of 3.71 GB with 20 PCAP
represents a random sample of the node v’s neighbors. The files, and all PCAP files are separated by traffic category.
aggregation function should be invariant to the permutations This dataset is commonly used in encrypted malicious traffic
of node orderings, such as a mean, sum, min or max func- classification [11], [12], [38]. Statistics of the USTC-TFC
tion. Specifically, we use three GraphSAGE layers in one dataset can be referred to Table V.
GraphSAGE Block, which is the same setup as in GAT Block. Fig. 7 illustrates the visualization of different classes of
 3) Readout Layer: After sufficient feature aggregation and malicious traffic. It stretches the first N packets of the session
updating, the rich information in the graph needs to be flow and the first L bytes of each packet into a 1×M (M=N×L)
summarized to generate smaller representation. The operation dimensional array. Then convert each position in the byte
of readout is very similar with the operation of pooling, array to an integer between (0, 255), and finally reshape the
which reduce the size of parameters by down-sampling the byte array into x × x (x ≤ √M ) for visualization. As
data. Through the readout, a compact representation on the can be seen in Fig. 7, malicious flows such as BitCoinMiner,
graph-level of each graph is obtained, which can be used to Downware, and BitTor are typically shorter and contain more
predict the malicious traffic label for an entire graph. Common zero padding in the tail. The visualization of the malicious
readout operations include summation, average, maximum or flow CCleaner has a discrete distribution of white dots, which
minimum. The readout layer is generally defined as is significantly different from normal Benign traffic. Although
  
 (k ) (k ) (k )
 h G = R h1 , h2 , . . . , hn (13) both the malicious flow Cridex and the malicious flow Geodo
 show a dotted distribution, Geodo’s white dots are more
where n represents the number of nodes in the graph. densely packed and have a gray band at the lower edge,
 which is significantly different from Cridex. These differences
F. Classification Module can be captured by MTSecurity and used to achieve accurate
 classification.
 After byte feature extraction, we get a byte feature vector
containing compact byte information, which has dimension
D. At the same time, MTIG obtains the graph representation
feature through graph feature extraction, which has the same B. Evaluation Metrics
dimension as the byte feature vector. The classification module All experiments were performed on the platform equipped
concatenates the two feature vectors together to obtain a fused with an Intel Core 2.7GHz and 16Gb of memory. Pytorch
traffic representation. Then, it passes through a fully connected was used as the back-end deep learning framework, and the
layer consisting of two linear layers. After that, softmax maps deep graph library (DGL) was used to construct the malicious
the fused features to a vector space that is non-negative and traffic interaction graph and design the graph feature extraction
sums to 1 to get the final prediction. module.
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3591

 TABLE IV
 N UMBER OF B I -F LOW S AMPLES FOR D IFFERENT
 L ABELS AND B OTNET-ID IN THE MCFP DATASET

 TABLE V
Fig. 7. Visualization of different classes of malicious traffic. We selected N UMBER OF B I -F LOW S AMPLES FOR D IFFERENT
eight classes for visualization on both datasets. (a) is on the MCFP dataset, L ABELS IN THE USTC-TFC DATASET
(b) is on the USTC-TFC dataset.

 To evaluate and compare the performance of the proposed
model, we used several typical metrics, including Accuracy
(ACC), Precision (PR), Recall (RC), F1-score, and False
Positive Rate (FPR). The formulas are shown in (14)–(18).
The Macro Average specifically refers to calculating the mean
value of each category, which is used to avoid biased results
due to data imbalance. This formula is defined in (19). Where
n represents the total number of categories, and X represents
a certain evaluation metric.
 TP + TN
 Accuracy = (14)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP described in the paper. For the MCFP dataset, we parse the
 Precision = (15)
 TP + FP SSL/TLS protocol and the HTTP protocol. For the USTC-TFC
 TP dataset, we parse the SSL/TLS and HTTP protocols, as well as
 Recall = (16)
 TP + FN other data transfer protocols such as DNS, MySQL, and FTP.
 FP All flows are packet parsed and anonymized as described in
 FPR = (17)
 TN + FP Section IV-B and raw traffic representations are generated. The
 Precision × Recall corresponding MTIGs are generated according to the graph
 F 1 − score = 2 × (18)
 Precision + Recall construction algorithm described in Section IV-C. Since the
 n
 1 extreme imbalance of the original data makes it impossible to
 Macro Average − X = Xi (19) train the model effectively on the categories with less data,
 n
 i=1 with reference to [11], we use up-sampling [35] to increase
 the sample size, and random down-sampling [35] to reduce the
C. Data Preprocessing number of samples in some categories to make the input data
 We perform supervised training and testing on the relatively balanced. Statistics of the MCFP and the USTC-
MCFP [30] and USTC-TFC [31] datasets. Prior to the exper- TFC datasets are listed in Table IV and Table V. Each dataset
iments, we use the SplitCap tool to split the raw traffic into used in the experiments was divided into no-overlapping
separate bi-directional flows according to quintuples. Then training set, validation set and testing set following the ratio
we label each flow with the corresponding traffic category as of 6 : 2 : 2.
3592 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE VI
D. Hyperparameter Selection GNN H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION ON MCFP DATASET
 In this subsection, we describe the hyperparameters used in
MTSecurity. We use the MCFP dataset [30] and the USTC-
TFC dataset [31] for model parameter optimization. The
hyperparameters are tuned to adjust the trade-off between
variance, bias and classification performance. In order to get
better training results, we perform hyperparameter selection
for the Transformer module and GNN module separately.
 Due to the large number of training examples and hyperparameters in MTSecurity, it is a challenging task to find the
best hyperparameter settings. Therefore, for the Transformer
module, we refer to the article [21] to set the appropriate
hyperparameters and make fine-tuning of the results. For the
GNN module, we refer to [13] to search hyperparameters from
a listed area and choose the best values. Specifically, for GNN
activation function, the search area is [Tanh, Relu, Elu], the
candidate parameter area of GNN hidden units is [16, 32, TABLE VII
64, 128] the candidate parameter area of GNN dropout rate GNN H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION ON USTC-TFC DATASET
is [0.1, 0.2, 0.3], and the search area of GNN readout type
is [Mean, Sum]. For each GAT block, where the number of
GAT layers is selected between [1], [3], [6], the GraphSAGE
block follows the same principle. In order to seek an efficient
match between the GAT block and the GraphSAGE block, we
also compared the results using different GAT/GraphSAGE.
It is worth noting that the number of heads in attention
can split the embedded input data into different heads to
avoid losing local information in a large matrix. That is to
say using different number of multiple heads also affects
the performance of graph feature extraction. Therefore, we
also tested the effect of different number of heads on the
performance of the GNN module. The experimental results
for GAT/GraphSAGE as well as for the number of heads are
shown in Table VI and Table VII (training for 30 epochs).
In above tables, GAT/GraphSAGE denotes the ratio of the TABLE VIII
number of GAT blocks to the number of GraphSAGE blocks. H YPERPARAMETER S ELECTION FOR MTS ECURITY
GAT layer denotes the number of GAT layers in each GAT
block. GraphSAGE layer denotes the number of GraphSAGE
layers in each GraphSAGE block. Heads denotes the number
of self-attention heads in each GAT layer. We use accuracy
and F1 as metrics for evaluating performance, and they are
defined as shown in Section V-B.
 As for the selection of N and L (described in Section IV-B),
we refer to the article [19] and use the optimal results therein
N = 7 and L = 125, thus obtaining M = 875. Since the patch
size in the Transformer module is 4 [21], we truncate M to
784 and obtain the input dimension of the Transformer module
to be 28 × 28. The reason for this is that 28 can be divided
by 4 so that the input data can be processed without padding.
The final values chosen for the hyperparameters are shown in
Table VIII. Based on the parameters in the table we get the
results given in the experiment section.

 VI. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
A. Graph Node Quantity Selection one packet in each flow. Since the number of packets in a
 The number of graph nodes used to construct the corre- flow varies from a few to hundreds of thousands, in order
sponding MTIG also has an impact on the performance of to select the appropriate number of graph nodes, we counted
MTSecurity, where one graph node in each MTIG represents the distribution of the number of packets for all flows in the
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3593

 Fig. 9. Compare TIG and MTIG using the same graph classifier on the
 MCFP dataset and USTC-TFC dataset, respectively. (a) Training Accuracy
 on MCFP dataset. (b) Training Accuracy on USTC-TFC dataset. (c) Testing
 Accuracy, Macro-F1 and Macro-FPR on MCFP dataset. (d) Testing Accuracy,
 Macro-F1 and Macro-FPR on USTC-TFC dataset.

 accuracy of TLG is only 59.55%. And MTIG consistently
Fig. 8. Distribution of the number of packets in the MCFP dataset (blue) and maintains better accuracy during the training process. After
USTC-TFC dataset (green). Since the number of packets in a flow can reach training for 50 epochs on the training set, we conduct further
hundreds of thousands and cannot be fully displayed in the figure, flows with
a number of packets greater than 100 are truncated to 100 for visualization. evaluation on the testing set, as shown in Fig. 9 (c). Compared
 to TIG, the new graph representation method got 6.86%
 increase on accuracy, 19.74% improvement on macro-F1 score
MCFP dataset and the USTC-TFC dataset, and the results are and 21.68% decrease on FPR.
shown in Fig. 8. The results show that more than 90% of the Result on USTC-TFC: As shown in Fig. 9 (b), we can see
flows have packet counts between 0 and 50. In the MCFP that MTIG has also consistently maintained higher accuracy
dataset, flows with packet counts greater than or equal to 100 during training on the USTC-TFC dataset. After training for
account for only 2.59% of the total flows, and in the USTC- 50 epochs on the training set, we conduct further evaluation on
TFC dataset, this percentage is 1.08%. Although the higher the testing set, as shown in Fig. 9 (d). MTIG outperforms the
the number of packets used to construct the graph, the more TIG in all indicators. Compared to TIG, the new graph repdistinct the discriminative features of the graph representation. resentation method got 9.72% increase on accuracy, 11.33%
However, as the number of graph nodes used increases, the improvement on macro-F1 score and 20.11% decrease on FPR.
time to construct the graph and the time to perform graph The following analysis explains why MTIG is better than
representation learning also increases [13]. Therefore, we TIG.
select the first 50 packets of each stream to construct the graph TIG has been introduced for processing decentralized
to balance the performance and time consumption. encrypted traffic [13]. Since such flows are typically long,
 the resulting TIGs are highly distinguishable. However, the
B. Comparison of Graph Construction Methods scenario differs when confronted with malicious flows. Some
 malware-generated malicious flows are notably brief, compris-
 To evaluate the graph representation capability of the coning only 1 to a few packets. If framed in the same manner
structed MTIG, we use the same GNN classifier to extract
 as TIG, the distinguishability between different malicious
features and classify MTIG and TIG [13] respectively. We
 flows diminishes. To address this challenge, we propose a
train and test on MCFP dataset and USTC-TFC dataset
 new method called MTIG. In comparison to TIG, MTIG
respectively to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of
 incorporates nine additional dimensions of discriminative feathe constructed graph representation method.
 tures into the graph nodes to enhance the representation
 For efficient graph feature extraction, we use the GNN
 characteristics of malicious traffic (as illustrated in Table III).
module proposed in this paper for graph feature extraction. The
 These added statistical features ensure that MTIG remains
graph feature extraction module connects a fully connected
 highly distinguishable even when dealing with shorter flows.
layer and a softmax layer to form a complete graph classifier.
 As a result, MTIG holds significant advantages in recognizing
Note that the same graph classifier and the same training
 malicious encrypted traffic compared to TIG.
parameters are used for both comparison groups in order to
avoid performance differences due to model structure and
parameters. C. Experiment Results
 Result on MCFP: As shown in Fig. 9 (a), we can see In our experiments, we mainly focus on the multi-class
that the accuracy of our graph representation method improves classification task for malware traffic classification. To evaluate
very quickly, reaching 69.25% in the second epoch, while the the capability of the proposed method, we first train and
3594 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 TABLE IX TABLE XI
 R ESULTS ON THE MCFP DATASET ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND M ACRO F1-S CORE OF T WO
 C ONTROL G ROUP AND THE P ROPOSED M ODEL ON MCFP DATASET

 TABLE XII
 TABLE X ACCURACY, P RECISION , R ECALL AND M ACRO F1-S CORE OF T WO
 R ESULTS ON THE USTC-TFC DATASET C ONTROL G ROUP AND THE P ROPOSED M ODEL ON USTC-TFC DATASET

 is named Graph, which utilizes only MTIG as input. In this
test our model on the MCFP dataset. After that, to show control group, only GNN module is available for feature
the generality of the proposed method on other network extraction. The second one is named Raw, which uses only raw
traffic sources, we further validated our model on USTC- traffic data as input, and only Transformer module is included
TFC dataset. On the MCFP dataset, we selected five different for feature extraction. It should be noted that the outputs of
methods (GraphDApp [13], Single-RF [28], MTHL [27], the feature extraction module of the two control groups are
Multi-RF [28], ET-Bert [12] and R1DIT [19]). On the directly connected to the classification module without feature
USTC-TFC dataset, we compared it with six advanced concatenation. Furthermore, to maintain the uniqueness of the
methods (AppScanner [5], FS-Net [29], Deeppacket [10], variables, the parameters utilized in both training and testing
GraphDApp [13], TSCRNN [11] and ET-Bert [12]). phases are kept consistent with those employed in MTSecurity.
 As shown in Table IX and Table X, these methods exhibit Table XI lists the various performance metrics of the two
large performance differences in accuracy, precision, recall control groups and the proposed method on the MCFP dataset.
and F1-score. It is clear that the classification performance of From the table, compared to single-GNN, MTSecurity method
single feature input methods is lower than that of fused feature got 18.78% increase on accuracy, 37.31% improvement in
input methods. macro-F1 score and 97.27% decrease in FPR. Meanwhile,
 Result on MCFP: MTSecurity achieves the best compared to single-Transformer, MTSecurity method got
performance on accuracy, precision, recall and F1-score as 1.13% increase on accuracy, 1.43% improvement in macro-
0.9946, 0.9954, 0.9926 and 0.9940. Our proposed model has F1 score and 70% decrease in FPR.
improved by 1.90% on F1-score compared to the best existing Table XII lists the various performance metrics of the
model [19]. Compared with the Graph-based method [13], our two control groups and the proposed method on the USTCproposed method has improved accuracy by more than 50% TFC dataset. From the table, compared to single-GNN,
and F1 score by more than 80%. MTSecurity method got 20.03% increase on accuracy, 23.55%
 Result on USTC-TFC: MTSecurity achieves accuracy, improvement in macro-F1 score and 97.09% decrease in FPR.
precision, recall and F1-score as 0.9948, 0.9937, 0.9931 and Meanwhile, compared to single-Transformer, MTSecurity
0.9934. Our proposed method outperforms the latest ET-Bert method got 1.44% increase on accuracy, 1.90% improvement
method by 2.07% on accuracy and 2.15% on F1-score. At the in macro-F1 score and 70% decrease in FPR.
same time, MTSecurity outperforms the Graph-based method The above experimental results show that both input data
by 11.59% in accuracy and 17.00% in F1-score. are beneficial in providing complementary features for classi-
 This phenomenon suggests that graphs, as an auxiliary fication. This result also demonstrates the effectiveness of the
feature, can significantly improve the upper bound of the proposed method based on graph and raw data in malicious
accuracy of the raw data-based approach to more than 0.99. traffic detection.
In conclusion, it can be seen that the proposed method is In order to visualize the classification performance of the
the most accurate among these methods and has significant proposed MTSecurity model, Table XI details the various
improvement over the existing models. metrics for each traffic class generated by the proposed method
 In order to evaluate the proposed method more compre- on the MCFP dataset. Table XII details the metrics of the
hensively, we set up two other control groups. The first one proposed method on the USTC-TFC dataset for each traffic
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3595

 TABLE XIII
 T HE D ETAILED P RECISION , R ECALL , F1-S CORE OF the consistency and reproducibility of the results. Another
 E ACH T RAFFIC C LASS OF MCFP DATASET potential threat is that our experiments were conducted in a
 relatively controlled environment, and external validity threats
 cannot be avoided, i.e., there may be some limitations and
 validity challenges in generalizing the experimental results to
 a wider range of scenarios. In the follow-up study, we plan to
 expand the malicious encrypted traffic dataset by introducing
 more diverse types of malicious traffic. Without training these
 new samples, we will evaluate the ability of the proposed
 algorithm to classify these unknown traffic as benign/malicious
 (i.e.,binary classification), so as to comprehensively test and
 evaluate the effectiveness and generalization ability of the
 proposed method.

 VIII. C ONCLUSION
 Encrypted malicious traffic classification plays a crucial role in identifying and preventing malicious activities,
 thereby enhancing network security. This paper explores existing approaches to encrypted malicious traffic classification
 and introduces a novel method, MTSecurity, leveraging Transformer and graph neural networks. MTSecurity
 TABLE XIV
 T HE D ETAILED P RECISION , R ECALL , F1-S CORE OF autonomously detects encrypted malicious traffic by combin-
 E ACH T RAFFIC C LASS OF USTC-TFC DATASET ing the original byte features of encrypted malicious flows
 with graph-based traffic interaction features. The fusion of
 the two features can describe the behavior of encrypted
 malicious flows more comprehensively than any individual
 feature. Numerous experimental results validate the effectiveness of MTSecurity. Through the fusion of byte features and
 network interaction features, MTSecurity achieves a classification accuracy of 99.48%, surpassing analyses based on single
 features. Additionally, experimental findings indicate that
 the proposed method significantly enhances the classification
 accuracy of unbalanced, invisible, and multi-category malicious traffic compared to state-of-the-art methods. However,
 the introduction of two classifiers raises concerns about slow
 inference speed, and further exploration is needed to better
 integrate these two features. In the future, MTSecurity will
 undergo further optimization to enhance its inference speed
 and performance.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The authors want to convey our grateful appreciation to the
 corresponding author of this paper, Yulin Lei. He has offered
 advice with huge values in all stages when writing this essay to
class. As can be seen from Table XIII and Table XIV, the us. The authors would like to express their sincere appreciation
proposed method performs well in all classes of malicious to the editors and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful
traffic. comments, which have greatly helped us improve the quality
 of this article.
 VII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY
 R EFERENCES
 The potential threat of our study is that differences in
the experimental environment may affect the accuracy of the [1] “HTTPS encryption on the Web.” 2019. [Online]. Available:
 https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview
results. To eliminate this threat, we strictly controlled the [2] “Security outcomes report, volume 3.” 2019. [Online]. Available:
before and after parameters to be consistent in the comparison https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/global/zh_cn/products/security/securityexperiments to avoid the potential threat caused by inconsistent reports/threats-of-the-year-cybersecurity-series.pdf
 [3] “The state of encrypted attacks.” 2021. [Online]. Available:
implementation. At the same time, the same experiments https://www.zscaler.com/resources/infographics/infographic-state-ofwere conducted on multiple platforms and devices to ensure encrypted-attacks-2021.pdf
3596 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 3, JUNE 2024

 [4] A. S. Shekhawat, F. Di Troia, and M. Stamp, “Feature analysis of [29] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 encrypted malicious traffic,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 125, pp. 130–141, network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. INFOCOM IEEE
 Jul. 2019. Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 [5] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- [30] 2015, “Stratosphere Laboratory Datasets,” stratosphereips. Dataset,
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE Mar. 2020, https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-overview.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, pp. 63–78, 2017. [31] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 [6] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained Webpage classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted traffic,” learning,”in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), 2017, pp. 712–717.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, 2020. [32] S. Garcia, M. Grill, J. Stiborek, and A. Zunino, “An empirical compari-
 [7] Z. Wang, K. W. Fok, and V. L. L. Thing “Machine learning for encrypted son of botnet detection methods,” Comput. Secur., vol. 45, pp. 100–123,
 malicious traffic detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study,” Sep. 2014.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 113, Feb. 2022, Art. no. 102542. [33] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
 [8] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun.,
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural 2014, pp. 781–789.
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), 2017, [34] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
 pp. 43–48. traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute
 [9] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “Flowpic: Encrypted Internet traffic classifi- bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, pp. 1830–1843,
 cation is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. 2017.
 Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687. [35] V. Dumoulin and F. Visin, “A guide to convolution arithmetic for deep
[10] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. Hossein Zade, and M. Saberian, learning,” 2016, arXiv:1603.07285.
 “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using [36] Q. Zhang, C. Wang, H. Wu, C. Xin, and T. V. Phuong, “GELU-Net: A
 deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, 2020. globally encrypted, locally unencrypted deep neural network for privacypreserved learning,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2018, pp. 3933–3939.
[11] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme of
 [37] J. Xu, X. Sun, Z. Zhang, G. Zhao, and J. Lin, “Understanding and
 encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient manimproving layer normalization,” in Proc. 33rd Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 agement of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. 107974.
 Syst., 2019, pp. 1–11.
[12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-bert: A [38] J. Dai, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “GLADS: A global-local attention data
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers selection model for multimodal multitask encrypted traffic classification
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, of IoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109652.
 pp. 633–642. [39] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Conf. Neural
[13] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[14] W. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. He, Y. Li, and J. Liu, “BotMark: Automated
 botnet detection with hybrid analysis of flow-based and graph-based
 traffic behaviors,” Inf. Sci., vol. 511, pp. 284–296, Feb. 2020. Jin Yang received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
[15] Y. Li et al., “GraphDDoS: Effective DDoS attack detection using graph computer science from Sichuan University, Sichuan,
 neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Support. China, in 2004 and 2007, respectively, where he is
 Cooperat. Work Des. (CSCWD), 2022, pp. 1275–1280. currently an Associate Professor with the School of
[16] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website finger- Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University.
 printing in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th His main research interests include network security,
 Annu. ACM Workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., 2011, pp. 103–114. knowledge discovery, and expert systems.
[17] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers
 for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
[18] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “A
 comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, Jan. 2021.
[19] O. Barut, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “R1DIT: Privacy-preserving
 malware traffic classification with attention-based neural networks,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2071–2085,
 Xinyun Jiang is currently pursuing the M.S.
 Jun. 2023.
 degree with the School of Cyber Science and
[20] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning Engineering, Sichuan University, Sichuan, China.
 enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., Her main research interests include artificial intellivol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022. gence, network intrusion detection, encrypted traffic
[21] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using classification, and network security.
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. 2021,
 pp. 10012–10022.
[22] K. Simonyana and A. Zisserman “Very deep convolutional networks for
 large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556.
[23] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Lear., 2019,
 pp. 6105–6114.
[24] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, Y. Bengio,
 “Graph attention networks,” 2017, arXiv:1710.10903.
[25] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling “Semi-supervised classification with graph Yulin Lei is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907. with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
[26] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation Sichuan University, Sichuan, China. His main areas
 learning on large graphs,” in Proc. 31st Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., of interest and research are intrusion detection,
 2017, p. 30. malicious traffic, artificial intelligence, and network
[27] O. Barut, Y. Luo, T. Zhang, W. Li, and P. Li, “Multi-task hierarchical security.
 learning based network traffic analytics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Commun. (ICC), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[28] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1,
 pp. 5–32, 2001.
YANG et al.: MTSecurity: PRIVACY-PRESERVING MALICIOUS TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 3597

 Weiheng Liang is currently pursuing the M.S. Siyu Li received the B.E. degree from Sichuan
 degree in electronic information with the School of University, Chengdu, China, in 2021, where he
 Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the
 Sichuan, China. His main research interests include School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His
 encrypted traffic detection, network security, and research interests include natural language processdeep learning. ing, Transformer-based models, and social network
 analysis.

 Zicheng Ma received the B.E. degree from the
 Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, in 2021, where
 he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the
 School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His
 research areas are artificial intelligence, natural
 language processing, and visualization technology.