sensors
Article
Multi-Task Scenario Encrypted Traffic Classification and
Parameter Analysis
Guanyu Wang and Yijun Gu *

 College of Information and Cyber Security, People’s Public Security University of China, Beijing 100038, China;
 gyc0016@163.com
 * Correspondence: guyijun@ppsuc.edu.cn

 Abstract: The widespread use of encrypted traffic poses challenges to network management and
 network security. Traditional machine learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification no
 longer meet the demands of management and security. The application of deep learning technology
 in encrypted traffic classification significantly improves the accuracy of models. This study focuses
 primarily on encrypted traffic classification in the fields of network analysis and network security. To
 address the shortcomings of existing deep learning-based encrypted traffic classification methods
 in terms of computational memory consumption and interpretability, we introduce a Parameter-
 Efficient Fine-Tuning method for efficiently tuning the parameters of an encrypted traffic classification
 model. Experimentation is conducted on various classification scenarios, including Tor traffic service
 classification and malicious traffic classification, using multiple public datasets. Fair comparisons are
 made with state-of-the-art deep learning model architectures. The results indicate that the proposed
 method significantly reduces the scale of fine-tuning parameters and computational resource usage
 while achieving performance comparable to that of the existing best models. Furthermore, we
 interpret the learning mechanism of encrypted traffic representation in the pre-training model by
 analyzing the parameters and structure of the model. This comparison validates the hypothesis that
 the model exhibits hierarchical structure, clear organization, and distinct features.

 Keywords: encrypted traffic; network management; interpretability analysis; fine-tuning

Citation: Wang, G.; Gu, Y. Multi-Task 1. Introduction
Scenario Encrypted Traffic In network management and cybersecurity domains, network traffic classification
Classification and Parameter Analysis. plays an integral role. Traffic classification refers to the process of identifying and dis-
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078. https:// tinguishing different categories of network traffic according to specific requirements and
doi.org/10.3390/s24103078 designs, enabling further analysis. Accurate network traffic classification can help us obtain
Academic Editor: Alberto Gotta an overall perception of network bandwidth, capture different network usage habits, and
 assess network security. Internet Service Providers (ISPs) optimize network resources and
Received: 15 April 2024 enhance network management through traffic classification, while security departments
Revised: 9 May 2024
 leverage traffic analysis to monitor network security states, identifying and responding to
Accepted: 10 May 2024
 malicious network attacks. However, the widespread use of traffic encryption technologies
Published: 12 May 2024
 such as Transport Layer Security (TLS) presents significant challenges to network traffic
 classification [1]. Encrypted traffic, where plaintext payloads are encrypted and transmitted
 as ciphertext, can only be decrypted by the sender and the receiver, making it difficult for
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
 third parties to interpret. Traditional traffic analysis methods, which rely on extracting
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. valuable information from plaintext payloads (such as port-based methods, Deep Packet
This article is an open access article Inspection (DPI) methods, and statistical methods), may become ineffective. This encrypdistributed under the terms and tion prevents network administrators from directly extracting useful plaintext information
conditions of the Creative Commons from network traffic, complicates management tasks, and creates convenient channels for
Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// malicious actors to transmit malicious traffic, increasing network security risks [2,3].
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ In this complex scenario, encrypted traffic classification methods based on feature
4.0/). engineering extract statistically designed features and classify them using classical machine

Sensors 2024, 24, 3078. https://doi.org/10.3390/s24103078 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 2 of 21

 learning [4–7] or deep learning [8,9]. This approach differs from traditional methods as they
 do not solely rely on plaintext information such as ports, resulting in better classification
 performance and ease of deployment. However, performance depends on the comprehensiveness and effectiveness of manually selected features [10]. Alternatively, representation
 learning-based methods for encrypted traffic classification employ deep learning models
 to automatically extract and process representations from encrypted traffic [2,10–14]. This
 approach has become a high-performance algorithmic solution to the problem of encrypted
 traffic classification [15,16]. While these methods can improve classification performance,
 they also expose the immaturity of applying deep learning to this problem and are constrained by the limitations inherent in deep learning itself. Improper design may result
 in biased conclusions or exaggerated classification outcomes. Neglecting the alignment
 between deep learning methods and the challenges in this domain prevents designers from
 fully harnessing the potential of deep learning [17]. Unlike natural language and images,
 encrypted byte streams are difficult for humans to understand. The relevance of the loaded
 bytes, coupled with the complexity of the deep learning model itself, makes the problem of
 poor interpretability even more pronounced.
 Among the many deep learning frameworks, pre-training models have been extensively applied and have shown exceptional performance in fields such as Natural Language
 Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) [14]. In the increasingly complex network
 environment, pre-training model-based encrypted traffic classification methods outperform
 other deep learning architectures. Pre-training models first undergo training with a large
 volume of unlabeled data to pre-train the initial model, followed by fine-tuning with a
 small amount of labeled data from downstream tasks. The fine-tuned model can then be
 directly applied to well-designed tasks [18]. However, traditional pre-training methods
 that adjust all parameters of the model lead to increasingly expensive training costs as the
 model size and number of downstream tasks grow.
 The feature engineering-based encrypted traffic classification methods and the representation learning-based methods demonstrate that it is possible to classify traffic in a
 fine-grained manner. Statistical representation, plaintext information, and features present
 in the original payloads are discriminative enough to make each class easily separated
 from one another [19]. We therefore focus on designing a fine-grained encrypted traffic
 classification method with broad applicability and stable results in a generic network environment. We aim to implement encrypted traffic functional classification methods under
 limited conditions. The application scenarios for encrypted traffic classification include
 four types: (I) the network analytics domain, (II) the network security domain, (III) the
 user privacy domain, and (IV) the domain of network functions in middleboxes [3]. Our
 research primarily focuses on two subdomains within Scenarios (I) and (II): application
 identification, network intrusion detection, and malware detection, particularly emphasizing application identification in different network environments. Specifically, we aim to
 design a representation learning framework that can be trained in different scenarios to
 achieve encrypted traffic functional classification. For example, distinguishing different
 services (VPN Email, Email, VPN Chat, Chat, etc.) and applications (Netflix, P2P, SCP, etc.)
 in VPN traffic, distinguishing normal traffic (BitTorrent, Facetime, FTP, etc.) from traffic
 generated by malware (Cridex, Geodo, etc.) in mixed traffic, and distinguishing different
 attack traffic in the IoT environment (DDoS ACK Fragmentation, ARP Spoofing, XSS, etc.).
 In this paper, we propose the Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT)-based Encrypted
 Traffic Representation Learning Method (PETReLM). We develop suitable data preprocessing methods based on the characteristics of encrypted traffic and use pre-training models
 for representation learning to accomplish encrypted traffic classification tasks.
 Our contributions are as follows:
 • We propose a novel packet-level encrypted traffic classification method based on
 pre-trained models and PEFT methods. We introduce the Low-Rank Adaptation
 (LoRA) [20] method into encrypted traffic classification, enhancing pre-training and
 fine-tuning methods to adapt to encrypted traffic classification tasks. Our method
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 3 of 21

 can learn different types of traffic representations in different scenarios with wide
 applicability and also improve the efficiency of parameter utilization.
 • We validate the existence of comprehensive traffic representation information in individual packets and demonstrate the feasibility of classifying traffic for specific scenarios based on these representations. We also discuss the limitations of packet-level
 encrypted traffic classification.
 • Based on singular values and vectors, we compare the matrix parameters of the finetuned model with those of the pre-trained model to analyze the model’s representation
 learning mechanism and fine-tuning principles.
 The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces related work on
 encrypted traffic classification and PEFT. Section 3 describes our proposed method for
 encrypted traffic classification. Section 4 presents our experimental settings and results.
 In Section 5, we analyze the mechanism of encrypted traffic representation extraction and
 fine-tuning. In Section 6, we discuss the limitations of our method and conclude the paper.

 2. Related Works
 In this section, we review the related research in the fields of encrypted traffic classification and PEFT, discussing the advantages and limitations of these methods.

 2.1. Encrypted Traffic Classification
 The methods of encrypted traffic classification mainly include feature engineeringbased approaches and representation learning-based methods. The objective is to classify
 encrypted traffic according to predefined criteria by learning statistical features, payload
 features, etc., of the encrypted traffic. Table 1 reports relevant work in these domains and
 summarizes the fundamental aspects of the methodologies employed.

 Table 1. Comparison of encrypted traffic classification algorithms.

 Input Data Algorithms Paper
 IP, Port, Packet Lenth, Packet Direction,
 Random Forest, Correlation Graph FlowPrint [4]
 TLS Certificate
 IP, Protocol, Packet Length Random Forest APPScanner [5]
 Packet Lenth, Packet Direction Random Forest Conti et al. [6]
 Certificate, Packet Length Second-order Markov Chains Shen et al. [7]
 Packet Length, Arrival Time Auto Encoder Yu et al. [8]
 Packet Lenth, Packet Direction GNN Shen et al. [9]
 Payload 1D-CNN Wang et al. [11]
 Payload SAE, 1D-CNN Deep Packet [10]
 Payload 1D-CNN, BiLSTM TCSRNN [2]
 Payload BiLSTM, TextCNN Jiang et al. [12]
 Payload ALBERT PERT [13]
 Payload BERT ET-BERT [14]

 2.1.1. Feature Engineering-Based Methods
 Feature engineering-based methods involve extracting manually designed traffic
 features and classifying encrypted traffic using classic machine learning or deep learning.
 Commonly effective features include basic features, time-series features, statistical features,
 and multi-protocol payload characteristics [21]. Designers produce features based on
 experience, screen features by comparing their information content and redundancy, and
 provide these features as input to the designed model. Common classification granularities
 include data flows (unidirectional or bidirectional), TCP connections, etc.
 FlowPrint [4] utilizes the temporal correlation of traffic communication destination
 addresses to discover different patterns in network traffic, creating a fingerprint library for
 network traffic. APPScanner [5] employs manually selected traffic statistical features to
 identify mobile applications, exploring the extent to which mobile app fingerprints can be
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 4 of 21

 constructed and assessing the robustness of the app fingerprint framework. Conti et al. [6]
 generate different time-series cumulative graphs based on varied network behaviors and
 learn the associations of network traffic cumulative graphs related to specific behaviors.
 Shen et al. [7] propose constructing application fingerprints by merging the application
 attribute bigrams into the second-order homogeneous Markov chains, where the attribute
 bigram comprises certificate packet lengths and the size of the first application data in
 encrypted sessions. Yu et al. [8] extract traffic statistical features and certificate features from
 the TLS handshake to the verification phase, extend traffic features into higher dimensions,
 and introduce hierarchical clustering to reduce data computation. Shen et al. [9] use traffic
 packets to build the traffic interaction graph and then employ Graph Neural Networks
 (GNNs) to achieve decentralized APP recognition.
 The aforementioned methods lack flexibility and adaptability in the realistic mobile
 context. Feature engineering relies on task characteristics and expert experience. Manually selected features may not fully capture the characteristics of traffic. This selection
 process, coupled with method usage, imposes certain limitations on the applicability of
 classification methods.

 2.1.2. Representation Learning-Based Methods
 Representation learning-based methods avoid manually designing traffic features
 and allow for deep learning frameworks to automatically extract representations from
 raw encrypted byte streams in an end-to-end manner. Typically, these methods focus on
 classifying at the granularity of data flows (unidirectional or bidirectional), packets, TCP
 connections, and traffic bursts.
 Wang et al. [11] use a One-Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (1D-CNN) for
 end-to-end encrypted traffic classification. They transform traffic into two-dimensional
 images by truncating traffic payloads to a fixed length and converting bytes into image
 pixels, subsequently using 1D-CNN to learn image representations. Lotfollahi et al. [10]
 introduce Deep Packet architecture employing Stacked Auto-Encoders (SAE) [22] and a
 1D-CNN to handle both traffic representation and application identification tasks. For
 learning temporal dimension representations, TSCRNN [2] proposes using 1D-CNN to
 extract spatial features of encrypted traffic, followed by stacked BiLTSM [23] to extract
 temporal features based on these low-dimensional feature mappings. Jiang et al. [12] use
 BiLSTM and TextCNN [24] to capture local features and temporal relationship of traffic,
 employing a multi-head attention mechanism to select important features and reduce
 the impact of noisy features. PERT [13] devises a novel method to convert encrypted
 traffic payloads into byte streams, using the A Lite BERT (ALBERT) model [25] for packetlevel traffic representation learning, learning the contextual distribution of unlabeled
 payload bytes, and then reusing the pre-trained model for data stream-level fine-tuning.
 ET-BERT [14] designs an encrypted traffic representation model based on Bidirectional
 Encoder Representation from Transformers (BERT) [18] and pre-training tasks more suitable
 for encrypted traffic, achieving significant improvements in generalization ability and
 performing well on multiple datasets.
 Methods that take raw input data as input enable models to automatically extract
 representations from the raw data, reducing the overall reliance on human expertise.
 While current methods achieve good results, deep learning models selected by these
 representation learning-based methods face certain constraints. The performance of the
 methods is influenced by preprocessing methods for raw traffic, the adaptability of deep
 learning models to encrypted traffic classification tasks, and the inherent limitations of
 deep learning itself, such as slow convergence, high computational resource usage, and
 poor interpretability.

 2.2. PEFT
 PEFT aims to enhance the performance of pre-training models on new tasks by reducing the number of fine-tuning parameters and computational complexity, thereby
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 5 of 21

 alleviating the high training costs of large pre-training models. PEFT methods can overcome catastrophic forgetting [26] and exhibit excellent robustness in out-of-distribution
 evaluations [27].
 Houlsby et al. [28] design the Adapter module consisting of two feedforward projection matrices and a nonlinear layer embedded within the Transformer [29] structure.
 During training, Transformer parameters are frozen, and only the newly added Adapter
 module parameters are adjusted. The Adapter achieves results close to full fine-tuning with
 just 3.6% of the original model’s parameter size. Lin et al. [27] construct a set of prompt
 tokens as Prefix connected to the left side of each attention layer input in Transformer,
 keeping model parameters unchanged during fine-tuning and updating only the Prefix
 part. The Prefix Tuning approach has achieved good results in various language models.
 Liu et al. [30] develop the IA3 method, which scales activations by learned vectors in attention layers and the Feedforward Neural Network (FNN), achieving stronger performance
 than full model fine-tuning. Liu et al. [31] propose converting prompts into learnable
 embedding layers and processing prompt embedding layers with MLP+LSTM, enhancing
 BERT’s performance on few-sample tasks, and significantly reducing the need for prompt
 engineering. Hu et al. [20] design the LoRA method based on the intrinsic “low rank” of
 parameter update matrices. LoRA maintains the pre-trained model parameters unchanged
 and uses two low-rank matrices to replace weight update matrices, avoiding inference
 delay issues introduced by inserting other modules.
 The shortcoming of PEFT is that it sacrifices a portion of the model’s performance and
 fails to establish a connection with the pre-trained model, leaving room for improvement
 in interpretability.

 3. Our Methods
 In this section, we present the overall framework and implementation details of the
 PETReLM. The PETReLM is designed to extract representations of encrypted traffic and
 classify traffic based on traffic representations. Our open-source code is hosted at the
 following GitHub repository: https://github.com/ssy198/PETReLM.

 3.1. Architectural Overview
 We propose the overall framework of the PETReLM as shown in Figure 1. We select
 BERT [18] as the foundational model architecture for pre-training and fine-tuning, and the
 approach consists of three main stages:
 (1) Traffic Preprocessing: This stage involves trimming and transforming raw encrypted
 traffic data. We tailor traffic packets by removing irrelevant information and the
 convert tailored traffic into a format suitable for the model.
 (2) Model Pre-training: This stage employs a Masked Language Model (MLM) and a
 modified Next Sentence Prediction (mNSP) task as pre-training tasks for the model
 to learn general representations of traffic. This enables the model to initially extract
 basic general representations.
 (3) Model Fine-tuning: In this stage, the pre-trained model parameters are reused for
 downstream classification task training. The pre-trained model parameters are frozen,
 and the newly embedded PEFT module and added fully connected layer classifier parameters are fine-tuned. This enables the model to learn task-specific representations
 and achieve encrypted traffic classification in specific scenarios.
Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 21
 Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 6 of 21

 Pre-training
 mNSP MLM Downstream Task 3
 Tasks
 Downstream Task 2
 Output O0 O1 O2 O3 ON ON
 CLS Downstream Task 1

 O0 O1 O2 O3 ON ON

 BERT
 Trainable
 Parameters
 BERT + PEFT
 Model
 Pre-training
 Frozen Trainable
 Parameters Parameters
 Input I0 I1 I2 I3 IN IN

 Byte Pair Encoding&Word Piece
 Raw Encrypted I0 I1 I2 I3 IN IN
 Traffic
 Traffic Model
 Preprocessing Fine-tuning

 Figure 1. Overview of model framework.
 Figure 1. Overview of model framework.
 3.2. Preprocessing
 3.2. Preprocessing
 The preprocessing of traffic involves traffic trimming and traffic transformation. Traffic
 The preprocessing
 trimming of traffic involves
 refers to appropriately trimming traffic
 thetrimming and traffic
 original traffic transformation.
 to reduce interferenceTraf- from
 trimming
 ficnoise appropriately
 refers toTraffic
 information. transformation trimming refersthetooriginal
 converting trafficthe totrimmed
 reduce interference
 traffic into a
 datanoise
 from format information.
 suitable for Traffic
 model transformation
 input. We classify refersencrypted
 to converting traffictheintrimmed
 a packettrafficlevel,into
 with
 data format
 a specific suitable
 rationale for model
 detailed input.4.1.
 in Section We classify encrypted traffic in a packet level, with
 specific We analyzedetailed
 rationale in Sectionbased
 packet structure 4.1. on the TCP/IP protocol suite and discuss which
 partWe analyze
 should packet or
 be retained structure
 discarded. based on thethe
 Because TCP/IP
 data link protocol
 layer (L2) suite and discuss
 header and trailerwhichonly
 contain
 part should essential controlorinformation
 be retained discarded. Becausefor communication
 the data link between
 layer (L2)adjacent
 header hosts, traileris
 andwhich
 not very
 only containhelpful for encrypted
 essential traffic classification,
 control information they should between
 for communication be removed. The network
 adjacent hosts,
 layer (L3) IP packet header mainly includes communication
 which is not very helpful for encrypted traffic classification, they should be removed. The addresses (IP addresses)
 within the
 network layer (L3) IP packet network.
 packet-switched header mainly Whileincludes
 the server’s IP address in
 communication normal (IP
 addresses traffic
 ad-is
 valuable
 dresses) for encrypted
 within traffic classification,
 the packet-switched network. While considering that IP
 the server’s VPNs,
 addressmalware,
 in normal may
 etc.,trafficobscure actualfor
 is valuable IP encrypted
 addresses and traffic complexity of considering
 theclassification, translating IPthat VPNs, into
 addresses meaningful
 malware, etc.,
 mayinformation
 obscure actualfor deep learning models,
 IP addresses we remove of
 and the complexity the network layer
 translating header information.
 IP addresses into mean-
 The transport layer (L4) is a crucial part of a packet,
 ingful information for deep learning models, we remove the network layer header consisting of the TCP and UDP
 inforprotocols. Most services are designed based on these protocols.
 mation. The transport layer (L4) is a crucial part of a packet, consisting of the TCP and The transport layer header
 UDPincludes information
 protocols. such asare
 Most services ports basedcontrol.
 and session
 designed on thesePorts indicate
 protocols. Theinformation
 transport layerabout
 processes,
 header and ifinformation
 includes the port is asuch well-known
 as ports and number,control.
 portsession the service indicatecan
 Portscategory be directly
 information
 determined.
 about processes, Although
 and if the portmay
 ports be obfuscated
 is a well-known portin number,
 some malicious
 the service traffic scenarios,
 category can bethe
 transport layer header is an important reference for host
 directly determined. Although ports may be obfuscated in some malicious traffic scenar- process communication behavior.
 Wethe
 ios, believe that retaining
 transport layer headerinformation from the transport
 is an important reference layer for hostheader
 processyields greater benefits
 communication
 than the information loss from discarding it, so we keep
 behavior. We believe that retaining information from the transport layer header yields the relevant information from
 the transport layer. Finally, the application layer (L5) is a
 greater benefits than the information loss from discarding it, so we keep the relevant in- crucial reference for encrypted
 traffic classification
 formation and is retained.
 from the transport layer. Finally,In summary, to retain
 the application efficient
 layer (L5) isrepresentations
 a crucial reference that
 enable the separation of different categories for downstream
 for encrypted traffic classification and is retained. In summary, to retain efficient repre- tasks, we discard network
 layer headers
 sentations and retain
 that enable relevant information
 of differentfrom
 the separation the transport
 categories layer and the
 for downstream tasks,application
 we dislayer for further processing.
 card network layer headers and retain relevant information from the transport layer and
 The length of encrypted traffic payload is not fixed, and we also need to preserve the
 the application layer for further processing.
 transportation layer header information and part of the application layer payload byte
 The length of encrypted traffic payload is not fixed, and we also need to preserve the
 stream by the truncation operation. This step reduces the dimensions of the input data and
 transportation layer header information and part of the application layer payload byte
Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21

Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 7 of 21

 stream by the truncation operation. This step reduces the dimensions of the input data
 and improves the efficiency of model training and inference. Details regarding the trunimproves the efficiency of model training and inference. Details regarding the truncation
 cation operation are discussed in Section 4.2.
 operation are discussed in Section 4.2.
 Encrypted traffic is a distinct data type separate from natural language or images.
 Encrypted traffic is a distinct data type separate from natural language or images.
 However, from an abstract perspective, traffic data can be considered sequential data.
 However, from an abstract perspective, traffic data can be considered sequential data.
 Therefore, we
 Therefore, employ sequence
 we employ sequence data data preprocessing
 preprocessing methods
 methods to handle trimmed
 to handle trimmed traffic
 traffic
 payloads. To transform the byte stream of payloads into a sequence
 payloads. To transform the byte stream of payloads into a sequence of basic character of basic character
 units
 units akin to natural language, we employ a Byte-Pair Encoding method
 akin to natural language, we employ a Byte-Pair Encoding method [13]. It concatenates [13]. It concatenates bytesbytes
 two adjacent
 two adjacent to form
 to form a basica basic unit unit
 character
 character (0000—ffff),
 (0000—ffff), turning
 turning the byte
 the byte streamstream
 into
 into a string of byte pairs. Subsequently, the Word Piece algorithm [32]
 a string of byte pairs. Subsequently, the Word Piece algorithm [32] is used to tokenize is used to tokenize
 thesebyte
 these pairstrings.
 bytepair Forsubsequent
 strings.For subsequenttask taskprocessing,
 processing,special tokens[CLS],
 specialtokens [SEP],[PAD],
 [CLS],[SEP], [PAD],
 and [MASK] are added to the dictionary generated by the Word Piece algorithm. Each
 and [MASK] are added to the dictionary generated by the Word Piece algorithm. Each
 tokensequence
 token beginswith
 sequence begins [CLS], representing
 with [CLS], representing thethe hidden
 hidden layer state output
 layer state output for thefinal
 forthe final
 classificationtask.
 classification [SEP]marks
 task.[SEP] marks thethe
 end of of
 end a sub-sequence,
 a sub-sequence, [PAD][PAD] is used for padding
 is used for padding sequences to reach a minimum length, and [MASK] is used to obscure
 sequences to reach a minimum length, and [MASK] is used to obscure existing tokens for existing tokens for
 pre-training task
 pre-training task MLM.
 MLM. The The token embeddingtransformed
 token embedding transformedby bythetheWordWordPiece algorithmis
 Piecealgorithm
 is summed with the segment and position embeddings to obtain the
 summed with the segment and position embeddings to obtain the input sequence. Figure input sequence. Fig-2
 ure 2 illustrates
 illustrates the process
 the process of traffic
 of traffic preprocessing.
 preprocessing.

 Input I0 I1 ... Ik Ik+1 ... IN

 Segment EA EA ... EA EB ... EB
 Embeddings
 + + + + +
 Position E0 E1 ... Ek Ek+1 ... EN
 Embeddings
 + + + + +
 Token
 E[CLS] E[d56f] ... E[SEP] E[537b] ... E[SEP]
 Embeddings

 [CLS] d56f ... [SEP] 537b ... [SEP]

 Word Piece

 d56f 6f01 01bb bb88 8805 ... 61fa

 Byte Pair
 d5 6f 01 bb 88 05 ... de 61 fa
 Encoding

 Payload from d56 f0 1b b8 80 5e 2f3 f39 84 80 d8 0 ... de 61 fa
 network layer (L3)

 Raw Encrypted
 3c18... d56 f0 1b b8 80 5e 2f3 f39 84 80 d8 0 ... de 61 fa
 Traffic

 Figure 2. Encrypted traffic preprocessing.
 Figure 2. Encrypted traffic preprocessing.
 3.3. Pre-Training
 3.3. Pre-Training
 Pre-training leverages unlabeled data to train the model to learn general representaof encryptedleverages
 tionsPre-training unlabeled
 traffic. Plaintext data toare
 payloads train the model into
 transformed to learn general representaunintelligible ciphertext
 tions of encrypted traffic. Plaintext payloads are transformed into unintelligible
 through encryption algorithms. Cryptographic implementation of encryption algorithms ciphertext
 exhibits encryption
 through algorithms.
 a certain degree Cryptographic
 of non-complete implementation
 randomness of encryption
 [33], indicating algorithms
 a high information
 content aand
 exhibits highdegree
 certain of non-complete
 uncertainty randomness
 in the ciphertext. [33], indicating
 Encryption algorithmsa high information
 (e.g., AES, etc.)
 mix bytes from input plaintext blocks, enhancing the entropy of the ciphertext etc.)
 content and high uncertainty in the ciphertext. Encryption algorithms (e.g., AES, and mix
 also
 bytes from input plaintext blocks, enhancing the entropy of the ciphertext
 increasing the correlation between bytes within the blocks. Although the ciphertext and inalsoitself
 creasing the correlation between bytes within the blocks. Although the
 appears random, there are still some abstract representations that can be learned by neu- ciphertext itself
 appears random,
 ral networks, there
 such are still
 as the some abstract
 frequency representations
 of occurrence of certainthat canand
 bytes be learned by neural
 the relationships
 networks, such asbytes.
 between specific the frequency
 Therefore,ofwe occurrence bytes and
 of certainBERT’s
 directly introduce the relationships
 original pretraining task, be-
 MLM, specific
 tween bytes.the
 and improve Therefore, we directly
 original NSP methodintroduce
 to adapt to BERT’s original representations
 pretraining task,
 the byte-level of
 the encrypted traffic.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 8 of 21

 The model’s core structure is a BERT base [18], consisting of 12 Transformer [29]
 Encoder modules. Each Encoder’s input and output vectors correspond one to one and
 maintain consistent dimensions. Within each Encoder module, there are two sequential
 sub-layers: the first is a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second is an FNN.
 Both sub-layers employ residual connections followed by layer normalization.
 To learn the contextual relationships of token embeddings, the MLM task randomly
 masks part of the input tokens, and the output hidden layer vectors corresponding to the
 masked tokens are computed in a fully connected layer to predict the actual tokens. A total
 of 15% of the tokens in the input sequence are masked, with 80% replaced by [MASK], 10%
 replaced by random tokens, and 10% unchanged. The negative log-likelihood function is
 used as the loss function for this task, as shown in Equation (1):

 M
 L MLM (θ, θ MLM ) = − ∑ log P(tokeni |θ, θ MLM ) . (1)
 i =1

 In this equation, θ denotes the parameter of the Encoder part, θ MLM is the parameter
 of the fully connected layer of the MLM task, M is the number of randomly masked tokens,
 and tokeni represents the token predicted by the model at position i of the sequence.
 The mNSP task learns the matching relationship of payload by determining whether
 two sub-sequences belong to the same packet. Unlike natural language, encrypted traffic
 payloads are continuous byte streams without clear sentence demarcation or independent
 meaning, so it is not feasible to divide them using punctuation as in natural language.
 However, encrypted payloads from different plaintext have distinct ciphertext feature
 distributions, allowing for us to determine whether two sub-sequences belong to the same
 payload. In this task, payloads are divided into two nearly equal-length sub-sequences,
 each ending with [SEP] to mark the end of the sub-sequence. The second sub-sequence
 is replaced with another packet’s sub-sequence in 50% of cases. The complete input byte
 sequence consists of [CLS] at the beginning followed by the two sub-sequences. The
 output hidden layer vector corresponding to [CLS] is passed through a binary classifier to
 determine whether the sub-sequences belong to the same packet. This classifier comprises
 two fully connected layers. The negative log-likelihood function is used as the loss function
 for this task, as indicated in Equation (2):

 N
 LmNSP (θ, θmNSP ) = − ∑ log P(y j θ, θmNSP ) . (2)
 j=1

 In this equation, θmNSP is the binary classifier parameter followed by Encoder, N
 is the number of input sequences, y j ∈ [0, 1] is the output result of the binary classifier
 (1 represents paired sub-sequences and 0 represents unpaired ones).
 The sum of the loss functions from both tasks is used to calculate the model loss for
 gradient updates, as shown in Equation (3):

 L(θ, θ MLM , θmNSP ) = L MLM (θ, θ MLM ) + LmNSP (θ, θmNSP ). (3)

 3.4. Fine-Tuning
 During the fine-tuning phase, the model is trained on small-scale labeled datasets
 for given tasks to learn task-specific representations. Adjusting all parameters in a pretrained model enables quick adaptation to downstream tasks. However, full parameter
 fine-tuning in a pre-trained model demands high computational and memory resources.
 As the model size and number of tasks increase, training and storing a new model for each
 task exacerbates the issue of inefficient parameter use.
 The PEFT method, particularly LoRA [20], effectively mitigates this problem. We
 apply LoRA’s parallel matrix approach to the encrypted traffic classification model to
 The PEFT method, particularly LoRA [20], effectively mitigates this problem. We apply LoRA’s parallel matrix approach to the encrypted traffic classification model to conserve computational parameters. The advancement of LoRA over other PEFT methods in
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078
 encrypted traffic classification is shown in Section 4.6.
 9 of 21
 LoRA involves inserting matrices parallel to the pre-trained model matrices while
 freezing the pre-trained model. This allows for the model to maintain new small-scale
 parameter matrices for downstream tasks. Unlike classic fine-tuning methods, the model
 conserve computational parameters. The advancement of LoRA over other PEFT methods
 can switch PEFT
 in encrypted trafficmodule parameters
 classification is shown as in Sectionfor
 needed 4.6.different traffic classification tasks
 without replacing the entire model’s
 LoRA involves inserting matrices parallel to theenhancing
 parameters, pre-trained parameter
 model matrices whileeffiutilization
 ciency
 freezing andthereducing deployment
 pre-trained model. This and allowsswitching for thecosts for multi-task
 model to maintain models. Compared to
 new small-scale
 other PEFTmatrices
 parameter methods, for LoRA
 downstreammodules tasks. compute in parallel
 Unlike classic with the
 fine-tuning pre-trained
 methods, model,
 the model
 avoiding
 can switch computational
 thePEFT bottlenecks
 module parameters as and inference
 needed of newclassification
 delays traffic
 for different serial modules.tasks
 LoRA
 without updates
 replacing theonly the
 entire query parameters,
 model’s and value projection
 enhancing weight parametermatrix of each
 utilization Encoder’s
 efficiency
 and reducing
 multi-head layer and
 deployment
 attention andswitching
 the final fully costsconnected
 for multi-task models.
 classifier layer.Compared to other
 Specifically, lever-
 PEFT the
 aging methods, LoRA modules
 low “intrinsic rank” of compute in parallel with
 over-parametrized the pre-trained
 models model, avoiding
 [20], it employs the product
 the
 of twocomputational bottlenecks
 low-rank matrices and inference
 to replace the original delays matrixof new forserial modules.
 gradient updates during back-
 LoRA updates only the query
 propagation, as demonstrated in Equation (4). and value projection weight matrix of each Encoder’s
 multi-head attention layer and the final fully connected classifier layer. Specifically, leveraging the low “intrinsic rank” of over-parametrized models[20], it employs the product of
 h = W (i ) x + ΔWx = W ( i ) x + BAx . (4)
 two low-rank matrices to replace the original matrix for gradient r updates during backpropagation, as demonstrated in Equation (4).
 d k
 In this equation, W 
 (i )
 represents the projection weight matrix of layer i
 (i ) (i ) α
 with rank r ( r  d , k ) selected, the product
 h = W x + ∆Wx = W x + BAx.A  r k , B  d r is used
 of matrices (4) to
 r
 (i )
 replace the updated weight matrix ΔW of W , x is the input vector, h is the output
 In this equation, W(i) ∈ Rd×k represents the projection weight matrix of layer i with
 vector, and  is the deflation parameter of the updatedr×weight matrix. We use a random
 rank r (r << d, k) selected, the product of matrices A ∈ R k , B ∈ Rd×r is used to replace
 (i )
 Gaussian
 the updated initialization for each
 weight matrix ∆W element
 of W , xofis the
 ( i ) A andinput zero for Bh. isWthe output
 vector, is kept vector,
 frozen and
 during
 the deflation
 α istraining
 the parameter
 process, of the updated
 and gradients are computed weightand matrix.
 updatedWe use
 for aArandom
 , B . Gaussian
 Drawingfor
 initialization oneach element of A and
 the computational ideas zeroof B. W(iwe
 forLoRA, ) is kept frozen during the training
 introduce this computational approcess,into
 proach andour model.are
 gradients computed
 Figure and updated
 3 illustrates for A, B.
 the computational operation for a single Encoder. Drawing on the computational ideas of LoRA, we introduce this computational approach into our model. Figure 3 illustrates the computational operation for a single Encoder.

 Output y0 y1 y2 ... yN

 Initialization A = N (0, σ2)
 B=0
 Add & Norm
 Frozen

 Feed Forward
 Frozen

 Add & Norm
 Transformer Frozen
 Encoder
 B d×r
 Multi-Head Attention W(i)d×k
 Frozen A r×k
 Frozen
 Parameters Trainable Parameters

 Q K V
 Frozen

 Input x0 x1 x2 ... xN

 Figure 3. Fine-tuning computational diagram.
 Figure 3. Fine-tuning computational diagram.
 As for the fully connected classifiers, the classic LoRA method preserves the first
 fully connected layer parameter of the pre-trained model’s NSP task classifier and allows
 for only the second fully connected layer parameter to undergo gradient updating due
 to the consideration of the relevance of the NLP fine-tuning task to the pre-training task.
 However, because of the distinct association manner of encrypted traffic payloads compared
 to natural language sentences, continuing to use the first fully connected layer might not
 effectively synthesize feature information. Since the association between encrypted traffic
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 10 of 21

 payloads and natural language sentences differs, and different encryption algorithms
 encrypt traffic with varying byte-level features, to accommodate these differences and
 improve the model’s effectiveness, we design both fully connected layers of the classifier
 subjected to gradient updates.
 The loss function for the fine-tuning stage is formulated as shown in Equation (5).

 k
 L(θ A,B , θcls ) = − ∑ log P( predicti |θ, θ A,B , θcls ) . (5)
 i =1

 Here, θA, B represent the parameters of all A and B, θcls is the classifier, θ is the
 frozen parameters from the pre-trained model, k is the batch, and predicti is the classifier’s
 prediction label.

 4. Experiments
 This section validates the advanced performance of the PETReLM from multiple
 perspectives. We first introduce the datasets, experimental setup, and evaluation metrics
 used in our experiments, then present the classification results of the model on these
 datasets, and follow by ablation studies to prove the effectiveness of each module.

 4.1. Datasets
 For model pre-training and fine-tuning, we utilize various public encrypted traffic
 datasets, each with its specific characteristics:
 Browser2020 [4]: This dataset comprises traffic generated by accessing the top 1000 websites on Alexa using four different browsers: Google, Firefox, Samsung Internet, and UC.
 Each website visit lasts for 15 s, with scripts simulating random clicks and browsing behavior.
 CIC-IDS 2017 [34]: A network attack traffic dataset containing benign and malicious
 traffic based on protocols like HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, and SSH. The traffic is segmented into
 different time periods, each producing various types of traffic.
 ISCXTor2017 [35]: A dataset focusing on The Onion Routing (Tor) traffic which includes eight different types of Tor traffic collected using onion routing.
 ISCXVPN2016 [36]: A Virtual Private Network (VPN) traffic dataset that gathers traffic
 generated by different types of applications under conditions of using or not using a VPN,
 simulated between two hosts. This dataset is one of the most commonly used datasets
 currently. The dataset categorizes encrypted applications into 17 classes and encrypted
 services into 12 classes.
 USTC-TFC2016 [37]: This dataset comprises malicious traffic collected in a real network
 environment alongside normal traffic.
 CIC IoT Dataset 2023 [38]: This dataset contains IoT attack traffic collected from a
 topology consisting of 105 IoT devices. It includes both normal IoT traffic and network
 attack traffic generated by 33 types of malicious IoT devices.
 The granularity of encrypted traffic classification mainly includes a packet level and a
 session level. Encrypted traffic sessions contain more information than individual packets.
 However, it is challenging to obtain datasets with sufficient diversity and undisputed
 ground truth [19]. Labeled encrypted traffic datasets may suffer from class sample imbalances, with limited samples collected for certain categories under constrained conditions.
 For instance, in the ISCXVPN2016 dataset (see Table 2), the AIM and ICQ categories each
 contain only 49 and 45 valid sessions, respectively (we consider a session to be valid if it
 contains more than 4 packets). The limited samples may hinder deep learning models from
 effectively learning sample representations. Therefore, we confine our study to packet-level
 representation learning. We validate that valuable information about traffic can still be
 obtained from packets. Additionally, packet-level traffic classification can alleviate the
 problem of insufficiently labeled training samples.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 11 of 21

 Table 2. Description of fine-tuning datasets.

 Dataset Task Classes Classification Basis Specific Categories
 ISCXTor2017 [35] ISCXT8 8 Tor Service Audio, Browsing, Chat, FTP, Mail, P2P, Video, VoIP
 VPN: Email, Chat, Stream, File transfer, VoIP, P2P; Non-VPN:
 ISCXS12 12 VPN Service
 ISCXVPN2016 [36] Email, Chat, Stream, File transfer, VoIP, P2P
 AIM, Email, Facebook, FTP, Gmail, Hangouts, ICQ, Netflix, P2P,
 ISCXA17 17 VPN Application
 SCP, SFTP, Skype, Spotify, tor, Vimeo, Voipbuster, Youtube
 Benign: BitTorrent, Facetime, FTP, Gmail, MySQL, Outlook,
 USTC-TFC2016 [37] USTC20 20 Malware Skype, SMB, Weibo, World of Warcraft; Malware: Cridex,
 Geodo, Htbot, Miuref, Neris, Nsis-ay, Shifu, Tinba, Virut, Zeus
 DDoS: ACK Fragmentation, HTTP Flood, ICMP Flood, ICMP
 Fragmentation, PSHACK Flood, RSTFIN Flood, SlowLoris,
 SynonymousIP Flood, SYN Flood, TCP Flood, UDP Flood, UDP
 Fragmentation; Brute Force: Dictionary Brute Force; Spoofing:
 CIC IoT Dataset 2023 ARP Spoofing, DNS Spoofing; DoS: HTTP Flood, SYN Flood,
 CICIoT33 33 IoT Cyberattack
 [38] TCP Flood, UDP Flood; Recon: Host Discovery, OS Scan, Ping
 Sweep, Port Scan, Vulnerability Scan; Web Based: Backdoor
 Malware, Browser Hijacking, Command Injection, SQL
 Injection, Uploading Attack, XSS; Mirai: Greeth Flood, GREIP
 flood, UDPPlain

 For pre-training, we use benign traffic from Browser, CIC-IDS 2017, and the CIC
 IoT Dataset 2023 as the pre-training dataset. This dataset comprises 955,000 unlabeled
 traffic data, totaling 11.3 GB. For fine-tuning, we use datasets as shown in Table 2. It is
 worth mentioning that our datasets encompass a wide range of protocols such as QUIC.
 By selecting datasets that cover a variety of protocols, we aim to enable the model to learn
 more general and effective representations. We select datasets from various classification
 scenarios to validate the model’s performance. ISCXT8, ISCXS12, and ISCXA17 simulate
 traffic classification in network management scenarios, while USTC20 and CICIoT33 simulate malicious traffic classification in network security scenarios. Our experiment ensures
 the orthogonality between the pre-trained and fine-tuned datasets, simulating the scenario
 where the model learns representations of encrypted traffic it has never seen before.
 We select 5000 samples from each category in the fine-tuning dataset with a ratio of
 8:1:1 for the training, validation, and test sets, respectively.

 4.2. Experimental Settings
 The experiments are conducted using the NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU, with Python
 version 3.10.12, CUDA version 11.7, and PyTorch version 1.13.0.
 In BERT-base, each multi-head self-attention sublayer within the Encoders contains
 12 attention heads. The dimension of the embedding vectors is set to 768, and the maximum
 length for input vector sequences is 512.
 During the model’s pre-training phase, the batch size is set to 32, with a total step
 count of 500,000 and a learning rate of 2 × 10−5 . For the fine-tuning phase, the batch size
 remains at 32, and the learning rate is adjusted to 8 × 10−4 . We consistently use AdamW as
 the optimization tool. The deflation parameter of the updated weight matrix is set to 32,
 and the rank for the weight update matrix is set to 4. The fine-tuning process is conducted
 over 10 epochs.
 By comparing the distribution of network layer payload lengths in each fine-tuning
 dataset, we determine the specific truncation length. Figure 4 illustrates the distribution
 of network layer payload lengths for the four fine-tuning datasets. We observe that the
 payload distribution of the datasets mostly falls below 300 bytes, with some datasets
 having a proportion of over 1000 bytes. As shown in Figure 2, since most byte pairs are
 converted into one token and a byte appears in two adjacent byte pairs, it is reasonable to
 approximate one byte as one token. If a larger value is chosen for the input token length, a
 ing a proportion of over 1000 bytes. As shown in Figure 2, since most byte
 verted into one token and a byte appears in two adjacent byte pairs, it is
 approximate one byte as one token. If a larger value is chosen for the input
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078
 a high proportion of samples requires padding with [PAD].12 Conversel of 21

 smaller value compromises the model’s ability to learn representations of t
 layer
 high payload.
 proportion requires the
 Considering
 of samples overall
 padding with distribution of dataset
 [PAD]. Conversely, selecting apayloads
 smaller and
 value
 of thecompromises
 pre-trained model’s ability
 the model, we opt to learn representations
 to use 512 tokensofof application
 thethe payload layer
 as the m
 payload. Considering the overall distribution of dataset payloads and the generality of the
 length for pre-training. With TCP packets having a fixed header of 20 b
 pre-trained model, we opt to use 512 tokens of the payload as the maximum input length
 packets
 for having
 pre-training. With 8-byte
 anTCP header,
 packets fixedchoice
 having athis header ensures
 of 20 bytesthe
 and retention
 UDP packets of comp
 having an 8-byte header, this choice ensures the retention of complete
 layer header information and most of the application layer encrypted paylo transport layer
 header information and most of the application layer encrypted payload while mitigating
 igating the impact of excessive [PAD] on model classification results.
 the impact of excessive [PAD] on model classification results.

 Figure 4. The network layer load length distribution of fine-tunning datasets.
 Figure 4. The network layer load length distribution of fine-tunning datasets.
 4.3. Evaluation Metrics
 Evaluation
 4.3.We use classicMetrics
 metrics to evaluate model performance, including Accuracy (Acc),
 Precision (Pre), Recall (Rec), and F1-Score (F1). For binary classification problems, the
 use
 Weare
 equations follows: metrics to evaluate model performance, including Accur
 as classic
 cision (Pre), Recall (Rec), and F1-Score TP + TN(F1). For binary classification proble
 Acc = (6)
 tions are as follows: TP + FP + FN + TN
 TP
 Pre =
 TP + FPTP + TN (7)
 Acc =
 TP TP + FP + FN + TN
 Rec = (8)
 TP + FN
 Precision × Recall
 F1 = 2 × TP (9)
 Precision +Pre =
 Recall
 TP is+ true
 where TP represents true positives, FP is false positives, TN FP negatives, and FN
 is false negatives. In multi-classification scenarios, we adopt the Macro Average [39]
 method to calculate Precision, Recall, and F1-Score. It involves calculating these metrics for
 TP
 each category and then averaging the results. The Rec = metric is not affected by the
 accuracy
 multi-class nature of the problem. TP + FN
 4.4. Performance Analysis
 Precision  Recall
 PETReLM’s performance is compared against 
 F1 = 2baseline models based on deep learning
 including 1D-CNN [11], Deep Packet [10], PERT [13], and Preci sion + [14].
 ET-BERT Recal l motivation
 The
 for selecting these baseline models is that they represent typical deep learning methods
 wheretoTP
 applied traffic true
 represents
 encrypted positives,
 classification. FP is against
 Comparing false positives, TN
 these baseline is true
 can negati
 models
 objectively demonstrate the performance of our model. These models are
 false negatives. In multi-classification scenarios, we adopt the Macro Averagreplicated with
 their original structure and parameters, and their performance (in terms of Acc, F1) is
 to calculate
 compared Precision,
 with our Recall,
 model across variousand F1-Score.
 datasets, It in
 as shown Table 3. calculating these m
 involves
 category and then averaging the results. The accuracy metric is not affected
 class nature of the problem.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 13 of 21

 Table 3. Comparative experiment results of different methods.

 ISCXT8 ISCXS12 ISCXA17 USTC20 CICIoT33
 Model
 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc F1
 1D-CNN [11] 0.9704 0.9709 0.9149 0.9147 0.9265 0.9181 0.7738 0.7508 0.7280 0.7307
 Deep Packet [10] 0.9722 0.9727 0.9169 0.9153 0.9154 0.9073 0.7911 0.7659 0.6987 0.7029
 PERT [13] 0.9995 0.9995 0.9705 0.9706 0.9816 0.9782 0.9875 0.9876 0.8419 0.8400
 ET-BERT [14] 0.9998 0.9997 0.9785 0.9786 0.9911 0.9893 0.9940 0.9940 0.8065 0.8094
 PETReLM 0.9998 0.9997 0.9685 0.9686 0.9867 0.9830 0.9881 0.9881 0.8234 0.8247

 Based on the experimental results, we observe that individual packets indeed contain
 sufficient representations for distinguishing between traffic categories. Most methods are
 effective in accurately classifying designed scenarios based on packet representations. Furthermore, convolutional deep learning methods (1D-CNN, Deep Packet) exhibit unstable
 performance: they show significant discrepancies in performance on USTC20 and CICIoT33
 datasets. There are two main reasons: (a) Convolutional neural networks have a relatively
 narrow low-level field of view. Convolutions capture relationships between nearby bytes,
 while distant relationships can only be learned at higher layers. Therefore, the overall byte
 relationship extraction capability of convolutional methods may be lacking, resulting in
 inferior representation extraction performance on complex datasets. (b) Convolutional
 neural networks lack prior knowledge of encrypted traffic. Un-pretrained convolutional
 methods cannot acquire universal representations of traffic and only learn proprietary
 representations in limited datasets. The lack of incremental learning may also lead to
 subpar performance.
 In contrast, the excellent performance of pretraining-based methods highlights the
 strong appeal of deep learning frameworks for encrypted traffic classification. Pretraining
 models with large-scale parameters and architectures conducive for learning long sequences
 are more suitable for encrypted traffic classification tasks. Specifically, ET-BERT and PERT
 have similar structures and training methods. PERT uses the ALBERT architecture to
 share all parameters between layers, resulting in performance fluctuations observed in the
 ISCXA17 dataset. ET-BERT’s performance declines on the CICIoT33 dataset. Overall, the
 PETReLM demonstrates more balanced performance across different application scenarios,
 and it also performs similarly to the best baseline models.
 At the same time, we identify potential limitations in our approach. From the classification results, we observe that the effectiveness of classifying IoT attack scenarios is
 notably lower compared to other scenarios. As illustrated in Figure 5, the PETReLM classification heatmap reveals that the model nearly classifies all DoS SYN Flood traffic as
 DDoS SYN Flood. This discrepancy arises because the primary difference between the
 two attacks lies in the flood attack originating from multiple or fewer source hosts, which
 may not be clearly evident at the level of individual packets. Similar issues are observed
 with Command Injection, Uploading Attacks, and XSS, where all attacks involve similar
 data transmission methods such as Web requests, and their application layer payloads
 may also be comparable. These challenges extend to other confused categories, where the
 representations of these categories within a single packet are similar, making them difficult
 to distinguish. In summary, we find that the limitations of this approach may arise in
 scenarios where the representation of individual packet is not sufficiently clear, and relying
 solely on packet-level information may not effectively classify data accurately.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 arise in scenarios where the representation of individual packet14 ofis21not suﬃ
 and relying solely on packet-level information may not eﬀectively classify d

 Figure
 Figure 5. Classification heatmap
 5. Classification of IoT attack.
 heatmap of IoT attack.
 4.5. Resource Usage Analysis
 Resource
 4.5. To resourceAnalysis
 compare Usage usage, we take the USTC20 task as an example. We compare the
 parameter scales of all baseline methods and also examine the GPU usage of pre-training
 models.
 To compare resource usage, we take the USTC20 task as an example. W
 parameter scales
 Table 4 reveals thatofsettings
 all baseline methods and
 of convolution-based alsoaffect
 methods examine the GPU
 the parameter scale,usage o
 with an average magnitude of around 10 5 . Pre-training methods have parameters scaled
 models.
 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than convolutional methods. PERT reduces the parameter
 Table 4 reveals that settings of convolution-based methods aﬀect the pa
 scale by sharing parameters between layers, but fluctuates in performance. The PETReLM
 with an
 reduces parametermagnitude
 theaverage of around
 scale by inserting 10modules
 additional 5. Pre-training methods have para
 while maintaining stable
 performance.
 1-2 orders of PETReLM’s
 magnitude parameter
 higherscale
 thanaccounts for only 5.6% methods.
 convolutional and 21.0% ofPERT
 ET-BERT reduces
 and PERT, respectively, and is in the same order of magnitude as small-scale convolutional
 scale by sharing parameters between layers, but fluctuates in performance. T
 models. The PETReLM utilizes the least GPU memory among pretrained models because
 a smallthe
 reduces
 only parameter
 fraction of parameters scale by gradient
 accepts inserting additional
 updates, reducing GPUmodules
 resource while
 usage main
 for storing gradients. Updating only a small fraction of parameters
 performance. PETReLM’s parameter scale accounts for only 5.6% and 21.0 also accelerates model
 computation speed, reducing training time by 16.68% compared to ET-BERT. The PETReLM
 and PERT, respectively, and is in the same order of magnitude a
 is more suitable for multitask applications, as conventional methods require storing all
 parameters models.
 convolutional
 model for each task,Thewhile
 PETReLM
 the PETReLM only the
 utilizes needsleast GPU
 to store the memory
 inserted amo
 modelstobecause
 modules only a small
 preserve task-specific fraction
 feature of capabilities.
 extraction parametersWhen accepts gradient upd
 task switching
 is needed, the PETReLM can quickly switch between different task scenarios by only
 GPU resource usage for storing gradients. Updating only a small fraction
 switching small modules.
 also accelerates model computation speed, reducing training time by 16.68%
 ET-BERT. The PETReLM is more suitable for multitask applications, as
 methods require storing all model parameters for each task, while the P
 needs to store the inserted modules to preserve task-specific featu
 capabilities. When task switching is needed, the PETReLM can quickly sw
 diﬀerent task scenarios by only switching small modules.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 15 of 21

 Table 4. Parameter scales of different methods.

 Trainable Parameters Pretraining Parameters Percentage (%) GPU (GB)
 1D-CNN [11] 5.7 × 106 - - -
 Deep Packet [10] 10.1 × 106 - - -
 PERT [13] 36.7 × 106 36.7 × 106 100 24.8
 ET-BERT [14] 136.3 × 106 136.3 × 106 100 23.3
 PETReLM 7.7 × 106 136.3 × 106 5.6 19.3

 Overall, the PETReLM ensures that the model’s complexity is sufficient to learn the
 basic representations of encrypted traffic while significantly reducing the required training
 resources. It facilitates rapid task switching in multitask scenarios while maintaining
 classification performance comparable to that of state-of-art models.

 4.6. Ablation Analysis
 To validate the effectiveness of our fine-tuning approach, we conduct ablation experiments focusing on two aspects:
 (1) Suitability of the modified LoRA for fine-tuning pre-trained models in encrypted traffic classification. We compare it with other traditional PEFT methods like Adapter [22],
 Prefix Tuning [21], P-Tuning [25], and IA3 [24].
 (2) Applicability of using two fully connected layers as a classifier for encrypted traffic
 classification. We compare two approaches: (i) Using a classifier composed of two
 fully connected layers, where the first layer parameters from the mNSP task are
 preserved and the second layer is subject to gradient updates (mNSP1 + FC2); (ii)
 Using a classifier composed solely of one fully connected layer, which reduces the
 input dimension to the classification dimension (FC1).
 The experiments are conducted on the USTC20 dataset, and the results are presented
 in Table 5.

 Table 5. Comparison of ablation results.

 Method Acc Pre Rec F1
 Adapter 0.9839 0.9842 0.9839 0.9839
 Prefix Tuning 0.9706 0.9713 0.9706 0.9702
 P-Tuning 0.8734 0.8816 0.8734 0.8722
 IA3 0.9698 0.9703 0.9698 0.9695
 mNSP1 + FC2 0.9824 0.9824 0.9824 0.9817
 FC1 0.9861 0.9863 0.9861 0.9862
 PETReLM 0.9878 0.9888 0.9878 0.9877

 The findings indicate that compared to other PEFT methods and classifier configurations, our model achieves superior results in encrypted traffic classification tasks. The
 Adapter method is similar to the PETReLM in that both insert modules that function
 to downscale and then upscale the input vectors to the output. The main difference is
 that Adapter inserts serial parameter modules between layers while the PETReLM inserts
 parallel parameter modules in the layers. IA3 reduces trainable parameters through vectorscaled activation. Prefix Tuning and P-Tuning construct prompts to minimize fine-tuning
 parameters. The PETReLM shows improvement in F1-Score compared to these methods.
 When comparing different classifier configurations, performance slightly drops with both
 the original classifier and the use of a single fully connected layer as a classifier. Notably,
 even with a 75% reduction in trainable parameter volume when using only one fully
 connected layer, the performance exhibits only minor fluctuations. Therefore, employing
 a single fully connected layer as a classifier also emerges as a balanced choice between
 performance and resource utilization.
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 16 of 21

 5. Interpretability Analysis
 This section analyzes the model’s matrix parameters using singular value decomposition, comparing the changes between pre-trained and fine-tuned model parameters
 to explain the mechanism of learning traffic representations. We use the original pretrained model, the fully fine-tuned model, and the PETReLM for interpretability analysis,
 aiming to explain the underlying learning mechanisms of the full fine-tuning and PEFT
 methods by analyzing the correlations between model parameters in the pre-training and
 fine-tuning phases.

 5.1. Singular Value Analysis
 The magnitude of the singular value corresponds to the importance of the left and
 right singular vectors in a matrix. A large singular value indicates primary structures and
 directions represented by their associated vectors. Singular values and singular vectors are
 primarily used for interpretability analysis. In this section, we take the ISCXA17 task as
 (i ) (i ) (i )
 an example, and set W p , W f , and Wm to represent the query projection matrices of the
 multi-head self-attention mechanism of the Encoder at layer i of the pre-trained model (p),
 the fully fine-tuned model (f ), and the PETReLM (m), respectively. We merge PETReLM’s
 parallel module with the pre-trained model to align the model sizes. The singular value
 (i )
 decomposition of matrix W p is as shown in Equation (10):

 (i ) (i ) (i ) (i ) T
 W p = U p Σ p (V p ) . (10)

 (i,j) (i )
 Setting the diagonal element σp represents the jth singular value of Σ p . We define
 the magnification factor of the fine-tuned matrix’s jth singular value as the ratio of the jth
 singular value of the fine-tuned matrix to the jth singular value of the pre-trained matrix.
 For instance, the calculation formula of the jth singular value magnification factor for the
 fully fine-tuned model is shown in (11):

 (i,j)
 
 (i ) (i )
  σf
 f W f , Wp , j = (i,j)
 . (11)
 σp

 (i )
 Figure 6a displays the jth singular value of W p for different values of i and j (represented as p-i in the figure), while Figure 6b shows the magnification factors (represented as
 (i ) (i )
 f -i, P-i in the figure) for W f and Wm . For brevity, only the first 10 singular values of the
 odd-numbered layers are shown in the figures.
 It can be observed that the singular values of the fully fine-tuned model and the pretrained model are closely aligned, increasing with layer number i, but they are generally
 small in value. PETReLM significantly amplifies the first four singular values. Similar results
 are observed in the value projection matrix and other matrices of the fully fine-tuned model.
 Overall, the main features of the first layer query projection matrix of the pre-trained
 model and the fully fine-tuned model are not pronounced, while the main features, especially in the last two layers near the output, are more prominent. The PETReLM amplifies
 certain features of the original matrices to varying degrees. The magnification of singular
 values in lower layers by the PETReLM is significantly higher than in higher layers, indicating substantial changes made by the PETReLM to the pre-trained model. The extent of
 these changes is greater in extracting basic representations in lower layers compared to
 abstract representations in higher layers.
Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 21
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 17 of 21

 4 p-0 p-2 25 P-0 f-0
 3.5 p-4 p-6 P-2 f-2
 p-8 p-10

 Magnification factors
 20 P-4 f-4
 3
 P-6 f-6
 Singular values

 2.5 P-8 f-8
 15
 P-10 f-10
 2
 1.5 10

 1
 5
 0.5
 0 0
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 j-th Singular Value j-th Singular Value

 (a) (b)

 Figure6.6.Comparison
 Figure ofsingular
 Comparisonof singularvalues
 valuesbetween
 betweenpre-trained
 pre-trainedand fine-tunedmodels.
 andfine-tuned models.(a)(a)Pre-trained
 Pre-trained
 model singular values of different layers; (b) Magnification factors of different fine-tuned matrix’s
 model singular values of different layers; (b) Magnification factors of different fine-tuned matrix’s
 singular values.
 singular values.

 5.2.Subspace
 5.2. SimilarityAnalysis
 SubspaceSimilarity Analysis
 To
 To analyze the adjustments
 the adjustments made madeby thefine-tuned
 bythe fine-tuned model
 model to to
 thethe parameters
 parameters of the
 of the prepre-trained model, we compare the feature and structural similarity of matrices.
 trained model, we compare the feature and structural similarity of matrices. We measure We measure the similarity
 the similarity by comparing
 by comparing the overlap
 the overlap of the subspaces
 of the subspaces formed by formed byk ∈
 the first the[1,first
 784]
  [1,784]
 kright right
 singular singular
 vectors vectors
 of the query the query matrix
 ofprojection projection matrix
 in the in the first-layer
 Encoder ofEncoder
 first-layer the preoftrained the fine-tuned
 model andmodel
 the pre-trained model. The
 and the fine-tuned normalized
 model. matrix similarity
 The normalized [40] is used
 matrix similarity to
 [40]
 calculate the subspace similarity, as shown in (12):
 is used to calculate the subspace similarity, as shown in (12):

 ∑ σi2 i 2
 p p

 A), B=) = i=1i =1
 A,( B
 d (d m, n}.
 min{m,
 pp== min (12)
 (12)
 pp

 Here, A
 Here, A∈ Rl l ×
 mn
 and B
 and B ∈ Rl l ×
 nn
 representmatrices
 represent composedofofthe
 matricescomposed first mm and nnlthefirst
 ldimensional
 -dimensionalright singularvectors,
 rightsingular with σi ibeing
 respectively, with
 vectors, respectively, being theithi singular
 the th singular value
 valueof
 matrix AT B.T When the value of the normalized matrix similarity tends to one, it means
 of matrix A B . When the value of the normalized matrix similarity tends to one, it means
 that the subspaces formed by A, B have a high degree of overlap; equality to one means
 that the subspaces formed by A , B have a high degree of overlap; equality to one
 complete overlap; tendency to zero means low overlap; and equality to zero means no
 means complete overlap; tendency to zero means low overlap; and equality to zero means
 overlap at all.
 no overlap at all.
 Figure 7a,b shows the similarity of the subspaces formed by the first k right singular
 Figure
 vectors 7a,b shows
 of each layer ofthe thesimilarity
 pre-trained of the subspaces
 model formed
 with the fullyby the first kmodel
 fine-tuned rightand
 singuthe
 lar vectors of each
 PETReLM, respectively. layer of the pre-trained model with the fully fine-tuned model and the
 PETReLM, respectively.
 Each square in the figure represents the similarity of the subspace consisting of the
 Each square
 first k vectors of the in the The first 40the
 figure represents
 matrices. similarity
 singular of the
 vectors subspace
 already consisting
 illustrate of the
 the pattern
 first k vectors of the matrices. The first 40 singular vectors already
 well. The figure reveals that, apart from some fluctuations, the subspace similarity of the illustrate the pattern
 fully The
 well. figure reveals
 fine-tuned model withthat, the
 apart from somemodel
 pre-trained fluctuations,
 remainsthe at asubspace
 high level.similarity of the
 The subspace
 fully fine-tuned model with the pre-trained model remains at a high
 formed by the right singular vectors corresponding to the largest four singular values of the level. The subspace
 formed
 PETReLM the right
 by and singular vectors
 the pre-trained corresponding
 model barely overlap. to the largest
 However, as thefour singular number
 values of
 dimension of
 the PETReLM and the pre-trained model barely overlap. However,
 the subspace increases, the similarity rapidly grows, with most of the subspace formed byas the dimension numthe of
 ber first 25subspace
 the increases,
 singular values the similarity
 overlapping. Eachrapidly grows,
 layer shows samemost
 thewith trend.of Similar
 the subspace
 results
 formed by the first 25 singular values
 are observed for the left singular vectors. overlapping. Each layer shows the same trend. Similar results are observed for the left singular vectors.
Sensors 2024, 24, x FOR PEER REVIEW 1
 Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 18 of 21

 11 0.084 0.853 0.659 0.702 0.895 0.941 0.945 0.936 0.961 0.966 0.966 0.937 0.955 0.942 0.940 0.932

 10 0.084 0.561 0.828 0.784 0.892 0.902 0.909 0.932 0.963 0.952 0.974 0.950 0.957 0.941 0.927 0.932 0.875

 9 0.952 0.927 0.904 0.936 0.894 0.928 0.823 0.885 0.866 0.905 0.907 0.923 0.904 0.901 0.892 0.892

 8 0.963 0.931 0.937 0.921 0.895 0.920 0.922 0.834 0.910 0.915 0.860 0.906 0.892 0.884 0.901 0.875

 7 0.941 0.925 0.948 0.952 0.908 0.946 0.872 0.893 0.891 0.900 0.922 0.882 0.878 0.890 0.892 0.890 0.625
 Layer
 6 0.959 0.926 0.865 0.877 0.863 0.904 0.826 0.837 0.872 0.881 0.898 0.893 0.878 0.894 0.892 0.900

 5 0.928 0.507 0.734 0.875 0.908 0.921 0.815 0.846 0.844 0.889 0.923 0.923 0.909 0.905 0.892 0.903

 4 0.931 0.582 0.801 0.751 0.917 0.928 0.936 0.935 0.845 0.909 0.927 0.867 0.893 0.883 0.883 0.900 0.375

 3 0.904 0.929 0.669 0.835 0.911 0.902 0.883 0.907 0.917 0.914 0.899 0.891 0.899 0.882 0.883 0.890

 2 0.982 0.952 0.824 0.863 0.758 0.817 0.895 0.817 0.877 0.893 0.851 0.866 0.865 0.875 0.864 0.862

 1 0.992 0.977 0.924 0.843 0.902 0.926 0.858 0.927 0.864 0.863 0.905 0.870 0.856 0.857 0.856 0.867 0.125

 0 0.839 0.924 0.883 0.810 0.677 0.660 0.701 0.731 0.710 0.683 0.722 0.822 0.827 0.839 0.851 0.879

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

 The First k Right Singular Vectors
 (a)

 11 0.009 0.008 0.012 0.015 0.213 0.340 0.437 0.505 0.564 0.615 0.648 0.801 0.841 0.865 0.884 0.898

 10 0.000 0.001 0.006 0.008 0.207 0.337 0.432 0.503 0.562 0.604 0.640 0.801 0.840 0.866 0.884 0.897 0.875

 9 0.003 0.010 0.012 0.012 0.208 0.338 0.434 0.504 0.557 0.603 0637 0.798 0.838 0.864 0.881 0.895

 8 0.007 0.008 0.007 0.013 0.206 0.338 0.435 0.506 0.559 0.604 0.637 0.798 0.837 0.863 0.881 0.895

 7 0.000 0.003 0.007 0.010 0.206 0.340 0.437 0.507 0.562 0.605 0.638 0.800 0.838 0.864 0.883 0.895 0.625
 Layer

 6 0.000 0.007 0.015 0.042 0.206 0.343 0.438 0.510 0.563 0.602 0.640 0.798 0.838 0.863 0.882 0.895

 5 0.001 0.005 0.007 0.014 0.222 0.342 0.436 0.507 0.559 0.602 0.636 0.799 0.838 0.863 0.882 0.897

 4 0.000 0.006 0.017 0.022 0.210 0.340 0.432 0.504 0.557 0.602 0.639 0.799 0.837 0.864 0.883 0.896 0.375

 3 0.000 0.000 0.009 0.011 0.209 0.342 0.435 0.505 0.559 0.603 0.639 0.799 0.837 0.862 0.881 0.895

 2 0.000 0.000 0.007 0.012 0.211 0.343 0.437 0.506 0.562 0.603 0.638 0.798 0.837 0.861 0.883 0.894

 1 0.001 0.003 0.004 0.024 0.223 0.356 0.449 0.515 0.563 0.602 0.639 0.795 0.837 0.861 0.881 0.896 0.125

 0 0.003 0.002 0.006 0.009 0.207 0.339 0.431 0.503 0.553 0.597 0.635 0.797 0.833 0.858 0.876 0.892

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

 The First k Right Singular Vectors
 (b)
 Figure7.
 Figure Subspace similarity.
 7. Subspace (a) Subspace
 similarity. similarity
 (a) Subspace of the fully
 similarity fine-tuned
 of the model with the
 fully fine-tuned pre- with th
 model
 trained model; (b) Subspace similarity of the PETReLM with the pre-trained
 trained model; (b) Subspace similarity of the PETReLM with the pre-trained model. model.

 5.3. Summary of Interpretability Findings
 5.3. Summary Interpretability
 of the
 Combining Findings
 changes in singular values and the subspace similarity between model
 matrices, we observe
 Combining thethatchanges in and
 the structure featuresvalues
 singular and themodel’s
 of the pre-trained querysimilarity
 subspace projec- be
 tion matrices are balanced and smooth. The matrices in the lowest layer are the smoothest,
 model matrices, we observe that the structure and features of the pre-trained m
 while the structure and features of the matrices in the higher layers are relatively more
 query projection
 prominent, matrices
 with the are balanced
 middle layers and
 having fewer smooth.features.
 prominent The matrices in the lowest
 This characteristic is lay
 the smoothest, while the structure and features of the matrices in the higher laye
 relatively more prominent, with the middle layers having fewer prominent feature
 characteristic is more suitable for extracting general representations of traffic: the
 layers use smoother matrices to extract general byte representations of the payloa
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 19 of 21

 more suitable for extracting general representations of traffic: the lower layers use smoother
 matrices to extract general byte representations of the payload, the middle layers continually filter and process representations from byte representations to abstract features, and
 the higher layers use matrices with more pronounced features to extract abstract features.
 The fully fine-tuned model essentially maintains the structure and features of the pretrained model’s matrices, making only minor adjustments to the matrix structure. However,
 since full fine-tuning alters the parameters of each matrix in the model, it is challenging to
 observe the actual changes made by fine-tuning.
 The PETReLM, by updating a minimal number of matrix parameters instead of the
 full parameter set, allows for us to capture the subtle parameter changes at each layer,
 reflecting the fine-tuning adjustments made to the parameters of the pre-trained model. The
 PETReLM alters the model’s most crucial structure and features of the pre-trained model
 while maintaining the essential structure and features. Specifically, at the microscopic
 level, the matrix does not replicate the primary feature directions of the original matrix but
 instead amplifies directions not emphasized in the original matrix. The amplification is
 greater in the lower layers than in the higher layers. Macroscopically, this is reflected in
 the rapid increase in subspace similarity within a certain range as the value of k increases.
 Therefore, fine-tuning alters the overall feature extraction framework of the pre-trained
 model, thoroughly changing the primary feature extraction pattern at each layer. This
 includes more significant adjustments in the lower layers near the input for byte feature
 extraction and relatively minor macroscopic changes in the higher layers for abstract feature
 processing. This approach is more suitable for extracting specific traffic representations
 for a given classification task, with the lower layers filtering and retaining representation
 capabilities relevant to the given task and the higher layers focusing more on processing
 abstract features related to the task.

 6. Conclusions
 Motivated by the need to achieve encrypted traffic functional service classification under limited conditions, we propose the PEFT-based encrypted traffic classification method,
 the PETReLM. The method utilizes low-rank matrices instead of weight update matrices
 for parameter fine-tuning, enabling precise functional classification at the packet level for
 downstream tasks. We evaluate PETReLM’s generalization, robustness, and effectiveness
 across various network analysis and network security scenarios, including Tor service
 classification, VPN network service classification, VPN application classification, malware
 classification, and IoT attack traffic classification. When compared with existing methods,
 PETReLM maintains performance comparable to that of advanced models while reducing
 the trainable parameters by 99.44%, effectively saving computational and storage resources
 and reducing the deployment and switching costs of multi-task models. We explain the
 underlying principles and mathematical logic of how the PETReLM extracts features from
 the encrypted traffic, representing a novel attempt in encrypted traffic classification. We
 find that the PETReLM changes the characteristics of model parameters so that parameter
 hierarchy becomes distinct and the structure remains basically the same, which enhances
 the interpretability of the model.
 However, we also identify some limitations in our approach. Our method does not
 consistently outperform existing state-of-the-art models in experimental performance.
 Additionally, packet-level identification introduces inherent limitations to the classification
 model. In scenarios where packet-level representations are not sufficiently effective, the
 classification results may not be optimal. Therefore, designing a universal encrypted traffic
 classification model may be more suitable for benign network environments in the field of
 network application detection. For environments where malicious or deceptive traffic may
 exist, more targeted designs are needed.
 In the future, we hope to combine neural network model architectures with encrypted
 traffic algorithms to analyze the representation extraction mechanisms of encrypted traffic,
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 20 of 21

 further improving model classification effectiveness, and providing a more universally
 effective interpretative approach for encrypted traffic classification.

 Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.W. and Y.G.; methodology, G.W. and Y.G.; software,
 G.W.; validation, G.W.; formal analysis, G.W.; investigation, G.W.; resources, G.W.; data curation, G.W.;
 writing—original draft preparation, G.W.; writing—review and editing, G.W. and Y.G.; visualization,
 G.W.; supervision, Y.G.; project administration, Y.G.; funding acquisition, Y.G. All authors have read
 and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
 Funding: This research was funded by grant number 2023JC02 and the Fundamental Research Funds
 for the Central Universities, grant number 2023JKF01ZK14.
 Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
 Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
 Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
 Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1. Isingizwe, D.F.; Wang, M.; Liu, W.; Wang, D.; Wu, T.; Li, J. Analyzing Learning-Based Encrypted Malware Traffic Classification
 with AutoML. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE 21st International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), Tianjin,
 China, 13 October 2021; pp. 313–322. [CrossRef]
2. Lin, K.; Xu, X.; Gao, H. TSCRNN: A Novel Classification Scheme of Encrypted Traffic Based on Flow Spatiotemporal Features for
 Efficient Management of IIoT. Comput. Netw. 2021, 190, 107974. [CrossRef]
3. Papadogiannaki, E.; Ioannidis, S. A survey on encrypted network traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures.
 ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2021, 54, 123. [CrossRef]
4. Van Ede, T.; Bortolameotti, R.; Continella, A.; Ren, J.; Dubois, D.J.; Lindorfer, M.; Choffnes, D.; Van Steen, M.; Peter, A. FlowPrint:
 Semi-Supervised Mobile-App Fingerprinting on Encrypted Network Traffic. In Network and Distributed System Security Symposium;
 Internet Society: San Diego, CA, USA, 2020. [CrossRef]
5. Taylor, V.F.; Spolaor, R.; Conti, M.; Martinovic, I. Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2017, 13, 63–78. [CrossRef]
6. Conti, M.; Mancini, L.V.; Spolaor, R.; Verde, N.V. Analyzing Android Encrypted Network Traffic to Identify User Actions. IEEE
 Trans. Inform. Forensic Secur. 2016, 11, 114–125. [CrossRef]
7. Shen, M.; Wei, M.; Zhu, L.; Wang, M. Classification of Encrypted Traffic With Second-Order Markov Chains and Application
 Attribute Bigrams. IEEE Trans. Inform. Forensic Secur. 2017, 12, 1830–1843. [CrossRef]
8. Yu, T.; Zou, F.; Li, L.; Yi, P. An Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection System Based on Neural Network. In Proceedings of the
 2019 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Computing and Knowledge Discovery (CyberC), Guilin, China,
 17–19 October 2019; pp. 62–70. [CrossRef]
9. Shen, M.; Zhang, J.; Zhu, L.; Xu, K.; Du, X. Accurate Decentralized Application Identification via Encrypted Traffic Analysis
 Using Graph Neural Networks. IEEE Trans. Inform. Forensic Secur. 2021, 16, 2367–2380. [CrossRef]
10. Lotfollahi, M.; Jafari Siavoshani, M.; Shirali Hossein Zade, R.; Saberian, M. Deep Packet: A Novel Approach for Encrypted Traffic
 Classification Using Deep Learning. Soft Comput. 2020, 24, 1999–2012. [CrossRef]
11. Wang, W.; Zhu, M.; Wang, J.; Zeng, X.; Yang, Z. End-to-End Encrypted Traffic Classification with One-Dimensional Convolution
 Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), Beijing,
 China, 22–24 July 2017; pp. 43–48. [CrossRef]
12. Jiang, T.; Yin, W.; Cai, B.; Zhang, K. Encrypted malicious traffic identification based on hierarchical spatiotemporal feature and
 multi-head attention. Comput. Eng. 2021, 47, 101–108. [CrossRef]
13. He, H.; Yang, Z.; Chen, X. PERT: Payload Encoding Representation from Transformer for Encrypted Traffic Classification. In
 Proceedings of the 2020 ITU Kaleidoscope: Industry-Driven Digital Transformation (ITU K), Online, 7–11 December 2020; pp. 1–8.
 [CrossRef]
14. Lin, X.; Xiong, G.; Gou, G.; Li, Z.; Shi, J.; Yu, J. ET-BERT: A Contextualized Datagram Representation with Pre-Training
 Transformers for Encrypted Traffic Classification. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022, Lyon, France, 25–29 April
 2022; pp. 633–642. [CrossRef]
15. Aceto, G.; Ciuonzo, D.; Montieri, A.; Pescapè, A. DISTILLER: Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep
 learning. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2021, 183–184, 102985. [CrossRef]
16. Wang, P.; Chen, X.; Ye, F.; Sun, Z. A survey of techniques for mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning.
 IEEE Access 2019, 7, 54024–54033. [CrossRef]
17. Chen, Z.; Cheng, G.; Xu, Z. A survey on Internet encrypted traffic detection classification and identification. Chin. J. Comput. 2023,
 46, 1060–1085. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2024, 24, 3078 21 of 21

18. Devlin, J.; Chang, M.; Lee, K.; Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding.
 In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL),
 Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2–7 June 2019; pp. 4171–4186. [CrossRef]
19. Shen, M.; Ye, K.; Liu, X.; Zhu, L.; Kang, J.; Yu, S.; Li, Q.; Xu, K. Machine Learning-Powered Encrypted Network Traffic Analysis: A
 Comprehensive Survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2023, 25, 791–824. [CrossRef]
20. Hu, E.J.; Shen, Y.; Wallis, P.; Allen-Zhu, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, S.; Wang, L.; Chen, W. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
 models. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.09685.
21. Kang, P.; Yang, H.; Ma, H. TLS Malicious Encrypted Traffic Identification Research. J. Comput. Eng. Appl. 2022, 58, 11. [CrossRef]
22. Gehring, J.; Miao, Y.; Metze, F.; Waibel, A. Extracting Deep Bottleneck Features Using Stacked Auto-Encoders. In Proceedings of
 the 2013 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 26–31 May 2013; pp.
 3377–3381. [CrossRef]
23. Huang, Z.; Xu, W.; Yu, K. Bidirectional LSTM-CRF models for sequence tagging. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1508.01991.
24. Kim, Y. Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. arXiv 2014, arXiv:1408.5882.
25. Lan, Z.; Chen, M.; Goodman, S.; Gimpel, K.; Sharma, P.; Soricut, R. ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of
 Language Representations. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
26. Pfeiffer, J.; Kamath, A.; Rücklé, A.; Cho, K.; Gurevych, I. AdapterFusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer learning.
 arXiv 2020, arXiv:2005.00247.
27. Li, X.L.; Liang, P. Prefix-Tuning: Optimizing Continuous Prompts for Generation. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2101.00190.
28. Houlsby, N.; Giurgiu, A.; Jastrzebski, S.; Morrone, B.; de Laroussilhe, Q.; Gesmundo, A.; Attariyan, M.; Gelly, S. Parameter-efficient
 transfer learning for nlp. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), Long Beach, CA, USA,
 9–15 June 2019.
29. Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A.; Kaiser, L.; Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 30, 5998–6008.
30. Liu, H.; Tam, D.; Muqeeth, M.; Mohta, J.; Huang, T.; Bansal, M.; Raffel, C. Few-Shot Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning is Better and
 Cheaper than In-Context Learning. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS, New Orleans, LA, USA, 28 November–9 December 2022.
31. Liu, X.; Zheng, Y.; Du, Z.; Ding, M.; Qian, Y.; Yang, Z.; Tang, J. GPT understands, too. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2103.10385. [CrossRef]
32. Wu, Y.; Schuster, M.; Chen, Z.; Le, Q.V.; Norouzi, M.; Macherey, W.; Krikun, M.; Cao, Y.; Gao, Q.; Macherey, K.; et al. Google’sneural
 machine translation system: Bridging the Gap between human and machine translation. arXiv 2016, arXiv:1609.08144.
33. Doğanaksoy, A.; Ege, B.; Koc¸ak, O.; Sulak, F. Cryptographic randomness testing of block ciphers and hash functions. Cryptol.
 Eprint Arch. 2010. Available online: https://eprint.iacr.org/2010/564 (accessed on 14 April 2024).
34. Sharafaldin, I.; Habibi Lashkari, A.; Ghorbani, A.A. Toward Generating a New Intrusion Detection Dataset and Intrusion Traffic
 Characterization: In International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy; SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology
 Publications: Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, 2018; pp. 108–116. [CrossRef]
35. Lashkari, A.; Draper Gil, G.; Mamun, M.S.I.; Ghorbani, A.A. Characterization of Tor Traffic Using Time Based Features: In 3rd
 International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy; SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology Publications: Porto,
 Portugal, 2017; pp. 253–262. [CrossRef]
36. Draper-Gil, G.; Lashkari, A.H.; Mamun, M.S.I.; Ghorbani, A.A. Characterization of Encrypted and VPN Traffic Using Time-Related Features: In 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy; SCITEPRESS-Science and Technology Publications:
 Rome, Italy, 2016; pp. 407–414. [CrossRef]
37. Wang, W.; Zhu, M.; Zeng, X.; Ye, X.; Sheng, Y. Malware Traffic Classification Using Convolutional Neural Network for Representation Learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 11–13 January 2017; pp. 712–717. [CrossRef]
38. Neto, E.C.P.; Dadkhah, S.; Ferreira, R.; Zohourian, A.; Lu, R.; Ghorbani, A.A. CICIoT2023: A Real-Time Dataset and Benchmark
 for Large-Scale Attacks in IoT Environment. Sensors 2023, 23, 5941. [CrossRef]
39. Liu, C.; Wang, W.; Wang, M.; Lv, F.; Konan, M. An Efficient Instance Selection Algorithm to Reconstruct Training Set for Support
 Vector Machine. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2017, 116, 58–73. [CrossRef]
40. Hamm, J.; Lee, D.D. Grassmann discriminant analysis: A unifying view on subspace-based learning. In Proceedings of the 25th
 International Conference on Machine Learning, Helsinki, Finland, 5–9 July 2008; pp. 376–383. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.