anomaly extraction process not only considers the prediction error
 values, but also takes the length of detected anomaly sequences and
 the interchannel dependencies into account. A case study is given in

Multichannel Anomaly the experimental section to illustrate the use of the model on a real
 dataset. Also, the effectiveness of our method is evaluated on an Mars
 Reconnaissance Orbiter dataset with inserted known anomalies and
Detection for Spacecraft Time two public datasets: Secure Water Treatment and Water Distribution.

Series Using MAP Estimation
 I. INTRODUCTION
 There are thousands of sensors in a typical spacecraft
 for collecting various information about the state of the
TIANYU LI
 spacecraft [1], such as temperature, power consumption,
SRIRAM BAIREDDY
 and wheel speed. This information can be used to determine
MARY COMER , Member, IEEE
 the status of the spacecraft and help experts to understand
EDWARD DELP , Life Fellow, IEEE the reasons for a system failure. Usually, subject matter
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN USA
 experts utilize their domain-based knowledge to analyze
SUNDIP R. DESAI subsystem components during root cause analysis by in-
RICHARD H. FOSTER
 specting abnormal events from downlink telemetry [2].
MOSES W. CHAN , Member, IEEE
 However, massive amounts of time-series data are collected
Lockheed Martin Corporation, Palo Alto, CA USA
 every day, and it is extremely time-consuming to analyze all
 the data manually. Hence, a dependable automated anomaly
 detection algorithm is essential for reducing the burden on
 Automated anomaly detection in spacecraft telemetry systems domain experts.
is essential for analyzing abnormal events and system failures. A Due to the lack of labeled anomalous data, anomaly
widely adopted strategy is to predict the target time sequences using detection in time series is often realized in a semisupervised
a machine learning method first, then extract the anomalies from way. Such semisupervised anomaly detection approaches
the residuals between the target time sequences and the predicted
sequences by a thresholding method. Although thresholding-based
 can learn the normal and expected behavior of a telemetry
anomaly extraction is simple and fast, it fails to take advantage of cor- channel, so the anomalies can be identified by the deviarelations between anomaly sequences over time and across channels. tions from this behavior [3]. To learn the normal behavior
To make the process of anomaly extraction more flexible and more of a time series, there are mainly two kinds of models:
accurate, a statistical model referred as an anomaly marked point prediction-based learning models and reconstruction-based
process (Anomaly-MPP) is proposed in this article. This model treats
anomaly sequences as objects to be detected, making the anomaly
 learning models.
detection a classical object detection problem. Formulating this as A prediction-based model usually learns to predict the
an optimization problem, we find the maximum a posteriori estimate unknown data in the future from past known data. Traditionof the set of anomaly objects in a multichannel time-series dataset, ally, an autoregressive integrated moving average model [4]
modeling the prediction error sequences generated from the output has been a common choice for time series prediction. Howof a transformer with the proposed Anomaly-MPP for the posterior
distribution. The prior distribution can incorporate domain knowlever, it makes a stationarity assumption on the data that
edge and user-specified context into the problem formulation, thus may not be satisfied in a spacecraft system. Support vector
providing additional detection “power.” By including a length prior machines are also a potential choice for prediction [5],
energy term and a correlation prior energy term into the model, the [6], and their use in anomaly detection in time series has
 been demonstrated in [7]. The ability to learn long patterns
Manuscript received 19 March 2023; revised 20 February 2024 and 29 and contextual reasoning makes long short-term memorys
April 2024; accepted 1 May 2024. Date of publication 14 May 2024; date (LSTMs) [8], [9] a popular model for anomaly detection
of current version 11 October 2024.
 in time series [10], [11], [12]. They have also proven to be
DOI. No. 10.1109/TAES.2024.3400943 effective at adapting to new data via transfer learning [13].
Refereeing of this contribution was handled by Q. Zhu. Ahmad et al. [14] proposed the hierarchical temporary
 memory for online anomaly detection without labeled data.
This work was supported by Lockheed Martin Corporation.
 Baireddy et al. [15] applied extreme learning machines to
Authors’ addresses: Tianyu Li, Sriram Baireddy, Mary Comer, and Edward real-time anomaly detection. With the successful applica-
Delp are with Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 USA, E-mail: tion of transformers [16], [17] in natural language process-
(cosmos.yu9@gmail.com; sbairedd@gmail.com; comerm@purdue.edu;
ace@ecn.purdue.edu); Sundip R. Desai, Richard H. Foster, and Moses
 ing and time series forecasting [18], [19], their potential for
W. Chan are with Advanced Technology Center, Lockheed Martin Cor- anomaly detection has been demonstrated in [20] and [21].
poration, Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA, E-mail: (sundip.r.desai@lmco.com; To fully use the spatial and temporal information of
richard.h.foster@lmco.com; moses.w.chan@lmco.com). (Corresponding multichannel time series for predicting the unknown future
author: Edward Delp.) behavior, Tian et al. [22] proposed an anomaly detection
 network using spatial and temporal information, which
0018-9251 © 2024 IEEE models the relationship graph between variables for a graph
5842 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
attention network to capture the spatial dependency be- anomaly marked point process (Anomaly-MPP) to model
tween variables and utilizes an LSTM to mine the tem- the anomaly sequence objects in the target sequences. The
poral dependency of time series. Due to the usefulness of MPP objects in this case are the anomaly sequences. To fit
graphs in depicting objects and their relationships, several an anomaly object with the prediction error sequences, a
studies have utilized dynamic graphs [23], [24], [25] to data energy term is defined based on the contrast between
represent multivariate time series and their correlations the prediction errors in a region and those in its neighboring
over continuous time intervals. Examples include the mul- regions. Also, a length prior term is proposed to penalize
tivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph attention short anomaly sequence objects, which are likely to be
network proposed by Zhao et al. [23] and the multimodal noise. Moreover, a correlation prior term is proposed in
spatial–temporal graph attention network proposed by Ding our model, allowing us to identify an anomaly object with
et al. [25]. the information of detected anomaly objects in all other
 A reconstruction-based model represents the input data channels. Note that very short anomalies and single-channel
by some latent variables first, then reconstructs the input anomalies might still be detected as detection depends on
data from such latent variables. In [26], generative adversar- the complete posterior distribution.
ial networks [27] were proposed as a reconstruction model Considering the ability of a transformer to draw global
for anomaly detection. In [28], the OmniAnomaly detector dependencies between input and output through its attenis proposed to use a stochastic recurrent neural network to tion mechanism [16], we use a bidirectional transformerreconstruct the input data and determine anomalies accord- based predictor to learn the normal behavior from time
ing to the reconstruction probabilities. Given the capability series and generate the predicted sequences. For the task
of the variational autoencoder model (VAE) [29] to learn a of anomaly detection in multiple-channel time series, a
low-dimensional latent space representation of input time residual sequence is calculated by subtracting the prediction
series, Lin et al. [30] combined VAE with an LSTM model sequence from the target sequence for each channel. Then,
for input data reconstruction in anomaly detection. To fur- the proposed Anomaly-MPP model is used for the residual
ther learn the long-term dependence of time series data, sequences, and maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation is
Chen et al. [31] proposed an RT-Semi VAE, which combines used for anomaly extraction. Note that the novelty in this
transformer and VAE. article is in the modeling and optimization of the multi-
 No matter whether the learning model is prediction channel prediction error sequences, and although we use a
based or reconstruction based, for each target sequence, transformer in this work, the method proposed here could
it is necessary to generate a residual sequence by deduct- be used with other prediction/reconstruction approaches.
ing the prediction/reconstruction sequence from the target In summary, our work makes the following contribusequence. Then, an anomaly extraction algorithm will be tions.
applied to the residual sequences to identify the anomaly
sequences. In [10], the anomalies are extracted from the 1) We propose a novel statistical model Anomaly-MPP
prediction error sequences by a dynamic thresholding al- with MAP estimation for anomaly extraction in mulgorithm. In our previous work [2], instead of extracting the tichannel time series.
anomalies from the prediction error sequence directly, we 2) We introduce the length prior energy term and the
model the distribution of error values by kernel density es- correlation prior energy term into our model to
timation [32] and convert the error sequence to a likelihood suppress short anomaly objects and establish relavalue sequence based on the error distribution first, then tionships among anomaly objects across different
extract the anomalies from the likelihood value sequence channels, which is essential for anomaly detection
by a dynamic thresholding method. A peaks-over-threshold in spacecraft time series.
(POT) model [33] is another choice for anomaly extrac- 3) Extensive experiments show the flexibility and eftion from prediction error sequences, having been applied fectiveness of our approach, outperforming the comin [21], [23], [28], and [34]. monly used thresholding-based methods.
 Thresholding-based anomaly extraction algorithms
 The rest of this article is organized as follows. In
work fine for single-channel time series when the learning
 Section II, the problem of anomaly detection is properly
model is reliable (the prediction sequence matches the nordefined. In Section III, we briefly review the structure of the
mal part of the target sequence well and the abnormal part
 transformer and how we use it in our application first, then
of the target sequence poorly). However, when the perforthe Anomaly-MPP model is presented in detail. A standard
mance of the learning model is not sufficient or there is a lot
 method for MAP optimization for MPPs is used, so we
of noise in the target sequence, the extraction results can be
 describe it briefly. In Section IV, experimental results are
poor. Moreover, for the case of multichannel time series,
 given to show the performance of our approach. Finally,
the single-channel thresholding method fails to consider
 Section V concludes this article.
channel dependencies, rendering it inadequate for anomaly
detection in spacecraft time series as anomalies in different
channels could be related. II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
 To make the anomaly extraction process more flexi- In this work, we address the problem of anomaly deble and robust for spacecraft time series, we propose an tection in multichannel time series. Denote the target time

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5843
 greater lengths. In addition, the correlation prior energy
 incorporates insights from other channels.
 In this section, we describe the structure of the transformer and introduce how we use it in our work first, then
 the proposed Anomaly-MPP model is discussed in detail.
 Finally, we give a brief description of the MAP optimization
 method we use.

 A. Transformer Review
 Our choice of a transformer-based predictor stems from
 its exceptional capabilities in capturing temporal dependencies and modeling complex sequences. Unlike traditional
 sequence models, such as recurrent neural networks, transformers leverage self-attention mechanisms to efficiently
 capture long-range dependencies across sequences. This
Fig. 1. Diagram of the proposed anomaly detection method. The gray
 block is the novel contribution of this article. ability is crucial for our task, which involves predicting
 data points where signals may exhibit complex temporal
 patterns. In addition, transformers offer scalability and
series as X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xN ], where xt ∈ RM , N is the
 parallelization, enabling efficient processing of large-scale
number of samples in X , and M is the total number of
 sequential data without sacrificing model performance.
channels.
 The transformer-based predictor utilized in our method
 In a spacecraft system, a system-level anomaly may
 follows the original transformer architecture [16]. The
trigger anomalies in several channels, and these anomalies
 main differences between the transformer-based forecasting
may not always occur at the same time. For example, an
 model used in [18] and our predictor are the input and
anomaly could occur in an electrical power channel before
 output. Since our task is neither real-time anomaly detection
a corresponding anomaly appears in a related temperature
 nor forecasting of unknown future data, we do not use
channel. To assist with root cause analysis, our objective is
 the left-to-right forecasting model. Instead, a bidirectional
not only to answer the question of when an anomaly occurs
 prediction model is used, as shown in Fig. 2. Intuitively,
but also to give information about which channels are
 a bidirectional model is more powerful [17], especially for
questionable. That is, for the target time series X ∈ RM×N ,
 predicting the data at points where a signal changes abruptly.
our objective is to find a set of anomaly sequences
 For a subsequence [xt−L , xt−L+1 , . . ., xt , . . .xt +L ] of the
[(i, ki , starti , endi )], where i means the ith anomaly, ki is the
 test sequence X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xN ], where L controls the
channel where the anomaly is found, and starti and endi are
 size of the transformer input. We mask the middle three data
the starting and ending time of the ith anomaly, respectively.
 samples with 0 s to generate the input data for time t: X t =
 [xt−L , . . ., xt−2 , 0, 0, 0, xt +2 . . .xt +L ]. We try to predict xt
III. METHODOLOGY based on the input X t . The reason for masking the middle
 Fig. 1 shows the diagram of our method for multichannel three data samples rather than only masking xt is to avoid the
anomaly detection. There are mainly two parts: the first is trivial prediction of replicating the immediately preceding
the time series predictor, which is a pure transformer-based or succeeding values or by the average of the two [35].
predictor. We train the predictor with sequences assumed The transformer has an encoder–decoder architecture.
to have no anomalies. Since the spacecraft system runs The encoder encodes the input representation X t into a hidat a normal status most of the time, such normal data are den state representation Zt = [zt−L , zt−L+1 , . . ., zt , . . .zt +L ],
easily accessible. In the anomaly detection process, we feed where zi ∈ Rdmodel , and dmodel is the model dimension.
the target multichannel sequences into the trained predictor The decoder decodes an output representation At =
to generate the predicted sequences. An error sequence is [a1 , a2 , . . ., aLd ] from the hidden representation Zt and the
computed as the difference between a target sequence and rightmost Ld elements of X t , where Ld is the size of the
its predicted sequence. The second part of our approach is input of the decoder, ai ∈ Rdmodel . Finally, a linear layer is
an anomaly extractor that uses MAP estimation to detect applied to map At to the prediction x̂t .
anomaly objects from the error sequences, which are mod- The encoder is composed of an input layer, a positional
eled using an Anomaly-MPP. With the data energy, length encoding layer, and a stack of four identical encoder layers.
prior energy, and correlation prior energy defined in the The input layer linearly projects the M-dimensional input
Anomaly-MPP model, it is flexible to extract the anomaly onto a dmodel -dimensional vector space. Since the attention
objects with different settings. The data energy promotes the model contains no recurrence and no convolution operadetection of objects with high error contrast. Meanwhile, the tions, to make use of the order information of the sequence,
length prior energy discourages the identification of short the positional encoding layer is applied to inject position inobjects with low error contrast while favoring those with formation with sine and cosine functions [16]. The encoder

5844 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
 Fig. 2. Structure of the bidirectional transformer-based predictor with L = 3 and Ld = 2.

layer uses one multi-attention block to learn the depen- from the test sequence X = [x1 , x2 , . . ., xN ], where x̂n =
dencies of data with different positions. A multi-attention [x̂1,n , x̂2,n , . . ., x̂M,n ] and xn = [x1,n , x2,n , . . ., xM,n ].
block consists of six attention blocks, each attention block Let E = [e1 , e2 , . . ., eN ] be the absolute error sequence,
realizing the “scaled dot-product attention” by where en = [e1,n , e2,n , . . ., eM,n ] and em,n = |xm,n − x̂m,n |
 (Note: for convenience, we ignore the first and last L data
  
 QK T points in the test sequence). When em,n is relatively large, it
 Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √ V (1) indicates potential abnormal behavior at time n in channel
 dk
 m.
where Q, K, and V are the query matrix, key matrix, The Anomaly-MPP is proposed to model the set of
and value matrix, respectively, Q ∈ Rq×dk , K ∈ R p×dk , V ∈ anomalies in the multichannel input based on the error se-
R p×dv , q is the number of queries, p is the number of quence E . In this section, we will define the Anomaly-MPP
key–value pairs, dk is the dimension of each key and query, model first, then discuss the data and prior energy terms
and dv is the dimension of each value. of the model, and finally, briefly describe the optimization
 The decoder is composed of an input layer and a stack method we use to find the MAP estimate of the set of
of four identical decoder layers. The input layer is the same anomaly sequences.
as the one in the encoder. The decoder layer has two multi- 1) Anomaly-MPP Model: Let S be the M × N lattice,
attention blocks, one for learning the dependencies of input S = [1, M ] × [1, N ] ⊂ R2 , upon which the input data X
data and the other for integrating the information from the are defined. Then, a point process on S is a set of points
hidden representation Zt . To read the details of the encoder {S1 , S2 , . . ., SK } ⊆ S, with random variables Si = (mi , ni )
layer and the decoder layer, see the original transformer representing the random location of the ith point, where mi
paper [16]. is its channel identifier (ID) and ni is the time location. The
 The commonly-used mean squared error loss function random variable K is the total number of points in the point
is used to train the transformer-based predictor in our ap- process [36], [37].
plication. By associating a mark bi to each point object Si ,
 we get an MPP [38], [39]. In the Anomaly-MPP model,
 bi ∈ B is the random width of the ith anomaly object,
B. Anomaly-MPP Model where B = [bmin , bmax ] is the mark space with parameters
 With the transformer trained on the training data, we can bmin and bmax . A marked object is denoted as Wi = (Si , bi ) ∈
generate a predicted sequence X̂ = [x̂L+1 , x̂L+2 , . . ., x̂N−L ] S × B. Then, an anomaly configuration is defined as W =

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5845
 Fig. 3. Example of anomaly object configuration. Fig. 4. Inner area (yellow) and outer area (green) of an object.

{W1 , W2 , . . ., WK }. The space of all possible configurations W has elements of the form w = {w1 , w2 , . . ., wk },
containing anomaly objects w1 , . . ., wk . Fig. 3 shows an
example of an object configuration within three channels.
 A Gibbs model is used for the MPP, which results in a
posterior density function given by
 1
 f (w|e ) = exp{−Vd (e|w) − Vp (w)} (2)
 Z
where w is an anomaly object configuration, e is the observed error sequence, Vd (e|w) is the data energy, which Fig. 5. Function of h (x, T, K ) with T = 0.5 and K = 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, 5,
determines the fit of the anomaly configuration w to the respectively.
observed error sequence e, Vp (w) is the prior energy, and Z
is the normalizing constant. Our goal is to find the object
configuration that maximizes f (w|e ), that is, the MAP
estimate of W given that the observation error sequence
is e.
 It remains to define the energy functions Vd and Vp in
(2). We will use a common “reward” function [40] [given
in (6)] for Vd and for each part of Vp , as described next.
 2) Data Energy: Under the assumption that the elements of the error sequence E are conditionally independent
given that W = w for any configuration w ∈ W , the data
energy term of (2) can be written as Fig. 6. Function of h (x, T, K ) with K = 2 and T = 0.1, 0.5, 0.8, 1, 2,
 respectively.
 
 k
 Vd (e|w) = Ṽd (e|wi ) (3)
 i=1 where the data term threshold Td and data reward coefficient
where k is the number of anomalies in configuration w. The Kd are parameters settable by the user, and h is the reward
basic idea of the data energy we propose is this: if the mean function defined as
error value of object wi is larger than the mean error value 
 1 − Tx , if x < T
of its neighboring regions, then it has higher probability to h (x, T, K ) =  −(x−T )  (6)
be a true anomaly object, and thus should have a smaller exp Kx
 − 1, else.
Ṽd (e|wi ).
 Figs. 5 and 6 present the function h with fixed T and
 Define the outer area of object wi as the union of its left
neighborhood lefti and right neighborhood righti , which are fixed K, respectively. As we can see, when x < T , the functhe green areas shown in Fig. 4. We set the neighborhood tion returns a linear positive value, which can be taken as a
 linear penalty. When x > T , the function returns a negative
area length to bmax , where bmax is the parameter of the
maximum object width. Then, let uin (wi ) be the mean error reward, which is controlled by the reward coefficient K.
value of object wi , and uout (wi ) be the mean error value of 3) Prior Energy: The prior energy Vp (w) describes
 prior information about objects, and is given by
its outer area. Define the error contrast as
 uin (wi ) − uout (wi ) Vp (w) = Vpol (w) + αVplen (w) + βVpco (w). (7)
 contrast(wi ) = . (4)
 uout (wi )
 The overlap prior Vpol (w) rejects overlapping between
 Let D (wi ) = Gd contrast(wi )2 with data gain Gd , being
 any two objects in the same channel, the length priorVplen (w)
fixed for our experiments, and set
 penalizes objects with short length, the correlation prior
 Ṽd (e|wi ) = h (D (wi ), Gd Td2 , Kd ) (5) Vpco (w) takes account of the relationship among objects in

5846 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
 Fig. 7. Overlapping of two objects.

different channels, and α and β are the weights for the last
two terms.

a) Overlap prior: For the task of anomaly detection, we
do not allow overlapping between any two objects within a
channel. That is if two objects are in the same channel and Fig. 8. Illustration for correlation prior.
overlap with each other, as shown in Fig. 7, then the one
with larger data energy should be removed. This helps to To simplify computation, we compute the correlation
avoid the detection of a single anomaly as multiple different prior for each object separately and let
anomalies. Define
  
 k
 Vpol (w) = g(wi , w j ) (8) Vpco (w) = Ṽpco (wi ). (14)
 i= j i=1

where For object wi in channel mi located at time ni , we count
  the number ci of channels that have expanded objects, which
 ∞, if wi and w j overlap overlap with the expanded wi in the timeline. Then, we let
 g(wi , w j ) = . (9)
 0, otherwise. Ṽpco (wi ) = h (P (ci , M ), P (Tco , M ), Kco ) (15)
 where
b) Length prior: To avoid false alarms caused by noise, the
length prior term Vplen (w) is introduced to encourage long P (x, M ) = Gco R2 (x, M ) (16)
objects and penalize short objects. We let
 and
 
 k x
 R2 (x, M ) = (17)
 Vplen (w) = Ṽplen (wi ) (10) M −1
 i=1
 where Tco is the correlation threshold parameter, Kco is the
where correlation reward coefficient, and Gco is the correlation
 gain, which is fixed for our experiment.
 Ṽplen (wi ) = h (L (bi ), L (Tl ), Kl ). (11) 4) Optimization Method: To find the MAP estimate
 of the true anomaly configuration under our model, the
 In this case Gibbs energy in (2) must be minimized, so that the posterior
 L (x ) = Gl Rl (x )2 (12) distribution is maximized. A reversible jump Markov chain
 Monte Carlo [41] method is widely used for this type of
and problem when the normalizing constant of the posterior
 density is difficult to calculate. However, this algorithm is
 x − bmin
 Rl (x ) = (13) mainly based on proposing local perturbations, which limits
 bmax − bmin its convergence speed. Instead, we use the multiple birth and
so the first argument to the reward function h is a quadratic death (MBD) algorithm [42], [43], which is able to make
function of the length of anomaly i, the second argument is multiple perturbations in parallel, to search for the optimal
the same quadratic function of the length threshold, and the configuration.
third argument is the length reward coefficient. The length The MBD algorithm runs a birth step and a death
gain Gl is fixed for our experiments. step iteratively. At iteration i, given the previous configuration w(i − 1), we propose a new configuration w =
c) Correlation prior: The correlation prior Vpco (w) is intro- {w1 , w2 , . . ., wk  } to get w = w(i ) ∪ w in the birth step.
duced to model the relationships among objects in different In the death step, we update w(i ) by removing nonfitting
channels. Fig. 8 gives an example to illustrate the basic idea objects from w. The algorithm keeps iterating until a conof the correlation prior. For any two channels, say channel vergence condition is satisfied or the maximum iterations
m1 and channel m2 , suppose that an object w1 is in channel set by the user is reached.
m1 at location n1 , and another object w2 exists in channel
m2 at location n2 . We expand w1 and w2 by a width d, as IV. EXPERIMENTS
shown in the green area in Fig. 8. If the expanded object w1 To illustrate the proposed Anomaly-MPP-MAP apand object w2 are overlapped in the timeline, then both of proach in detail, a case study is made on five selected
them should have a higher probability to be true anomalies, channels from the Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite
thus we reduce the prior energy for w1 and w2 . (SMAP) dataset [44]. Then, we test the method on a Mars

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5847
 Fig. 9. Example to compare different anomaly counting methods.

Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) dataset, to which we have
inserted multichannel anomalies, to show its advantage
over threshold-based methods for anomaly extraction in
multichannel series. Finally, we apply the Anomaly-MPP-
MAP approach to a single accumulated error sequence
generated from Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) and Water
Distribution (WADI) datasets [45], [46] to further verify its
effectiveness.

A. Datasets
 Four datasets have been used in our experiments: SMAP
dataset [10], [44] which is a spacecraft dataset collected by
NASA; MRO dataset, which is a spacecraft dataset provided by Lockheed Martin; SWaT dataset [45], which was
collected from a water treatment testbed for cyber-attack
investigation in 2015; and WADI dataset [46], which was
collected from a water distribution testbed as an extension
of the SWaT testbed.
 The SMAP dataset contains 54 channels of time series,
each with 25 features (the first feature is the telemetry value
and others are related to system status). There is a training
sequence and a test sequence for each channel, with the
test sequences varying in length. For our illustrative case
study, we select the telemetry value sequences from five Fig. 10. Part of the test time series used in the case study.
channels (A-2, A-3, A-4, E-1, and E-10) with similar length
to form a multichannel test case, which is partially shown
in Fig. 10. There are a total of seven anomaly sequences in anomaly sequences in all the groups. We treat each group
these channels. of data as a ten-channel test case.
 The MRO dataset includes thousands of channels, which The SWaT dataset contains 51 channels of data collected
encompass all spacecraft subsystems, and is downlinked to a in 11 days: seven days under normal operation and four days
ground system at varying sample rates [2]. The MRO dataset with attack scenarios. A total of 41 attacks appear in the last
does not contain ground truth anomalies and is considered four days of data.
an unlabeled dataset. For each channel, a single week of The WADI dataset contains 123 channels of data coldata preceding a system reboot is given. We assume that lected in 16 days: 14 days under normal operation and two
the first five-and-half days of data of the time series in each days with attack scenarios, with 15 attacks launched during
channel represents normal functioning. By this assumption, the last two days.
eight groups of data were created from the first five days Following the work in [21] and [24], the original data
of data (the original data points were downsampled to one samples for SWaT and WADI are downsampled to one
measurement every 30 s). In each group, ten channels were measurement every 10 s by taking the median values. Since
randomly selected from the MRO dataset. The time series the attacks (anomalies) are labeled for the whole system
is divided into training sequences and test sequences for rather than for every single channel in SWaT and WADI,
each channel, with lengths of 5000 and 10 000, respectively. after getting the absolute prediction error sequence for
Anomalies were injected into the test sequence in a similar each channel, we add all of the error sequences together
way as described in [47]. There are a total of 140 injected to generate an accumulated error sequence. We test the

5848 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
Anomaly-MPP model on this 1-D sequence without the TABLE I
correlation prior. Comparison of Different Anomaly Counting Methods

B. Evaluation Metrics
 Quantitative evaluation of the performance of anomaly
detection in time series is not straightforward. There are
mainly three ways commonly used to count anomalies:
strict-point-based method, adjusted-point-based method,
and segment-based method.
 In the strict-point-based method, when a time point is
classified as an anomaly, if it is labeled as a true anomaly in
the ground truth, then this point is counted as a true positive
(TP); otherwise, it is a false positive (FP). When a point is
labeled as a true anomaly in the ground truth, but it is not
classified as an anomaly in the detection, then it is a false
negative (FN). not detected, the recall is still as high as 0.86, which is
 In the task of anomaly detection, the start and end points not reasonable in our application, since it is important to
of an anomaly segment are sometimes “blurry” [48]. Often, discover the short anomaly segments for system diagnosis.
partial detection of an anomaly is enough for experts to an- The segment-based method works on segments rather
alyze the anomaly segment. Thus, the adjusted-point-based than points, so each anomaly segment is equally counted.
metric has been broadly applied to anomaly detection [28]. The recall is 0.6 in the example, which is more reason-
In the adjusted-point-based method, if any point of a true able for our application. However, by expanding the length
anomaly segment is detected as an anomaly point, then of a detected anomaly segment, one could improve the
the whole true anomaly window is considered as correctly segment-based recall without reducing the precision. The
detected and every observation point in this segment will first detected anomaly sequence in Fig. 9 gives an example
be counted as a TP. If no point of a true anomaly segment is for this case. Although only a small portion of this detected
detected as an anomaly, then all points belonging to this true anomaly is covered by the true anomaly segment, the other
anomaly segment are taken as FNs. The detected anomaly parts do not contribute to FPs, so the segment-based recall
points outside the true anomaly segments are treated as FPs. and F1 scores could be improved by simply extending
 For the segment-based counting method [10], a detected each detected anomaly segment, without any penalty to the
anomaly segment consists of consecutive detected anomaly precision.
points. A TP is recorded if any portion of a true anomaly The segment-based method is preferred in our task, but
segment falls within any detected segment of anomalies. An to reduce the effect of the aforementioned problem, we
FN is recorded if no detected segments overlap with a true propose a split-segment-based method for counting anomaanomaly segment. An FP is recorded if a detected segment lies. The way to count TP, FP, and FN is the same as the
does not overlap with any true anomaly segment. segment-based method, but we will set a maximum length
 After defining the TP, FP, and FN in different counting Lmax for the detected anomaly sequence. When the length of
methods, the standard evaluation metrics, namely, preci- the detected anomaly sequence is larger than Lmax , the desion, recall, and F1-score can be used to evaluate the per- tected anomaly is split into shorter anomaly sequences with
formance of an anomaly detection approach, where length less or equal to Lmax before counting anomalies. In
 the example of Fig. 9, we set Lmax = 50, so the first detected
 TP anomaly segment is split into three parts by the dashed red
 Precision = (18)
 TP + FP lines, which results in two more false alarms. Note that
 TP this adjustment is made only for computing performance
 Recall = , (19) metrics and does not affect the detected anomalies presented
 TP + FN
 Precision × Recall to the user.
 F1 = 2 × . (20) In analyzing the results of our experiments, we mainly
 Precision + Recall
 focus on the split-segment-based metrics, and the maximum
 To compare the point-based metrics and segment-based length of sequence Lmax is set to 1000. Meanwhile, we
metric, an example with ground truth (blue line) and de- present the adjusted-point-based results just for reference,
tected anomalies (orange line) is shown in Fig. 9. The since that is often used in the literature. Since our method
evaluation results for this example are given in Table I. considers not only the amplitude of the error value but also
Compared with the strict-point-based method, the adjusted- the length of an anomaly object, a detected anomaly object
point-based method re-labels 60 FN points to TP as the could contain many points with low error values, which
second and the third detected anomaly segments are over- may result in low precision with the adjusted-point-based
lapped with two true anomaly segments. We can see that metrics. Thus, we extract the peaks from a detected anomaly
the adjusted-point-based metric is insensitive to short FNs. segment as detected anomaly points for calculating the
Even though two of the five true anomaly segments are adjusted-point-based results.

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5849
 TABLE II
 Parameters of Anomaly-MPP Model

 Fig. 11. Correlation heatmap of the test channels in the case study.

C. Experiment Settings
 Part of the time series is shown in Fig. 10 and its absolute
 A transformer-based predictor was used to generate the
 correlation heatmap is shown in Fig. 11. The two E-channels
prediction error sequences. To keep consistency, the paramare highly correlated, the A-2 channel and the A-4 channel
eters of the predictor were set to be the same for all of our
 are weakly correlated, and A-3 seems not to be correlated
experiments. The input window size parameter L = 150,
 with any other channels. There are a total of seven anomalies
model dimension dmodel = 36, value dimension dv = 36,
 (red shaded segments in Fig. 10) in the test sequences of
key dimension dk = 96, and decoder input size Ld = 6.
 these five channels. The three anomalies in A-channels
In the training process, Adam optimizer was used with
 appear around time = 4500. Two short anomalies happen
initial learning_rate = 0.001. Early stopping was applied
 in E-channels around time = 5000, followed by two long
when validation loss did not decrease for 30 epochs, and
 anomalies around time = 5700.
the maximum training epoch was 300. The batch size was
 Since the original time sequences are not aligned, we
set to 128.
 trained each channel separately with the transformer-based
 The 14 parameters of the proposed Anomaly-MPP
 predictor. The absolute prediction error sequences are genmodel are listed in Table II. There are three groups of
 erated with the trained predictor. Fig. 12 shows all five of
parameters, namely, data energy parameters, length prior
 the absolute prediction-error sequences for this case study,
energy parameters, and correlation prior energy parameters.
 superimposed. The Anomaly-MPP model aims to extract
The three gain parameters Gd , Gl , and Gco from each group,
 the anomalies from these error sequences.
which are used to control the range of the independent
 1) Data Energy With Overlap Prior Energy: In the
variable of the reward function, were fixed to the values
 beginning, we only include the data energy and overlap prior
in Table II for all of our experiments. The minimum and
 energy. Thus, the weights for length prior and correlation
maximum lengths (bmin and bmax ) of anomaly objects were
 prior are set to zero (α = 0, β = 0). The overlap prior is kept
set to 6 and 600, respectively. The expanded width dcor
 to prohibit the overlapping of objects in the same channel. In
for calculating the correlation prior energy was set to 300.
 this case, the fitting of objects is mainly determined by the
The values of the other eight parameters (Td , Kd , wl , Tl ,
 data energy term Ṽd (e|wi ). When Ṽd (e|wi ) < 0, the object
Kl , wco , Tco , and Kco ), whose values differ for the four
 wi is more likely to be an anomaly. When wi and w j are
datasets for which we present results, are discussed in the
 overlapped in the same channel, the object with larger Ṽd
following section. Note that the fixed parameter values were
 will be killed. According to (6), and as seen in Figs. 5 and 6,
determined experimentally to work well for all four datasets
 the reward function h is monotonically decreasing with the
tested.
 independent variable x, the threshold parameter T controls
 All the experiments were implemented by Python and
 when to reward, and the reward coefficient parameter K
PyTorch, running on a workstation with an Intel Core i7-
 is related to the degree of reward only when x > T . For a
5930 K CPU and two 24 Gb Titan RTX GPUs.
 fixed Kd = 5, we test with different Td . Table III gives the
 test results with different Td . When Td is very small (e.g.,
D. Case Study
 Td = 0.8), we can extract all the TP with a lot of FPs. When
 An anomaly detection example is presented in this sec- we increase Td , the precision goes up, however, the recall
tion to illustrate how each term in the energy function of may also decrease as in the case of Td = 2.4. Since the data
the Anomaly-MPP model works. We select five channels energy is based on the error contrast (between the inner and
(A-2, A-3, A-4, E-1, and E-10) of telemetry time series outer area of the object), generally, it is impossible to extract
from the SMAP dataset as the test series for this illustration. all the true anomalies without generating any false alarms.

5850 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
 Fig. 12. Superimposed absolute prediction errors for each channel in the case study.

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 Extracted Results With Fixed Kd = 5 and Different Td Extracted Results With Fixed Kl = 5 and Different Tl

 TABLE V
 Extracted Results With Fixed Kco = 5 and Different Tco

 3) Adding Correlation Prior Energy: We may re-
 Fig. 13. Detecting results from channel A-4 with data energy and move all the false alarms by fine-tuning the parameters
overlap energy. Red shaded area: ground truth, and green hatched area: of Kd , Td , α, Kl , and Tl . However, the parameter tuning
 detection results. process for just a few false detections could be tedious
 and time-consuming due to the tradeoff between recall
 and precision. Instead of fine-tuning parameters, we can
Fig. 13 shows the extraction results in channel A-4 when introduce some more prior knowledge to improve the
Td = 1.6. In addition to the true anomalies, the detected detection results. Here, we add the correlation prior enfalse alarms also have high error contrast. They generally ergy to the previous model by setting the weight of the
also have short lengths. correlation prior β = 0.15 and keeping Kd = 5, Td = 1.6,
 2) Adding Length Prior Energy: In this section, we α = 0.15, Kl = 5, Tl = 60, and Kco = 5 in the new test.
fix Kd = 5 and Td = 1.6 and add the length prior energy Also, we fix the neighbor distance dcor = 300 for the corto our previous test model by setting the weight of length relation prior. The test results with different Tco are given
prior α = 0.15 to penalize the short objects and encourage in Table V. For the cases of Tco = 1.0 and Tco = 1.5, we
long objects. Again, we keep the length reward parameter reached the 1.0 F-1 score in the segment-based metric.
Kl = 5 and try different Tl in our test. From the results It is worth noting that the correlation prior is introduced
given in Table IV, by introducing the length prior term, to capture dependencies among anomaly objects occurthe precision improved in all of the five cases. The short ring in different channels. This is particularly beneficial
FP in A-4 presented in Fig. 13 is killed in the case Tl = 60. for scenarios where an anomaly appears in one channel,
However, it is still not easy to remove all false alarms with followed by anomalies occurring in other channels, which
the added length prior energy. is a common case in spacecraft subsystems. When anomaly

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5851
 Fig. 14. Detection results of SWaT dataset. Red shaded area: ground truth, and green hatched area: detection results.

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 Anomaly Detection Results of MRO-MUL Dataset Anomaly Detection Results of SWaT Dataset

objects in different channels are independent, it is preferable to conduct single-channel analysis by setting β = 0 to
disregard the correlation prior energy.

E. Test on MRO-MUL Dataset
 There are eight groups of data in MRO-MUL dataset,
each containing ten channels. For each group of data, a
transformer-based predictor is trained in a multichannel-in
and multichannel-out manner. By applying the trained Fig. 15. SWaT detection results in the range of [16 300, 18 200]. Red
predictor on the test data, we can generate ten absolute shaded area: ground truth, and green hatched area: detection results.
error sequences for each group. Then, we extract the
anomalies from the error sequences by several different sequence and scaled the error value into range [0, 1] as the
anomaly extraction methods for comparison: POT [34], blue line shown in Fig. 14. To extract the anomalies from
dynamic threshold (DT) [10], and Anomaly-MPP. For our this sequence, we reset the parameters of the Anomalyproposed method, we set the same parameters for all of the MPP model as: Td = 0.4, Kd = 6, α = 0.4, Tl = 120, and
eight groups of tests by trial and error: Td = 2.2, Kd = 5, Kl = 1. The correlation prior is not used, thus β = 0. The
α = 0.2, Tl = 120, Kl = 5, β = 0.3, Tco = 3, and Kco = detected results are given in Table VII. Our method still
6. The quantitative test results are given in Table VI. outperforms the threshold-based anomaly extraction methods even though the target error sequence is single. To
F. Test on SWaT and WADI Dataset
 see why this happens, let us focus on the sample range
 There are 51 channels of data in the SWaT dataset. We [16 300, 18 200] of the error sequence, which is presented
trained a transformer-based predictor on all the channels in in Fig. 15. The maximum prediction error value in the true
a multi-in and multi-out manner. Absolute prediction error anomaly sequence is smaller than the errors in other normal
sequences are generated from the test data spanning four places, which makes it impossible for a threshold-based
days. Unlike what we do in the test of MRO-MUL dataset, method to extract the true anomalies without extracting
we do not extract anomalies from each channel separately. other false alarms. But with the length prior in our model, the
Instead, we treat the combination of the 51 channels as a true anomaly is extracted without any false alarms because
single system since the true anomaly points are labeled at its accumulated error is larger than the accumulated error in
the system level rather than the channel level. We added the other places and the length prior encourages longer anomaly
51 absolute prediction error sequences into a single error objects while penalizing shorter anomaly objects. Note that

5852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
 Fig. 16. Detection results of WADI dataset. Red shaded area: ground truth, and green hatched area: detection results.

 TABLE VIII G. Computational Considerations
 Anomaly Detection Results of WADI Dataset
 Compared with the simple and fast thresholding-based
 anomaly extraction methods, the proposed Anomaly-MPP
 in the above experiments has slower processing speeds for
 different time series, with additional running times ranging
 from a few seconds to dozens of seconds. As an MPP
 optimized by MBD, the process of extracting anomalies
 by Anomaly-MPP involves simulating the birth (creation)
 and death (removal) of points (anomaly objects) in a point
 process, which require complex calculations. In addition,
 like many Monte Carlo simulation algorithms, MBD may
 require many iterations to converge to a stable solution,
 which can contribute to the algorithm’s overall running
 time. To accelerate the proposed method, one potential
 approach is to carefully parallelize the birth and death
 operations across multiple processing units, although this
 is beyond the current scope of this work.

 V. CONCLUSION

 Fig. 17. One of the FNs in the WADI detection results. Red shaded
 In this article, we proposed an anomaly detection
 area: ground truth, and green hatched area: detection results. method for multichannel time series, using a transformerbased predictor for generating prediction error sequences
 and an Anomaly-MPP model with MAP estimation for
 extracting the anomalies from the error sequences. The
although shorter anomaly objects are penalized, it is still proposed Anomaly-MPP model is mainly controlled by
possible to detect short anomalies if the other energy terms three energy terms: the data energy, length prior energy, and
in the model favor it enough. correlation prior energy. The data energy encourages objects
 Although there are a total of 123 channels in the WADI with high error contrast to be detected. The length prior
dataset, we processed it in the same way as we did for the energy suppresses short objects with low error contrast and
SWaT dataset. The anomaly detection results are shown in rewards objects with longer lengths. The correlation prior
Fig. 16 and Table VIII. Note that the recall for this dataset energy introduces the information from other channels. A
is not as high as for the other datasets. By checking the case study on the time sequences from the SMAP dataset is
error sequence, there are no obvious clues for the missed given to show the function of each energy term. Experimenanomalies. Fig. 17 shows the subsequence with one of the tal results on MRO-MUL dataset, SWaT dataset, and WADI
FNs. The error values in the true anomaly region are not dataset prove the superiority of our Anomaly-MPP model
significantly larger than the error values in other places, over the threshold-based anomaly extraction methods that
which resulted in the missed detection. This example shows have been previously proposed.
that the extraction results are still highly dependent on the Although our Anomaly-MPP model is quite flexible, the
prediction results from the learning model since the data performance is still highly dependent on the error sequences
energy depends on the prediction errors. generated by the predictor since the object data energy

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5853
is based on the error contrast. This is difficult to correct [19] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long
with a deep-learning approach for prediction, because of sequence time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
the “black-box” nature of deep learning systems. However, 2021, vol. 35, pp. 11106–11115.
 [20] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer:
it is not necessary for the data energy to be defined on Time series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in
prediction error sequences. For example, we could define Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. [Online]. Available:
the data energy according to the variance of the values in https://openreview.net/forum?id=LzQQ89U1qm_
the original input sequence. In our future work, we plan to [21] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learnexplore some other data energy terms that do not depend on ing graph structures with transformer for multivariate time series
 anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12,
prediction error sequences. pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022.
 [22] Z. Tian, M. Zhuo, L. Liu, J. Chen, and S. Zhou, “Anomaly detection
REFERENCES using spatial and temporal information in multivariate time series,”
 [1] A. E. Hassanien, A. Darwish, and S. Abdelghafar, “Machine learning Sci. Rep., vol. 13, 2023, Art. no. 4400.
 in telemetry data mining of space mission: Basics, challenging [23] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
 and future directions,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 53, pp. 3201–3230, attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
 Jun. 2020. pp. 841–850.
 [2] T. Li et al., “A stacked predictor and dynamic thresholding algorithm [24] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detecfor anomaly detection in spacecraft,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. tion in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 Conf., 2019, pp. 165–170. 2021, vol. 35, pp. 4027–4035.
 [3] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A [25] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal spatial–
 survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, 2009, Art. no. 15. temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly detection,”
 [4] R. Adhikari and R. Agrawal, An Introductory Study on Time series Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, 2023.
 Modeling and Forecasting. Saarbrücken, Germany: LAP LAMBERT [26] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and
 Academic Publishing, 2013. K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using
 [5] N. I. Sapankevych and R. Sankar, “Time series prediction using generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
 support vector machines: A survey,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., 2020, pp. 33–43.
 vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 24–38, May 2009. [27] A. Creswell, T. White, V. Dumoulin, K. Arulkumaran, B. Sen-
 [6] R. Samsudin, A. Shabri, and P. Saad, “A comparison of time se- gupta, and A. A. Bharath, “Generative adversarial networks: An
 ries forecasting using support vector machine and artificial neural overview,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 53–65,
 network model,” J. Appl. Sci., vol. 10, pp. 950–958, 2010. Jan. 2018.
 [7] S. R. Mounce, R. B. Mounce, and J. B. Boxall, “Novelty detection for [28] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 time series data analysis in water distribution systems using support detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent
 vector machines,” J. Hydroinformat., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 672–686, neural network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 2010. Discov. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 [8] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neu- [29] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection
 ral Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. using reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1,
 [9] I. J. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning, Ser. pp. 1–18, 2015.
 Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning Series. Cambridge, [30] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
 MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016. “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
[10] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2020,
 strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonpara- pp. 4322–4326.
 metric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. [31] N. Chen, H. Tu, X. Duan, L. Hu, and C. Guo, “Semisupervised
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. anomaly detection of multivariate time series based on a variational
[11] P. Malhotra, L. Vig, G. Shroff, and P. Agarwal, “Long short term autoencoder,” Appl. Intell., vol. 53, pp. 6074–6098, 2023.
 memory networks for anomaly detection in time series,” in Proc. [32] B. W. Silverman, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis.
 Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 2015, pp. 89–94. Evanston, IL, USA: Routledge, 2018.
[12] B. Lindemann, B. Maschler, N. Sahlab, and M. Weyrich, “A survey [33] E. Simiu and N. Heckert, “Extreme wind distribution tails: A
 on anomaly detection for technical systems using LSTM networks,” “peaks over threshold” approach,” J. Struct. Eng., vol. 122, no. 5,
 Comput. Ind., vol. 131, 2021, Art. no. 103498. pp. 539–547, 1996.
[13] S. Baireddy et al., “Spacecraft time-series anomaly detection using [34] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly
 transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog- detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM
 nit., AI Space Workshop, 2022, pp. 1951–1960. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–
[14] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised real-time 1075.
 anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262, [35] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickpp. 134–147, 2017. hoff, “A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series
[15] S. Baireddy, M. Chan, S. Desai, R. Foster, M. Comer, and E. Delp, representation learning,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 “Spacecraft time-series online anomaly detection using extreme Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 2114–2124.
 learning machines,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–9. [36] C. J. Geyer and J. Møller, “Simulation and likehood inference for
[16] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. spatial point processes,” Scand. J. Statist., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 359–373,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010. 1994.
[17] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre- [37] J. Illian, A. Penttinen, H. Stoyan, and D. Stoyan, Statistical Analysis
 training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understand- and Modelling of Spatial Point Patterns. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
 ing,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chap. Ass. Comput. Linguistics: 2008.
 Human Lang. Technol., Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2019, pp. 4171– [38] M. N. M. V. Lieshout, Markov Point Processes and Their Applica-
 4186. tions. London, U.K.: Imperial College Press, 2000.
[18] N. Wu, B. Green, X. Ben, and S. O’Banion, “Deep transformer [39] X. Descombes and J. Zerubia, “Marked point process in image
 models for time series forecasting: The influenza prevalence case,” analysis,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 77–84,
 2020, arXiv:2001.08317. Sep. 2002.

5854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AEROSPACE AND ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS VOL. 60, NO. 5 OCTOBER 2024
[40] H. Zhao, M. L. Comer, and M. D. Graef, “A unified Markov ran- Edward Delp (Life Fellow, IEEE) received
 dom field/marked point process image model and its application to the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical encomputational materials,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process., gineering from the University of Cincinnati,
 2014, pp. 6101–6105. OH, USA, in 1973 and 1975, respectively, and
[41] P. J. Green, “Reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo computa- the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from
 Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, in
 tion and Bayesian model determination,” Biometrika, vol. 82, no. 4, 1979.
 pp. 711–732, 1995. He is a Charles William Harrison Dis-
[42] X. Descombes, “Multiple objects detection in biological images us- tinguished Professor of electrical and coming a marked point process framework,” Methods, vol. 115, pp. 2–8, puter engineering and Professor of biomedi-
 2017. cal engineering with Purdue University, West
[43] X. Descombes, R. Minlos, and E. Zhizhina, “Object extraction using Lafayette, IN, USA. His research interests include image and video
 a stochastic birth-and-death dynamics in continuum,” J. Math. Imag. processing, image analysis, computer vision, image and video compres-
 Vis., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 347–359, 2009. sion, multimedia security, medical imaging, multimedia systems, and
[44] P. O’Neill, D. Entekhabi, E. Njoku, and K. Kellogg, “The NASA soil communication and information theory.
 moisture active passive (SMAP) mission: Overview,” in Proc. IEEE
 Int. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., 2010, pp. 3236–3239.
[45] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed for research and training on ICs security,” in Proc. Sundip R. Desai received the B.S. degree
 Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, in aeronautical and astronautical engineering
 pp. 31–36. from the California state polytechnic university-
 Pomona, California, in 2004, and the M.S. de-
[46] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water gree in aeronautical and astronautical engineerdistribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical ing from university of southern California, Los
 systems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Angeles, California, in 2011.
 Netw., 2017, pp. 25–28. He is a Guidance, Navigation and Controls
[47] T. Li, M. Comer, E. Delp, S. R. Desai, R. H. Foster, and M. W. Chan, Engineer and Associate Fellow with Lockheed
 “A matching-based method for anomaly verification in spacecraft Martin Space Center, Palo Alto, CA, USA,
 telemetry,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., 2022, pp. 1–8. where his research interests include general ma-
[48] Q. Wen et al., “Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A chine learning, computer vision, explainable AI, recommender systems,
 survey,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Z.-H. Zhou, 2021, pose estimation, anomaly detection, and characterization of time series
 signals.
 pp. 4653–4660.

 Tianyu Li received the Ph.D. degree in electrical
 and computer engineering from the School of
 Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue Richard H. Foster is a Senior Principal Re-
 University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, in 2023. search Engineer with the Lockheed Martin
 His research interests include image process- Space Advanced Technology Center, Palo Alto,
 ing using statistical models and deep learning CA, USA. His research interests include system
 models, as well as time series forecasting and protection using multiphenomenology observanomaly detection in time series. ables and applying AI/machine learning techniques to advance the methods for the protection
 of systems, and in addition, applying optimal
 estimation techniques in optimizing the design
 and performance of advance communication
 systems, electronic warfare, and multidomain
 remote sensing systems.
 Sriram Baireddy received the B.S. and M.S.
 degrees in electrical engineering with minors
 in economics, math, and physics in 2018 and
 2021, respectively, from Purdue University,
 West Lafayette, IN, USA, where he is currently Moses W. Chan (Member, IEEE) received the
 working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engiengineering. neering from Purdue University, West Lafayette,
 His research interests include the application Indiana, in 1991, 1993, and 1999, respectively.
 of machine learning techniques to signals, im- He is a Lockheed Martin Technical Fellow.
 ages, and videos for forensic and agricultural His research interests include primarily defenresearch. sive systems with multisensor and multi-int fusion, missile defense, space tracking and surveillance, and spacecraft anomaly detection.

 Mary Comer (Member, IEEE) received the
 B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette,
 Indiana, in 1990, 1993, and 1995, respectively.
 She is an Associate Professor of electrical and
 computer engineering with Purdue University,
 West Lafayette, IN, USA. Her research interests
 include statistical image modeling and analysis,
 stochastic simulation of images, rare event modeling and simulation, and anomaly detection.

LI ET AL.: MULTICHANNEL ANOMALY DETECTION FOR SPACECRAFT TIME SERIES USING MAP ESTIMATION 5855