IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024 1199

 Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation Boosted by
 Monomodal Normal Brain Images
 Huabing Liu , Zhengze Ni , Dong Nie , Dinggang Shen , Fellow, IEEE, Jinda Wang, and Zhenyu Tang

 Abstract— Many deep learning based methods have been subsequent diagnosis and treatment. Due to the inter-subject
proposed for brain tumor segmentation. Most studies focus on variance of brain tumors in location, shape, and appearance,
deep network internal structure to improve the segmentation accurate tumor segmentation is a challenging task.
accuracy, while valuable external information, such as normal
brain appearance, is often ignored. Inspired by the fact that With the advance of deep learning (DL), many brain
radiologists often screen lesion regions with normal appearance tumor segmentation methods [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7],
as reference in mind, in this paper, we propose a novel deep [8] using various DL networks have been proposed, e.g.,
framework for brain tumor segmentation, where normal brain 3D convolutional neural network (CNN) [2], U-Net [9],
images are adopted as reference to compare with tumor brain and Transformer [10]. Although they have shown promising
images in a learned feature space. In this way, features at
tumor regions, i.e., tumor-related features, can be highlighted results, most of them try to improve the learning capacity of
and enhanced for accurate tumor segmentation. It is known tumor-related features by elaborating deep network’s internal
that routine tumor brain images are multimodal, while normal structure. However, valuable external information, such as
brain images are often monomodal. This causes the feature normal brain appearance, is usually ignored or underutilized.
comparison a big issue, i.e., multimodal vs. monomodal. To this It is known that radiologists are usually first trained with
end, we present a new feature alignment module (FAM) to
make the feature distribution of monomodal normal brain normal samples before performing robust screening of lesion
images consistent/inconsistent with multimodal tumor brain regions. Following this observation, anomaly detection has
images at normal/tumor regions, making the feature compar- arisen for lesion region segmentation [11], [12], [13], [14].
ison effective. Both public (BraTS2022) and in-house tumor The basic idea is to compare images containing lesion regions
brain image datasets are used to evaluate our framework.
 (e.g., tumor brain images) with their normal appearance recon-
Experimental results demonstrate that for both datasets, our
framework can effectively improve the segmentation accuracy structed by autoencoder [15], in this way, lesion regions can be
and outperforms the state-of-the-art segmentation methods. highlighted and relatively easy to be segmented. For example,
Codes are available at https://github.com/hb-liu/Normal-Brain- Baur et al. [11] utilized a deep spatial autoencoder to recon-
Boost-Tumor-Segmentation. struct normal brain images from input tumor brain images.
 Index Terms— Brain tumor segmentation, normal brain Then, brain tumors can be segmented using thresholding on
images, normal reference, feature alignment, BraTS2022 dataset. the residual images produced by the tumor brain images
 and its normal appearance reconstruction. Astaraki et al. [12]
 I. I NTRODUCTION proposed to use variational autoencoder (VAE) [13] to generate synthetic normal lung images. Different from [11], the
S EGMENTATION of brain tumor from multimodal magnetic resonance (MR) images is an essential task for residual images are concatenated with original tumor lung
 images and fed to the segmentation backbone. As a result,
 Manuscript received 20 August 2022; revised 16 July 2023 and 28 December tumor regions can be highlighted in the segmentation process.
2023; accepted 24 January 2024. Date of publication 5 February 2024; date
of current version 7 February 2024. This work was supported in part by the Kobayashi et al. [14] proposed a discriminative network to
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62073012 and detect brain tumor regions patch-wisely by calculating the
in part by the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation under Grant L2 distance between tumor brain image patches and the
7222307. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and
approving it for publication was Dr. Christophoros Nikou. (Huabing Liu and corresponding reconstructed normal brain image patches in the
Zhengze Ni contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Zhenyu learned feature space. In anomaly detection based methods,
Tang; Jinda Wang.) target images (with lesion regions) and reconstructed images
 Huabing Liu, Zhengze Ni, and Zhenyu Tang are with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, (with normal appearance) are of the same modality and are
China (e-mail: tangzhenyu119@hotmail.com). often monomodal [16], so direct comparison (e.g., L2 distance)
 Dong Nie is with the Department of Computer Science, University of North at image- or feature-level can be performed. However, in the
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA.
 Dinggang Shen is with the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical context of brain tumor segmentation, routine tumor brain
Materials and Devices, School of Biomedical Engineering, ShanghaiTech images are multimodal [17], e.g., T1, T1 contrast enhanced
University, Shanghai 201210, China, also with Shanghai United Imaging Intel- (T1c), T2, and FLAIR MR images, while normal brain images
ligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200230, China, and also with the Shanghai Clinical Research and Trial Center, Shanghai 201210, China (e-mail: Dinggang. are usually monomodal, e.g., T1 MR images [18]. Therefore,
Shen@gmail.com). existing anomaly detection based methods are difficult to be
 Jinda Wang is with the Sixth Medical Center of PLA General Hos- applied for multimodal brain tumor segmentation.
pital, Senior Department of Cardiology, Beijing 100853, China (e-mail:
wjd301@163.com). In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning based
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2024.3359815 framework for multimodal brain tumor segmentation. In our
 1941-0042 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1200 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

Fig. 1. Structure of the proposed framework. It is composed of two networks: the segmentation backbone (blue region), and the normal appearance network
(green region). The segmentation backbone learns features from multimodal tumor brain images {IT1 , . . . , ITM } and outputs tumor segmentation results Y ′ .
A global correlation block (GCB) is used in the segmentation backbone to fuse features learned from different modalities. The normal appearance network
learns features from monomodal normal brain images IR reconstructed by introspective variational autoencoder (IntroVAE). At each decoding level, features
from both networks are sent to the feature alignment module (FAM) to perform feature alignment and comparison to generate the attention map, by which
tumor-related features in the segmentation backbone can be highlighted and enhanced.

framework, a new self-attention based global correlation block • To the best of our knowledge, our framework is the first
(GCB) is proposed to achieve effective fusion of tumor brain work, which presents a possible way of using normal
features learned from multimodal tumor brain images. More brain images to boost tumor brain image segmentation in
importantly, monomodal normal brain images are adopted in the context of clinical situation, i.e., tumor brain images
our framework as reference, from which normal brain features and normal brain images are of different number of
are learned and compared with the tumor brain features. modalities.
In this way, tumor-related features can be highlighted and
enhanced, and the segmentation performance can be improved. II. M ETHOD
To solve the incomparable issue between features learned from The structure of our framework is shown in Fig. 1. The
multimodal and monomodal images, a new feature alignment framework is composed of two networks: the segmentation
module (FAM) is presented. Based on FAM, the distribution of backbone and the normal appearance network. The input of
normal brain features is consistent/inconsistent with the tumor the segmentation backbone is multimodal tumor brain images
brain features at normal/tumor regions, facilitating the feature denoted as IT1 , . . . , ITM , where M indicates the number of
comparison as well as the final segmentation. The proposed different modalities. The input of the normal appearance
framework is evaluated using public (BraTS2022) and in- network is monomodal normal brain images IR generated by
house tumor brain image datasets. The experimental results introspective variational autoencoder (IntroVAE) [19] from the
demonstrate that our framework outperforms the state-of-the- T1 sequence of the multimodal tumor brain images, e.g., ITM .
art segmentation methods in both datasets. Our contributions Considering high computational efficiency of 2D convolution
are summarized as follows: and the advantage of using 3D spatial information, all inputs of
 • A novel multimodal deep learning framework for brain our framework are 2.5D slices, which contain one 2D slice to
 tumor segmentation is proposed, where monomodal nor- be segmented and its K neighboring slices, i.e., 2K +1 number
 mal brain images are adopted as reference and compared of slices.
 with multimodal tumor brain images in a learned feature In our framework, the segmentation backbone learns feaspace, by which tumor-related features can be highlighted tures from the input multimodal tumor brain images and
 and enhanced. produces the final tumor segmentation results. The normal
 • A new feature alignment module (FAM) is presented to appearance network learns features from the input monomodal
 solve the incomparable issue between features learned normal brain images, and these features are sent to the
 from multimodal tumor brain images and monomodal segmentation backbone to highlight and enhance the tumornormal brain images, making the feature comparison related features via feature comparison. In this way, the final
 more effective. tumor segmentation results can be improved. Details of each
 • Evaluation results of public (BraTS2022) and in-house network are presented in the following sections.
 datasets show superior performance of our framework
 over the state-of-the-art segmentation methods. Moreover, A. The Segmentation Backbone
 further ablation studies confirm the effectiveness of the The segmentation backbone is of encoder-decoder strucproposed components. ture, and skip connections are adopted to combine low-level
LIU et al.: MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION BOOSTED BY MONOMODAL NORMAL BRAIN IMAGES 1201

 where ωlc (m) is the weight for the m-th channel (i.e., modality)
 c
 in flc . In this way, the fused feature of channel c, i.e., f l , can
 be obtained by:
 M
 c X
 fl = ωlc (m) · flc (m), (3)
 m=1
 where flc (m) is the feature at m-th channel in flc . At last, the
 c
 fused features of all channels f l , c = 1, . . . , C are concatenated as the final fused feature f l at the l-th encoding level of
Fig. 2. Global correlation block (GCB) at the l-th encoding level. The input the segmentation backbone. Since the global correlations are
flc is formed by features at the c-th channel in flm , m = 1, . . . , M. Two considered in GCB, the feature fusion is more effective and
parallel fully connected layers are used to get Q and K , based on which the
 c
correlation matrix Mlc is obtained and used to get the fused feature f l . comprehensive as compared with CMC.
 2) The Decoding Stage of Segmentation Backbone: The
and high-level features. Considering that early fusion of decoding stage contains four deconvolution layers and one
features learned from different modalities could lose modality- convolution layer. The input of the first deconvolution layer,
specific information [20], [21], [22], multi-encoder structure i.e., decoding level l = 1, is the fused feature produced
is adopted, where each encoding pathway is responsible for by the fusion module at the bottleneck of the encoder (i.e.,
learning features from one image modality of the tumor brain. f 4 ), while for the rest deconvolution layers (l = 2, 3, 4),
There are four convolution layers in each encoding pathway, the input includes feature from the previous deconvolution
and each convolution layer uses 3×3 kernel with stride of two layer enhanced by the attention map Al (i.e., FT,l−1 ⊙ Al−1 )
followed by batch normalization (BN) and rectified linear unit and the fused feature (i.e., f 5−l ) from the corresponding
(ReLU) activation. The output features of the first convolution fusion module at the encoding stage. The attention map Al
layer have 64 channels, and the channel number is doubled is produced by the feature alignment module (FAM), which is
after each subsequent convolution layers. discussed later. A softmax nonlinear unit is applied after the
 To fully exploit correlations among features from different last convolution layer to generate the final segmentation result
modalities and perform effective multimodal image feature Y ′ , which is in the form of a probability map, and the value
fusion before sending to the decoder via the skip connections, at each channel in Y ′ indicates the probability of each tumor
inspired by cross modality convolution (CMC) [23] and self- region of interest (ROI).
attention [10], [24], we propose a global correlation block The Dice index loss [26] is adopted as the loss function of
(GCB) for the fusion module (see Fig. 2). the segmentation backbone, which is defined as:
 1) The Fusion Module With Global Correlation Block 2 x∈ Y (x) · Y ′ (x)
 P
(GCB): At each encoding level l of the backbone, the inputs of LDice (Y, Y ) = − P
 ′
 , (4)
 x∈ Y (x) + x∈ Y (x)
 P ′
the fusion module are features flm ∈ R H ×W ×C , learned from
tumor brain images of different modalities ITm , m = 1, . . . , M, where x is the position at image region , Y ′ and Y are the
respectively. Then features at the same channel in flm are con- segmentation result and the ground truth, respectively.
catenated, getting C number of features flc ∈ R H ×W ×M , c =
1, . . . , C. In CMC, each flc is proceeded by 3D convolution B. The Normal Appearance Network
with kernel size of M × 1 × 1 and concatenated together to get
 The normal appearance network is a simple U-Net. It is
the final fused features. We notice that such convolution has
 used to learn features from monomodal normal brain images.
limited receptive fields and lacks global correlations. To this
 Considering commonly used image modality for normal brain,
end, in GCB, a self-attention mechanism is adopted to explore
 the modality of input monomodal normal brain images IR
the global correlations among all modalities. Specifically, flc
 is set to T1. Inspired by anomaly detection methods, in our
is flattened to M × (H × W ) and sent to two parallel fully
 framework, IR is reconstructed from the T1 MR tumor brain
connected (FC) layers. The resulting two features are reshaped
 image (e.g., ITM ) contained in the input multimodal tumor
as Q ∈ R M×d and K ∈ Rd×M respectively to get the
 brain images using IntroVAE (see Fig. 1).
correlation matrix Mlc defined as:
 1) The IntroVAE: As shown in Fig. 3a, IntroVAE is com-
 Mlc = β Q K , (1) posed of an encoder for projecting input brain images to a
 latent distribution and a decoder for producing reconstructed
where β is used to counteract the numerical explosion. Similar
 brain images based on the latent distribution. IntroVAE is
to [10], β is set to √1 , and d is set to 768 as adopted
 d trained in an adversarial manner by self-estimating the differin [25]. In Mlc , each element Mlc (i, j) indicates the correla- ences between input and reconstructed normal brain images.
tion between the i-th and j-th modalities. Based on Mlc , the Given N T1 MR normal brain images from healthy subjects
weighting vector ωlc = {ωlc (m)|m = 1, . . . , M} is calculated (denoted as IHi , i = 1, . . . , N ) as training images, the encoder
by: projects each normal brain image IHi to a feature embedding
 PM z H = µ + ϵ · σ , where µ and σ are mean and deviation of
 e j=1 Ml (m, j)/M
 c

 ωl (m) = P
 c
 PM , (2) z estimated by the encoder, respectively, and ϵ is a randomly
 j=1 Ml (i, j)/M
 M c
 i=1 e generated vector under the standard normal distribution. Based
1202 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 and the second part is feature comparison, where regions with
 low feature consistency between ζ (FT,l ) and g(FR,l ), e.g.,
 ζ (FT,l )(x) at tumor regions vs. g(FR,l )(x) at normal regions,
 are identified to produce the attention map Al for highlighting
 and enhancing the tumor regions in FT,l . Details of each part
 are discussed as follows.
 In the feature alignment part as shown in Fig. 4a, ζ (FT,l )
 and g(FR,l ) should have similar/different feature distribution
 at normal/tumor regions. To make the training of ζ and g
 more effective, a representation learning method called Simple
 Siamese network (SimSiam) [27] is adopted (see Fig. 4c). The
 SimSiam network is composed of an encoder F, a projection
 MLP K, and a prediction MLP H. It takes each positive sample
 pair {I1 , I2 }, i.e., samples of the same class, as input and
 maximizes the cosine similarity between two output vectors
 p1 and v2 :
 p1 v2
 D(I1 , I2 ) = − · (5)
 || p1 ||2 ||v2 ||2
Fig. 3. Structure of IntroVAE. The encoder is trained to maximize LReg
of the reconstructed normal brain image to discriminate it from the real one, where p1 ≜ H(K(F(I1 ))), v2 ≜ K(F(I2 )), and
while the decoder is responsible for reconstructing the normal brain image
with small LRec , by which LReg can be minimized to confuse the encoder.
 || · ||2 is L2-norm. In our framework, the feature pairs
In the inference stage, T1 MR tumor brain image ITM is used as input of {ζ (FT,l )(x), g(FR,l )(x)}, x ∈ NR (x at normal region) are
IntroVAE to reconstruct the normal brain image IR . defined as positive samples, and the normal region NR is
 determined according to the label images in the training
on z H , the decoder can produce the corresponding recon- dataset. In FAM, ζ and g are regarded as the encoder F in
structed normal brain image IRi . A reconstruction loss LRec the SimSiam network, and the loss function of the SimSiam
is applied on IHi and IRi to minimize the reconstruction error, network is defined as:
and a regularization loss LReg is applied on z H to enforce the 1 X
 LSim (FT,l , FR,l ) = D(FT,l (x), FR,l (x))
posterior distribution to match the prior distribution. In this 2
 x∈NR
way, effective representation of normal brain appearance can
be achieved. Details of IntroVAE are referred to [19]. + D(FR,l (x), FT,l (x)). (6)
 After the training of IntroVAE, T1 sequence, e.g., ITM , It is worth noting that the SimSiam network is used in
selected from the multimodal tumor brain images IT1 , . . . , ITM the training stage and is removed at the inference stage.
is used as the input of IntroVAE, where ITM is projected to Moreover, to make the segmentation backbone focus on tumor
a certain feature embedding z representing the closest normal segmentation rather than feature alignment, a stop gradient
brain appearance. Based on the feature embedding, the corre- operation is applied before ζ to stop back-propagation to the
sponding T1 MR normal brain image IR can be reconstructed segmentation backbone (see Fig.4a).
(see Fig. 3b) and used in the normal appearance network to In the feature comparison part as shown in Fig. 4b, feature
learn normal brain features. The normal brain features are sent consistency between ζ (FT,l ) and g(FR,l ) is measured to get
to the segmentation backbone as reference, and by comparing the attention map Al using soft-attention [28], [29], which is
them with the tumor brain features, tumor-related features can defined as:
be highlighted and enhanced for accurate tumor segmentation.
However, in the context of brain tumor segmentation, the nor- Al = σ2 (ψ(σ1 (−ζ (FT,l ) · g(FR,l )))) (7)
mal brain features learned from monomodality and the tumor
 where σ1 is ReLU, σ2 is sigmoid activation function. The
brain features from multimodality are incomparable. To solve
 attention map Al is used to highlight and enhance tumorthis issue, a new feature alignment module is proposed.
 related features in FT,l , i.e., FT,l ⊙ Al .
 2) The Feature Alignment Module: We denote the tumor
 FAM is applied at each level of the decoding stage in the
and normal brain features at each decoding level l of the
 segmentation backbone. In this way, the tumor-related features
segmentation backbone and the normal appearance network as
 could be strengthened in a coarse-to-fine manner, and the final
FT,l and FR,l , l = 1, . . . , 4, respectively (see Fig. 1). FT,l (x)
 tumor segmentation results can be improved.
and FR,l (x) are feature at position x. The main idea of FAM is
to make the distribution of FR,l (x) consistent/inconsistent with
FT,l (x) at normal/tumor regions. In this way, tumor regions III. R ESULTS
in FT,l can be effectively highlighted according to feature The proposed framework is evaluated using a public dataset
consistency compared with the reference FR,l . Structure of BraTS2022 [30], which contains multimodal MR tumor brain
FAM is shown in Fig. 4. It is composed of two parts: the first images (T1, T1c, T2 and FLAIR) of 1251 glioma patients.
part is feature alignment, where two 1 × 1 convolution layers Corresponding manually labeled tumor masks of three tumor
ζ and g are adopted to align FT,l and FR,l at normal regions; ROIs, i.e., edema, enhancing core, and necrosis, are available.
LIU et al.: MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION BOOSTED BY MONOMODAL NORMAL BRAIN IMAGES 1203

Fig. 4. Structure of FAM at decoding level l. In the feature alignment part, two 1 × 1 convolutional layers (ζ and g) are adopted to align tumor brain
features FT,l and normal brain features FR,l , and the feature consistency at normal regions is improved by the SimSiam network during training. In the feature
comparison part, the attention map Al is generated in a dot-product soft-attention manner.

 TABLE I the segmentation backbone of our framework (no normal
 S UMMARY OF THE GBM PATIENTS IN THE IN -H OUSE DATASET appearance network), and the only difference between them
 is that Baseline-1 uses cross modality convolution (CMC) in
 the fusion module, while global correlation block (GCB) is
 adopted in Baseline-2. Baseline-3 is similar to our framework,
 but it does not use SimSiam network in the feature alignment
 module (FAM).
 For both public and in-house datasets, we randomly split
 all samples into 70%, 10% and 20% for training, validation
 and testing, respectively. All methods under evaluation are
 implemented using PyTorch and trained with RTX 3090 GPU.
Besides the BraTS2022 dataset, an in-house dataset captured
 The input of all methods under evaluation is 2.5D slices with
by our cooperation hospital is also adopted in the experiment.
 K = 2, i.e., five successive slices. The batch size is set to
The in-house dataset contains multimodal MR tumor brain
 four, and the maximal number of training epochs is 300.
images, including T1c, B0, mean diffusivity (MD), and fractional anisotropy (FA) of 104 glioblastoma (GBM) patients.
The latter three modalities are derived from diffusion-weighted A. Evaluation of Segmentation Results
imaging (DWI). The key statistics of the GBM patients in Accuracy of tumor segmentation results is quantified using
the in-house dataset are summarized in Table I, including Dice score, Sensitivity, Hausdorff distance, Precision, Speciage, sex, tumor location, and the located brain hemisphere. ficity, and Jaccard index. Specifically, the Dice score and
Manually labeled whole tumor masks are available in the Jaccard index are used to evaluate the overlap ratio between
in-house dataset. Although the in-house dataset has no T1 the segmentation results and the ground truth, the Hausdorff
modality, considering that T1c is T1 with contrast agents in distance measures the consistency between the boundaries of
the vessel and both modalities exhibit similar appearance of the segmented tumor and the ground truth, the Sensitivity is
gray matter and white matter at normal regions [31], for the an indicator of the true positive rate, while the Precision and
in-house dataset, we adopt T1c MR tumor brain images as the Specificity can indicate the segmentation ability to correctly
input of IntroVAE to reconstruct T1 MR normal brain images. identify the tumor and non-tumor regions.
 It is worth noting that IntroVAE is trained independently For the BraTS2022 dataset, the average and standard deviabefore integrated into our framework, i.e, the parameters of tion of the six metrics on enhancing tumor (ET, i.e., enhancing
IntroVAE are fixed in the training stage of our framework. core), tumor core (TC, i.e., ET+necrosis), and whole tumor
Specifically, the IXI dataset [32], which contains 581 T1 MR (WT, i.e., ET+TC+edema) are calculated, while for the innormal brain images, are used to train IntroVAE. All images of house dataset, the corresponding metrics on whole tumor are
the IXI dataset go through the same pre-processing stage used calculated. Details of the evaluation results comparing with the
in the BraTS2022 and in-house datasets to reduce possible nine state-of-the-art methods and the ablation study are shown
distribution shift. The training strategy of IntroVAE follows in Table II. It is clear that our framework outperforms the
the paper [14], where the hyperparameters, such as the batch other methods in terms of all metrics on both datasets. Moresize and maximal number of training epochs, are set to 120 and over, the evaluation results of the ablation study demonstrate
200, respectively. that each proposed component in our framework, including
 Besides our framework, exisiting state-of-the-art methods, GCB, normal appearance network, and SimSiam based FAM,
including V-Net [33], Attention U-Net [34], nnU-Net [35], plays an effective and positive role in the segmentation. The
UNETR [36], nnFormer [37], TransBTS [5], MultiCNN [38], patient-wise Wilcoxon signed rank test [41] is adopted to
MultiFormer [39], and TuningUNet [40] are also evaluated. the evaluation results between our framework and the other
Moreover, ablation experiments of our framework are also methods, and all resulting p values are < 0.05, i.e., statistical
conducted. Specifically, Baseline-1 and Baseline-2 use only significance. It is worth noting that although Baseline-3 adopts
1204 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 TABLE II
 E VALUATION R ESULTS OF A LL M ETHODS U NDER C OMPARISON
LIU et al.: MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION BOOSTED BY MONOMODAL NORMAL BRAIN IMAGES 1205

Fig. 5. Examples of segmentation results using all methods under evaluation in the BraTS2022 dataset (left) and in-house dataset (right). Note that, the
BraTS2022 dataset contains three tumor ROIs, i.e., edema (gray), enhancing core (white), and necrosis (dark gray), while the in-house dataset has one whole
tumor region. It is clear that the segmentation results using our framework are more accurate than the other methods under evaluation in both BraTS2022 and
in-house datasets, especially at the regions marked in red circles.

the normal appearance network, FT,l learned from multimodal while the weights of T1 and T1c are close to zero. This is
tumor brain images and FR,l learned from monomodal normal because T2 and FLAIR exhibit clear boundary and shape of
brain images suffer from the incomparable issue as no Sim- whole brain tumor, which can be directly reflected by low-level
Siam network is applied before feature comparison. Therefore, features. As the network depth increasing (encoding level l =
the improvement using Baseline-3 is minor as compared with 3 and 4), details of tumor structure contained in T1 and T1c are
Baseline-2 which has no normal appearance network. learned as high-level features, thus, the weights of T1 and T1c
 Fig. 5 shows some examples of the segmented brain tumors are increased. For the in-house dataset, the trend of modality
using each method under evaluation on both datasets. It is clear weights is similar to the BraTS2022 dataset. Specifically, B0,
that for each tumor ROI in the BraTS2022 dataset and the MD, and FA, which have high contrast tumor appearance, are
whole tumor region in the in-house dataset, the segmentation assigned with large weights at low levels, while for T1c, which
results using our framework are more consistent with the contains details of tumor structure, large weights are assigned
ground truth than the other SOTA methods under evaluation, at high levels.
especially at the regions marked in red circles.

B. Evaluation of Global Correlation Block C. Evaluation of Feature Alignment Module
 Table II shows that the global correlation block (GCB) can To give an intuitive view of the effect of the feature
do more effective fusion of features learned from multimodal alignment module (FAM) as well as the SimSiam network in it,
images than the traditional cross modality convolution (CMC). distributions of features in ζ (FT,l ) and g(FR,l ) (after feature
As aforementioned (Section II-A), at each encoding level l of alignment) are plotted in Fig. 7. Specifically, features, i.e.,
the segmentation backbone, GCB fuses features of different ζ (FT,l )(x) and g(FR,l )(x), are divided into three classes: (1)
modalities channel-wisely according to the weighting vector tumor regions in ζ (FT,l ); (2) normal regions in ζ (FT,l ); and
ωlc ∈ R M , c = 1, . . . , C defined in (2). Each element in ωlc (3) normal regions in g(FR,l ). All features are projected onto
indicates the importance of the corresponding modality at the a 2D plane using principal component analysis (PCA) [42].
c-th channel. C = 64, 128, 256, and 512 at the encoding Clearly, with the SimSiam network, features at normal
level l = 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively. Fig. 6 shows the regions in ζ (FT,l ) and g(FR,l ) can be effectively aligned and
average ωlc (m), i.e., average weight of the m-th modality, are different from the features at tumor regions in ζ (FT,l ).
of all input images calculated at the testing stage. The vertical In contrast, good feature alignment cannot be achieved without
axis indicates the average weights of each modality, and the the SimSiam network, causing the feature incomparable issue.
horizontal axis indicates the channel. Dotted lines indicate the Fig. 8 shows some examples of the attention maps Al produced
quarter and three-quarter weights. after the feature comparison at each decoding level (l =
 It is clear that for the BraTS2022 dataset, the weights of T2 1, . . . , 4) of our framework and Baseline-3. It is clear that, Al
and FLAIR are close to one at encoding level l = 1 and 2, of our framework has more concentrated tumor regions than
1206 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

Fig. 6. Modality weights during the channel-wise feature fusion in the fusion Fig. 7. Distribution of features in ζ (FT,l ) and g(FR,l ) at each decoding
module at each encoding level l of the segmentation backbone using the level l of our framework and Baseline-3 (l = 1, . . . , 4) using BraTS2022
BraTS2022 and in-house datasets. The vertical axis represents weights, and and In-house datasets. Features are from three classes, i.e., tumor regions in
the horizontal axis indicates channels. ζ (FT,l ), normal regions in ζ (FT,l ) and normal regions in g(FR,l ), which are
 colored in blue, green and orange, respectively.
Baseline-3. As a result, the final tumor segmentation results
using our framework is more consistent with the ground truth. where IR is the original normal brain image reconstructed by
 IntroVAE, q is data distribution, N represents Gaussian distribution, the scalar parameters α1:T determine the variance of
D. Sensitivity to Normal Brain Images
 the noise added at each iteration, and I is the identity matrix.
 Normal brain images, which are used as reference to high- At each iteration t = 1, . . . , T , the distribution of image IRt is
light tumor-related features, play an important role in our a combination of IRt−1 and Gaussian noise, and αt determines
framework. In this section, we evaluate the influence of normal how much the information of IRt−1 is preserved. Thus, the
brain images to our framework. Specifically, we conduct higher t, the lower quality of the resulting normal brain image
this experiment to answer the following questions: (1) How IRt . In our experiment, α1:T is set to linearly increased from
does image noise in the reconstructed normal brain images α1 = 0.001 to αT = 0.02. We evaluate the segmentation
affect the segmentation? (2) What is the performance of our results of our framework using t = 200, 400, 700, and 1000,
framework using other generative models instead of IntroVAE? respectively. Details of the evaluation results are shown in
(3) Can we use normal brain images from healthy subjects in Table III. It is clear that the performance of tumor region
our framework? segmentation is degraded as the quality of normal brain images
 To the first question, we gradually add Gaussian noise to decreases. Specifically, for t = 200, the segmentation results
each normal brain image reconstructed by IntroVAE following is relatively stable, but as the t increases the performance is
a forward Markovian diffusion process [43] over T iterations: sharply decreased. Therefore, our framework is sensitive to the
 noises in normal brain images.
 T
 Y To the second question concerning generative models, our
 q(IRT |IR ) = q(IRt |IRt−1 ) (8)
 framework currently uses IntroVAE to reconstruct high qualt=1
 √ t−1 ity normal brain images from corresponding tumor brain
 q(IRt |IRt−1 ) = N (IRt ; αt IR , (1 − αt )I ), (9) images as input of the normal appearance network. In this
LIU et al.: MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION BOOSTED BY MONOMODAL NORMAL BRAIN IMAGES 1207

 TABLE III
 S ENSTIVITY OF O UR F RAMEWORK TO THE Q UALITY OF N ORMAL B RAIN I MAGES

experiment, we replace IntroVAE with other generative models unreal and disordered. In contrast, the anatomical structure
commonly adopted in anomaly detection methods, such as using VAE is consistent with human brain in general.
VAE [13] and f-AnoGAN [44]. The training dataset for each To the third question about using normal brain images
generative model is the same as that used in IntroVAE, i.e., from healthy subjects instead of reconstruction. For each input
the IXI dataset. Some examples of the normal brain images multimodal tumor brain images of our framework, T1 MR
reconstructed by IntroVAE, VAE, and f-AnoGAN are shown normal brain images of healthy subjects, which have the
in Fig. 9. It is clear that the reconstructed normal brain minimal L2 distance to the T1 modality of the tumor brain
images using VAE are highly blurry, and important anatomical images, are selected from the IXI normal brain dataset as the
structure, such as the brain sulcus and gyrus, is missing. input of the normal appearance network. Clearly, because of
f-AnoGAN can reconstruct relatively clear brain anatomical inter-subject variation, normal brain images of healthy subjects
structure, but it cannot preserve anatomical consistency well. usually have lower anatomical consistency with tumor brain
Since IntroVAE combines the merits of both VAE and GAN, images than those reconstructed by IntroVAE. To quantify
the reconstruction quality is better than VAE and f-AnoGAN. such consistency, average image intensity error ratio (ER)
In our experiment, VAE and f-AnoGAN instead of IntroVAE between each tumor brain image and its corresponding normal
are respectively used in our framework to produce the normal brain image is calculated, which is defined as
brain images for the normal appearance network. Details of
 x∈NR |IT (x) − IR (x)|
 P
the evaluation results are shown in Table III. Clearly, the final ER(IT , IR ) = , (10)
 x∈NR IT (x)
 P
segmentation results using VAE and f-AnoGAN are inferior
to IntroVAE. Interestingly, the evaluation results show that where IT and IR indicate tumor brain image (T1 modality) and
our framework with VAE is better than f-AnoGAN, the main its corresponding T1 MR normal brain image (reconstructed
reason is that although the reconstructed normal brain images by IntroVAE or from healthy subjects), respectively, and NR
using f-AnoGAN is clear, the anatomical structure is usually stands for normal regions in IT . Low ER indicates high
1208 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

Fig. 8. Examples of the attention maps generated after the feature comparison Fig. 9. Examples of reconstructed normal brain images of BraTS2022
at each decoding level. Clearly, the quality of the attention maps and the final and in-house datasets using IntroVAE, VAE, and f-AnoGAN. Specifically,
segmentation results produced by our framework (with SimSiam) are better VAE has blurred reconstruction structure, f-AnoGAN has clear but disordered
than Baseline-3 (without SimSiam). structure, IntroVAE has clear and reasonable structure.

consistency between IT and IR . For the BraTS2022 dataset, Specifically, we adopt TransBTS as the segmentation backthe averages and standard deviations of the error ratio are bone of our framework and compare with pure TransBTS on
0.274±0.043 (IntroVAE) vs. 0.495±0.168 (healthy subjects), the BraTS2022 and in-house datasets. The evaluation results
and for the in-house dataset, the results are 0.378 ± 0.010 are shown in Table IV. It is clear that TransBTS in our
(IntroVAE) vs. 0.573 ± 0.018 (healthy subjects). The corre- framework, which is denoted as Ours (TransBTS), achieves
sponding p values of Wilcoxon signed rank test are 1.120 × better performance than pure TransBTS in most metrics except
10−12 (BraTS2022) and 1.149 × 10−6 (in-house dataset), the Specificity on the in-house dataset. Therefore, our framerespectively. As aforementioned, for each input tumor brain work, which uses normal brain images as reference to conduct
images, the most similar T1 MR normal brain image from feature-level comparison with tumor brain images, is broadly
healthy subject is selected from the IXI dataset and sent to applicable and can boost the segmentation performance of
the normal appearance network. The evaluation results of both existing methods.
BraTS2022 and in-house datasets are shown in Table III.
It can be seen that the performance of our framework is little F. Model Complexity
decreased but still comparable to that using IntroVAE.
 To make a comprehensive comparison of all methods under
 evaluation, besides the segmentation accuracy reported in the
E. Evaluation of Different Segmentation Backbone previous sections, network parameters, number of floating
 The segmentation backbone of our framework is of a point operations (FLOPs), and average inference time are
simple U-net like encoder-decoder structure. Actually, the investigated. The evaluation results are shown in Table V.
segmentation backbone can be replaced by other segmentation Specifically, except V-Net, and baseline-1 and -2 from the
networks, such as TransBTS [5]. In this section, we eval- ablation study, our framework has the smaller number of
uate the generalization ability of our framework and show parameters than the rest methods. The FLOPs of our framethe advantage of integrating normal appearance network. work is relatively large, and the main reason is the global
LIU et al.: MULTIMODAL BRAIN TUMOR SEGMENTATION BOOSTED BY MONOMODAL NORMAL BRAIN IMAGES 1209

 TABLE IV
 E VALUATION R ESULTS OF O UR F RAMEWORK U SING T RANS BTS A S S EGMENTATION BACKBONE

 TABLE V maps Al can be generated, finally boosting the performance
 E VALUATION R ESULTS OF M ODEL C OMPLEXITY of brain tumor segmentation.
 Both public BraTS2022 and in-house datasets were used to
 evaluate our framework. The experimental results showed that
 our framework achieved the best performance of all methods
 under evaluation in terms of Dice score, Sensitivity, Hausdorff
 distance, Precision, Specificity, and Jaccard index. Besides the
 comparison with the state-of-the-art segmentation methods,
 ablation experiments were also conducted and demonstrated
 that all proposed components, including IntroVAE, GCB,
 FAM, and the normal appearance network, have positive
 impacts on the segmentation results. Moreover, we investigated
 the performance of our framework using normal brain images
 with different qualities and sources. The experimental results
 showed that our framework can be influenced by the noise
 in normal brain images and the performance is relatively
 stable using normal brain images from healthy subjects.
 In addition, the evaluation results using VAE and f-AnoGAN
 showed that reconstructed normal brain images with blurred
 but consistent anatomical structure in general can provide more
correlation block (GCB), which is used for multimodal fusion effective information to enhance the segmentation than clear
and requires large FLOPs. In a similar way, Baseline-1, which but disordered anatomical structure. At last, we evaluated our
adopt cross modality convolution (CMC) for multimodal framework using different segmentation backbone, and the
fusion, require large FLOPs too. It is worth noting that all results showed that our framework has high generalization
methods in our experiment take 2.5D slices as input, therefore, ability and can improve the performance of existing segmenthe network parameter, FLOPs, and average inference time are tation networks.
smaller than those working on 3D. For the future study, although IntroVAE and FAM with
 SimSiam are used in our framework, we noted that the domain
 gap between the monomodal normal brain images and the
 IV. C ONCLUSION multimodal tumor brain images is still non-negligible. Thus,
 In this paper, we proposed a novel deep learning framework we will explore possible ways of getting multimodal normal
for multimodal brain tumor segmentation, where monomodal brain images. Moreover, our framework has relatively large
normal brain images were used as reference to compare with computational workload, and we will explore more lightweight
multimodal tumor brain images in a learned feature space. techniques for effective fusion of cross-modality.
In this way, tumor-related features can be highlighted and R EFERENCES
enhanced for good segmentation. In our framework, a new [1] H. Dong, G. Yang, F. Liu, Y. Mo, and Y. Guo, “Automatic brain
self-attention based global correlation block (GCB) was pre- tumor detection and segmentation using U-Net based fully convolutional
sented to capture global correlations among features learned networks,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Med. Image Understand. Anal. Cham,
 Switzerland: Springer, Jul. 2017, pp. 506–517.
from different modalities of tumor brain images for effective
 [2] K. Kamnitsas et al., “Efficient multi-scale 3D CNN with fully connected
feature fusion. Moreover, a new feature alignment module CRF for accurate brain lesion segmentation,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 36,
(FAM) was proposed to tackle the incomparable issue between pp. 61–78, Feb. 2017.
features learned from multimodal tumor brain images and [3] H. Jia, Y. Xia, W. Cai, and H. Huang, “Learning high-resolution and efficient non-local features for brain glioma segmentation in MR images,” in
monomodal normal brain images. Based on FAM, effective Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. Cham,
feature comparison can be achieved, and high quality attention Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 480–490.
1210 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2024

 [4] D. Zhang, G. Huang, Q. Zhang, J. Han, J. Han, and Y. Yu, “Cross- [24] X. Wang, R. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local neural
 modality deep feature learning for brain tumor segmentation,” Pattern networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 Recognit., vol. 110, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 107562. Jun. 2018, pp. 7794–7803.
 [5] W. Wang, C. Chen, M. Ding, H. Yu, S. Zha, and J. Li, “TransBTS: [25] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 Multimodal brain tumor segmentation using transformer,” in Proc. for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
 24th Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. Cham, [26] L. R. Dice, “Measures of the amount of ecologic associa-
 Switzerland: Springer, 2021, pp. 109–119. tion between species,” Ecology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 297–302,
 [6] Z. Jiang, C. Ding, M. Liu, and D. Tao, “Two-stage cascaded U-Net: 1st Jul. 1945.
 place solution to BraTS challenge 2019 segmentation task,” in Proc. Int. [27] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,”
 MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, 2019, pp. 231–241. in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit.,
 [7] D. Nie, L. Xiang, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Dual adversarial learning Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758.
 with attention mechanism for fine-grained medical image synthesis,” [28] S. Jetley, N. A. Lord, N. Lee, and P. H. S. Torr, “Learn to pay attention,”
 2019, arXiv:1907.03297. 2018, arXiv:1804.02391.
 [8] Z. Tang, S. Ahmad, P.-T. Yap, and D. Shen, “Multi-atlas segmentation [29] F. Wang et al., “Residual attention network for image classification,” in
 of MR tumor brain images using low-rank based image recovery,” IEEE Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 2224–2235, Oct. 2018. pp. 3156–3164.
 [9] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional [30] B. H. Menze et al., “The multimodal brain tumor image segmentanetworks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. tion benchmark (BRATS),” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 34, no. 10,
 Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. (MICCAI), 2015, pp. 1993–2024, Oct. 2015.
 pp. 234–241. [31] E.-W. Radue, M. Weigel, R. Wiest, and H. Urbach, “Introduction to
[10] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” 2017, arXiv:1706.03762. magnetic resonance imaging for neurologists,” Continuum, Lifelong
[11] C. Baur, B. Wiestler, S. Albarqouni, and N. Navab, “Deep autoencoding Learn. Neurol., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1379–1398, 2016.
 models for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR images,” [32] IXI. Information Extraction From Images. Accessed: Feb. 1, 2022.
 in Proc. Int. MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop, 2018, pp. 161–169. [Online]. Available: http://www.brain-development.org
[12] M. Astaraki, I. Toma-Dasu, Ö. Smedby, and C. Wang, “Normal [33] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-Net: Fully convolutional
 appearance autoencoder for lung cancer detection and segmentation,” neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation,” in Proc.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent. 4th Int. Conf. 3D Vis. (3DV), Oct. 2016, pp. 565–571.
 (MICCAI), 2019, pp. 249–256. [34] J. Schlemper et al., “Attention gated networks: Learning to lever-
[13] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” 2013, age salient regions in medical images,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 53,
 arXiv:1312.6114. pp. 197–207, Apr. 2019.
[14] K. Kobayashi et al., “Learning global and local features of nor- [35] F. Isensee, P. F. Jaeger, S. A. A. Kohl, J. Petersen, and K. H. Maier-Hein,
 mal brain anatomy for unsupervised abnormality detection,” 2020, “nnU-Net: A self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomediarXiv:2005.12573. cal image segmentation,” Nature Methods, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 203–211,
[15] M. M. R. Siddiquee et al., “Learning fixed points in generative adver- Feb. 2021.
 sarial networks: From image-to-image translation to disease detection [36] A. Hatamizadeh et al., “UNETR: Transformers for 3D medical image
 and localization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 Oct. 2019, pp. 191–200. (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 574–584.
[16] C. Baur, S. Denner, B. Wiestler, N. Navab, and S. Albarqouni, [37] H.-Y. Zhou, J. Guo, Y. Zhang, L. Yu, L. Wang, and Y. Yu,
 “Autoencoders for unsupervised anomaly segmentation in brain MR “NnFormer: Interleaved transformer for volumetric segmentation,” 2021,
 images: A comparative study,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 69, Apr. 2021, arXiv:2109.03201.
 Art. no. 101952. [38] R. A. Zeineldin, M. E. Karar, O. Burgert, and F. Mathis-Ullrich,
[17] B. M. Ellingson et al., “Consensus recommendations for a standardized “Multimodal CNN networks for brain tumor segmentation in MRI:
 brain tumor imaging protocol in clinical trials,” Neuro-Oncol., vol. 17, A brats 2022 challenge solution,” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple
 no. 9, pp. 1188–1198, Aug. 2015, doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nov095. Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic Brain Injuries, S. Bakas et al., Eds.
[18] Z. Tang, P.-T. Yap, and D. Shen, “A new multi-atlas registration Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023, pp. 127–137.
 framework for multimodal pathological images using conventional [39] J. Cho and J. Park, “Multi-modal transformer for brain tumor segmentamonomodal normal atlases,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 28, no. 5, tion,” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke and Traumatic
 pp. 2293–2304, May 2019. Brain Injuries, S. Bakas et al., Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023,
[19] H. Huang, Z. Li, R. He, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “IntroVAE: Introspec- pp. 138–148.
 tive variational autoencoders for photographic image synthesis,” 2018, [40] M. Futrega, M. Marcinkiewicz, and P. Ribalta, “Tuning U-Net for brain
 arXiv:1807.06358. tumor segmentation,” in Brainlesion: Glioma, Multiple Sclerosis, Stroke
[20] T. Zhou, S. Canu, P. Vera, and S. Ruan, “Brain tumor segmentation with and Traumatic Brain Injuries, S. Bakas et al., Eds. Cham, Switzerland:
 missing modalities via latent multi-source correlation representation,” in Springer, 2023, pp. 162–173.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., 2020, [41] R. Woolson, “Wilcoxon signed-rank test,” in Wiley Encyclopedia of
 pp. 533–541. Clinical Trials. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2007, pp. 1–3.
[21] F. Xu, H. Ma, J. Sun, R. Wu, X. Liu, and Y. Kong, “LSTM multi-modal [42] I. T. Jolliffe and J. Cadima, “Principal component analysis: A review
 UNet for brain tumor segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Image, and recent developments,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, Math., Phys. Eng.
 Vis. Comput. (ICIVC), Jul. 2019, pp. 236–240. Sci., vol. 374, no. 2065, Apr. 2016, Art. no. 20150202.
[22] T. Zhou, S. Canu, P. Vera, and S. Ruan, “Latent correlation repre- [43] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 sentation learning for brain tumor segmentation with missing MRI in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33. Vancouver, BC, Canada: Curran Associates,
 modalities,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 4263–4274, 2021. 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[23] K.-L. Tseng, Y.-L. Lin, W. Hsu, and C.-Y. Huang, “Joint sequence learn- [44] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, G. Langs, and U. Schmidting and cross-modality convolution for 3D biomedical segmentation,” Erfurth, “F-AnoGAN: Fast unsupervised anomaly detection with
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, generative adversarial networks,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 54, pp. 30–44,
 pp. 6393–6400. May 2019.