IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024 4013

 No More Data Silos: Unified Microservice Failure
 Diagnosis With Temporal Knowledge Graph
 Shenglin Zhang , Member, IEEE, Yongxin Zhao , Sibo Xia , Shirui Wei , Yongqian Sun , Member, IEEE,
 Chenyu Zhao, Shiyu Ma , Junhua Kuang, Bolin Zhu , Lemeng Pan , Yicheng Guo ,
 and Dan Pei , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Microservices improve the scalability and flexibil- I. INTRODUCTION
ity of monolithic architectures to accommodate the evolution of
 ICROSERVICES have gained significant attention in
software systems, but the complexity and dynamics of microservices challenge system reliability. Ensuring microservice quality
requires efficient failure diagnosis, including detection and triage.
 M the last few years in both industry and academia [1].
 However, the complexity and dynamism of microservice sys-
Failure detection involves identifying anomalous behavior within tems pose unique challenges for maintenance [2]. When a
the system, while triage entails classifying the failure type and
directing it to the engineering team for resolution. Unfortunately,
 microservice system fails, the failure will propagate along the
current approaches reliant on single-modal monitoring data, such interaction network between microservices, posing significant
as metrics, logs, or traces, cannot capture all failures and neglect challenges and pressures for operators. Failures will negatively
interconnections among multimodal data, leading to erroneous di- impact user experience and cause enormous losses for service
agnoses. Recent multimodal data fusion studies struggle to achieve providers if they are not quickly diagnosed and mitigated [3],
deep integration, limiting diagnostic accuracy due to insufficiently
captured interdependencies. Therefore, we propose UniDiag, which
 [4]. To ensure high availability and minimize service downtime,
leverages temporal knowledge graphs to fuse multimodal data for prompt diagnosis, encompassing both detection and triage, is
effective failure diagnosis. UniDiag applies a simple yet effective crucial [5], [6]. This allows operators to respond efficiently to
stream-based anomaly detection method to reduce computational failures, mitigating their impact and restoring service functioncost and a novel microservice-oriented graph embedding method ality as quickly as possible. Proactive failure detection can alert
to represent the state of systems comprehensively. To assess the
performance of UniDiag, we conduct extensive evaluation experioperators timely, and accurate failure triage can not only provide
ments using datasets from two benchmark microservice systems, operators with suggestions for mitigation measures (Table I)
demonstrating its superiority over existing methods and affirming but also minimize the cost associated with reassignment, which
the efficacy of multimodal data fusion. Additionally, we have pub- refers to the process of re-allocating the initially assigned mitigalicly made the code and data available to facilitate further research. tion measures to the potentially more appropriate measures [5].
 Index Terms—Microservice, failure diagnosis, multimodal data, Therefore, rapid and accurate failure diagnosis is indispensable
knowledge graph. for effectively maintaining microservice systems.
 Received 18 June 2024; revised 19 September 2024; accepted 16 October A microservice system is an architecture composed of mul-
2024. Date of publication 31 October 2024; date of current version 30 De- tiple microservices, with each microservice having multiple
cember 2024. This work was supported in part by the Advanced Research
Project of China under Grant 31511010501, and in part by the National Natural instances. To monitor the status of microservice systems in real-
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272249, Grant 62302244, and Grant time and achieve rapid failure diagnosis, operators often contin-
62072264. (Corresponding author: Yongqian Sun.) uously collect three modalities of monitoring data (i.e., metrics,
 Shenglin Zhang is with the College of Software, Haihe Laboratory of Information Technology Application Innovation (HL-IT), Nankai University, Tianjin logs, traces) for each microservice instance [7]. Fig. 1 shows
300192, China (e-mail: zhangsl@nankai.edu.cn). the three modalities of data in a microservice system. Metrics
 Yongxin Zhao, Sibo Xia, Shiyu Ma, and Junhua Kuang are with the Nankai include system-level metrics (e.g., CPU utilization, memory
University, Tianjin 300192, China (e-mail: zyx_nkcs@mail.nankai.edu.cn;
xiath@mail.nankai.edu.cn; mashiyu@mail.nankai.edu.cn; 2013157@mail. utilization, and network throughput) and user-perceived metrics
nankai.edu.cn). (e.g., average response time, error rate, and page view count),
 Shirui Wei is with the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing presented as time series. Logs are semi-structured text that
101408, China (e-mail: weishirui23@mails.ucas.ac.cn).
 Yongqian Sun is with the College of Software, Tianjin Key Laboratory of records various events and system runtime status. Traces are
Software Experience and Human Computer Interaction (TKL-SEHCI), Nankai in the tree structure recording information about user requests
University, Tianjin 300192, China (e-mail: sunyongqian@nankai.edu.cn). like instances and service calls, and each call forms a span.
 Chenyu Zhao is with the Alibaba Group, Beijing 100020, China (e-mail:
zhaochenyu@mail.nankai.edu.cn). For example, as shown in Fig. 1, after a failure occurs, the
 Bolin Zhu is with the Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China (e-mail: “system.cpu.pct_utilization” metric sharply rises, and simultabolinzhu@smail.nju.edu.cn). neously microservice instances S1 and S2 generate anomalous
 Lemeng Pan and Yicheng Guo are with the Huawei Technologies
Co., Ltd., Shenzhen 518129, China (e-mail: panlemeng@huawei.com; log messages, with a significant increase in response time in
guoyicheng3@huawei.com). related traces.
 Dan Pei is with the Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, Over the years, many single-modal data-based failure diag-
Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: peidan@tsinghua.edu.cn).
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2024.3489444 nosis approaches for microservice systems have been proposed

 1939-1374 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I
 ANOMALOUS MANIFESTATIONS OF MULTIMODAL DATA ARE DERIVED FROM AN EXTENSIVE EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF FAILURE CASES, AND MITIGATION
 MEASURES FOR EACH FAILURE TYPE ARE BASED ON THEIR UNDERLYING ROOT CAUSES [21]

Fig. 1. An example of the multimodal data of a microservice system during a failure. Fig. 1(a) shows two metrics: the blue line in the figure represents the original
value of the metric, and the red line represents an anomalous fragment. Fig. 1(b) shows eight logs; the red ones are anomalous. Fig. 1(c) shows a trace where a node
represents a microservice instance, an edge from a caller to a callee denotes a span, and the red span is anomalous because of its excessively high response time.

(e.g., metrics [8], [9], [10], logs [11], [12], [13], or traces [14]). learning frameworks in these existing methods introduces a
However, these approaches usually lead to a large number of significant dependency on labeled data, restricting their flexibilmisdiagnoses due to the inherent limitations of the characteris- ity and generalization capabilities, particularly when confronted
tics of the data used: with novel failure patterns or evolving system architectures.
 Limitations of Metrics: Metrics can react rapidly to changes Much research has demonstrated that knowledge graph (KG)
in system performance [15], reflecting various failure modes is a potent technique for combining multimodal informavia higher or lower values. However, the over-sensitivity of the tion [22], [23]. It can capture entity characteristics for subsequent
metrics may produce false alarms [15], [16]. For example, in failure detection and triage. Therefore, we try to apply KG to
scenarios where memory is effectively released, notwithstanding fuse multimodal data for failure diagnosis (i.e., failure detection
a potentially decreased memory utilization may be lower than and triage). However, applying KG to achieve failure diagnosis
normal level, it does not indicate a system failure. through multimodal data faces the following challenges:
 Limitations of Logs: Since logs are semi-structured text gen- 1) The immense volume of monitoring data generated by mierated by logging statements in software source code [17], they croservices systems [2], makes it challenging to integrate
rely significantly on developers’ domain knowledge. Conse- all the data into the KG in the form of entities and relations.
quently, certain nuanced performance issues, such as anomalous Furthermore, as aforementioned, the multimodal data is
memory utilization, may not be adequately reflected in the logs, heterogeneous. The fusion of these heterogeneous data in
rendering it impossible to diagnose “Resource underprovision- a KG poses significant challenges.
ing” failures (Table I). 2) The relations between entities in the KG manifest as a
 Limitations of Traces: The information reflecting calls be- heterogeneous composition, capturing not only the states
tween microservice instances does not provide information of distinct events within a given microservice instance but
about what is happening inside the instance [18]. This lack of also the intricate interactions and resource-sharing across
information makes it unfeasible to diagnose “System component different instances. Moreover, the temporal variations in
damage” failures through tracing alone (Table I). instance states and the dynamic fluctuations in the num-
 Due to the above limitations, recent studies have explored ber of instances [24], [25] present notable obstacles in
multimodal data fusion for enhanced failure diagnosis [19], [20]. effectively acquiring temporal and heterogeneous struc-
However, these approaches often fall short of achieving suffi- tural information from a KG. Furthermore, deriving graph
ciently deep integration of heterogeneous data sources. This lim- representations from dynamic node embeddings adds to
itation in effectively capturing the complex interdependencies the complexity of the challenge.
between different modalities consequently hinders diagnostic In this paper, we propose UniDiag, a novel approach for
accuracy. Furthermore, the predominant reliance on supervised integrating the multimodal data in microservice systems and
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4015

conducting failure diagnosis. It first fuses multimodal data using failure types. Yuan et al. [12] use supervised methods to extract
a temporal knowledge graph (TKG), which is constructed by features from anomalous logs and correlate them with failure
temporally stacking KG snapshots to capture system dynam- behaviors, requiring extensive manual labeling.
ics [26]. This method enables the effective fusion of multi- MEPFL [14] predicts errors and failure types for trace inmodal data. Subsequently, a novel microservice-oriented graph stances based on system trace data. However, methods like those
embedding (MOGE) method is employed to generate graph in [31], [32], [33] using traces for anomaly detection or root
representations of the TKG, encoding its rich structural and cause localization do not specify failure types.
temporal information. The main contributions of this paper are Several studies integrate multimodal data for anomaly deas follows: tection or root cause localization [18], [19], [20], [34], [35],
 1) UniDiag considers the heterogeneity and correlation of [36], [37]. CloudRCA [20] combines metrics and logs with a
 three modalities of data (i.e., metrics, logs, and traces) Knowledge-informed Hierarchical Bayesian Network for root
 and combines these data with TKG. To the best of our cause analysis. MicroCBR [34] embeds anomaly event seknowledge, we are among the first to apply the KG-based quences into a failure knowledge graph for case retrieval and
 method to fuse the three modalities of data for failure failure triage. DiagFusion [19] uses embedding techniques and
 diagnosis. a Graph Neural Network to determine failure types. Eadro [18]
 2) To decrease the number of entities present in KG and fuse models intra-service dynamics and inter-service dependencies
 the heterogeneous data, we propose a simple yet effective using traces, logs, and KPIs for anomaly detection and root
 stream-based anomaly detection method, addressing the cause localization. TAD [35] employs a Transformer encoder
 first challenge. model to identify failures and utilizes tracing chains to pinpoint
 3) To obtain the comprehensive state representation of a faulty services. HeMiRCA [36] utilizes Spearman correlation
 microservice system, we propose a novel MOGE method, to localize hierarchical root causes. MULAN [37] localizes root
 integrating the Relation-aware Graph Convolutional Net- causes by co-learning a causal graph from metrics and logs.
 work (R-GCN) [27], Gate Recurrent Unit (GRU) [28] and However, none of these approaches, including Eadro, TAD,
 second-order pooling (SOPOOL) [29], which addresses HeMiRCA, and MULAN offer comprehensive triage of failure
 the second challenge. R-GCN and GRU effectively cap- types in microservice systems.
 ture the heterogeneous structural and temporal information of entities and relations in the TKG, respectively. III. MOTIVATION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
 Furthermore, we utilize SOPOOL to learn a comprehensive graph representation of dynamically changing KGs A. Motivation
 by leveraging the node embeddings. Our goal is to recommend to the operators the occurrence
 4) We assess the efficacy and efficiency of UniDiag by and type of failure based on the latest multimodal data to help
 conducting experiments on two benchmark microservice- operators quickly take the correct mitigation measures. We refer
 generated datasets. Our findings reveal that UniDiag to this as failure diagnosis, which includes failure detection
 achieves online diagnosis within 0.6 seconds and exhibits and triage, which facilitates a more comprehensive identificarobust generalization across diverse microservice systems. tion and comprehension of diverse failure types [5], [6], [38].
 Furthermore, we observe that UniDiag outperforms the Table I lists typical failures encountered in microservice sysbaseline methods, as evidenced by an average F1 -score tems, showcasing the corresponding manifestations of these
 of 0.869 and 0.723 for failure diagnosis on the respective failures on multimodal data and the corresponding mitigation
 datasets, representing a significant improvement of 0.117 measures. The failure types are designated based on their unand 0.04 compared to the best-performing baseline meth- derlying root causes [21]. Nevertheless, the primary objective
 ods, respectively. Beyond achieving superior performance of our research in this study centers on failure diagnosis rather
 on known failure types, UniDiag demonstrates promis- than the subsequent remediation of failures.
 ing capabilities for diagnosing previously unseen failure Our examination of 164 microservice system failure cases coltypes, highlighting its potential for real-world deployment lected from benchmark microservice systems (see Section VI-A
 scenarios. To ensure better reproducibility, we have made for more details) determined that the fusion of multimodal data
 our code and data publicly available [30]. holds crucial significance in detecting and triaging failures.
 During failures, anomalies can be observed in metrics [8],
 [9], [10], logs [11], [12], and traces [31]. Moreover, different
 II. RELATED WORK types of failures exhibit distinct anomalous patterns across these
 Various methodologies exist for diagnosing failures through multimodal data [18].
metric analysis. For instance, iSQUAD [8] labels root causes and 1) The Role of Metric in Failure Diagnosis: As shown in
features for different failure clusters, while PatternMatcher [9] Fig. 1(a), the metric data is defined as x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xT },
employs coarse-grained anomaly detection and a pattern classi- where T is the observation window length and xt ∈ R represents
fier to identify anomalous patterns. DéjàVu [10] trains a model the observation at time t. Metrics are crucial for gauging proper
using historical failures and system dependencies. system functioning. When a microservice instance experiences
 Log analysis is also pivotal for diagnosing microservice sys- failures, the associated metrics (e.g., memory utilization, disk
tem failures. LogCluster [11] clusters log sequences to determine I/O, CPU utilization, and network throughput) frequently exhibit
4016 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

abnormal patterns. Therefore, operators must remain vigilant in orchestration and dynamic interactions. Failure diagnosis is
continuously monitoring the metrics. the core of microservice system maintenance, which enables
 2) The Role of Log in Failure Diagnosis: As shown in operators to resolve failures effectively.
Fig. 1(b), a log message often contains multiple fields, including Our goal is to recommend to the operators the occurrence
timestamp, node ID, and detailed information, etc. The detailed and type of failure based on the latest multimodal system
information field is unstructured and usually contains constants monitoring data to help operators quickly take the correct reand variables. The constants are fixed texts the developers set covery measures. We refer to this as failure diagnosis, which
to describe system event entities and relations. In contrast, the includes failure detection and triage. The detection and triage
variables carry dynamic runtime information (e.g., IP address, of failures facilitate a more comprehensive identification and
file name, status code, etc.) [17]. Various log parsing algo- comprehension of diverse failure types, thereby enabling the
rithms, such as Drain [39] and FT-tree [40], can automatically implementation of suitable remedial actions [5], [6], [38]. For
distinguish the constants and the variables, and generate log example, metrics, logs, and traces are the most direct signals
templates (constants) and parameters (variables). System states that characterize underlying failures [43]. Table I lists typical
and significant events at various critical points are the main failures encountered in microservice systems, showcasing the
function of logs [41]. Diagnosing microservice system failures corresponding manifestations of these failures on multimodal
can be effectively facilitated by analyzing the diverse anomalous data and the corresponding remedial measures. The failure types
behaviors manifested in logs. are designated based on their underlying root causes [21]. Never-
 3) The Role of Trace in Failure Diagnosis: The microser- theless, the primary objective of our research in this study centers
vice systems encompass a significant volume of asynchronous on failure diagnosis rather than the subsequent remediation of
interactions between instances of microservices, which involve failures.
intricate invocation chains [2]. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the mutual
invocations between instances can be represented as trace trees,
 IV. PRELIMINARIES
where one invocation request corresponds to one trace. Each
span corresponds to one service invocation, having a span ID A. Temporal Knowledge Graph
and a parent ID to reconstruct the calling relations between A TKG incorporates temporal information into a static KG by
individual spans [42]. The trace data, which contains response extending the triple (h, r, t) into a quadruple (h, r, t, τ ), where h
time, status codes, and request frequency, etc., can be crucial represents the head entity, t represents the tail entity, r represents
indicators for failures [14]. the relation, τ provides additional temporal information about
 4) Multimodal Data Fusion: For instance, consider a “Net- the fact of the triple, indicating that the fact is valid at time
work device breakdown” failure may result in increased network τ . KG can effectively combine multimodal data, and since
packet errors for affected services. While metrics alone might metrics, logs, and traces change dynamically over time, using
indicate anomalies, identifying the failure type remains chal- TKG allows for the accurate representation of the microservice
lenging without additional contextual information. By integrat- system’s state.
ing metrics with traces, which expose disrupted communication
paths between services, operators can more precisely diagnose
the underlying network device failure. B. R-GCN
 In light of the above observations, a novel approach for the fu- To capture the multiple relations in the graph, R-GCN [27]
sion of multimodal data to enable effective failure diagnosis has models different relations for the central node separately while
been conceptualized. This has culminated in the development of adding self-looping features for feature fusion and continuously
UniDiag. updating the representation of the central node. In KGs, different
 It is worth noting that in our study, data collection is con- edge types convey distinct information, and the direction of
ducted with distinct granularity levels to capture comprehensive edges plays a crucial role in determining the underlying facts.
insights. Metrics and logs are collected at the microservice in- Therefore, in our work, we employ R-GCN to capture not only
stance level, gaining a detailed understanding of the performance the states of individual events within a specific microservice
and the events within individual microservice instances, re- instance but also the intricate relations among diverse instances.
spectively. Meanwhile, traces are collected at the microservices
system level, revealing intricate interactions and dependencies
among the microservices and facilitating a holistic understand- C. GRU
ing of the whole system. This multi-faceted analysis, encom- Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [44] is a powerful model
passing various levels of data granularity, enables UniDiag to for processing sequential data [45]. However, it cannot solve
deliver a comprehensive assessment of the microservices system problems such as long-term memory and gradients in backpropand empowers accurate failure diagnosis. agation. Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) [46] and GRU [28]
 have been proposed to address this issue. GRU and LSTM
 are similar in functional performance in many cases [47], but
B. Problem Statement
 compared to LSTM, GRU has fewer parameters and is more
 The fine-grained decomposition of microservices makes the computationally efficient. Therefore, we choose GRU in Unisystem susceptible to performance issues due to highly complex Diag.
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4017

Fig. 2. The framework of UniDiag.

 V. APPROACH adeptly capturing the dynamic nature of microservices. Their
 ability to accommodate updates ensures real-time accuracy,
A. Overview
 which is essential for effective monitoring in rapidly evolving
 As shown in Fig. 2, UniDiag has two parts: offline training and environments. UniDiag applies TKGs to enhance the fusion of
online diagnosis. In the offline training stage, UniDiag consists heterogeneous multimodal data. The TKGs can be viewed as a
of three main steps: series of sub-KGs, i.e., G = (Gτ −k+1 , . . . , Gτ −1 , Gτ ), where
 1) Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction Gτ is the KG at time τ . We try to utilize all instances, metrics,
 (Section V-B): To address the first challenge of KG, we and log templates in the microservice system as nodes in Gτ .
 introduce a stream-based anomaly detection module. It Serializing Multimodal Data: As shown on the left side of
 first serializes the multimodal data into streams based on Fig. 3, we need to serialize multimodal data of each microservice
 their characteristics, and then conducts anomaly detection instance to obtain multimodal information at each time point.
 for each stream. To deal with the dynamically changing 1) Metric Serialization: Metrics appear in the form of time sedata, UniDiag builds a TKG based on the topological ries with a serialized structure. Therefore, UniDiag adopts
 relations of microservice systems. standard preprocessing steps such as normalization.
 2) MOGE (Section V-C): To address the second challenge, 2) Log Serialization: Logs, as semi-structured text, encap-
 UniDiag combines R-GCN, GRU, and SOPOOL. R-GCN sulate crucial information regarding system events [17].
 leverages its ability to handle multi-relational graphs to UniDiag employs the Drain algorithm [39] to extract fixed
 learn the structural information within the TKG. GRU, on text segments, referred to as log templates, which preserve
 the other hand, captures long sequence dependencies to the core semantic content essential for effective analylearn the temporal information within the TKG. Lastly, sis [48]. Utilizing the sliding window technique, UniDiag
 SOPOOL pools the TKG to capture high-level features segments the logs and quantifies the occurrence frequency
 within the graph. of each log template per minute. These frequencies are
 3) Failure Diagnosis (Section V-D): A hierarchical cluster- subsequently transformed into time series data, aligning
 ing approach is used to perform failure diagnosis on the with metrics for comprehensive analysis.
 learned graph embeddings to obtain a number of clusters. 3) Trace Serialization: UniDiag concentrates on three pivotal
 Then, UniDiag presents these clusters to operators who metrics for traces: response time (RT), error count (EC),
 investigate and assign corresponding normal or failure and query count (QC) [32]. These metrics are essential for
 types to each cluster. identifying anomalies related to performance, reliability,
 In the online diagnosis (Section V-E) stage, UniDiag converts and traffic [32]. Specifically, to ensure a comprehensive
the data into a graph representation vector and diagnoses the evaluation, we divide the data into one-minute time winfailure type based on the trained model (Section V-D). dows and obtain the values of the three critical metrics
 within each window. Accordingly, we generate three time
 series for each tuple <caller, callee>, each reflecting
B. Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction the average response time, query count, and error count,
 KG representations, characterized by their structured nodes respectively.
and edges, elucidate the relationships among diverse data Capturing Microservice Dependencies: Understanding the
sources within microservice systems. This structured approach intricate dependencies between microservices is crucial for efenhances the comprehension of complex dependencies and fective failure diagnosing [19]. These dependencies primarily
facilitates the analysis of failure patterns. Temporal Knowl- consist of function calling and resource contention [49]. To
edge Graphs (TKGs) offer significant flexibility and scalability, accurately model these interdependencies, we integrate traces
4018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. Multimodal data serialization, stream-based anomaly detection, and construction of TKGs (u_low: unexpected low, e_high: excessively high).

and deployment data. Specifically, we aggregate trace data to the trace-related metrics are anomalous or not. For instance,
represent the invocation relations between microservices, adding the quadruple representation for calls between two microservice
a directed edge in the KG from each caller to its corresponding instances S1 and S2 is expressed as (S1 , anomalously calls, S2 ,
callee. Additionally, when two instances are co-deployed ac- τ ). Moreover, the relation between microservice instance S1 and
cording to the deployment data, we introduce a directed edge in host H1 is presented as (S1 , deploys at, H1 , τ ). Finally, UniDiag
the KG from the instance to the physical host associated with builds a comprehensive KG (τ ) based on the serialized data
the deployment data. and the topological relation between microservice instances.
 Transforming Time Series Data into Events: The intuitive idea UniDiag stacks the KGs of each moment together to form a
is to regard the invocation and deployment relations between graph stream (i.e., a TKG).
instances, the value of metrics data, the number of log templates, and the value of three vital trace-related metrics data C. Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding
as edges. However, this will bring excessively high calculation To learn the nodes and edges information in TKG, UniDiag
and storage costs for subsequent tasks, making real-time failure uses entity and relation embedding. We apply R-GCN and GRU
diagnosis impractical. Therefore, UniDiag applies a stream- to take into account the structural and temporal information of
based anomaly detection approach to transform these time series entities and relations, respectively.
into events and capture the underlying characteristics of the Capture Structural Dependency: Each graph in the TKG
multimodal data. As shown in the middle part of Fig. 3, we contains rich facts, and the interconnection between entities
adopt the 3-sigma rule to classify the time series data as normal, demonstrates a structural dependency. Exploiting the structural
excessively high, and unexpectedly low every minute, then the dependency enables the central entity to aggregate information
type of the edge is set accordingly. Specifically, the edge settings from its surrounding neighbors and enhance the learning of enin Gτ are as follows: tity representations. UniDiag uses L-layer relation-aware GCN
 The edge of an instance-type object represents whether it is as an evolutionary unit to model the concurrent facts of structural
a normal or anomalous call, and this classification depends on dependency information. Each entity et,τ obtains information
whether the current values of the three key trace-related metrics from itself, its connected neighboring entities eh,τ , and the
are normal, excessively high, or unexpectedly low. Moreover, relation r at time τ , and passes down to the next layer
the edge of a metric-type (log-template-type) object represents ⎛ ⎞
whether the current metric (log) data is normal, excessively high, 1   
or unexpectedly low. UniDiag stores this information on the t,τ = f
 ek+1 ⎝ γ1k ekh,τ + rτ + γ2kekt,τ ⎠ ,
 δt
edges of the KG. (h,r),∃(h,r,t)∈ϑτ
 Constructing the TKG: At time τ , UniDiag utilizes the output (1)
obtained from stream-based anomaly detection to derive the where ϑτ is the set of facts at timestamp τ , k ∈ [0, L − 1], ekh,τ ,
quadruples required for constructing a TKG. For example, the rτ , ekt,τ denote the k th layer embeddings of entities h, relation r,
representation of a quadruple between microservice instance S1 and entities t at time τ , respectively. γ1k and γ2k are the parameters
and metric m1 is indicated as (S1 , has a normal value of, m1 , τ ), for aggregating features and self-loop in the k th layer. ekh,τ + rt
whereas the representation of a quadruple between microservice represents the relational translation between the head entity and
instance S1 and log template l1 is denoted as (S1 , has an exces- the tail entity under relation r. δt is a normalization constant,
sively high number of, l1 , τ ). Concerning trace data, we utilize equal to the in-degree of entity t. f (·) is the RReLU activation
“anomalously calls” and “normally calls” to identify whether function.
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4019

 Capture Temporal Information: A TKG contains information We train the MOGE model with the KG inference task of
about the dynamic evolution of KGs over time. UniDiag uti- the TKG. Specifically, the inference is performed on the KG of
lizes two temporal gating components to model the sequential the next moment based on the KG of the current moment, and
information of entities and relations, respectively. a cross-entropy loss is computed according to the result of the
 The embedding of all entities at time τ is determined by the inferred and the actual KG of the next moment.
final layer output of the relation-aware GCN at time τ and the
entity embedding representation at time τ − 1. Formally,
 D. Failure Diagnosis
 Eτ = Uτ ◦ EτL + (1 − Uτ ) ◦ Eτ −1 , (2)
 UniDiag trains failure diagnosis models using various failure
where E ∈ R|E|∗d denotes the entity embedding matrix, E is features. Initially, the number of clusters n is set based on
the set of entities, and d is the dimension of the embeddings. ◦ operators’ prior knowledge. UniDiag then clusters the embedded
denotes the Hadamard product. The temporal gate Uτ ∈ R|E|×d representations of multimodal TKGs according to n. The farthest
conducts nonlinear transformation. distance between cluster centers defines the distance threshold
 The embedding of a relation at time τ is influenced by Eτ −1 d.
and er,τ , which can be formulated as We employ hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) for
  the following reasons: (1) it uses a “bottom-up” approach to
 rτ = [pooling (Eτ −1 , er,τ ) ; r ] , (3)
 identify hierarchical relations; (2) it is easy to define and flexible
where r is the embedding of relation r, er,τ is the set of r-related with distance similarities and rules; (3) it handles clusters of
entities, pooling denotes the mean pooling operation, and [; ] different sizes; and (4) it is widely used in failure diagnosis [13],
denotes the vector concatenation operation. [50], [51]. Operators label each cluster with a specific failure
 UniDiag uses the GRU component to obtain the embedding type using a typical case, thus reducing annotation effort by
of all relations labeling only the typical case closest to each cluster center.
 Rτ = GRU (Rτ −1 , Rτ ) , (4)
 E. Online Diagnosis and Update
where R ∈ R|R|∗d denotes the relation embedding matrix, and
R is the set of relations. For a new window’s multimodal data, UniDiag calculates the
 Our goal is to diagnose failures in the entire microservice distance between the failure’s embedding and the existing cluster
system, so we need to learn the graph embeddings of the KG at centers, mapping the failure to the nearest cluster. If the distance
each moment to perform downstream diagnostic tasks. Because is less than d, the failure is classified according to the nearest
microservice instances are dynamically created and deleted in cluster center. Otherwise, a new cluster is created and labeled by
the microservice system, the deployment and invocation relation operators, who then update UniDiag accordingly. Discrepancies
also change dynamically [24], [25]. That is, the KGs in the between UniDiag’s diagnosis and operators’ verification result
constructed TKG can be different, which brings challenges for in cluster set updates, enhancing performance.
subsequent failure detection and triage. Moreover, there is no UniDiag is initially deployed in a limited number of scenarios
inherent ordering relation among the nodes in the graph, and we and gradually expanded as it stabilizes. Failures identified in
get the same output by using any order of node representation one scenario can inform diagnoses in other scenarios, allowing
as input. operators to build a comprehensive knowledge base of failure
 SOPOOL [29] collects second-order statistics from the infor- types. This enables quick labeling of new failures, thereby
mation of all nodes. It captures the correlations among features improving diagnosis efficiency and mitigation.
and topology information in graph representation learning [29].
In this way, it can help UniDiag address the above challenge.
 F. Computational Complexity Analysis
Therefore, UniDiag uses SOPOOL to obtain a graph representation based on node representation. UniDiag transforms the To evaluate the computational efficiency of UniDiag, we
entity embedding matrix E using a linear mapping to obtain the conduct a complexity analysis of two critical components:
embedding of the graph Multimodal Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction and
 Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding. In the Multimodal
 SOP OOL(E) = E T Eμ, (5)
 Temporal Knowledge Graph Construction phase, the time comwhere μ ∈ R is a trainable vector.
 d
 plexity for serializing multimodal data is determined by the
 These graph embeddings, encapsulating the rich informa- number of data entries at each timestamp. Constructing the
tional content of three distinct monitoring data (metrics, logs, knowledge graph entails the insertion of nodes and edges.
and traces) gathered during microservice system operation, ef- Assuming the number of nodes is |Eall | and the number of
fectively capture the nuanced patterns embedded within each edges is |Rall |, the complexity is O(|Eall | + |Rall |). In the
modality. This comprehensive representation, derived from the Microservice-Oriented Graph Embedding phase, the time comfusion of heterogeneous data sources, enables a more discrim- plexity for capturing structural dependencies is O(|F|L), where
inating differentiation between various failure types, thereby |F| denotes the maximum number of concurrent facts within
facilitating increased accuracy in downstream failure diagnosis the knowledge graph. Additionally, the time complexity for
tasks. capturing temporal information is O(|Esub ||R|), where |Esub | is
4020 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE II Baselines: We compare UniDiag with the following base-
 DATASET INFORMATION
 line methods: iSQUAD [8], DéjàVu [10], LogCluster [11],
 Cloud19 [12], MEPFL [14], CloudRCA [20], MicroCBR [34],
 and DiagFusion [19], which are based on either single-modal or
 multimodal data. We implement these methods referring to the
 codes provided by the original papers. For the papers without
 open-source codes, we set the hyperparameters according to the
 descriptions provided in the respective papers.
 Evaluation Metrics: In the task of failure diagnosis, distinct
 labels are assigned to each type of failure. Hence, to assess
 multi-label tasks, we utilize the extensively employed evaluation
 metrics known as Weighted Average Precision, Weighted Averthe maximum number of entities involved in the relationships, age Recall, and Weighted Average F1 -score [55]. For each label,
and |R| is the size of the relation set. we perform calculations to determine the respective precision =
 T P/(T P + F P ), recall = T P/(T P + F N ), and F1 -score =
 VI. EVALUATION 2 × precision × recall/(precision + recall), with True Positives (T P ), False Positives (F P ), and False Negatives (F N ).
 We aim to answer the following research questions (RQs): Subsequently, these metrics are averaged by applying weighting
 RQ1: How effective does UniDiag perform in failure diagno- based on the support, representing the number of true cases
sis? associated with each label.
 RQ2: Does each component contribute to UniDiag? Furthermore, in the ablation experiments, we employ two
 RQ3: Does each data modality contribute to UniDiag? widely acknowledged metrics, namely Normalized Mutual In-
 RQ4: Is UniDiag computationally efficient? formation (NMI) [56] and Clustering Accuracy (ACC) [57],
 RQ5: What is the impact of different hyperparameter settings? to evaluate the performance of UniDiag. NMI is a commonly
 used evaluation metric for clustering results, which measures the
A. Experimental Setup consistency between clustering results and ground-truth class
 Dataset: To evaluate UniDiag, we conduct extensive exper- labels. Formally,
iments using two datasets, D1 and D2, sourced from distinct C×|Ti ∩Qj |
microservice systems with varying business contexts and ar- 2× i j |Ti ∩ Qj | × log |Ti |×|Qj |
chitectures. Table II details the datasets. Both datasets are split NMI = − ,
 |Ti | |Qj |
 i |Ti |×log + j |Qj |×log
into training (the initial 70% of failure cases) and testing (the C C
remaining 30%) sets based on their start time. (6)
 Dataset 1 (D1), derived from CloudWise’s Generic AIOps where C is the total number of cases, Ti and Qj denote the ith
Atlas (GAIA)1 , serves as a benchmark for microservice failure class of the ground truth and the jth cluster generated by the
diagnosis [19], [52], [53], [54]. GAIA data, primarily from clustering algorithm, respectively.
CloudWise’s MicroSS simulation system, encompasses com- ACC elucidates the correspondence between clustering reprehensive monitoring data and simulated failures. We test four sults and ground-truth class labels by quantifying the degree
types of failures: “Memory resource underprovisioning”, “Sys- to which each cluster encompasses data points belonging to the
tem component damage”, “Filesystem misconfigurations”, and respective ground-truth class. ACC can be calculated as follows:
“Access control errors”.
 1 
 C
 Dataset 2 (D2) originates from a simulated e-commerce ap- ACC(x, x̂) = δ (xc = x̂c ) , (7)
plication utilizing microservices. It includes a variety of real fail- C c=1
ure injections to replicate e-commerce operational challenges.
 where x and x̂ denote the actual class labels of the results and the
This dataset encompasses dynamic service topologies, real-time
 labels that match the ground truth best, respectively. δ denotes
traces, metrics, and logs. We test five types of failures: “CPU rethe Kronecker delta.
source underprovisioning”, “Memory resource underprovisioning”, “Disk resource underprovisioning”, “System component
 B. Overall Performance (RQ1)
damage”, and “Container resource quota violations”.
 Implementation: UniDiag is implemented in PyTorch, and all Table III presents the number of labeled samples (failures
of the experiments are conducted on a Linux Server with 64 needing labeling) and the overall performance comparison on
16C32T Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30GHz, two the two datasets. The quantity of labeled data for each baseline
NVIDIA(R) Tesla(R) V100S, and 187.5 GB RAM. As for the is tailored to its specific requirements. We empirically determine
hyperparameters, the number of layers and the hidden size in the optimal number of labeled samples for methods without
R-GCN are 2 and 50, respectively. The dimension of graph explicit labeling needs by conducting multiple experiments with
embedding is 100. varying labeled sample numbers, selecting the best configuration. Notably, the labeled samples are only a subset of the training
 1 https://github.com/CloudWise-OpenSource/GAIA-DataSet data, while larger datasets are used for training and testing to
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4021

 TABLE III
 EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY OF FAILURE DIAGNOSIS

ensure comprehensive learning and robust evaluation. A key as the microservice architecture evolves and develops, new types
distinction is that MEPFL [14] labels anomalous traces, unlike of failures, that is, undiscovered types of failures that have never
other methods that label failure cases. Table III details the num- occurred or occurred less frequently in the past, often manifest
ber of traces needing labeling for MEPFL. UniDiag outperforms within the microservice systems.
all baselines on both datasets, achieving an impressive Weighted To evaluate UniDiag’s robustness in diagnosing new failure
Average F1 -score of 0.869 and 0.723, respectively. types, we select distinct failure types from diverse datasets
 iSQUAD [8] diagnoses failures using ground truths from and excluded associated samples from the training set. Given
similar failures but lacks historical failure integration, risking that supervised methods cannot diagnose new failure types and
errors from noise and fluctuations. DéjàVu [10] trains a model MicroCBR can only match new cases with existing types, we
with historical failures and Failure Dependency Graphs (FDGs), used iSQUAD and LogCluster as baselines. As listed in Table IV,
requiring many labeled cases. Both methods rely on metric data, by averaging the results of each new failure type diagnosis on the
lacking comprehensive features, resulting in poor performance. same dataset, we calculate the precision, recall, and F1 -score.
LogCluster [11] struggles to parse log entries into meaningful UniDiag significantly outperforms the other methods. iSQUAD
events, missing semantic information. Cloud19 [12] fails to and LogCluster, limited to single-modal data, fail to detect some
address polysemy and uses a limited context window, missing failures, resulting in numerous false positives and negatives. In
broader contextual information and leading to suboptimal per- contrast, UniDiag’s fusion of three modalities of monitoring data
formance. captures unique features from each modality, leading to com-
 MEPFL [14] uses a supervised learning model through traces, prehensive representation learning for each failure type. This
relying on labeling all anomalous trace patterns. demonstrates that multimodal data fusion enhances UniDiag’s
 CloudRCA [20] combines logs and metrics but ignores the performance.
microservice system’s topology, missing crucial features. It also
requires many labeled historical failure cases, and insufficient C. Contribution of Key Components (RQ2)
training samples harm its performance. In contrast, UniDiag
excels in failure diagnosis, achieving a significantly higher To show the effectiveness of UniDiag’s key techniques (i.e., ,
Weighted Average F1 -score than existing methods. entity embedding, graph embedding, and clustering), we creat
 UniDiag demonstrates superior performance in failure diag- five variants (C1-C5) by substituting these techniques with comnosis compared to MicroCBR [34] and DiagFusion [19] by mon or state-of-the-art alternatives: (1) C1 uses RE-NET [58]
integrating both normal and failure data, thereby capturing a instead of MOGE for learning entity embedding. (2) C2 uses
holistic view of the system state and mitigating information loss. TANGO [59] instead of MOGE for learning entity embedding.
Unlike MicroCBR, which is constrained by its reliance on failure (3) C3 uses mean pooling instead of MOGE for learning graph
data alone, and DiagFusion, which depends heavily on labeled embedding. (4) C4 uses DBSCAN instead of HAC. (5) C5 uses
historical cases, UniDiag employs TKG and MOGE to provide K-means instead of HAC.
a comprehensive temporal representation of the microservice Table V demonstrates that UniDiag outperforms all variants
system’s state, effectively modeling complex dependencies and on two datasets, underscoring the significance of each compointeractions. nent. Substituting MOGE with RE-NET (C1) or TANGO (C2)
 RT and invocation paths reflect anomalous patterns in trace results in decreased performance. RE-NET’s use of subgraph
data, while EC and QC are key for detecting reliability and traffic aggregators and GRUs neglects the structural dependencies and
failures. MicroCBR uses only RT for anomaly detection, and static attributes in TKGs, leading to the potential loss or mix-
DiagFusion uses RT and EC, potentially leading to inaccurate ing of historical facts. TANGO’s Neural Ordinary Differential
diagnoses. In contrast, UniDiag uses invocation paths, RT, EC, Equations (NODE) [60] are better suited for continuous time
and QC to construct a knowledge graph, incorporating rich domains and fail to capture patterns in the discrete snapshots of
information for more accurate failure diagnosis. TKGs amidst frequent microservice changes.
 Frequent failure scenarios in historical data can be swiftly and Replacing MOGE with mean pooling (C3) degrades peraccurately identified through observation and practice. However, formance as traditional pooling methods (e.g., mean pooling)
4022 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE IV
 EFFECTIVENESS OF THE MODELS DEALING WITH NEW TYPES OF FAILURES

 TABLE V differently. Traces contribute the least in D1 and D2, as indicated
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDY
 by the minor performance drop in UniDiag w/o T , due to limited
 trace records and fluctuating RT and QC. Conversely, UniDiag
 w/o M shows significant performance degradation, aligning
 with observations in Table I.
 In conclusion, integrating all three data modalities significantly enhances UniDiag’s effectiveness, highlighting the crucial role of diverse data in improving failure diagnosis.

 E. Computational Efficiency (RQ4)
 Table III compares the running times of UniDiag with other
 baseline methods, covering both offline training and online diagnosis durations. Notably, UniDiag achieves an average online
 diagnosis time of 0.6s, meeting real-time diagnostic demands,
 TABLE VI given that data collection intervals for D1 and D2 are at least
 CONTRIBUTIONS OF DIVERSE DATA SOURCES 30s. However, UniDiag has longer offline training times due to
 the entity embedding process, which is influenced by the size
 and complexity of the KG and the GCN. Despite this, UniDiag
 minimizes the need for frequent retraining.
 To test UniDiag’s efficiency on larger datasets, we constructed
 a KG with 2,553 entities and 3,807,420 edges by replicating
 nodes and attributes from D1. UniDiag achieved an average
 offline training time of 5.12h and an average online diagnosis
 time of 4.73s, demonstrating suitability for real-world deployment. These results confirm UniDiag’s robust performance on
 large-scale datasets.
cannot effectively characterize features. SOPOOL, by modeling
general graph information correlations, captures long-distance F. Effect of Hyperparameters (RQ5)
feature information more effectively.
 We discuss the impact of UniDiag’s three hyperparameters
 Substituting HAC with DBSCAN or K-means (C4 & C5) also
 and different training set sizes. Fig. 4 shows how NMI, ACC,
reduces performance. HAC is robust to random initial values
 and Weighted Average F1 -score vary with these parameters.
and can identify outliers in KGs. DBSCAN, a density-based
 The Number of Layers in Entity Embedding: UniDiag’s permethod, is insensitive to noise and outliers, making it unsuitable
 formance declines as the number of GCN layers increases from 1
for failure detection. K-means struggles with non-spherical and
 to 5, with optimal results achieved at 2 or 3 layers. An excessive
varied-sized clusters, and the choice of initial cluster centers
 number of layers causes node representations to converge and
significantly affects the results.
 lose distinction.
 Graph Embedding Dimension: Optimal performance is ob-
D. Contribution of Each Modality (RQ3)
 served at a graph embedding dimension of 100. Larger dimen-
 We conduct ablation experiments to examine the contributions sions risk sparsity, over-fitting, and increased computational
of different data sources by creating the following variants: complexity, but they may be suitable for complex microservice
(1) UniDiagw/o M drops metrics while inputs logs and traces. systems.
(2) UniDiagw/o L drops logs while inputs metrics and traces. The Number of Clusters: Increasing the number of clusters
(3) UniDiagw/o T drops traces while inputs metrics and logs. enhances the utilization of training data; however, too many
 Table VI indicates that UniDiag’s effectiveness depends on clusters raise the labeling effort. We select 15 and 20 clusters
the integration of all data modalities, with each contributing for D1 and D2, respectively.
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4023

Fig. 4. Hyperparameters sensitivity on UniDiag.

 The Size of the Training Set: We evaluated UniDiag with experimental tests and iteratively optimized the approach. The
training set sizes of 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, and 70%, using the results presented are averages of multiple trials.
remaining 30% for testing. Fig. 4 demonstrates that UniDiag Externally, there are two primary threats. First, the limachieves a high Weighted Average F1 -score even with a limited ited scale of our datasets compared to real-world microservice
number of failure cases, proving its effectiveness in real-world systems in production environments restricts generalizability.
scenarios with constrained historical data. These datasets might not fully represent all microservice systems. Nevertheless, we believe our approach is sufficiently
 VII. DISCUSSION general. We plan to collaborate with a top-tier Internet service
 provider to deploy UniDiag and validate its effectiveness in
A. Lessons Learned real-world scenarios. Second, our datasets may not capture
 1) Data Collection Granularity: Currently, most IT enter- all failure types compared to industry-collected data. Future
prises collect data at minute-level granularity, typically every work will involve evaluating our approach on a broader range
1 or 5 minutes [61], [62]. This granularity generally does not of microservice systems, incorporating larger-scale real-world
significantly impact the model’s effectiveness. In our approach, cases with diverse failure types to address this limitation.
once the metric granularity is set, logs and traces must be aligned
with the metrics. C. Limitations
 2) Effectiveness: UniDiag demonstrates superior effective- Based on the conducted experiments, we draw attention to
ness in failure diagnosis by integrating comprehensive multi- two primary limitations of UniDiag, as follows:
modal data and leveraging TKGs to capture the full system 1) While UniDiag is designed to leverage metrics, logs, and
state over time. Unlike other methods that rely on limited data traces for comprehensive failure diagnosis, it remains rosources, insufficient labeled data, or simplistic models, UniDiag bust even when data from some modalities are unavailable.
incorporates a broader range of features, which ensures accurate This is crucial since acquiring synchronized multimodal
diagnosis in microservice systems. data can be challenging in certain microservice deploy-
 3) Flexibility: UniDiag’s flexibility is driven by its dynamic ments. Although UniDiag can function with missing data
TKG updates and incremental learning. The system continu- sources due to its loosely-coupled nature, providing all
ously adapts to new data, integrating evolving failure patterns data types maximizes its effectiveness. Open-source toolkand architectural changes without requiring full retraining, en- its such as cAdvisor [63] for metrics, Elasticsearch [64]
suring it remains effective in diagnosing emerging failures as for logs, and Jaeger [65] for tracing facilitate monitoring
the environment evolves. data collection in microservice systems. These tools sim-
 4) Scalability: UniDiag exhibits a high degree of adaptabil- plify equipping microservices with comprehensive data
ity to the dynamic nature of microservice architectures. As mi- collection capabilities [18].
croservice instances are created or destroyed, UniDiag requires 2) UniDiag relies on a data-driven approach. If specific failonly the addition or removal of the corresponding entities and ures do not manifest anomalies in the collected data, accurelations within the TKG. The workflow of UniDiag is inherently rate diagnosis becomes challenging. This issue is common
general and does not rely on any specific data modality, thereby and also recognized in MEPFL [14] and SCWarn [16].
maintaining its effectiveness even in production environments
where not all three modalities of data are concurrently moni- VIII. CONCLUSION
tored.
 Recognizing the limitations of relying solely on single-modal
 data, which may fail to capture a substantial amount of crucial
B. Threats to Validity
 information, we present UniDiag as a novel approach for failure
 Regarding internal validity threats, the primary concern is the diagnosis. UniDiag fuses multimodal data, including metrics,
implementation process. To address this, we conducted repeated logs, and traces, using TKG. It includes a three-step process:
4024 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

(1) effective fusion of metrics, logs, and traces through TKGs, [17] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
(2) utilization of MOGE for entity embedding and graph em- automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021.
bedding, and (3) training of the failure diagnosis model to detect [18] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end-to-end
failures and identify failure types accurately. We have conducted troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source data,” in
extensive evaluation experiments on two datasets to validate the Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2023,
 pp. 1750–1762.
efficacy, efficiency, and generalization of UniDiag. The empiri- [19] S. Zhang et al., “Robust failure diagnosis of microservice system through
cal findings affirm the robustness and effectiveness of UniDiag multimodal data,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3851–
in achieving accurate and efficient failure diagnosis. Moreover, 3864, Nov./Dec. 2023.
 [20] Y. Zhang et al., “CloudRCA: A root cause analysis framework for cloud
to overcome the limitations of the data-driven approach, a computing platforms,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
contextual analysis module could effectively analyze external New York, NY, 2021, pp. 4373–4382.
factors, such as deployment changes and system updates, which [21] P. Dogga, K. Narasimhan, A. Sivaraman, S. Saini, G. Varghese, and R. Netravali, “Revelio: ML-generated debugging queries for finding root causes
might provide additional clues about potential failures for more in distributed systems,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., vol. 4, pp. 601–622,
accurate failure diagnosis. 2022.
 [22] C. Deng et al., “GAKG: A multimodal geoscience academic knowledge
 graph,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York, NY,
 REFERENCES 2021, pp. 4445–4454.
 [23] A. V. Kannan et al., “Multimodal knowledge graph for deep learning papers
 [1] T. Colanzi et al., “Are we speaking the industry language? The practice and and code,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., New York,
 literature of modernizing legacy systems with microservices,” in Proc. 15th NY, 2020, pp. 3417–3420.
 Braz. Symp. Softw. Compon. Architectures Reuse, New York, NY, 2021, [24] X. Li, Y. Chen, and Z. Lin, “Towards automated inter-service authorization
 pp. 61–70. for microservice applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM 2019 Conf.
 [2] X. Zhou et al., “Fault analysis and debugging of microservice systems: Posters Demos, New York, NY, 2019, pp. 3–5.
 Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study,” IEEE Trans. [25] S. Chakraborty, S. Garg, S. Agarwal, A. Chauhan, and S. K. Saini,
 Softw. Eng., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 243–260, Feb. 2021. “CausIL: Causal graph for instance level microservice data,” in Proc. ACM
 [3] A. Mahimkar, C. E. de Andrade, R. Sinha, and G. Rana, “A composition Web Conf., New York, NY, 2023, pp. 2905–2915.
 framework for change management,” in Proc. 2021 ACM SIGCOMM [26] R. Trivedi, H. Dai, Y. Wang, and L. Song, “Know-evolve: Deep temporal
 Conf., New York, NY, 2021, pp. 788–806. reasoning for dynamic knowledge graphs,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach.
 [4] J. Y. Chung, C. Joe-Wong, S. Ha, J. W.-K. Hong, and M. Chiang, “CYRUS: Learn., New York, NY:PMLR, 2017, pp. 3462–3471.
 Towards client-defined cloud storage,” in Proc. 10th Eur. Conf. Comput. [27] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. v. d. Berg, I. Titov, and
 Syst., New York, NY, 2015, pp. 1–16. M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional net-
 [5] J. Chen et al., “An empirical investigation of incident triage for online works,” in Proc. Eur. Semantic Web Conf., Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2018,
 service systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw. pp. 593–607.
 Eng. Pract., Los Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 111–120. [28] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-
 [6] J. Chen et al., “Continuous incident triage for large-scale online service decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empir. Methods
 systems,” in Proc. 34th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Autom. Softw. Eng., Los Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg, PA: Association for Computational
 Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 364–375. Linguistics, 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
 [7] Y. Meng et al., “Localizing failure root causes in a microservice through [29] Z. Wang and S. Ji, “Second-order pooling for graph neural networks,”
 causality inference,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 28th Int. Symp. Qual. Serv., Los IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 6870–6880,
 Alamitos, CA, 2020, pp. 1–10. Jun. 2023.
 [8] M. Ma et al., “Diagnosing root causes of intermittent slow queries in [30] UniDiag, “Open source repository of unidiag,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
 cloud databases,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 1176–1189, https://github.com/AIOps-Lab-NKU/UniDiag.git
 2020. [31] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anoma-
 [9] C. Wu et al., “Identifying root-cause metrics for incident diagnosis in lies through service-level deep Bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 online service systems,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2020,
 Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 91–102. pp. 48–58.
[10] Z. Li et al., “Actionable and interpretable fault localization for recur- [32] D. Liu et al., “MicroHECL: High-efficient root cause localization in largering failures in online service systems,” in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. scale microservice systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw.
 Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2022, Eng.: Softw. Eng. Pract., Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 338–347.
 pp. 996–1008. [33] Z. Li et al., “Practical root cause localization for microservice systems
[11] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log cluster- via trace analysis,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Qual. Serv., Los
 ing based problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 1–10.
 IEEE/ACM 38th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion, Los Alamitos, CA, [34] F. Liu et al., “MicroCBR: Case-based reasoning on spatio-temporal fault
 2016, pp. 102–111. knowledge graph for microservices troubleshooting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[12] Y. Yuan, W. Shi, B. Liang, and B. Qin, “An approach to cloud execution Case-Based Reasoning, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2022, pp. 224–239.
 failure diagnosis based on exception logs in OpenStack,” in Proc. IEEE [35] J. Wang, Y. Li, Q. Qi, Y. Lu, and B. Wu, “Multilayered fault detection
 12th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput., Los Alamitos, CA, 2019, pp. 124–131. and localization with transformer for microservice systems,” IEEE Trans.
[13] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud Rel., vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1502–1515, Sep. 2024.
 systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. [36] Z. Zhu, C. Lee, X. Tang, and P. He, “HeMiRCA: Fine-grained root cause
 Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021, pp. 1253–1263. analysis for microservices with heterogeneous data sources,” ACM Trans.
[14] X. Zhou et al., “Latent error prediction and fault localization for microser- Softw. Eng. Methodol., Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1145/3674726.
 vice applications by learning from system trace logs,” in Proc. 27th ACM [37] L. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. He, and H. Chen, “MULAN: Multi-modal causal
 Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, structure learning and root cause analysis for microservice systems,” in
 NY, 2019, pp. 683–694. Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2024, pp. 4107–4116.
[15] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heterogeneous [38] A. Workshop, “2022 CCF AiOps challenge,” 2022. [Online]. Available:
 anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised cross-modal https://workshop.aiops.org
 attention,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Los Alamitos, [39] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 CA, 2023, pp. 1724–1736. approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv.,
[16] N. Zhao et al., “Identifying bad software changes via multimodal anomaly Los Alamitos, CA, 2017, pp. 33–40.
 detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting [40] S. Zhang et al., “Syslog processing for switch failure diagnosis and
 Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021, prediction in datacenter networks,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 25th Int. Symp.
 pp. 527–539. Qual. Serv., Los Alamitos, CA, 2017, pp. 1–10.
ZHANG et al.: NO MORE DATA SILOS: UNIFIED MICROSERVICE FAILURE DIAGNOSIS WITH TEMPORAL KNOWLEDGE GRAPH 4025

[41] J. Kulkarni, S. Joshi, S. Bapat, and K. Jambhali, “Analysis of system logs Shenglin Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the BS
 for pattern detection and anomaly prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. degree in network engineering from the School of
 Sci. Appl., Berlin:Springer-Verlag, 2020, pp. 427–436. Computer Science and Technology, Xidian Univer-
[42] B. H. Sigelman et al., “Dapper, A large-scale distributed systems tracing sity, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in
 infrastructure,” Google, Inc., Tech. Rep., 2010. computer science from the Department of Computer
[43] Z. Chen et al., “Adaptive performance anomaly detection for online service Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beisystems via pattern sketching,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., New jing, China, in 2017. He is currently an associate
 York, NY, 2022, pp. 61–72. professor with the College of Software, Nankai Uni-
[44] S. Kim, S. An, P. Chikontwe, and S. H. Park, “Bidirectional versity, Tianjin, China. His current research interests
 RNN-based few shot learning for 3D medical image segmenta- include failure detection, diagnosis, and prediction
 tion,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Palo Alto, CA:AAAI, 2021, for service management.
 pp. 1808–1816.
[45] M. S. Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan, and F.
 Hussain, “Machine learning at the network edge: A survey,” ACM Comput.
 Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–37, 2021. Yongxin Zhao received the BS and MS degrees in
[46] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural software engineering from the College of Software,
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997. Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2021 and 2024,
[47] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of respectively. She is currently working toward the PhD
 gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” in Proc. Neural degree with the College of Software, Nankai Univer-
 Inf. Process. Syst. Workshop Deep Learn., 2014. sity. Her research interests include failure detection
[48] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly and failure diagnosis.
 detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting
 Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., New York, NY, 2021,
 pp. 1404–1415.
[49] Y. Wang et al., “Fast outage analysis of large-scale production clouds with
 service correlation mining,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw.
 Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, 2021, pp. 885–896.
 Sibo Xia received the BS degree in software engineer-
[50] Y. Sun et al., “Efficient and robust KPI outlier detection for large-scale
 ing from the College of Software, Nankai University,
 datacenters,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 2858–2871,
 Tianjin, China, in 2022. He is currently working
 Oct. 2023. toward the PhD degree with the College of Soft-
[51] Y. Fu, M. Yan, Z. Xu, X. Xia, X. Zhang, and D. Yang, “An empirical study
 ware, Nankai University. His research interests inof the impact of log parsers on the performance of log-based anomaly
 clude anomaly detection and failure diagnosis.
 detection,” Empir. Softw. Eng., vol. 28, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 6.
[52] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge
 graph,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507,
 Sep./Oct. 2023.
[53] S. Zhang et al., “Efficient and robust trace anomaly detection for large-scale
 microservice systems,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Los
 Alamitos, CA, 2023, pp. 69–79. Shirui Wei received the BS degree in software engi-
[54] C. Zhao et al., “Robust multimodal failure detection for microservice neering from the College of Software, Nankai Universystems,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, sity, Tianjin, China, in 2023. She is currently working
 New York, NY, 2023, pp. 5639–5649. toward the master’s degree with the National As-
[55] B. M. Sundheim, “Overview of the fourth message understanding evalu- tronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciation and conference,” Naval Command Control and Ocean Surveillance ences, Beijing, China. Her research interests include
 Center RDT and E DIV, San Diego CA, USA, Tech. Rep., 1992. astroinformatics and virtual observatories.
[56] L. Danon, A. Diaz-Guilera, J. Duch, and A. Arenas, “Comparing community structure identification,” J. Stat. Mechanics: Theory Exp., vol. 2005,
 no. 09, 2005, Art. no. P09008.
[57] N. Zhao, L. Zhang, B. Du, Q. Zhang, J. You, and D. Tao, “Robust dual
 clustering with adaptive manifold regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 Data Eng., vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2498–2509, Nov. 2017. Yongqian Sun (Member, IEEE) received the BS de-
[58] W. Jin, M. Qu, X. Jin, and X. Ren, “Recurrent event network: Autore- gree in statistical specialty from Northwestern Polygressive structure inferenceover temporal knowledge graphs,” in Proc. technical University, Xi’an, China, in 2012, and the
 2020 Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg, PA: PhD degree in computer science from the Depart-
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 6669–6683. ment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua
[59] Z. Han, Z. Ding, Y. Ma, Y. Gu, and V. Tresp, “Learning neural ordinary University, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
 equations for forecasting future links on temporal knowledge graphs,” in an associate professor with the College of Software,
 Proc. 2021 Conf. Empir. Methods Natural Lang. Process., Stroudsburg, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His research inter-
 PA:Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 8352–8364. ests include anomaly detection and root cause local-
[60] R. Das et al., “Go for a walk and arrive at the answer: Reasoning over ization in service management.
 paths in knowledge bases using reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Learn. Representations, 2018, pp. 1–18.
[61] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Liu, and D. Pei, “Robust and rapid clustering of KPIs
 for large-scale anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Chenyu Zhao received the BS and MS degrees in
 Qual. Serv., Los Alamitos, CA, 2018, pp. 1–10.
 software engineering from the College of Software,
[62] Z. Li, W. Chen, and D. Pei, “Robust and unsupervised KPI anomaly
 Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 2020 and 2023,
 detection based on conditional variational autoencoder,” in Proc. IEEE
 respectively. Her research interests are focused on
 37th Int. Perform. Comput. Commun. Conf., Los Alamitos, CA, 2018, anomaly detection and root cause analysis.
 pp. 1–9.
[63] Google, “Container advisor,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.
 com/google/cadvisor
[64] Elastic, “Elasticsearch,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.elastic.co/
[65] C. N. C. Foundation, “Jaeger,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 jaegertracing.io/
4026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024

 Shiyu Ma received the BS degree in software engi- Lemeng Pan received the PhD degree in statistics
 neering from the College of Software, Nankai Univer- from the University of Maryland College Park, Marysity, Tianjin, China, in 2022. She is currently work- land. He is currently a research scientist with Huawei
 ing toward the master’s degree with the College of Technologies Company, Ltd.
 Software, Nankai University. Her research interests
 include failure diagnosis and root-cause localization.

 Yicheng Guo received the BS degree in particle and
 nuclear physics from the University of Science and
 Junhua Kuang received the BS degree in software Technology of China, in 2014, and the PhD degree in
 engineering from the College of Software, Nankai particle and nuclear physics from the Department of
 University, Tianjin, China, in 2024. He is currently Modern Physics, University of Science and Technolworking toward the master’s degree with the College ogy of China, Hefei, China, in 2019. He is currently a
 of Software, Nankai University. His research interests senior engineer with Huawei Technologies Company,
 include anomaly detection and anomaly localization. Ltd.

 Dan Pei (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BE
 and MS degrees in computer science from the De-
 Bolin Zhu received the BS degree in software engi- partment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsneering from the College of Software, Nankai Univer- inghua University, Beijing, China, in 1997 and 2000,
 sity, Tianjin, China, in 2023. He is currently working respectively, and the PhD degree in computer scitoward the master’s degree with the Computer Sci- ence from the Computer Science Department, Unience and Technology Department, Nanjing Univer- versity of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 2005.
 sity. His research interests include the reasoning of He is currently an associate professor with the Delarge language models. partment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. His research interests include network and service management in general. He is an
 ACM senior member.