IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024 1601

 One Model to Find Them All Deep Learning for
 Multivariate Time-Series Anomaly Detection
 in Mobile Network Data
Gastón García González, Sergio Martinez Tagliafico, Alicia Fernández , Member, IEEE, Gabriel Gómez Sena ,
 José Acuña, and Pedro Casas , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network monitoring data generally consists of hun- Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, multivariate
dreds of counters periodically collected in the form of time-series, time-series, variational auto encoder, dilated convolution, TELCO
resulting in a complex-to-analyze multivariate time-series (MTS) Open Dataset.
process. Traditional time-series anomaly detection methods target
univariate time-series analysis, which makes the MTS analysis
cumbersome and prohibitively complex. We present DC-VAE
(Dilated Convolutional - Variational Auto Encoder), a novel I. I NTRODUCTION
approach to anomaly detection in MTS data, leveraging convo- ETWORK monitoring data often consists of hundreds
lutional neural networks (CNNs) and variational autoencoders
(VAEs). DC-VAE detects anomalies in MTS data through a single
 N or thousands of variables periodically measured and
 analyzed in the form of time-series, resulting in a complexmodel, exploiting temporal information without sacrificing computational and memory resources. In particular, instead of using to-analyze multivariate time-series (MTS) process. Real-time
recursive neural networks, large causal filters, or many layers, anomaly detection in such MTS processes is a key ingredient
DC-VAE relies on Dilated Convolutions (DC) to capture long for network management, particularly to detect performance
and short-term phenomena in the data. We evaluate DC-VAE on degradation and service disruption events that might strongly
the detection of anomalies in the TELCO TELeCOmmunicationnetworks dataset, a large-scale, multi-dimensional network impact end customers or failures impacting the network’s
monitoring dataset collected at an operational mobile Internet health. There is a vast literature on the problem of anomaly
Service Provider (ISP), where anomalous events were manually detection in time-series using traditional statistical models [1],
labeled by experts during seven months, at a five-minutes granu- [2], [3], [4], [5]; due to the non-stationary, non-linear, and
larity. We benchmark DC-VAE against a broad set of traditional high-noise characteristics of network monitoring data, tratime-series anomaly detectors from the signal processing and
machine learning domains. We also evaluate DC-VAE in open, ditional models have difficulty predicting these time-series
publicly available datasets, comparing its performance against with high precision. Hence, modern approaches to timeother multivariate anomaly detectors based on deep learning series anomaly detection based on deep learning technology
generative models. Results confirm the advantages of DC-VAE, have flourished in recent years [6]. Most approaches in
both in terms of MTS data modeling, as well as for anomaly the literature address the problem by either focusing on
detection. For the sake of reproducibility and as an additional
contribution, we make the TELCO dataset publicly available univariate time-series modeling and analysis – running an
to the community and openly release the code implementing independent detector for each time-series, or by considering
DC-VAE. multi-dimensional input data with short-term memory analysis,
 to avoid the scalability limitations introduced by very deep
 Manuscript received 10 March 2023; revised 22 August 2023; accepted
22 November 2023. Date of publication 6 December 2023; date of current architectures or the complexities and delays introduced by
version 15 April 2024. This work has been partially supported by the ANII- recurrent topologies.
FMV project with reference FMV-1-2019-1-155850 Anomaly Detection with Despite the broad literature, detecting anomalies in time-
Continual and Streaming Machine Learning on Big Data Telecommunications
Networks, by the CSIC I+D project with reference 22520220100371UD series data through machine-learning remains a highly arduous
Anomaly Detection in Time Series: Generalization and Domain Change task [1], [6], and it has re-gained strong attention in recent
Adaptation, by Telefónica, and by the Austrian FFG ICT-of-the-Future project years. Some of the ever-present challenges to deal with include
DynAISEC – Adaptive AI/ML for Dynamic Cybersecurity Systems – project
ID 887504. Gastón García González was supported by the ANII scholarship the lack of labels and the contamination of normal operation
POS-FMV-2020-1-1009239, as well as by CSIC, under program Movilidad data with anomalies, the high imbalance between normal
e Intercambios Académicos 2022. The associate editor coordinating the and anomalous data, and the occurrence of so-called concept
review of this article and approving it for publication was N. Stakhanova.
(Corresponding author: Pedro Casas.) drifts [7], [8], [9], referring to changes in the underlying
 Gastón García González, Sergio Martinez Tagliafico, Alicia Fernández, statistical properties of the analyzed data and prediction
and Gabriel Gómez Sena are with IIE–FING, Universidad de la República, targets. By definition, anomalies are rare and sporadic-in-time
Montevideo 11300, Uruguay.
 José Acuña is with Telefónica Uruguay, Montevideo 11200, Uruguay, events; thus, there is generally little information on them for
and also with IIE–FING, Universidad de la República, Montevideo 11300, deeper characterization and eventual future detection. This
Uruguay. lack of insights into anomalies makes it generally difficult to
 Pedro Casas is with the AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, 1210 Vienna,
Austria (e-mail: pedro.casas@ait.ac.at). employ supervised techniques fingerprinting different anoma-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3340146 lous behaviors. On top of this, the characterization of an
 1932-4537 
 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1602 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

anomaly is typically bound to a certain time-period, which predictions for each independent time-series at each new
might not necessarily represent what could happen in the time-step, using a sliding window of past measurements;
future. These challenges have led to a rise in the applica- (iii) efficient temporal-memory representation: the VAE
tion of unsupervised learning-based approaches to time-series encoder/decoder architecture based on dilated convolutions
anomaly detection. Unsupervised learning certainly copes permits to efficiently process temporal sequences of longer
with many flagged challenges, although purely unsupervised length, making detection more robust; (iv) self-supervised
approaches tend to realize significantly high false-alarm rates. baseline modeling: by conception, auto-encoders are self-
The availability of partially labeled anomalies can alleviate supervised models, because the model trains itself to learn
this problem, enabling weakly-supervised anomaly detection the main features of the input from the very same input
approaches [6], to the detriment of inaccurate or imprecise samples, and ground-truth labels are only needed for tighter
ground-truth, which introduces a further challenge for model calibration of detection thresholds – nevertheless, in the
generalization. absence of ground-truth, DC-VAE still estimates a normal
 Another challenge we deem relevant is the benchmarking operation region, indirectly providing a detection threshold;
of time-series anomaly detection approaches through open (v) compact deep-learning architecture: the structure and
datasets of questionable quality. Most of the recent papers in number of layers in DC-VAE’s architecture is defined by a
the topic test on one or more of a handful of popular bench- single parameter T, representing the length of the temporal
mark datasets, including Yahoo [10], Numenta [11], [12], sliding-window of past measurements used as input; (vi)
NASA [13], and more. Recent studies [14] have shown independent, per time-series detection: VAEs provide an
that these datasets have flaws that make them unsuitable estimation of the expected value and its associated standard
for evaluating anomaly detection algorithms, making it even deviation for each independent time-series, which provides
harder to assess the goodness of recent contributions in the further flexibility and detail to the monitoring process; (vii)
domain. detection results are visually interpretable: predictions
 In this paper, we conceive a novel approach for MTS provided by DC-VAE define a continual and dynamically
anomaly detection, tackling many of the aforementioned adapted normality region, independently for each time-series,
challenges. We introduce DC-VAE, a deep-learning-based, making it visually easy to interpret the occurrence of an
unsupervised, and multivariate approach to real-time anomaly anomaly.
detection in MTS, based on popular Variational Auto-Encoders We apply DC-VAE to a MTS dataset arising from the mon-
(VAEs) [15]. VAEs are a generative version of classical itoring of an operational mobile ISP, detecting anomalies of
auto-encoders, with the advantage of producing as output very different structural properties. Referred to as the TELCO
prediction not only an expected value but also the associated dataset [17], this large-scale – about 750 thousand samples,
standard deviation, corresponding to the distribution the model long time-span – seven months’ worth of measurements
understands (i.e., has learned) generated the corresponding collected at a five-minutes scale, multi-dimensional – twelve
input. This automatically defines a normality region for each different metrics (time-series), network monitoring dataset
independent time-series, which can then be easily exploited includes ground-truth labels for anomalous events at each
for detecting deviations beyond this region. Using VAEs as an individual time-series, manually labeled by the experts of the
underlying approach allows the user to visualize the region of network operation center (NOC) managing the mobile ISP. We
normal behavior in an interpretable way, enabling fine-grained, benchmark DC-VAE against a broad set of 18 different timeper univariate time-series anomaly detection. series anomaly detectors coming from the signal processing
 To exploit the temporal dependencies and characteristics and machine learning domains, individually testing on each
of time-series data in a fast and efficient manner, we take time-series – to keep the scope of the comparative analysis,
a Dilated Convolutional (DC) Neural Network (NN) as the 15 of these traditional models are combined into a powerful
VAE’s encoder and decoder architecture. DCNNs have shown ensemble detector. In addition, we evaluate DC-VAE in an
excellent performance for processing sequential data in a open, publicly available dataset commonly used in the litercausal manner [16], i.e., without relying on recursive archi- ature – the SWaT dataset [18], and compare its performance
tectures, which are generally less time-efficient and more against other MTS anomaly detectors based on deep learning
difficult to train (e.g., gradient exploding/vanishing prob- generative models, which have become very popular in recent
lems). Compared to normal convolutions, dilated convolutions years. For the sake of reproducibility and as an additional
improve time-series modeling by increasing the receptive field contribution, we make the TELCO dataset publicly available
of the neural network, reducing computational and memory to the community, and openly release the DC-VAE’s code
requirements, and enabling training – and detection – on (https://github.com/GastonGarciaGonzalez/DC-VAE).
longer-in-the-past temporal sequences. We note that this work is an extension of a recently
 The main properties and contributions of DC-VAE can be published study [19]; the novel contributions of current
summarized as follows: (i) single model for MTS analysis: paper with respect to [19] are as follows: (i) a comprehen-
DC-VAE learns the behavior of the complete MTS process sive state of the art in the problem of machine learning
within a single model parametrization, avoiding per-time- for time-series anomaly detection; (ii) a more elaborated
series learning and fitting, and further exploiting the richness presentation of the theoretical foundation behind DC-VAE;
of the multidimensional process; (ii) real-time operation: the (iii) a more exhaustive performance benchmarking against
model architecture is fully causal, and provides instantaneous a much broader set of state-of-the-art detectors, as well as
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1603

against newer deep-learning-based MTS detectors leveraging temporal correlations, by considering a Gaussian process prior
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20], [21], [22]; (iv) in the latent space.
the evaluation of DC-VAE in the open SWaT dataset; (v) a Modeling data sequences through a combination of varideeper analysis of DC-VAE’s operation through controlled ational inference and deep learning architectures has been
tests; (vi) the description and release of the TELCO mobile vastly researched in other domains in recent years, mostly
ISP dataset. by extending VAEs to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: with architectures such as STORN [37], VRNN [38],
Section II presents a comprehensive overview of the related OmniAnomaly [39], and Bi-LSTM [40] among others.
work. In Section III we describe the DC-VAE model in Convolutional layers with dilation have also been incordetail. Section IV presents the TELCO mobile ISP dataset porated into some of these approaches [41], [42], [43],
collected for evaluation, and briefly describes the SWaT allowing to speed up the training process based on the
dataset. Section V reports the results obtained with DC- possibilities of parallelization offered by these architectures.
VAE on the detection of anomalies in TELCO, additionally Transformers [44] is another popular architecture recently
benchmarking its performance against other approaches in showing great performance in sequential data processing;
both TELCO and SWaT. Through the testing on synthetic previous work on anomaly detection using transformers and
anomalies, Section VI presents a deeper analysis of DC-VAE’s VAEs [45] improves training speed as compared to the state of
response when confronted with different temporal and spatial the art, additionally outperforming standard baseline methods.
behaviors such as concept drifts, multidimensional anomalies, In particular, the paper improves over [39], considered a referand strong outliers. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. ence work in the area. Transformer-based anomaly detection
 in MTS data is indeed a promising research direction.
 Few papers on deep learning-based detectors have addressed
 II. R ELATED W ORK the problem of real-time detection. In [46], authors consider
 There are multiple surveys on general-domain anomaly the alert delay in detecting so-called range-anomalies – i.e.,
detection techniques [1], [2], [3] as well as on network contiguous anomaly segments, and evaluate their models based
anomaly detection [4], [5]. The diversity of data characteristics both on F 1 scores and on average alert delay. The idea of
and types of anomalies results in a lack of universal anomaly range-anomaly detection is appealing in practice; in real-world
detection models. The temporal nature of a very large spectrum applications, the operator generally does not care about pointof data problems has led to a strong development of the wise anomalies, and it is acceptable for an algorithm to trigger
particular field of time-series anomaly detection [1], [23]. It an alert for any sample in a contiguous anomaly segment, as
is common to find open libraries implementing the most far as the detection delay is bounded to a certain max-delay
traditional approaches in the literature – a notable example threshold. The work in [47] generalizes the classic measures
we use in this study is the python ADTK open library of Recall, Precision, and F1-score for range-anomalies. We
(https://github.com/arundo/adtk/). As noted in [1], most of the consider these extended performance metrics when evaluating
methods for unsupervised anomaly detection in univariate and DC-VAE in TELCO.
multivariate time-series consist of predicting an expected value The last topic we overview relates to evaluating and
based on past information and finding a decision threshold to benchmarking model performance through in-the-wild data
decide whether the prediction matches the observation. The time-series, using expert domain knowledge for data labelautomatic and adaptive computation of detection thresholds ing. Most proposals in the literature have been analyzed
remains an open research problem. on public datasets, such as the well-known Yahoo [10],
 Modern approaches to time-series anomaly detection based Numenta [11], [12], NASA [13], or others, where operating
on deep learning technology have flourished in recent conditions are unrealistic, anomalies might be trivial, and
years [6], [24], [25]. Due to their data-driven nature and labels are poorly assigned in the labeling process [14]. Getting
achieved performance in multiple domains, generative models access to datasets labeled by domain experts in an operational
such as VAEs [15], and GANs [26] have gained relevance in environment is irreplaceable for the realistic evaluation of
the anomaly detection field [20], [21], [22], [27], [28], [29], algorithms.
[30]. VAEs [15], [31], [32] represent a powerful and widely- This work has its origins in our previous paper on generative
used class of models to learn complex data distributions. models for network anomaly detection in MTS data [21],
Unlike GANs, a potential limitation of VAEs is the prior where we conceived Net-GAN, an architecture based on
assumption that latent sample representations are independent GANs and RNNs, where Long Short-Term Memory networks
and identically distributed. While this is the most com- (LSTMs) were employed as both generator and discriminator
mon assumption followed in the literature, there is ongoing models to capture temporal dependencies in the data.
research on the benefits of accounting for covariances between
samples in time and between time-series to improve model
performance [33], [34], [35], [36]. For example, while the III. A NOMALY D ETECTION W ITH DC-VAE
original work [15] assumes that the prior over the parameters Sequential data such as time-series is generally processed
and latent variables are centered isotropic Gaussian and the through sliding windows, condensing the information of the
true posteriors are approximately Gaussian with approximately most recent T measurements. Let us define x as a matrix
diagonal covariance, [35] proposes an approximation capturing in RM ×T , where M is the number of variables in the MTS
1604 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 distribution P(x), the objective is to model or approximate the
 data’s true distribution P using a parametrized distribution pθ
 with parameters θ. Let z be a random vector jointly-distributed
 with x, representing the latent encoding of x. We can express
 pθ (x ) as:
 
 pθ (x ) = pθ (x , z ) d z , (1)
 z

Fig. 1. Variational autoencoder and the re-parameterization trick. where pθ (x , z ) represents the joint distribution under pθ of
 the observable data x and its latent representation or encoding
 z. According to the chain rule, the equation can be rewritten as:
 
 pθ (x ) = pθ (x |z )pθ (z ) d z (2)
 z
 In the vanilla VAE, pθ (x |z ) is considered a Gaussian
 distribution, and therefore, pθ (x ) is a mixture of Gaussian
 distributions. The computation of pθ (x ) is very expensive and,
 in most cases, even intractable. To speed up training and make
 it feasible, it is necessary to introduce a further function to
 approximate the posterior distribution pθ (z |x ), in the form of
 qφ (z |x ) ≈ pθ (z |x ). In this way, the overall problem can be
 easily translated into the autoencoder domain, in which the
 conditional likelihood distribution pθ (x |z ) is performed by the
 probabilistic decoder. In contrast, the approximated posterior
 distribution qφ (z |x ) is computed by the probabilistic encoder,
Fig. 2. Example of time-series analysis through DC-VAE, for the TELCO cf. Figure 1.
dataset. The normal-operation region is defined by μx and σx . As in every deep-learning problem, it is necessary to define
 a differentiable loss function to update the network weights
 through backpropagation. In VAEs, the idea is to jointly
process, i.e., defines the dimension of the problem. We also optimize the generative model parameters θ to reduce the
define x (t) ∈ RM ×1 as an M-dimensional vector, representing reconstruction error between the input and the output of the
the MTS at a certain time t, and xm (t), with m ∈ {1, . . . , M }, network and the parameters φ of the approximated posterior
as the value of the m-th time-series at time t. distribution to have qφ (z |x ) as close as possible to the real
 As depicted in Figure 1, for a given input x, the trained posterior pθ (z |x ). The Evidence Lower Bound Loss (ELBO)
VAE model produces two different predictions, μx and σ x loss function is generally considered for this task. In the case
– matrices in RM ×T , corresponding to the parametrization of VAEs, the ELBO loss function Lθ,φ can be written as
of the probability distribution which better represents the follows:
given input. If the VAE model was trained (mainly) with data  
describing the normal behavior of the monitored system, then Lθ,φ = − log(pθ (x )) + DKL qφ (z |x )pθ (z |x )
  
the output for a non-anomalous input would not deviate from = −Ez ∼qφ (z |x ) [log pθ (x |z )] + DKL qφ (z |x )pθ (z )
the mean μx more than a specific integer α times the standard (3)
deviation σ x . On the contrary, if the input presents an anomaly,
the output would not belong to the region determined by the where DKL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence, which here
predicted mean and standard deviation. For reference, Figure 2 basically measures the information loss when using q to
presents the main ideas behind the usage of VAEs for time- approximate p. To train the autoencoder and make the
series anomaly detection, in this case portraying the results application of backpropagation feasible, a so-called reparamobtained in the analysis of the TELCO dataset, which is fully eterization trick is generally introduced. The main assumption
described in Section IV. For each of the displayed time-series on the latent space is that it can be considered as a set of mul-
TSi – the TELCO dataset corresponds to twelve time-series tivariate Gaussian distributions, and therefore, z ∼ qφ (z |x ) =
TS1 to TS12 , its real value xi , along with the outputs of the N(μz , σz 2 ). Given a random matrix ε ∼ N(0, I ) and 
VAE μxi and σxi , are reported. defined as the element-wise product, the reparameterization
 In the VAE model, observations x are assumed to depend trick permits to explicitly define z = g(μz , σz ) = μz +σz ε.
on a random variable z that comes from a lower-dimensional Thanks to this transformation, the variational autoencoder is
latent space. The objective is to maximize P(x), the probability trainable. The probabilistic encoder has to learn how to map
of the observations through the model. Similar to x, z will a compressed representation of the input into the two latent
also be a sequence of length T, but with a smaller number vectors μz and σz . At the same time, the stochasticity remains
of dimensions J < M, z ∈ RJ ×T . In formal terms, given excluded from the updating process and is injected in the latent
an input sample x characterized by an unknown probability space as an external input through ε. Under the Gaussian
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1605

Fig. 3. Using CNNs with causal filters requires large filters or many layers to
learn from long sequences. Dilated convolutions improve time-series modeling
by increasing the receptive field of the neural network, reducing computational
and memory requirements, enabling training on long sequences.

assumption, the ELBO loss function Lθ,φ can be explicitly
re-written as:
  N T
 1
 Lθ,φ =
 2×T ×N
 n=1 t=1
  M  2
  xm (t)(n) − μxm (t)(n)  2
 ×  2 + log σxm (t)(n)
 m=1 σxm (t)(n) Fig. 4. Encoder architecture using causal dilated convolutions, implemented
 through a stack of 1D convolutional layers.
 J
   2  2
 − 1 + log σzj (t)(n) − μzj (t)(n)
 j =1
  2 at t depends on the input at that time and at {t − 1, t − 2,
 − σzj (t)(n) (4) . . . , t − T + 1}. The simplest way to achieve this is to use
 filters of length F = 2 and DCs with dilatation factor d = F h ,
 At each iteration, the loss is calculated for a batch of size N; which grow exponentially with the layer depth h ∈ [0, H − 1],
recall that m indicates the variable (time-series) in the space where H is the number of layers of the network. Subsequently,
of x, and j the variable in the space of z, whereas t represents H is the minimum value that verifies: T ≤ 2 ∗ F H −1 . In
the specific time instant. the example, the window length is T = 8, and the target
 To exploit the temporal dimension of the input time-series, is achieved by taking H = 3 layers. This direct relationship
we proposed an encoder/decoder architecture based on popular between T and the network architecture has a strong practical
CNNs, using Dilated Convolutions (DCs) [16]. DC is a impact, making it easy to construct the encoder/decoder based
technique that expands the input by inserting gaps between on the desired temporal-depth of the analysis.
its consecutive samples. In simpler terms, it is the same as Note that the dilation process allows doubling T with each
a normal convolution, but it involves skipping samples so added layer. Consequently, a large temporal receptive field of
as to cover a larger area of the input. Figure 3 explains the past measurements can be achieved without further deepening
basic idea behind DCs. The convolutions must be causal, the network. The encoder and decoder are symmetric in
so that detection can be implemented in real-time. Because architecture, both in the number of filters and applied dilations.
such architectures do not have recurrent connections, they In the encoder model, the idea is to reduce or maintain
are often much faster to train than RNNs and do not suffer layer output dimensions with network depth. The opposite
from complex-to-tame gradient exploding/vanishing problems. for the decoder is increasing or maintaining the dimension
Using DCs instead of standard convolutions has several advan- until reaching the observations’ dimension. In both cases, the
tages for real-time analysis: (i) they increase the so-called sequence length T is always maintained.
receptive field, meaning that longer-in-the-past information Model training is conducted on top of normal-operation data
can be fed into the detection; (ii) DCs are computationally to capture the baseline for anomaly detection. Once trained, the
more efficient, as they provide larger coverage at the same detection process runs continually, rolling the sliding window
computation cost; (iii) by using DC, the pooling steps are of length T by a unitary-time step. At each time t, the DC-VAE
omitted, thus resulting in lesser memory consumption; (iv) model takes as input the matrix x ∈ RM ×T , constructed out
finally, for the same temporary receptive field, the resulting of the last T samples observed in the MTS, and produces as
network architecture is much more compact. output matrices μx and σx – for notation brevity, we define
 Figure 4 depicts the encoder architecture used in DC-VAE. μ = μx and σ = σx . From these two output matrices,
The network architecture must be such that the output values the anomaly detection only considers their values at time t,
depend on all previous input values. The length T of the sliding corresponding to two vectors μ(t) and σ(t). For each of the
window plays a key role here, as it must ensure that the output univariate time-series m, an anomaly is detected at time t if its
1606 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 5. Snapshots of the TELCO MTS. For each time-series, the region of normal operation is depicted, as estimated from DC-VAE predictions μx and σ x .

value xm (t) falls outside the normal-operation region, defined (https://iie.fing.edu.uy/investigacion/grupos/anomalias/en/telcoby μm (t) and σm (t). More precisely, an anomaly in time- dataset-2/downloads/). The TELCO dataset [17] corresponds
series m is declared at time t if: to twelve different time-series, with a temporal granularity of
 five minutes per sample, collected and manually labeled for a
 |xm (t) − μm (t)| > αm × σm (t), (5) period of seven months between January 1 and July 31, 2021.
where α = (α1 , . . . , αm , . . . , αM ) is a vector of M detection This temporal length is seldom available in other publicly
sensitivity threshold, where each αm can be set independently available datasets of this nature and is highly relevant and
for each time-series, allowing for fine-grained, per time-series useful to allow for long-term seasonal behavior analysis.
calibration of the detection process. Each time-series corresponds to aggregated data from dif-
 Regarding the calibration of α, and despite being DC- ferent sources; to keep business confidentiality, we do not
VAE an unsupervised system, we acknowledge that these specify the exact data type reflected by each time-series. The
thresholds are set relying on annotated anomalies. Inevitably twelve time-series are typical data monitored in a mobile ISP,
in any anomaly detection problem, it is necessary to set an including the number and amount of prepaid data transfer fees,
operating point. This must be set by an expert operator in number and cost of calls, the volume of data traffic, number
the system, who knows the behavior of the data and the of SMS, and more.
cost of false detections, both positive and negative. In all Figure 5 depicts daily snapshots of the complete TELCO
sets for anomaly detection, this knowledge is in the labels MTS. For each time-series, the region of normal operation is
provided by the experts. There are different techniques to depicted, as estimated from DC-VAE predictions μx and σ x .
define thresholds automatically from the data [48], but all are Different time-series expose different behaviors, e.g., some of
applicable for the detection of outliers (i.e., values far from them are noisier (TS3 ), others have lower dynamic ranges
normal behavior). In the problem we are dealing with, the (TS11 ), and some others show a smoother evolution (TS2 ).
interest is to detect anomalies which are often difficult to To appreciate the strong seasonality component of the timedifferentiate from normal behavior, so the calibration stage series, Figure 6 depicts the TELCO MTS for a period of four
inevitably must be supervised. days, covering weekdays and weekends.
 Table I presents the main details of the dataset. Note in
 particular, how strongly imbalanced the dataset is in terms
 IV. T HE TELCO M OBILE ISP DATASET
 of normal-operation and anomalous samples, which is the
A. TELCO – A New Open Dataset Released to the typical case for real network measurements in operational
Community deployments. By definition, anomalies are rare events. We
 A recent study [14] alerts on the limitations of evaluating split the full dataset in three independent, time-ordered subanomaly detection algorithms on popular time-series datasets sets, using measurements from January to March for model
such as Yahoo, Numenta, or NASA, among others. training, April for model validation, and May to July for
In particular, these datasets are noted to suffer from testing purposes. For the sake of completeness, Table II reports
known flaws such as trivial anomalies, unrealistic anomaly normal-operation and anomalous samples per individual timedensity, mislabeled ground truth, and run-to-failure bias. series, for the training, validation, and testing sub-sets. The
For this reason, we decided to evaluate DC-VAE in a share of anomaly samples is low and significantly different
proprietary MTS dataset, corresponding to real measurements for some of the time-series, adding richness and complexity
collected at an operation mobile ISP – note that we to the dataset; for example, time series TS1 , TS4 , TS9 , and
are publicly releasing this dataset to the community TS10 have a total share of anomaly samples above 2% or 3%.
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1607

Fig. 6. TELCO dataset time-series, for four days, along with the corresponding DC-VAE estimations. The temporary receptive field – i.e., length of the
rolling time-window, is T = 512 samples, spanning about two days of past measurements.

 TABLE I
 TELCO DATASET. S EVEN -M ONTHS W ORTH OF M EASUREMENTS ,
 M ANUALLY L ABELED FOR T WELVE D IFFERENT M ETRICS

 While the TELCO dataset used in this paper and released to
the community has a seven-month time span, we acknowledge Fig. 7. Average log-likelihood Ez ∼q (z |x ) [ log pθ (x |z )] in the reconstruc-
 φ
that the complete dataset we have collected has almost two tion of TELCO in the testing dataset, using different temporal spans (3 to
 18 months) for self-supervised model training.
years of duration. We have decided to work only on these
seven months because it corresponds to the data for which
expert operator annotated labels are available. Although DC- in the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset [18], an open,
VAE trains in a self-supervised fashion, a fair comparison publicly available dataset commonly used in the literature for
with supervised methods as the one we do in the evaluations cybersecurity analysis. The SWaT dataset consists of 51 timerequires that all methods share the same training, validation, series of data collected over eleven days in 2015-2016, on a
and test sets. water treatment operational test-bed, which represents a small-
 Nevertheless, and for the sake of completeness, we investi- scale version of a large modern cyber-physical system. The
gated the impact on DC-VAE’s baseline modeling performance dataset contains two sub-sets temporally split; the first week is
when training with longer time-spans, without labels. Figure 7 anomaly free and is considered as the training dataset, whereas
reports the average log-likelihood Ez ∼qφ (z |x ) [ log pθ (x |z )] in the last four days of data contain 36 attacks of different
the reconstruction of TELCO in the testing dataset, using nature and duration (from a few minutes to an hour), and
different temporal spans for self-supervised model training. is meant for testing purposes. The total number of anomaly
Interestingly, improvements are rather marginal when con- samples accounts for about 5.8% of the total measurements.
sidering up to 18 months of training data, suggesting that As an example of the kind of patterns observed in the
manually labeling a longer time-span for TELCO might not SWaT MTS, Figure 8 depicts four of the time-series under
actually provide a richer dataset. In any case, we are working normal operation. Different from TELCO, which represents a
with the expert annotators to release a newer version of real operational network and anomaly labels are provided by
TELCO in the near future, covering more than one year of manual inspection on individual time-series, anomaly labels
labeled time-series. in SWaT correspond to temporal ranges in which the attacks
 were executed under a controlled environment.
B. The SWaT Open Dataset for Cybersecurity Analysis We acknowledge that the SWaT dataset is far from
 While the core of the evaluations and benchmarking is representing a real cyber-physical system and is not perfect
conducted on the TELCO dataset, we also evaluate DC-VAE as benchmark for anomaly detection, presenting significant
1608 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE II
D ISTRIBUTION OF A NOMALY S AMPLES IN THE TELCO DATASET, P ER T IME -S ERIES AND P ER T RAINING , VALIDATION , AND T ESTING S UB -S ETS . T HE
 S HARE OF A NOMALY S AMPLES I S L OW, AND S IGNIFICANTLY D IFFERENT FOR S OME OF THE T IME -S ERIES

Fig. 8. SWaT – the four time-series represent normal operation. Anomaly labels in SWaT correspond to 36 temporal ranges when attacks were executed.

trivial anomalies and unrealistic anomaly density, as well as parameter to set; while it must be smaller than the MTS
some mislabeled ground truth and missed anomalies in the dimension M, it must also be big enough to capture the most
data (https://mlad.kaspersky.com/swat-testbed/). Nevertheless, relevant information of the MTS process. We test different
there are two main reasons for testing DC-VAE in SWaT: values for the sequence length T to show how this affects the
(i) firstly, despite its deficiencies, the SWaT dataset is widely performance of the model. In particular, we test T = 1, 8, 16,
used in the state of the art as benchmark for multivariate 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024 samples, considering the average
time-series anomaly detection, and this allows us showing that of the mean absolute error (MAE) between xm and μxm , for
DC-VAE provides similar, or even better performance, than each time-series m. Sequence length T = 1 corresponds to a
other similar systems in a well-known dataset; (ii) secondly, standard VAE model with only snapshot-like inputs; to avoid
using SWaT lets us testing the modeling capabilities of DC- an excessively compressed model for this sequence length, we
VAE in a dataset with a broader variety of variables – 51 time consider here an architecture with three fully-connected layers.
series in this case. Besides the reconstruction MAE, we also compute the socalled explained variance or variance score Varscore , which
 V. DC-VAE E VALUATION AND B ENCHMARKING compares the variance of the reconstruction error and the
 variance of the input signal:
A. DC-VAE Architecture Calibration
 Var(x (t) − μx (t))
 The first step before evaluation of DC-VAE is to calibrate Varscore (x (t), μx (t)) = 1 − (6)
the model. As explained in Section III, the length T of the Var(x (t))
sliding window plays a major role in the architecture of DC- The value of Varscore is between [0, 1], where 1 represents
VAE. Given the usage of the dilated convolutions, T determines the ideal case. Figure 9 reports the (a) MAE and (b) Varscore
the number of encoder and decoder layers (cf. Figure 4). for each sequence length T and corresponding model archi-
The dimension J of the latent space is the other relevant tecture, in both cases obtained as the average value across all
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1609

 TABLE IV
 T EMPORAL C OMPLEXITY FOR A RCHITECTURE O PTIMIZATION AND
 M ODEL T RAINING (H ARDWARE R EFERENCE : GPU N VIDIA GTX 1060)

 in DC-VAE, as compared to traditional recurrent architectures,
 we created another architecture by replacing all layers with
 RNNs. To search for the hyperparameters, we define another
 grid that includes the previous one, adding the number of
 hidden layers: h = {2, 4}. It is worth remembering that for
 DC-VAE, defining the length of the T sequences automatically
 sets the number of layers, and thus, this value varies between
 [3, 10]. Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) were the type of layer
 used in the RNNs, as they showed the highest convergence
 stability in terms of vanilla RNN and LSTM models.
 Table IV reports the comparative times taken for hyper-
Fig. 9. Calibration of DC-VAE in TELCO. T = 512 provides the smallest
 parameter search and model training for both architectures,
reconstruction error and the highest variance score. i.e., DC-VAE and the RNN-based one. Tests are performed
 on standard GPU hardware, using a Nvidia GTX 1060 GPU.
 TABLE III The fully causal architecture proposed by DC-VAE is more
 G RID OF H YPERPARAMETERS U SED IN THE M ODEL C ALIBRATION compact and can be optimized and trained much faster than
 traditional, recursive architectures. In particular, hyperparameter search takes less than half the time, and model training
 is at least 33% faster.

 B. Anomaly Detection Results in TELCO
 We go back to Figure 6 to show DC-VAE in action, using
 a sliding-window of length T = 512 samples. DC-VAE can
 properly track different types of behavior in the time-series,
the time-series, for the TELCO validation set. Latent space including the strong seasonal daily component, but also the
dimensions J = 4, and J = 8 are considered in the analysis. operation during weekdays and weekends, clearly visible in
The MAE varies considerably for the proposed range, with TS2 and TS11 , among others. In this example, time-series
T = 512 providing the smallest reconstruction error, almost TS3 and TS9 are noisier than time-series TS5 and TS12 ,
identical for both latent space dimensions. Similarly, for the which justifies the need for different sensitivity thresholds
Varscore , T = 512 results in the highest score, for both latent αm to address the underlying nature of each monitored
space dimensions. metric. Note in addition how different periods of time-series
 Another relevant hyperparameter is the number of filters variability result in more or less tight normal-operation regions
f for each hidden convolutional layer, which together with estimated by DC-VAE, as defined by σ(t). Figure 10 extends
the number of layers and the input and output dimensions the predictions of DC-VAE to a longer time-span, considering
define the size of the architecture in terms of the number two weeks of measurements, for time-series TS2 and TS11 .
of trainable parameters. Also, hyperparameters typical of the While both time-series have a strong seasonal component, with
training stage, such as the learning rate γ and the mini-batch marked differences in behavior on weekdays and weekends,
size m, are key to find the optimal solution. To find the TS11 has a decreasing trend on the second week, which can
best combination of these hyperparameters, we use the Tree- be properly tracked by DC-VAE.
structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) approach [49]. In total, 50 To apply DC-VAE for anomaly detection, we have to
attempts were tested on the grid shown in Table III, where calibrate the sensitivity thresholds α, which is usually done
the hyperparameters for which the model showed the smallest in a supervised manner, relying on the labeled anomalies
validation loss are reported in the last column. available in the training and validation datasets. This step is the
 The hyperparameter search stage for a deep learning model only one that requires a certain level of “supervision” (in the
is one of the most important and most expensive steps, since sense of ground-truth availability), but could also be done in a
it involves training many models until the optimal values self-supervised manner, by labeling anomalies through outlier
are found. Therefore, lowering the times of this stage is detection techniques. In our specific problem, each sensitivity
paramount. To evaluate the time gained by using a fully threshold αm is calibrated on a per time-series basis, by
parallelizable compact architecture such as the one proposed maximizing the F1 score over the training and validation
1610 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 10. DC-VAE operation for time-series with stationary behavior. Weekly seasonality is identified, with variations between weekdays and weekends.

 were not labeled as anomalous by the expert operator. Whether
 this is a false-positive produced by DC-VAE, or a non-labeled
 anomaly missed by the expert operator is difficult to know.
 It is important to note that anomalies in real, operational
 measurements, as labeled by the expert operator, do not always
 translate into clear outliers in the data; the contrary is also true,
 meaning that typical outliers in the data might not correspond
 to actual anomalies in the eyes of the expert operator. Manual
 data labeling by experts is prone to human error, many times
 due to a lack of conclusive information for the operator to take
 a proper decision. These observations are paramount when
 evaluating anomaly detectors with real, in-the-wild data.
 We run a quantitative performance analysis of DC-
 VAE in the testing dataset (cf. Table I), benchmarking its
 performance against a broad set of more traditional detectors.
 As performance metrics, we consider an elaborated version of
 the traditionally used, per-sample evaluation metrics, to consider a more natural and practical approach for real anomaly
 detection applications, evaluating detection performance in
 the form of anomaly temporal-ranges. Traditional metrics
 can make sense for point anomalies where a true positive
 corresponds to a correct detection at the precise point in
 time. However, as shown for example in Figure 11(b), many
 anomalies occur in the form of multiple, consecutive point
 anomalies, defining an anomaly range. In such scenarios, it
 could be already enough to have a partial overlap between
 the real anomaly range and the predicted anomaly interval
 to consider a correct detection. Previous papers have considered these observations [11], [46], [47], defining new metrics
Fig. 11. Examples of real anomalies present in the analyzed dataset, and which prioritize early or delayed detection, or focusing mainly
their identification by DC-VAE. on range anomalies. Therefore, we take the extended definitions of recall and precision as defined in [47] to generalize
datasets, doing a grid-search of integer values from 1 to 5. In for ranges of anomalies, considering a correct detection if at
a nutshell, we decide how many standard deviations σm shall least one of the samples between the start and the end of the
be considered as tolerance for the normal-operation variability actual anomaly is flagged by the model. We refer to these
of the data. extended, range-based metrics as Rr , Pr , and F 1r , for recall,
 Figure 11 reports some examples of real (i.e., labeled) precision, and F1-score, respectively. More precisely, given a
anomalies present in the TELCO dataset, in particular for time- set of λ Real Anomaly ranges RA = RA1 . . . RAλ and a set
series TS2 , TS4 TS6 and TS9 , along with their corresponding of δ Predicted Anomaly ranges PA = PA1 . . . PAδ :
identification by DC-VAE, where sensitivity thresholds α were λ
calibrated as mentioned before. DC-VAE can detect different j =1 Rr (RAi , PA)
 Rr (RA, PA) = (7)
types of anomalies present in the data, of a more transient λ
 δ
and spiky nature in the case of TS6 and TS9 , or on a more j =1 Pr (RA, PAi )
structural basis in the case of TS2 and TS4 . Note also how Pr (RA, PA) = (8)
 δ
some of the actual measurements fall significantly outside the Rr × P r
 F 1r = 2 × (9)
normal-operation region – e.g., in Figure 11(c), but still these Rr + P r
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1611

 TABLE V
 S ET OF B ENCHMARK T IME -S ERIES A NOMALY D ETECTORS Table VI reports the corresponding results in the testing
 U SED IN TELCO AGAINST DC-VAE dataset, independently for each time-series, and as an average
 value. The first observation is that achieved results are in
 general rather poor, achieving F 1r scores around 60% for
 eight out of the twelve time-series, and below for the rest.
 This is highly in contrast with the high F1 scores usually
 reported in the literature, when dealing with simulated or
 flawed datasets [14]. Indeed, as we explained before, dealing
 with in-the-wild measurements and human-labeled, highlyimbalanced datasets is more complex than what the results in
 the literature usually report – real, in practice MTS anomaly
 detection is highly complex. Performance is significantly
 different for some of the time-series, which corresponds to
 the different nature and underlying behavior (cf. Figure 6)
 and the fraction of anomalies (cf. Table II). While DC-VAE’s
 performance as compared to S-VAE is outstanding, results
 show that no single approach is superior to the rest in all the
 time-series. DC-VAE’s performance is similar, on average, to
 S-EXPS and ARIMA. Still, among those already mentioned,
 the main advantage of DC-VAE remains its multivariate oper-
 In a nutshell, an intersection between an anomaly interval ation and the overall MTS modeling within a single learning
and the whole set of predictions is enough to set Rr (RAi , PA) step.
to one. Pr (RA, PAi ) is determined in its dual form. To
consider the manual labeling uncertainty in the real anomaly
location [50], we run a preprocessing on the real anomaly C. Benchmarking DC-VAE in the SWaT Open Dataset
regions, convolving the series with a rectangular window, to For the sake of completeness and to provide a stronger
obtain better-defined anomaly ranges. and more comprehensive benchmarking, we compare DC-VAE
 Table V summarizes the different anomaly detection against other deep-learning-based MTS anomaly detectors
approaches considered in the benchmark against DC-VAE. in SWaT. As discussed in the related work, GAN-based
Most of these approaches correspond to univariate detec- MTS detectors are very popular in the literature, given their
tion methods (except S-VAE), largely studied in the signal flexibility to model a complex MTS process without making
processing domain. A broad set of 15 univariate detectors any assumptions on the underlying distributions. GANs are a
are integrated into a single ensemble detector, referred to as powerful approach to learning the underlying distributions of
ENS-15. The ensemble includes regression models, change- data samples, in a purely data-driven, model-agnostic manner.
point detectors, outliers detectors, dimensionality reduction, Such models can be used in the practice to construct better
clustering, and more. The aggregation corresponds to a major- normal-operation baselines, improving the identification of
ity voting strategy, where each detector is independently instances that deviate from this baseline. We, therefore, comcalibrated in the training and validation datasets, and a voting pare DC-VAE against three GAN-based detectors proposed
threshold maximizing F1 validation scores is computed. In in recent years, including EGAN [22], MAD-GAN [20], and
TELCO, ENS-15 detects an anomaly if at least four ensemble our previous work on GAN-based MTS anomaly detection,
models detect it. We also consider well-established time-series referred to as NET-GAN [21].
detectors, such as Seasonal Exponential Smoothing (S-EXPS) To train DC-VAE in SWaT, we take an architecture using
and the standard Auto-Regressive Integrated Moving Average J = 16 as the dimension of the latent space, and a sequence
(ARIMA) model. These approaches base the detection on length T = 128, both parameters calibrated in the same way
the prediction of μx and σx for each time instant, making we did it in TELCO (cf. Figure 9). We train both DC-VAE and
them particularly interesting to compare against DC-VAE. To NET-GAN in the SWaT training dataset, using a small share of
show the advantages of DC-VAE as compared to the usage of samples from the attacks for calibration. Regarding EGAN and
standard, vanilla VAEs for anomaly detection in time-series, MAD-GAN, we decided to report here the results obtained by
we define the Standard-VAE (S-VAE) as a snapshot-input- the authors in [20], which would generally correspond to the
based anomaly detection model, where the encoder/decoder best performance which could be achieved by these methods.
architecture is based on a standard 3-layers, fully connected Finally, we also include a standard Auto Encoder (AE) model
feed-forward neural network, and the input corresponds to the as the simplest approach comparable to DC-VAE.
MTS at the specific time of detection – i.e., T = 1 in S-VAE. Table VII reports the results obtained in the testing dataset
The comparison against S-VAE serves to demonstrate the in terms of recall, precision, and F1 scores. We fall back to
advantages of DC-VAE temporal-aware architecture, through the standard evaluation on point anomalies instead of range
the dilated convolutions. Finally, evaluations are reported anomalies, to be consistent with the results obtained in SWaT
independently for each to the twelve time-series TSm in the as reported in the literature. We consider two variations of
TELCO dataset. NET-GAN detectors [21], one using the generator function
1612 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 TABLE VI
 A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE B ENCHMARKING IN TELCO, C OMPARING DC-VAE AGAINST S-EXPS, ARIMA, S-VAE, AND AN E NSEMBLE
 OF 15 T RADITIONAL D ETECTORS (ENS-15). F IRST AND S ECOND H IGHEST F 1 S CORES A RE M ARKED IN R ED AND B LUE , R ESPECTIVELY

 TABLE VII
 A NOMALY D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE B ENCHMARKING AGAINST
 D EEP -L EARNING G ENERATIVE M ODELS IN SWAT

(NET-GAN-G), and the other one the discriminator function
(NET-GAN-D). We also consider three different variations
of MAD-GAN, optimized for best precision (MAD-GAN-
P), recall (MAD-GAN-R), and F1 score (MAD-GAN-F1).
DC-VAE results are comparable to those obtained with NET-
GAN-G and MAD-GAN-F1, and significantly better than
EGAN or the AE model. In addition, absolute results are
also significantly better than those obtained in TELCO,
helping us demonstrate that anomaly detection in real data
as the one in TELCO, dealing with the error-prone process of human labeling, is much more complex than what
the literature usually reports on such benchmarks. To sumup, we can claim that DC-VAE realizes state-of-the-art
detection performance, while again, flagging its underlying
advantages.

 VI. T EMPORAL AND S PATIAL R ESPONSE OF DC-VAE
 The visual exploration of DC-VAE predictions and detec- Fig. 12. A strong outlier in TS11 results in poor prediction for TS4 , with
tions in TELCO revealed certain behaviors of the model sequence length T = 32. This effect is mitigated with longer lengths T.
when confronted with different temporal and/or spatial patterns
which are worth studying. In particular, the impact of the examples of simulated anomalies and their impact on DC-VAE
sequence length T on the reaction of the model to certain predictions, using S-VAE and the ARIMA models for comphenomena is relevant. Next, we present different prototypical parison, when applicable.
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1613

Fig. 13. S-VAE and DC-VAE response to univariate and multivariate anomalies. The simultaneous modeling of the full MTS process adds regularity and
stability to the detection.

Fig. 14. DC-VAE and ARIMA response to range and point anomalies. The lower image is always a close-up view of the upper one. Being univariate and
with a small temporal window makes ARIMA less robust for MTS anomaly detection, and missing anomalies.

 1) Impact of Strong Outliers: the processing of the com- making it go completely undetected. The result is totally difplete MTS simultaneously has evidenced, and in particular ferent for DC-VAE; as shown in Figure 13(c), the predictions
for simpler versions of the model with shorter sequence of a DC-VAE model with a sequence length of T = 512 tend to
lengths T, that coarse outliers affecting a single time-series follow the past behavior, and take longer to track the anomaly
can affect the predictions for other time-series, generating pattern, effectively detecting it.
false detections. Figure 12 shows how a major outlier in Similar to DC-VAE, the ARIMA detection model enables
TS11 strongly perturbates predictions for TS4 , especially for the visualization of the normal-operation region. However,
sequence length below 32 in this example. This effect can be as we show in Figure 14, being univariate and with a small
partially mitigated by taking longer sequences at the input. As temporal window makes ARIMA less robust for MTS anomaly
a lesson learned, using longer sequences improves the filtering detection. In the figure, model predictions are depicted in
of strong outliers from the data. green for ARIMA and in orange for DC-VAE, and red dots
 2) Multivariate Model Properties: besides being more indicate real (i.e., labeled) anomalies. Figures 14(a) and 14(b)
scalable in production, having a single model for the analysis show that the value of σx for the ARIMA model is constant
of the complete MTS also improves detection. Figure 13(a) over time, but dynamically adapts in DC-VAE, providing a
shows S-VAE model predictions for two highly correlated better, more accurate normal-operation region. This is a strong
time-series, TS1 and TS2 . An artificial univariate anomaly advantage of DC-VAE, since it adapts to the noise variations
in TS1 , emulating a period where the time-series is constant that these time-series generally present.
(e.g., no incoming measurements), has a contained impact The same happens to the estimations of μx . While the
on the rest of the time-series predictions, as reflected in the estimation of the signal through the ARIMA model closely folpredictions of μx and σ x for TS2 . As the S-VAE model has no lows the time-series, even in the occurrence of real anomalies
temporal information (i.e., T = 1), predictions are influenced – and thus the model misses detection, the estimation provided
by the fact that the rest of the time-series remained unchanged. by DC-VAE maintains a normal behavior in the face of the
Nevertheless, in this example, the anomaly introduced in TS1 anomalies, allowing to properly detect them. The bigger spatial
would be clearly detected. (M) and temporal (T) ranges of DC-VAE add robustness to the
 3) Temporal Model Properties: we now apply the previous anomaly detection process.
anomaly to all the time-series in the same period and 4) Concept Drift Response: the ability to detect Concept
verify how the VAE-based models exploit temporal correla- Drift (CD) in time-series data is a paramount property [8].
tions among time-series. Figure 13(b) shows that this time, The CD can manifest itself as a shift in the mean, an increase
the S-VAE model predictions perfectly follow the anomaly, or decrease in the variance, or both changes simultaneously,
1614 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

Fig. 15. DC-VAE response to univariate concept-drift: a gradual linear fall of the values during the day without affecting night behavior. While the drift
does not affect the predictions on the other time-series, it becomes easily detectable at the corresponding time-series.

which may be imperceptible for many methods [9]. These easy adjustment of the normal-operation region, robustness
CD changes may be related to important trends in the data, against anomalies in other time-series, as well as against
requiring proper detection. We simulate a univariate CD in concept drift, which can also be detected. The application
one of the time-series, and check the outputs of DC-VAE. of DC-VAE in the TELCO and SWaT datasets shows the
Figure 15 shows an example of CD, where a gradual change in complementarity with other detection methods and the onthe interval indicated as the CD zone is simulated in TS5 . The par performance with state-of-the-art MTS anomaly detectors
daily values of the time-series are reduced linearly, starting at in the literature. The quantitative and qualitative advantages
80% (beginning of the CD zone) up to 40% (end of the CD of DC-VAE concerning S-VAE evidenced the contribution
zone). This change does not only affect the mean value of of the convolutional layers in capturing a longer time
the time-series, but also its variance. Interestingly, predictions horizon.
of the DC-VAE follow the past behavior learned as normal, The open release of the TELCO dataset offers a real,
allowing the CD event to be detected. more representative environment to assess and benchmark
 anomaly detectors, providing a solid contribution to advance
 VII. C ONCLUDING R EMARKS the domain.

 DC-VAE is a novel approach to anomaly detection in
multivariate time-series, leveraging dilated convolutional neu- ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ral networks and variational autoencoders. DC-VAE detects The authors thank anonymous reviewers as well as associate
anomalies in multivariate time-series, exploiting temporal editors for their constructive feedback and comments, which
information without sacrificing computational and memory helped improving our work.
resources. In particular, instead of using recursive neural
networks, large causal filters, or many layers, DC-VAE relies R EFERENCES
on dilated convolutions to capture long and short-term phenomena in the data, avoiding complex and less-efficient deep [1] A. Blázquez-García, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review
 on outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
architectures, simplifying learning. Applying DC-VAE to real vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, Apr. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
measurements collected at a mobile ISP showed that its 10.1145/3444690
underlying architecture is better than traditional, vanilla VAEs [2] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, Outlier Detection for
 Temporal Data (Synthesis Lectures Data Mining Knowledge Discovery),
regarding time-series anomaly detection. The parameterization vol. 5. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 1–129.
of DC-VAE’s architecture is defined by a single parameter, [3] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
namely the length of the sliding window used for temporal ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009. [Online].
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1541880.1541882
analysis, and the normal operation region can be easily adapted [4] M. Ahmed, A. N. Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of network anomaly
on a per time-series basis by adjusting a single integer value, detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60, pp. 19–31,
all of these important advantages in practice. Jan. 2016.
 [5] W. Zhang, Q. Yang, and Y. Geng, “A survey of anomaly detection
 The performance analysis shows that DC-VAE has good methods in networks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Comput. Netw. Multimedia
properties for its implementation in production: scalability, Technol., 2009, pp. 1–3.
GARCÍA GONZÁLEZ et al.: ONE MODEL TO FIND THEM ALL DEEP LEARNING FOR MTS 1615

 [6] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning [30] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and
 for anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, K. Veeramachaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using
 no. 2, pp. 1–38, Mar. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big
 3439950 Data), 2020, pp. 33–43.
 [7] T. Hoens, R. Polikar, and N. Chawla, “Learning from streaming data [31] C. Doersch, “Tutorial on variational autoencoders,” 2016,
 with concept drift and imbalance: An overview,” Prog. Artif. Intell., arXiv:1606.05908.
 2012, pp. 89–101. [32] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “An introduction to variational autoen-
 [8] J. Gama, I. Žliobaitundefined, A. Bifet, M. Pechenizkiy, and coders,” 2019, arXiv:1906.02691.
 A. Bouchachia, “A survey on concept drift adaptation,” Assoc. Comput. [33] F. P. Casale, A. V. Dalca, L. Saglietti, J. Listgarten, and
 Machinery, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1–37, 2014. N. Fusi, “Gaussian process prior variational autoencoders,” in Proc. Adv.
 [9] G. H. F. M. Oliveira, R. C. Cavalcante, G. G. Cabral, L. L. Minku, and Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 10390–10401.
 A. L. I. Oliveira, “Time series forecasting in the presence of concept [34] L. Girin, F. Roche, T. Hueber, and S. Leglaive, “Notes on the
 drift: A PSO-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE 29th Int. Conf. Tools Artif. use of variational autoencoders for speech and audio spectrogram
 Intell. (ICTAI), 2017, pp. 239–246. modeling,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Conf. Digit. Audio Effects (DAFx), 2019,
[10] N. Laptev, S. Amizadeh, and Y. Billawala, 2015, “S5—A labeled pp. 1–8.
 anomaly detection dataset,” Dataset, yahoo. [Online]. Available: [35] V. Fortuin, D. Baranchuk, G. Rätsch, and S. Mandt, “GP-VAE: Deep
 https://webscope.sandbox.yahoo.com/catalog.php?datatypeWebscope | probabilistic time series imputation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell.
 Yahoo Labs Statist., 2020, pp. 1651–1661.
[11] A. Lavin and S. Ahmad, “Evaluating real-time anomaly detection [36] S. Ramchandran, G. Tikhonov, K. Kujanpää, M. Koskinen, and
 algorithms–The Numenta anomaly benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. H. Lähdesmäki, “Longitudinal variational autoencoder,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), 2015, pp. 38–44. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2021, pp. 3898–3906.
[12] S. Ahmad, A. Lavin, S. Purdy, and Z. Agha, “Unsupervised real- [37] J. Bayer and C. Osendorfer, “Learning stochastic recurrent
 time anomaly detection for streaming data,” Neurocomputing, vol. 262, networks,” 2014, arXiv:1411.7610.
 pp. 134–147, Nov. 2017. [38] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville,
[13] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and and Y. Bengio, “A recurrent latent variable model for sequential
 T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and non- data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 1-9.
 parametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. [39] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
[14] R. Wu and E. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection bench- network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 marks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023. [40] S. Shabanian, D. Arpit, A. Trischler, and Y. Bengio, “Variational bi-
[15] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational LSTMs,” 2017, arXiv:1711.05717.
 Bayes,” 2013, arXiv:1312.6114. [41] Z. Yang, Z. Hu, R. Salakhutdinov, and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, “Improved
[16] A. v. d. Oord et al., “Wavenet: A generative model for raw variational autoencoders for text modeling using dilated convoluaudio,” 2016, arXiv:1609.03499. tions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3881–3890.
[17] G. García González, S. Martínez Tagliafico, A. Fernández, G. Gómez, [42] G. Lai, B. Li, G. Zheng, and Y. Yang, “Stochastic wavenet: A generative
 J. Acuña, and P. Casas, 2023, “TELCO—A new multivariate time- latent variable model for sequential data,” 2018, arXiv:1806.06116.
 series dataset for anomaly detection in mobile networks,” Dataset, IEEE [43] C. Meng, X. S. Jiang, X. M. Wei, and T. Wei, “A time convolutional
 DataPort. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/skpg-0539 network based outlier detection for multidimensional time series in
[18] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed Cyber-physical-social systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 74933–74942,
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop 2020.
 Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), 2016, pp. 31–36. [44] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[19] G. G. González, S. M. Tagliafico, A. F. Iie-Fing, G. Gómez, J. Acuña, Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11.
 and P. Casas, “DC-VAE, fine-grained anomaly detection in mul- [45] H. Zhang, Y. Xia, T. Yan, and G. Liu, “Unsupervised anomaly detectivariate time-series with dilated convolutions and variational auto tion in multivariate time series through transformer-based variational
 encoders,” in Proc. 7th Workshop Traffic Meas. Cybersecurity (WTMC), autoencoder,” in Proc. 33rd Chin. Control Decis. Conf. (CCDC), 2021,
 2022, pp. 1–6. pp. 281–286.
[20] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: [46] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative encoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. 2018 World
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, Wide Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
 pp. 703–716. [47] N. Tatbul, T. J. Lee, S. Zdonik, M. Alam, and J. Gottschlich, “Precision
[21] G. G. González, P. Casas, A. Fernández, and G. Gómez, “On and recall for time series,” in Proc. 32nd Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
 the usage of generative models for network anomaly detection in (NeurIPS), 2018, pp. 1–11.
 multivariate time-series,” SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 48, [48] J. Beirlant, Y. Goegebeur, J. Segers, and J. Teugels, Statistics of
 no. 4, pp. 49–52, May 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ Extremes: Theory and Applications, vol. 558. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley,
 3466826.3466843 2004.
[22] H. Zenati, C. S. Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and [49] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. Kégl, “Algorithms for hyper-
 V. R. Chandrasekhar, “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,” 2018, parameter optimization,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2011,
 arXiv:1802.06222. pp. 2546–2554.
[23] M. Braei and S. Wagner, “Anomaly detection in univariate time-series: [50] A. Shahid, G. White, J. Diuwe, A. Agapitos, and O. O’Brien, “SLMAD:
 A survey on the state-of-the-art,” 2020, arXiv: 2004.00433. Statistical learning-based metric anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[24] D. Bäßler, T. Kortus, and G. Güehring, “Unsupervised anomaly detection Service-Oriented Comput., 2020, pp. 252–263.
 in multivariate time series with online evolving spiking neural networks,”
 Mach. Learn., vol. 111, pp. 1377–1408, Mar. 2022.
[25] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
 detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
[26] I. Goodfellow et al., “Generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Gastón García González received the B.Sc. and
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2014, pp. 1–9. M.Sc. degrees from the Universidad de la República,
[27] S. Zavrak and M. Iskefiyeli, “Anomaly-based intrusion detection from Uruguay, in 2018 and 2020, respectively. He is
 network flow features using variational autoencoder,” IEEE Access, currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Signal
 vol. 8, pp. 108346–108358, 2020. Processing Department, Electrical Engineering
[28] R.-Q. Chen, G.-H. Shi, W.-H. Zhao, and C.-H. Liang, “A joint model for Institute, Universidad de la República, where he
 IT operation series prediction and anomaly detection,” Neurocomputing, holds a position as a Teaching Assistant/Lecturer.
 vol. 448, pp. 130–139, Aug. 2021. His main research areas include signal processing,
[29] J. Donahue, P. Krähenbühl, and T. Darrell, “Adversarial feature learn- anomaly detection, and machine learning.
 ing,” 2016, arXiv:1605.09782.
1616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 2, APRIL 2024

 Sergio Martinez Tagliafico received the degree José Acuña received the degree in electrical engiin electrical engineering and the Specialization neering in July 1994, and the Ph.D. degree in signal
 Diploma degree in telecommunications from the theory and communications from the Universidad de
 Universidad de la República, Uruguay, in 2012 Vigo, Spain, in 2013, with a thesis concerning effiand 2013, respectively, where he is an Assistant ciency of OFDM systems on urban radio channels.
 Professor with the Engineering Faculty, working on He is an Assistant Professor with the Engineering
 signal processing and data science. Faculty, Universidad de la República, Uruguay. He
 is also a Network and IT Operations Manager with
 Telefonica Uruguay. His current research interests
 are related to telecommunication networks and
 anomaly detection.

 Alicia Fernández (Member, IEEE) is a Professor
 of Signal Processing with the Electrical Engineering
 Institute, Universidad de la República, Uruguay.
 Since 1989, she has been working with IIE, in
 telecommunication and signal processing areas. Her
 main research interests are signal processing and Pedro Casas (Member, IEEE) received the degree
 pattern recognition with focus in biomedical image in electrical engineering from the Universidad de la
 analysis, biometric identification, anomaly detection, República, Uruguay, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree
 and big data analysis. in computer science from Télécom Bretagne in
 2010. He is currently a Senior Scientist in AI/ML
 for Networking with the AIT Austrian Institute
 of Technology, Vienna. He was a Postdoctoral
 Researcher with LAAS-CNRS, Toulouse, from
 2010 to 2011 and a Senior Researcher with the
 Gabriel Gómez Sena received the degree in indus- Telecommunications Research Center Vienna from
 trial engineering (speciality electronics) in December 2011 to 2015. He has published more than 200
 1987, and the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering networking research papers in major international conferences and journals,
 from the Universidad de la República, Uruguay, in and received 17 awards for his work, including eight Best Paper Awards. His
 2011, with a thesis concerning statistical methods work focuses on machine learning-based approaches for networking, big data
 for traffic classification, where he is an Associate analytics and platforms, Internet network measurements, network security, and
 Professor with Engineering School. His current anomaly detection, as well as Internet QoE monitoring. He is the General
 research interests are related to networking pro- Chair for different actions in network measurement and analysis, including
 tocols, software defined networking, and anomaly the IEEE ComSoc ITC Special Interest Group on Network Measurements and
 detection in telecommunication networks. Analytics.