5668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Online Self-Supervised Deep Learning for Intrusion
 Detection Systems
 Mert Nakıp , Member, IEEE, and Erol Gelenbe , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— This paper proposes a novel Self-Supervised congestion, power consumption, and processor and memory
Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework, which enables a fully usage of IoT devices over time. Therefore, it is crucial to
online Deep Learning (DL) based Intrusion Detection System detect malicious network traffic and identify compromised
(IDS) that requires no human intervention or prior off-line
learning. The proposed framework analyzes and labels incoming IoT devices during an ongoing Botnet attack. While detecting
traffic packets based only on the decisions of the IDS itself using malicious traffic allows reactive actions to alleviate the effects
an Auto-Associative Deep Random Neural Network, and on an of the attack and stop it, identifying compromised IoT devices
online estimate of its statistically measured trustworthiness. The paves the way for preventive actions against the spread of
SSID framework enables IDS to adapt rapidly to time-varying malware and Botnet attack.
characteristics of the network traffic, and eliminates the need
for offline data collection. This approach avoids human errors in On the other hand, as the majority (approximately 52%)
data labeling, and human labor and computational costs of model of IoT connections are to low cost and low maintenance
training and data collection. The approach is experimentally devices deployed in massive IoT networks [5], developing
evaluated on public datasets and compared with well-known and implementing complex and advanced security methods is
machine learning and deep learning models, showing that this challenging as well. To this end, early research [6] developed
SSID framework is very useful and advantageous as an accurate
and online learning DL-based IDS for IoT systems. various types of lightweight Machine Learning (ML)-based
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) –especially anomaly detect-
 Index Terms— Self-supervised learning, intrusion detection,
 ing IDS (anomaly-based IDS)– for IoT networks, showing
deep learning, Internet of Things, random neural network (RNN),
auto-associative deep RNN, botnet attacks. that anomaly-based IDS is very promising in detecting zeroday attacks based on unknown intrusions that often target
 I. I NTRODUCTION vulnerable devices and networks.
 Since the decisions of anomaly-based IDS are highly
B OTNET attacks can lead to thousands of infected
 devices [1] compromising the devices of victims and
turning them into “bots” via malware [2], which in turn cause
 dependent on the characteristics of the normal traffic used
 for parameter optimization (i.e. learning), accurate decisions
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. The malicious become more difficult when the normal behaviour of network
bots, i.e. compromised devices, can generate fraud informa- traffic changes over time due to both internal and external
tion, cause data leaks, and spread malware. It is reported that influences. For example, new device(s) may be added to the
27.7% of all global website traffic in 2021 was generated by IoT network causing a considerable change in aggregated
bots with malicious intent, and is growing with a 7.3% increase normal network traffic and an increased false positive alarms.
reported between 2018 and 2021 [3]. Therefore, anomaly-based IDS could greatly benefit from
 Botnet attacks severely challenge resource-constrained the ability to adapt in real time to time-varying characteristics
devices and Internet of Things (IoT) networks [4], as an of network traffic, ideally through sequential online learnattack propagates over the victim network increasing network ing [7], [8]. However, the effectiveness of completely online
 learning, even for lightweight ML-based IDS, is often limited
 Manuscript received 5 September 2023; revised 8 April 2024 and 6 May by two main factors: 1) A sufficient amount of collected
2024; accepted 7 May 2024. Date of publication 16 May 2024; date of
current version 28 May 2024. This work was supported in part by European and labeled traffic data is not always accessible for every
Commission H2020 Program through the Security by Design IoT Devel- system intended to be secured by the IDS. 2) Online parameter
opment and Certificate Framework with Front-end Access Control (IoTAC) updates are occasionally performed in parallel with intrusion
Research and Innovation Action under Grant 952684 and in part by European Commission Horizon Europe—the Framework Program for Research detection at fixed or variable time intervals. Frequent online
and Innovation (2021–2027) Secure-by-Design IoT Operation with Supply updates, i.e. short time intervals, result in high computational
Chain Control (DOSS) Project under Grant 101120270. The associate editor resource consumption for only minor or no performance gain
coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication
was Prof. George Loukas. (Corresponding author: Mert Nakıp.) per update. In contrast, infrequent updates, i.e. long time
 Mert Nakıp is with the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informat- intervals, may have difficulty adapting to changes in normal
ics, Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN), 44-100 Gliwice, Poland (e-mail: traffic, resulting in poor IDS performance. Hence, each time
mnakip@iitis.pl).
 Erol Gelenbe is with the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Informatics, interval needs to be carefully selected, taking into account the
Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN), 44-100 Gliwice, Poland, also with the current state of the IDS and the actual behaviour of normal
Laboratory of I3S, Université Côte d’Azur, 06108 Nice, France, and also network traffic.
with the Department of Computer Engineering, Yaşar University, 35100 İzmir,
Turkey (e-mail: seg@iitis.pl). In this paper, in order to enable completely online learn-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402148 ing of IDS parameters, a novel fully online Self-Supervised
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5669

Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework is proposed. SSID attacks, 2) identifies compromised network nodes, and
learns from arriving traffic packets, measures the trustwor- 3) performs self-supervised learning for intrusion detection.
thiness of the IDS, including its generalization ability and
accuracy on traffic packets it uses for learning. It can then
decide when to update the neural weights via its learning A. DDoS Botnet Attack Detection
algorithm, keeping itself up-to-date with a high intrusion In [19], Tuan et al. conducted a comparative study for
detection accuracy. performance evaluation of ML methods aiming to classify
 The SSID framework can be used with any anomaly- Botnet attack traffic. In this work, the authors evaluated the
based IDS that requires parameter optimization, providing performances of Support Vector Machine (SVM), Multilayer
fully online self-supervised learning of parameters in parallel Perceptron (MLP), Decision Tree (DT), Naive Bayes (NB),
with real-time detection requiring no human intervention. and unsupervised ML methods (such as K-means clustering)
It also eliminates the need for labeled or unlabeled offline on two datasets (including KDD’99) revealing that unsudata collection, and offline training or parameter optimiza- pervised ML methods achieve the best performance with
tion. Therefore, the proposed framework contrasts sharply 98% accuracy. In [20], Shao et al. created an ensemble of
with much of existing work [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], Hoeffding Tree and Random Forest (RF) models with online
[15], [16] that has implemented self-supervised learning for learning using both normal and attack traffic. In [21], Shafiq
intrusion detection, often utilizing offline (small-sized) labeled et al. developed a feature selection technique as a preprocessor unlabeled training data and pseudo-labeling. Accordingly, ing algorithm for an ML-based botnet attack detector. This
as its main advantages, the SSID framework algorithm ranks features according to their Pearson correlation
 • Enables IDS to easily adapt time varying characteristics coefficients and greedily maximizes the detector’s performance
 of the network traffic, with respect to area under Receiver Operating Characteristic
 • Eliminates the need for offline data collection, (ROC) curve in the Bot-IoT dataset. In [22], Doshi et al.
 • Prevents human errors in data labeling (online or offline), developed an attack detection algorithm comprised of feature
 and extraction from the network traffic and ML classifier. In the
 • Avoids human labor and computational costs for model place of the ML classifier, the authors used each of K-Nearest
 training and data collection through prior experiments. Neighbour (KNN), SVM, DT, and MLP methods; then, they
 We also implement our SSID framework for a Deep evaluated the performance of this algorithm on a dataset
Random Neural Network (DRNN)-based IDS that analyzes collected within the same work. Letteri et al. [23] developed
high-level network traffic metrics extracted from packet header an MLP based Mirai Botnet detector specialized for Software
information and learns those metrics calculated for only Defined Networks. The authors fed 5 metrics, including the
normal benign traffic. We evaluate the performance of the used communication protocol, to MLP.
SSID framework for two tasks, malicious traffic detection and In [24], Banerjee and Samantaray performed experimental
compromised device identification on Kitsune [17] and Bot- work to deploy a network of honeypots that attracts botnet
IoT [18] datasets. The results revealed that IDS trained under attacks and to detect those attacks via ML methods, such
the SSID framework achieve considerably high performance as DT, NB, Gradient Boosting, and RF. In reference [25],
compared to the same IDS with offline and quasi-online (incre- McDermott et al. developed the Bidirectional LSTM-based
mental and sequential) learning. Meanwhile, the IDS trained method which is developed for packet-level botnet attack
under SSID requires no offline dataset, external parameter detection by performing text recognition on multiple features
optimization or human intervention. including source and destination IP addresses of a packet.
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In addition, Tzagkarakis et al. [26] developed a sparse repre-
Section II reviews the related work on intrusion detection. sentation framework with parameter tuning using only normal
Section III presents the overview of the IDS used in this work traffic for botnet attack detection.
as well as the detection and learning processes. Section IV Meidan et al. [27] developed an ML-based attack detection
proposes the novel SSID framework and present the method- technique which is trained using only normal traffic and tested
ology enabling the self-supervised learning for IDS. Section V for Mirai and Bashlite botnet attacks on an IoT network with
evaluates the SSID framework for malicious traffic detection nine devices. The authors also published the data collected
and compromised device identification on public datasets, and in this study under the name N-BaIoT dataset. In order to
compares its performance against the state-of-the art methods. detect Botnet attack in N-BaIoT dataset, Htwe et al. [28] used
Finally, Section VI summarizes this paper and provides some Classification and Regression Trees with feature selection,
insights for the future work. Note that the definitions of abbre- and Sriram et al. [29] performed a comparative study using
viations and the symbols appear in this paper are respectively 7 different ML methods (including NB, KNN, and SVM).
listed in Table III and Table IV in Appendix. In Reference [30], Soe et al. developed a Botnet attack
 detection algorithm comprised of two sequential phases first to
 train utilized ML method and perform feature selection, then
 II. R ELATED W ORK to perform attack detection. The authors used MLP and NB
 We now briefly review recent related work on intrusion within this architecture, and they evaluated the performance on
detection in three categories of the work that: 1) detect N-BaIoT dataset. In [31], Parra et al. developed a cloud based
malicious traffic during Botnet-based DDoS (in short Botnet) attack detection method using Convolutional Neural Network
5670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

(CNN) for phishing and using Long Short-Term Memory or current location of an IoT device is classified as unusual
(LSTM) for Botnet attacks. The authors evaluated the perfor- behavior, the device is considered compromised.
mance of this method also on the N-BaIoT dataset achieving
94.8% accuracy. CNN was also used by Liu et al. [32] with C. Self-Supervised Learning for Intrusion Detection
features that are processed by the triangle area maps based Song and Kim [9] developed self-supervised learning
multivariate correlation analysis algorithm. In recent work algorithm for anomaly-based IDS in in-vehicle networks.
[33], Bovenzi et al. employed DL models, specifically using In this algorithm, Reduced Inception-ResNet is used to make
Auto Encoders (AEs) and KitNET, for unsupervised early binary classification and detect unknown (zero-day) attacks.
anomaly detection in IoT datasets, namely IoT-23 [34] and The training of this anomaly-based IDS offline uses both
Kitsune [17]. The results of [33] demonstrated the potential for normal traffic and noised pseudo data generated using LSTM.
early anomaly detection in IoT network attacks by evaluating Wang et al. [10] applied and adapted Bootstrap Your Own
the detection effectiveness of varying numbers of packets, Latent (BYOL) self-supervised learning approach, which has
finding the first four packets to be the most effective. been proposed in [45], for intrusion detection. The parameters
 of the BYOL algorithm are learned, then updated via transfer
 learning, using a dataset containing both normal and malicious
B. Compromised Device Identification traffic samples. For anomaly detection, Zhang et al. [11]
 Some recent work [35], [36], [37], [38], [39], [40] focused developed deep adversarial training architecture by extending
on detecting compromised IoT devices during Botnet attacks, the well-known bidirectional Generative Adversarial Network
while Kumar and Lim [35] detected Mirai-like bots scanning (GAN) model. This architecture jointly learns from normal
the destination port numbers in packet headers using an data and generated latent features. Kye et al. [12] introduced
optimization-based technique for subsets of all IoT packets. a hierarchical network IDS based on the Auto Encoder (AE).
Chatterjee et al. [36] identified malicious devices in IoT By leveraging self-supervised signals and specialized anomaly
networks via evidence theory-based analysis. To this end, they scores within its AE architecture, this IDS learns offline only
analyzed traffic flows and selected the rarest features from a from normal traffic data and does not need an additional
large number of communication features, including number of data generator. Caville et al. [13] developed a Graph Neural
connections, transport layer protocol, and source/destination Network (GNN) based network-level IDS. This IDS was
ports. In [41], in order to detect IoT botnet in an Industrial trained with a self-supervised learning approach using both
IoT network, Nguyen et al. developed a dynamic analysis positive and negative samples for offline training with an
technique utilizing various ML models, such as SVM, DT, and encoder graph created using an extended version of the well-
KNN, based on the features generated from the executable known GraphSAGE framework. Wang et al. [14] developed an
files. In Reference [42], Hristov and Trifonov developed a IDS with unsupervised learning combined with transformer
compromised device identification algorithm using wavelet based self-supervised masked context reconstruction, which
transformation and Haar filter on the metrics indicating the improves the learning by magnifying the abnormal intrusion
processor, memory and network interface card usage of an behaviours. Abououf et al. [15] developed a lightweight IDS
IoT device. In [40], Prokofiev et al. used Logistic Regres- architecture based on LSTM Auto Encoder (LSTM-AE) to
sion to determine if the source device is a bot based on perform detection on IoT nodes. This model is trained offline
10 metrics regarding the traffic packets. The performance of and unsupervised in an encoder-decoder architecture using a
logistic regression is tested for a botnet that spreads through pre-collected dataset in the cloud. Meyer et al. [16] developed
brute-force attacks. Nguyen et al. [37] detected compromised a federated self-supervised learning IDS. This IDS employ
devices by an anomaly detection technique combining fed- auto-encoder based self-supervised model on local datasets
erated learning with language analysis for individual device using federated approach. Note that the key features of the
types identified prior to detection. In order to evaluate the related works on self-supervised learning, as well as the
performance of this technique, the authors collected a dataset proposed SSID framework, are summarized in Table I.
by installing 33 IoT devices, 5 of which were malicious, and In this paper, we introduce a pioneering learning framework
showed that detection performance is around 94% for positive termed SSID, tailored for Deep Learning (DL)-based intrusion
and 99% for negative samples. detection. Unlike conventional approaches prevalent in the
 More differently, in Reference [38], Abhishek et al. detected ML / DL literature, SSID distinguishes itself in several key
not compromised devices but compromised gateways monitor- aspects:
ing the downlink channels in an IoT network and performing • SSID eliminates dependency on additional generative
binary hypothesis test. In [43], Trajanovski and Zhang devel- models. Unlike common practice in self-supervised learnoped a framework consisting of honeypots to identify the ing, which often necessitates the incorporation of an extra
indicators of compromised devices and botnet attacks. Bahşi generative model (or contrastive method) for training
et al. in [44] addressed the scalability issues for ML-based purposes [46], our SSID framework operates without this
Bot detection algorithms by minimizing the number of inputs requirement.
of ML model via feature selection. In [39], for mobile IoT • SSID is independent of offline training data. While many
devices, Taneja proposed to detect compromised devices tak- methods in the literature rely on the availability of preing into account their location, such that if a location change collected (unlabeled) offline training data [47], SSID is
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5671

 TABLE I
 K EY F EATURES OF R ELATED W ORKS ON S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING FOR I NTRUSION D ETECTION

 designed to function autonomously, even in scenarios
 where such data is not readily accessible. However,
 if available, SSID can leverage offline data to enhance
 its performance.
 • SSID facilitates fully online learning on independent network nodes. A distinctive feature of SSID is its ability to
 facilitate continuous online learning and enable real-time
 intrusion detection across independent network nodes.

 III. I NTRUSION D ETECTION S YSTEM U SED IN SSID
 The SSID framework does not consider a specific algorithm
for IDS or have strict requirements for it, except that it is based Fig. 1. Particular structure of IDS used within the SSID framework during
 performance evaluation.
on ML / DL or some other function with learnable parameters
and has a certain range of inputs and outputs. In addition,
the SSID framework can also be used with both anomaly
 the output of DL-based AAM, for packet i is denoted by
and signature based detection algorithms. On the other hand,
 x̂i = [x̂i1 , . . . , x̂im , . . . , x̂iM ]. The DL-based AAM is a learned
as real-time network traffic contains only normal “benign” traffunction that maps the noisy or disordered metrics to the
fic until an attack occurs, an IDS structure that can learn only
 normal metrics, i.e. f aam : xi 7 → f aam (xi ) for f aam (xi ) = x̂i ,
from normal traffic may provide higher performance under
 so that f aam : [0, 1] M → [0, 1] M .
self-supervised learning. Therefore, anomaly-based algorithms
are the main focus in this paper.
 We first present the structure of anomaly-based IDS that we A. Deep Random Neural Network as Auto-Associative
used within the SSID framework. This particular IDS structure Memory
is displayed in Figure 1, which is mainly comprised of an DL In the particular implementation of the IDS shown in
model and a decision maker component. Figure 1, in place of the DL algorithm, we use the DRNN
 In the IDS structure shown in Figure 1, the DL model model [48], [49]. DRNN is an extension of the RNN [50], [51]
is used to create an Auto-Associative Memory (AAM) that with dense feedback loops between clustered neuronal somas,
reconstructs benign traffic metrics –which are the expected and an overall feed-forward structure between layers of dense
metrics according to the norm of the actual traffic learned by clusters. After it is trained to create an AAM, we call it Autothe AAM– from observed metrics. The significant difference Associative DRNN (AADRNN). Earlier research has shown
between the reconstructed (expected) metrics and the actual that an AADRNN-based IDS has a lightweight architecture
metrics, as measured by the decision maker component, may and offers high accuracy when used with unsupervised autobe indicative of malicious traffic. associative training with normal (benign) traffic [7], [8], [52],
 The input of this IDS is the vector of M network traffic [53], [54], [55]. The AADRNN-based IDS was also evaluated
metrics, xi = [xim , . . . , xim , . . . , xiM ], and the output, yi is a with offline [54], incremental [7] and sequential [8] learning
decision indicating the probability of intrusion corresponding to detect malicious traffic and compromised devices during
to current traffic. The vector of expected metrics, which is Botnet attacks. G-Networks [56], which generalize the RNN,
5672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

and the simple RNN itself were also used with offline learning of layer h. In addition, ζ (·) denote the activation function of
to detect zero-day [55] and SYN DoS [57] attacks. In contrast, a cluster in AADRNN.
in this paper, we use the AADRNN-based IDS as a specific Accordingly, in real-time operation, the forward pass of
IDS within the novel SSID framework proposed for the first AADRNN model for the given input vector xi is computed
time in this paper. The parameters of the AADRNN-based IDS as:
are now learned online thanks to the SSID framework learning
 x̂(i,1) = ζ ([xi , 1] W1 ) (1)
approach that is completely online and does not require labeled
data. It should be noted that the main contribution of this paper x̂(i,h) = ζ ([x̂(i,h−1) , 1] Wh ) ∀h ∈ {2, . . . , H − 1}, (2)
is the development of self-supervised approach and the novel x̂i = [x̂(i,H −1) , 1] W H , (3)
SSID framework. In addition, AADRNN-based IDS can be
 where x̂(i,h) is the output of layer h for packet i, and the term
replaced with another ML or DL based IDS, e.g. MLP will
 [xi , 1] or [x̂(i,h) , 1] indicates that 1 is added to the input of
also be evaluated within the SSID framework in Section V.
 each layer as a multiplier of the bias.
 In the AADRNN-based IDS, we use a DRNN model
 The activation function ζ (·) is defined as [48]:
consists of H layers and a rectangular structure with equal
units at each layer. Accordingly, we set H = M, each hidden p (r + λ+ ) + λ− + 3
 ζ (3) =
layer h ∈ {1, . . . , H − 1} contains M neural clusters, and the 2 [λ− + 3]
output layer is comprised of M linear neurons. s
  p (r + λ+ ) + λ− + 3 2 λ+
 − − , (4)
 2 [λ− + 3] λ− + 3
B. Intrusion Detection Process
 where 3 is the input of the given cluster, p is the probability
 Recall that this paper considers two main tasks: detecting that any neuron received trigger transmits a trigger to some
malicious traffic packets and identifying compromised network other neuron, and λ+ and λ− are respectively the rates of
nodes. As the results of earlier research [8], [54] showed, external Poisson flows of excitatory and inhibitory input spikes
each task requires a customized IDS to provide high accuracy. to any neuron.
Therefore, in the remainder of this subsection, we present the 3) Decision Making: The last step in the attack detection
traffic metrics and the decision maker component for each task process is making the attack decision. Since the AADRNN
separately. output provides the expected metrics for normal network
 1) Traffic Metrics: We use the traffic metrics that are traffic, any deviation of the actual metrics from the AADRNN
defined in our earlier research specifically for Botnet attack output, i.e. the expected metrics, indicates malicious traffic.
detection in [54] and compromised device identification in Therefore, we use a lightweight decision making approach
[8]. These metrics are relatively few in number and are based on comparison of actual and expected metric values.
calculated based solely on packet header information. There- In particular, we measure the deviation of the actual metrics
fore, they remain anonymous regarding packet content and xi from the expected metrics x̂i . On the other hand, since
communicating devices, do not need for any sensitive or AADRNN-based IDS uses different set of metrics for malidevice-specific information, thus preventing IDS from making cious traffic detection and compromised device identification
biased decisions, and are suitable for real-time operation on tasks, the decision making approach is also slightly different
lightweight systems. Meanwhile, they have been shown to be for each task. One should note that this lightweight decision
effective in capturing signatures of Botnet attacks. making approach requires no human intervention or parameter
 For malicious traffic detection, in order to capture the settings based on offline data; therefore, it is suitable for online
signatures of Botnet attacks (especially Mirai), as the inputs learning IDS.
of AAM, we use M = 3 normalized metrics that measure For malicious traffic detection, the decision maker calcuthe total size and average inter-transmission times of the last lates the output of IDS, yi , as the average absolute difference
500 packets and the number of packets in the last 100 seconds. between the actual and the expected metric values:
 For compromised device identification, we use M = M
6 normalized traffic metrics which are calculated over time 1 X m
 yi = |xi − x̂im |. (5)
windows of length 10 seconds. These metrics measure the M
 m=1
average size and average number of packets received from
a single source, the maximum size and maximum number of For compromised device identification, the decision
packets received from any single source, and the total size and maker calculates the output of IDS as the maximum absolute
total number of packets transmitted during a time window. difference between the actual and the expected metric values:
 2) Estimation of the Expected Benign Traffic Metrics: The yi = max (|xim − x̂im |). (6)
expected benign traffic metrics is estimated (i.e. reconstructed) m∈{1,...,M}

based on the traffic metrics given as the inputs of AADRNN.
The estimated traffic metrics (x̂i ) are then fed into the decision C. Learning Algorithm to Create AADRNN
maker component. In order to create an AADRNN, we train an DRNN model
 Let Wh denote the [(M + 1) × M] matrix of connection based on a batch of packet samples, denoted by B l , collected
weights (including biases) between the layer h − 1 and layer and provided by the proposed SSID framework at any learning
h for h ∈ {1, . . . , H }; that is, Wh is the multiplier for the inputs phase l. To this end, we use the learning algorithm, used
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5673

for DRNN in earlier research [7], [8], [54], which shall be
reviewed in this subsection.
 1) Initial Learning: As we use sequential learning to create
an auto-associative memory from DRNN (namely, AADRNN),
each weight matrix Wh is learned and updated based on
only the batch of benign packets B l provided by the SSID
framework.
 When the learning algorithm is called by SSID for B l at
initial learning phase l = 0, we solve the following problem using A Fast Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm
(FISTA) [58]: Fig. 2. Detection and learning processes of IDS within the Fully Online
  Self-Supervised Intrusion Detection (SSID) framework.
 Wh = argmin [ad j (ζ ( X̂ l,h−1
 train
 W R )), 1k×1 ] W
 {W : W ≥ 0}
 2  IV. T HE S ELF -S UPERVISED I NTRUSION D ETECTION
 train
 − X̂ l,h−1 + ||W || L 1 , (7)
 L2 F RAMEWORK
where W R is a random weight matrix whose elements are in As the main contribution of this paper, we propose the
(0, 1) and X̂ l,h
 train is the matrix that collects the output vectors novel SSID framework to enable fully online self-supervised
of layer h for all packets i ∈ B l if yi = 0: learning of the parameters of IDS with no need for human
 intervention. In order to clearly present the SSID framework,
 train
 X̂ l,h = {x̂(i,h) , ∀i ∈ B l }, this section first explains the main functionalities of both the
 train
 X̂ l,0 = {xi , ∀i ∈ B l }, and X̂ l,H
 train
 = {x̂i , ∀i ∈ B l } (8) initial and online learning phases through Figure 2. Then, the
 comprehensive methodology, that includes the details regard-
After FISTA is performed for a predefined number of iterations ing all the blocks in Figure 3, is presented.
to solve (7), we normalize the resulting weight matrix Wh : As shown in Figure 2, within the SSID framework, there
 are two main operations performed, intrusion detection (lower
 Wh
 Wh ← 0.1 train
  . (9) line) and learning (upper line). Intrusion detection is the main
 max X̂ i,h operation performed by IDS and is not modified by SSID. That
 2) Online Incremental Learning: During the online incre- is, intrusion detection (as an operation) is defined only by a
mental learning of IDS parameters (i.e. l ≥ 1), only the particular IDS algorithm used in SSID. On the other hand,
connection weights of the output layer of AADRNN, W Hl , we can say that our SSID framework ensures that IDS makes
are updated via the second stage to learn the new patterns of accurate decisions by updating its parameters with online
the benign traffic provided by SSID via B l . As the incremental self-supervised learning, and it performs intrusion detection
learning algorithm, we mainly integrate the sequential learning uninterruptedly and continuously. Regarding the communicaalgorithm developed in [59]. Let define the operation matrix tion (data transfer) between intrusion detection and online
Ol , which is initialized for l = 0 as the inverse of the Gram self-supervised learning processes in SSID, it is important
matrix: to note that SSID uses the decisions of IDS to enable selfh i−1 supervised learning during either initial or online learning
 O0 = ( X̂ l,H ) X̂ l,H
 train T train
 (10) phases.

If there is at least one benign packet in B l , we first compute A. Online Self-Supervised Learning
the value of Ol for l ≥ 1: In parallel with attack detection, our SSID framework
 Ol = Ol−1 − Ol−1 ( X̂ l,H provides online self-supervised learning of IDS parameters,
 −1 )
 train T
 h i−1 as shown on the upper process line in Figure 2. As seen in
 −1 Ol−1 ( X̂ l,H −1 )
 train train T train that figure and Figure 3 which shows the learning process in
 × I + X̂ l,H X̂ l,H −1 Ol−1
 (11) SSID, the online self-supervised learning process starts with
 the initial learning phase (namely, l = 0) and continues with
Then, the value of W H is updated: successive online learning phases.
 Since network traffic characteristics may vary with time
 W H ← W H + Ol ( X̂ l,H −1 ) ( X̂ l,0 − X̂ l,H −1 W H )
 train T train train
 (12) and substantially affect the IDS detection performance, it is
 3) Learning Error Provided to the SSID Framework: crucial to update the parameters of the IDS online concurrently
Furthermore, since we use an anomaly-based algorithm that with its real-time operation. The parameter updates conducted
learns only the benign traffic, we take the learning error as the through online learning serve to enhance the reliability of the
mean of estimated attack probabilities for packets in learning IDS as a detector by enhancing its performance and ensuring
batch B l : it remains aligned with the latest traffic characteristics. Online
 learning also circumvents the need to collect and label exten-
 1 X
 E(l) = l yi (13) sive datasets for offline training, thereby conserving both time
 |B | l and resources. In situations where labeled datasets are readily
 i∈B
5674 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Fig. 3. Block diagram of the learning process in the SSID framework for online self-supervised learning of the parameters of IDS.

accessible, the IDS can be pre-trained, and its performance SSID is in the online learning phase l ≥ 1, each packet
can be validated using those datasets. i selected by our self-supervised packet selection method is
 1) Initial Learning: The initial learning phase in SSID can collected into the batch of training packets, B l .
be considered a special case of the proposed methodology of Then, SSID checks the trust-based criterion to update the
self-supervised learning, which allows IDS to be used from its parameters of the IDS. Inversely with the initial learning phase,
initial setup and updates the parameters of the IDS frequently SSID now updates the parameters of the IDS if 0 < 2, at least
achieving the desired performance gradually and quickly. K packets are collected for learning (i.e. |B l | ≥ K ), and there
 In detail, as shown in the top block of Figure 3, during is no attack detected by the IDS:
the initial learning phase in SSID, the parameters of the IDS i
are updated for each packet that is selected for learning via 1 X
 if 0 < 2 and |B l | ≥ K and yj ≤ γ,
our self-supervised packet selection methodology. Whether the I
 j=i−I +1
parameters of the IDS are updated or not, SSID checks the
 update parameters and set l = l + 1 (15)
trust based completion criterion of the initial learning phase
l = 0 aiming to complete this phase as soon as the IDS is where I is the number of packets to calculate the average of
trained enough to make trustworthy decisions. To this end, the intrusion decisions, γ is the intrusion threshold, and K
it first calculates the trustworthiness of the IDS, namely the is provided by the user considering properties of the network
“trust coefficient” denoted by 0 ∈ [0, 1], which indicates and learning algorithm. Limit of minimum K packets is added
the confidence of SSID in any decision made by the IDS. only to provide practical efficiency for training.
Since the IDS does not have any information about the network That is, by (15), SSID waits for a considerable decrease
traffic patterns yet, SSID cannot judge the decisions of the IDS in the trustworthiness of the decisions of IDS to update the
and starts the initial learning process with 0 = 0 meaning that parameters since 0 is known to be already greater than 2 at
there is no trust in the decisions of the IDS. the end of the initial learning phase l = 0. In this way, the
 Subsequently, SSID checks the trust criterion to complete learning is performed when it is essential.
the initial learning phase l = 0 by measuring if SSID’s trust in On the other hand, if an intrusion is detected where the
the IDS is greater than a threshold 2, is the minimum desired average output of the IDS is greater than γ , SSID clears the
trust level: batch of collected packet samples, B l :
 if 0 ≥ 2, complete initial learning and set l = 1 (14) i
 1 X
 if y j > γ , empty B l (16)
 Thus, as given in (14), if 0 ≥ 2, the initial learning phase I
 j=i−I
has been completed, and the next packet will be considered With this cleanup, SSID aims to prevent the IDS from learning
for the first phase l = 1 of continuous online learning. any false negative instances since false negative outputs are
 2) Online Learning: After the initial learning is completed, very likely to occur just before an attack is detected.
the parameters of IDS are updated via an online learning phase
l ≥ 1 when the trust of SSID in the IDS is unacceptably low.
As the lower block in Figure 3 shows, the parameters of the B. Self-Supervised Packet Selection
IDS are updated for a collected batch of packets when the In the remainder of this section, we present our proposed
trustworthiness of the IDS is not acceptable anymore. When methodology to train the utilized IDS in a self-supervised
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5675

fashion enabling the fully online property of SSID. In other To this end, we first define the factor of “representativewords, we explain the details of the learning process in SSID, ness”, denoted by Cr ep , for the traffic packets that are learned
which are shown as subblocks in Figure 3. by the IDS. The representativeness factor Cr ep takes a value in
 As the first operation of the learning process in SSID, each the range of [0, 1] and measures how much the packets used
packet i is decided to be used in learning for the next update for learning (during all of the past learning phases) represent
of IDS parameters. The packet selection is executed in a self- the total observed traffic.
supervised manner that only considers the output of the IDS In addition, we define the factor of “generalization ability”,
together with SSID’s trust in it. denoted by C gen , of the IDS. The generalization factor C gen
 Let pi− and pi+ respectively be the probability of selecting takes a value in the range of [0, 1] and is calculated only at the
packet i to be used as a benign or malicious packet sample end of each parameter update since it is the only time when
in the training of IDS, and qi be the probability of rejecting the parameters of the IDS are updated. These two factors shall
i to be used in training. That is, we select the packet i as the respectively be given in Section IV-D and Section IV-E.
sample of a benign packet with probability pi− or that of an Accordingly, in (21), we determine the trust coefficient 0
attack packet with probability pi+ to use it in training, or the as the multiplication of Cr ep and C gen :
packet i is not included in the training set with probability qi .
Also, recall that yi ∈ [0, 1] is the output of IDS for packet i. 0 = Cr ep C gen (21)
 Since we assume that there are no packet labeling mecha- In this way, 0 simultaneously measures how much the IDS
nisms or labor to prepare packet data for learning, we select is able to learn and generalize from provided traffic packets
each packet i based on the output of IDS (which is the and how much these packets reflect actual traffic patterns.
estimation of the probability of packet i being malicious) That is, through this trust coefficient, we evaluate how much
considering how trustworthy IDS is. Therefore, we shall also information the IDS can generalize from the traffic packets
define a trust coefficient 0 to measure the trustworthiness of provided to make decisions for the upcoming traffic.
IDS at any time based on the representativeness of the packet
samples that IDS learned until the end of the last learning
phase and the generalization ability of IDS from these samples. D. Representativeness of the Traffic That Is Learned (Cr ep )
 Accordingly, we start by defining pi+ as In order to calculate the representativeness of the packet
 traffic used during the earlier learning phases, we compare the
 pi+ ≡ (trust in IDS) (est. prob. of packet i being malicious)
 learned traffic with the total observed traffic through Kullbackpi+ = 0 yi (17) Leibler (KL)-Divergence [60]. Therefore, there are two sets of
We further define pi− similarly to pi+ : traffic packets for comparison, the packets used in the previous
 learning phases up to and including l (where l is the latest
 pi− ≡ (trust in IDS) (est. prob. of packet i being normal) completed learning phase) and the normal packets that are
 pi− = 0 (1 − yi ) (18) observed by IDS during continuous detection.
 During this comparison, we assume that the packet traffic
Subsequently, since consists of two main properties, inter-transmission time (T T )
 pi+ + pi− + qi = 1, (19) and the packet length (P L) since these properties can be
 considered as the basis of traffic metrics, which are the inputs
the probability qi of not selecting the packet i for training is: of the IDS. Inter-transmission time (T T ) refers to the duration
 between the transmissions of consecutive packets, while packet
 qi = 1 − ( pi+ + pi− )
 length (P L) denotes the size of each packet in the network
 =1−0 (20) traffic. These properties are crucial as they directly reflect the
 Recall that SSID starts with 0 = 0 since the IDS does not behaviour and characteristics of network traffic, thus serving as
have yet any information about the network traffic patterns at fundamental metrics for IDS to analyse and detect anomalies
the initial learning phase. That is, the output of the IDS is or malicious activities effectively.
calculated using the initial parameter values (if available) and We further assume that packet arrivals –any sample colwill not be able to achieve accurate detection for the particular lected from the network traffic– has a Poisson distribution
traffic. In addition, for selecting the first packet, the parameters so that the inter-transmission time T T is an Exponentiallyof the IDS are updated for the first time using pi− = 1, pi+ = distributed random variable. The packet length P L is also
0, and qi = 0. Thus, SSID selects the first packet to learn as assumed to be an Exponentially-distributed random variable
a benign sample. because the header length is considerably larger than the message length for the majority of IoT applications. In addition,
 T T and P L are considered to be independent. On the other
C. Trustworthiness of IDS hand, for particular applications, these assumptions and the
 Now, we determine the trust coefficient 0 for the IDS in the traffic model can be changed and the below methodology can
SSID framework. Through this coefficient, we aim to include easily be adapted for the new traffic model with a new set of
both the effects of changes in the normal behavior of network assumptions.
traffic over time and the generalization ability of the IDS into Furthermore, let SlT T and SlP L respectively denote the sets
the packet selection model for learning. of the inter-transmission times and lengths of all packets
5676 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

learned at the end of l, and SoT T and SoP L respectively denote Therefore, in order to obtain the representativeness factor,
the same of all normal packets observed during continuous we first normalize each of D KT TL and D KP LL as
detection. In addition, according to our assumptions, SlT T and TT
SoT T have exponential distributions with means of 1/λl and D KT TL−nor m = e−D K L , (26)
1/λo while SlP L and SoP L also have exponential distributions D KP LL−nor m = e −D KP LL
 . (27)
with means of 1/µl and 1/µo .
 1) KL-Divergence for Inter-Transmission Times: For the which solve the issues 1) and 2) stated above. Each of these
set of inter-transmission times, D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ) is KL- normalized divergence measures can also be written in terms
Divergence from SlT T to SoT T measuring the information of only the traffic parameters:
gain achieved if SoT T would be used instead of SlT T which (λ −λ )
 − log( λλo )− oλo l
  
has been used during the learning phases of SSID. Note D KP LL−nor m = e l
 hλ
that small KL-Divergence means low information gain, and l − (λl λ−λo )
 i
 = e o (28)
D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ) = 0 shows that SoT T and SlT T provide the λo
same amount of information. Accordingly, using the definition Similarly,
of KL-Divergence [60], we first calculate D K L (SoT T ||SlT T ),
 (µ −µ )
 − log( µµo )− oµo l
  
which can shortly be denoted by D KT TL , as D KP LL−nor m = e l
 hµ
 f (x; λo ) l − (µlµ−µo )
 Z ∞ i
 TT
 DK L = f (x; λo )log( ) dx =
 µo
 e o (29)
 −∞ f (x; λl )
 f (x; λo )  Then, we combine D KT TL−nor m and D KP LL−nor m into the
 )
 
 = E f (x;λo ) log(
 f (x; λl ) “representativeness factor” Cr ep as
 λo
 = E f (x;λo ) log( ) − x(λo − λl )
  
 (22) Cr ep = c1 D KT TL−nor m + c2 D KP LL−nor m (30)
 λl
where f (x; λo ) and f (x; λl ) denote the probability distribu- where c1 ≤ 1 and c2 ≤ 1 are positive constants that satisfy
tion functions of SoT T and SlT T respectively with parameters c1 + c2 = 1.
λo and λl . This leads to the result of In order to weigh transmission times and packet lengths
 equally, we take c1 = c2 = 0.5. That is, we take their average:
 λo (λo − λl )
 D KT TL = log( )− (23) 1 TT
 λl λo + D KP LL−nor m
 
 Cr ep = D
 2 K L−nor m
 2) KL-Divergence for Packet Lengths: Similarly with trans- 1 TT PL 
mission times, for the set of packet lengths, D K L (SoP L ||SlP L ) = e−D K L + e−D K L (31)
 2
is KL-Divergence from SlP L to SoP L , which is shortly denoted We can rewrite (31) only in terms of the traffic parameters
by D KP LL , and is calculated as using (28) and (29):
 f (x; µo )
 Z ∞
 1 h λl − (λl λ−λo ) µl − (µlµ−µo ) i
 D KP LL = f (x; µo )log( ) dx Cr ep = e o + e o (32)
 −∞ f (x; µl ) 2 λo µo
 f (x; µo ) 
 )
 
 = E f (x;µo ) log(
 f (x; µl ) E. Generalization Ability of IDS (C gen )
 µo
 = E f (x;µo ) log( ) − x(µo − µl )
  
 (24) As stated above, we consider the generalization ability of
 µl the IDS as one of two factors that define the trustworthiness
where f (x; µo ) and f (x; µl ) denote the probability distribu- of intrusion decisions. To this end, the aim of this subsection
tion functions of SoP L and SlP L respectively with parameters is to determine the generalization ability of the IDS in simple
µo and µl . This results in: terms to make its computation as easy as possible using the
 available measures during the execution of SSID. Accordingly,
 µo (µo − µl )
 D KP LL = log( )− (25) we start with the basic definition of generalization [61]:
 µl µo
 Generalization ≡ Data + Knowledge
 3) Representativeness Factor Based on Normalized KL-
Divergence: For both transmission times and packet lengths, stating that the generalization depends on the “Data”, which is
we now obtained the KL-Divergence between the set of denoted by 1 and refers to the adequacy of the packet samples
observed packets and the set of packets learned. However, the that are used for learning, and the “Knowledge”, which is
KL-Divergence cannot directly be used as a representativeness denoted by κ and refers to the knowledge of the IDS obtained
factor because of the following reasons: 1) It has no upper from packets learned. Therefore, we define the generalization
bound but the representativeness factor Cr ep ∈ [0, 1]. 2) KL- factor C gen as
Divergence is decreasing function of the similarity between C gen = c3 1 + c4 κ (33)
two sets but we need an increasing function of that as the
name “representativeness” suggests. 3) This factor should be where c3 and c4 are positive constants such that c3 , c4 ≤ 1,
the combination of D KT TL and D KP LL . and c3 + c4 = 1.
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5677

 1) Data Adequacy (1): We evaluate the adequacy of the We particularly set c3 = c4 = 0.5 representing that the data
packet samples that are used for learning with respect to the and knowledge are equally important for generalization:
number of learnable parameters in the IDS. Although there is
no hard rule for determining the adequacy of the learning data C gen
 (l−k+1) E(k)
 Pl Pl
 k=0 (1/2)
 k
 
(i.e., the number of training samples required) for a given DL min W/ k=0 |B |, 1 +
model, most studies have shown its relationship to the total =1−
 2
number of learnable parameters in the model and taken the (38)
minimum number of required training samples as a multiple
of the number of parameters [62]. V. R ESULTS
 Therefore, we define the 1 as the counterpart of the ratio
of the number of learnable parameters in the IDS to the We now evaluate the performance of SSID framework for
total number of packet samples used for learning up to and two different intrusion detection tasks to identify malicious
including learning phase l: traffic packets and compromised devices.
 h  W i
 1 = 1 − min Pl ,1 (34)
 k A. Parameter Settings for SSID
 k=0 |B |
where lk=0 |B k | is the total number of packet samples that
 P First, we set the parameters of SSID as follows: trust
are sequentially used to learn model parameters until the end threshold 2 = 0.95, number of packets observed for decision
of learning phase l. Clearly, 1 takes value in [0, 1]. While W I = 10, minimum number of training packets K = 100, and
is a constant number and |B l | ≥ 1 for any learning phase l (in intrusion threshold γ = 0.25. That is, SSID aims to keep
 the trust in the IDS above 0.95 while it considers a packet
 P is performed), liml→∞ (1) = 1. In addition,
which a learning
 as malicious if the output of the IDS is above 0.25. IDS
1 = 0 when lk=0 |B k | ≤ W .
 2) Knowledge (κ): We consider knowledge to be the mea- analyses I = 10 packets to make robust intrusion decisions,
sure of the DL model’s expected performance for the upcom- which allows IDS to make early decisions while not being too
ing traffic packets. Subsequently, we measure the knowledge reactive to instantaneous changes. In addition, the parameters
(i.e. expected performance) of the IDS based on its perfor- are updated using at least K = 100 packets in a learning batch
mance on the packet samples used for learning and on the for computational efficiency.
online available validation data.
 To this end, in this paper, we consider the worst-case B. Datasets
scenario when there is no validation data available. E(l) is Since the proposed SSID framework provides online learnthe empirical error measured at the end of learning phase l on ing for the IDS, its performance is evaluated using two
both packet samples learned and validation data (if available),
 well-known datasets, Kitsune [17], [63] and Bot-IoT [18],
such that 0 ≤ E(l) ≤ 1. We then define the knowledge κ as
 which contain the actual packet transmissions for both normal
the counterpart of the exponentially weighted moving average
 and malicious traffic over time. These are two of the most
of empirical errors for all learning phases up to and including
 recent and used datasets on Botnet and DDoS attacks.
the l–th phase:
 Some other examples of such datasets are UNSW-NB15
 l
 1 [64], CICIDS 2017 [65], and IoT-23 [34]. The UNSW-NB15
 ( )(l−k+1) E(k)
 X
 κ =1− (35) dataset focuses on general network intrusion detection, not
 2
 k=0 specifically focuses on botnet activities, capturing a wide
where the multiplier is set as 1/2 to keep the value of κ in range of network activities, while CICIDS 2017 emphasizes
[0, 1]. That is, if the empirical training error decreases with the both traditional and IoT-specific attacks in controlled lab
successive learning phases (i.e. E(l) is the decreasing function environments. IoT-23 is tailored for studying IoT-specific
of l), the knowledge of the IDS increases converging to its security challenges, offering data from various IoT devices.
maximum. Meanwhile, Bot-IoT and Kitsune datasets specifically focuses
 In practice, at the end of each learning phase l, κ can easily on IoT DoS and DDoS attacks. They include realistic IoT
be updated using only its previous value and the empirical device behaviors and various types of botnet activities, such as
error E(l) as command and control communication, malware propagation,
 1 1h i
 κ ← − E(l) − κ (36) and reconnaissance scans. These datasets offer a compre-
 2 2 hensive collection of normal and malicious traffic data for
 3) Generalization Factor: We now easily calculate the
 benchmarking attack detection and compromised device idengeneralization factor C gen combining the “data adequacy”
 tification systems.
1 (34) and “knowledge” κ (35) using the definition of the
 In the rest of this section, for malicious traffic detection
generalization factor (33):
 and compromised device identification during Mirai Botnet
 C gen attack, we first use the well-known Kitsune dataset [17],
 l which contains 764, 137 packet transmissions of both norh W i h X 1 i
 = c3 1 − min Pl , 1 +c4 1− ( )(l−k+1) E(k) mal and attack traffic cover a consecutive time period of
 k
 k=0 |B |
 2
 k=0 roughly 7137 seconds. Of the total 764, 137 packets exchanged
 (37) between 107 distinct IP addresses in this dataset, 121, 621 are
5678 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

Fig. 4. ROC curve for the performance of AADRNN-based IDS under the Fig. 5. Predictions of SSID and the value of trust coefficient 0 with respect
SSID framework for malicious traffic detection. to time.

normal packets and 642, 516 are malicious packets. Then, for
compromised device identification, in addition to the Mirai
Botnet, we use the following data: 1) SYN DoS attack from
the Kitsune dataset, 2) DDoS attacks using HTTP, TCP and
UDP protocols from the Bot-IoT dataset, and 3) DoS attack
using HTTP protocol from the Bot-IoT dataset. The data of
SYN DoS, DDoS HTTP, DDoS TCP, DDoS UDP, and DoS
HTTP are respectively comprised of “2, 771, 276”, “19, 826”,
“19, 548, 235”, “18, 965, 736”, and “29, 762” packets.

C. Performance Evaluation for Malicious Traffic Detection Fig. 6. Performance comparison between the AADRNN under SSID and
 the AADRNN with incremental and offline learning.
 The performance of SSID is first evaluated for malicious
traffic detection during Mirai Botnet attack. Figure 4 displays the AADRNN which is trained offline using approximately
the ROC curve, where the x-axis of this figure is plotted in 83, 000 packets. We also see that the SSID significantly
logarithmic scale. We see that AADRNN-based IDS trained outperforms the AADRNN with incremental learning with
under our novel SSID framework achieves significantly high respect to all performance metrics. Also note that the SSID
TPR above 0.995 even for very low FPR about 10−5 . learned from a total of 4, 161 packets while also conducting
 In more detail, in Figure 5, we present the predictions real-time attack detection.
and 0 of SSID with respect to time. This figure reveals an In contrast with offline and incremental learning, SSID
important fact that while the IDS is completely indecisive at framework assumes only that the first packet is known to be
the beginning, SSID framework enables it to learn the normal benign so the duration of cold-start equals the transmission
traffic very quickly. As a result, SSID makes significantly low of a single traffic packet. That is, using no offline dataset
false alarms although it learns –fully online– during real-time or requiring no cold-start, the SSID framework is able train
operation based only on its own decision using no external an DL-based IDS to achieve considerably high performance
(offline collected) dataset. We also see that 0 accurately which is highly competitive against the DL models trained on
reflects the trustworthiness of decisions made by AADRNN. significantly large dataset.
In addition, although 0 slightly decreases as a result of random 2) A Different DL Model –MLP– Under the SSID Framepacket selection, especially after attack starts, the parameters work: During the performance evaluation of the SSID
of AADRNN are not updated by SSID as the traffic is detected framework, we also use MLP, which is one of the most popular
as malicious. feed-forward neural networks used for various tasks such as
 1) Comparison With Incremental and Offline Learning: signal processing, forecasting, anomaly detection, etc. As also
We further compare the performance of AADRNN under reviewed in Section II, various works [19], [22], [23], [30]
SSID with the performance of AADRNN with incremental used MLP to develop different IDS methods.
and offline learning. All methods with offline learning are Similar to the AADRNN, the MLP model that we use is also
trained using the first 83, 000 benign traffic packets while the comprised of M layers with M neurons each. Each neuron has
AADRNN with incremental learning is trained periodically for sigmoid activation function as
the window of 750 packets using AADRNN’s own decision,
where the first 750 packets received are assumed to be normal 1
 ζ (3) = , (39)
packets during the cold-start of the network. 1 + e−3
 Figure 6 displays the performances of SSID and the where 3 is an input to the neural activation.
AADRNN, with incremental and offline learning. The results In both the initial and online learning stages, the parameters
in this figure first reveal that the fully online trained AADRNN of the MLP are updated using the state-of-the-art optimizer
using the SSID framework achieves competitive results with Adam. In each online learning phase, incremental learning is
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5679

Fig. 7. Performance comparison between the SSID-MLP and the MLP with Fig. 8. Performance comparison between the ML models under the SSID
incremental and offline learning. framework and those with offline learning.

applied by starting parameter optimization from the connection
weight values already in use at the beginning of that phase.
 In order to further analyze the impact of the proposed
SSID framework on the performance of a different DL model,
we evaluate the performance of the well-known MLP under the
SSID framework (called SSID-MLP) and compare it with the
performance of MLP with offline and incremental learning,
respectively. The results of this performance evaluation is
presented in Figure 7.
 Figure 7 shows that SSID-MLP achieves slightly higher
Accuracy and TPR than MLP with offline learning, although
MLP with offline learning raises no false alarms at all (i.e.
with 100% TNR). Moreover, we see that SSID-MLP signif- Fig. 9. Performance comparison of the CDIS trained under the SSID
 framework with that under sequential learning on Kitsune dataset.
icantly outperforms the MLP model that is also trained via
incremental learning periodically for every 750 packets based
 TABLE II
on its own output.
 C OMPARISON OF AVERAGE P ERFORMANCE OVER IP A DDRESSES
 3) Comparison of Different DL Models: We further com- B ETWEEN SSID-CDIS AND D IFFERENT ML M ODELS FOR M IRAI
pare the performance of AADRNN under SSID (called B OTNET F ROM THE K ITSUNE DATASET
SSID-AADRNN for clarity) and SSID-MLP with those of
some well-known ML models, including KNN and Lasso with
offline learning. Note that models with offline learning are
trained using a labeled normal traffic data. Also, note that
Lasso, KNN, and MLP are well-known and commonly used
models for Botnet attack detection and compromised device
identification [22], [23], [29], [41]. Figure 8 displays the
performance of all compared models with respect to Accuracy,
TPR and TNR. The results in this figure show that SSID-
MLP achieves the second-best performance with respect to all Figure 9 displays the performance of SSID-CDIS and its
performance metrics. In addition, both SSID-MLP and SSID- comparison with CDIS to identify compromised IP addresses,
AADRNN achieve highly competitive results with the offline for each of the Mirai Botnet and SYN DoS attacks in the
trained DL models, while the SSID framework completely Kitsune dataset. Specifically it shows that while the SSID
eliminates the need for data collection and labeling. framework provides the same performance as sequential learning to identify compromised devices during a Mirai Botnet
 attack, it significantly improves the overall performance of
D. Performance Evaluation for Compromised Device CDIS during a SYN DoS attack. The box plot on the right
Identification of Figure 9 shows that SSID-CDIS achieves 100% median
 We now evaluate the performance of CDIS [8] (using balanced accuracy when there is only one outlier IP address
the methodology in Section III) under the SSID framework, with around 85% accuracy. On the other hand, the sequentially
in short SSID-CDIS, on six different attacks, from the two trained CDIS has two outlier IP addresses with performances
distinct datasets Kitsune and Bot-IoT. For each dataset, the of 50% and 1%, respectively.
performance of SSID-CDIS is compared with the CDIS tech- In Table II, we present the average performance of the
nique with sequential learning. Using the same methods as SSID-CDIS against each of Lasso, KNN, and MLP with
in [8], compromised device identification is performed for a respect to Balanced Accuracy, TPR and TNR on Kitsune
10 seconds long time window. The performance is evaluated Mirai dataset. The results in this table show that SSID-CDIS
using the Balanced Accuracy [66]. achieves much higher Balanced Accuracy and TNR than other
5680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 During the real-time operation of the IDS, in parallel to
 detection, the SSID framework performs the following main
 tasks:
 • It continually estimates the trustworthiness of intrusion
 decisions to identify normal and malicious traffic. It also
 measures the ability of the IDS to learn and generalize
 from data provided by SSID and the extent to which
 this data can represent the current online network traffic
 patterns.
 • In order to provide training data for the IDS, the SSID
 framework selects and labels network traffic packets in
Fig. 10. Performance comparison of the CDIS trained under the SSID a self-supervised manner based only on the decisions
framework with that under sequential learning on Bot-IoT dataset. of IDS, and on the trust of SSID with regard to those
models. Although its average TPR is considerably low, SSID- decisions.
 • The SSID framework determines when the IDS parame-
CDIS provides a reasonable compromised device identification
accuracy with a much lower false alarm rate compared to other ters need to be updated, based on the trustworthiness of
models. the IDS, the selected training packets, and the latest state
 Figure 10 exhibits the performance of the SSID-CDIS of network security.
 Thus the proposed SSID framework eliminates the need for
system, and compares it with CDIS, to identify compromised
 offline data collection, it prevents human errors in data labeling
IP addresses during DDoS and DoS attacks, using different
 avoiding labor and computational costs for model training
communication protocols available in the Bot-IoT dataset.
 and data collection through experiments. Its most important
These results show that the SSID framework achieves higher
 advantage is in terms of performance, and it enables IDS to
identification performance, as compared to the use of CDIS
 easily adapt to the time varying characteristics of the network
sequential learning for the majority of attack types.
 traffic.
 Starting with the box plot displayed at the far left of this
 We also evaluated the performance of the SSID framework
figure, we observe the following results:
 for two tasks: malicious traffic detection and compromised
 1) For the DDoS HTTP attack, the overall performance
 device identification to enhance the security of an IoT network.
 is almost the same for SSID and CDIS with sequen-
 For malicious traffic detection, two different DL models,
 tial learning. However, as expected, performance varies
 AADRNN and MLP, have been deployed with the SSID
 slightly for individual IP addresses.
 framework and tested on the Kitsune dataset. The results we
 2) For the DoS HTTP attack, using SSID improved the
 obtain reveal that the DL models trained under the SSID
 performance by 2% on average with a minimum of 75%
 framework without offline training also achieve considerably
 balanced accuracy.
 high performance compared to the same models with offline
 3) For the DDoS TCP attack, SSID significantly improved
 and incremental learning.
 the median accuracy by 18%, where SSID-CDIS
 For compromised device identification, the performance of
 achieves 91% median accuracy. In addition, while the
 the state-of-the-art CDIS has been tested under sequential
 balance accuracy of CDIS with sequential learning is
 learning and the SSID framework on data from six different
 below 80% (with a minimum of 49%) for 9 out of
 cyberattacks provided by the two publicly available Kitsune
 13 unique IP addresses, the balance accuracy of SSIDand Bot-IoT datasets. The results show that the use of SSID
 CDIS is equal to 79% for only 2 IP addresses and above
 significantly improves the performance of CDIS for the major-
 80% for the rest.
 ity of cases considered.
 4) Similar to the results for the DDoS TCP attack, SSID
 Future work will evaluate the use of SSID for adapting
 was seen to provide significant performance improvea pre-trained IDS for use across different networks whose
 ment to identify compromised devices during a DDoS
 traffic has not been learned a priori, which seems to be
 UDP attack. The median accuracy increased by 11%,
 a promising approach for fast, self-supervised, and successachieving above 88% balanced accuracy for all IP
 ful adaptation of the IDS parameters for various networks.
 addresses.
 It would also be interesting to examine security assurance
 VI. C ONCLUSION methods targeting distributed systems that combine the SSID
 This paper has proposed a novel Self-Supervised Intrusion framework with Federated Learning and attack prevention or
Detection (SSID) framework which is designed to train any mitigation algorithms. It seems that a successful integration
given IDS (whose parameters are calculated using the network of the SSID framework with Federated Learning may provide
traffic) fully online with no need for human intervention secure, distributed and self-supervised online learning for
or prior offline training. The SSID framework comprises collaborative systems.
two successive learning stages, namely initial learning and
online learning. Initial learning aims to quickly adapt the IDS A PPENDIX
parameters to the network where the IDS is deployed. Online Table III and Table IV respectively display the list of
learning aims to update the parameters whenever it is required abbreviations and the list of symbols seen throughout this
to ensure high detection accuracy of the IDS. paper.
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5681

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ( IN A LPHABETIC O RDER ) (Continued.) L IST OF S YMBOLS

 R EFERENCES
 [1] C. Douligeris and A. Mitrokotsa, “DDoS attacks and defense mechanisms: Classification and state-of-the-art,” Comput. Netw., vol. 44, no. 5,
 pp. 643–666, Apr. 2004.
 [2] D. Goodin. (Dec. 2017). 100,000-Strong Botnet Built on Router
 0-Day Could Strike At Any Time. Ars Technica. [Online]. Available:
 https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2017/12/100000-strongbotnet-built-on-router-0-day-could-strike-at-any-time/
 [3] Imperva. (2022). Imperva Bad Bot Report. [Online]. Available: https://
 www.imperva.com/resources/resource-library/reports/bad-bot-report/
 [4] B. Tushir, H. Sehgal, R. Nair, B. Dezfouli, and Y. Liu, “The impact of
 TABLE IV dos attacks onresource-constrained IoT devices: A study on the Mirai
 attack,” 2021, arXiv:2104.09041.
 L IST OF S YMBOLS
 [5] Cisco. (Mar. 2020). Cisco Annu. Internet Rep. (2018–2023). [Online].
 Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executiveperspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html
 [6] H. Liu and B. Lang, “Machine learning and deep learning methods for
 intrusion detection systems: A survey,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 20, p. 4396,
 2019.
 [7] M. Nakip and E. Gelenbe, “Botnet attack detection with incremental
 online learning,” in Security in Computer and Information Sciences,
 Nice, France. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 51–60.
 [8] E. Gelenbe and M. Nakip, “Traffic based sequential learning during
 botnet attacks to identify compromised IoT devices,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 10, pp. 126536–126549, 2022.
 [9] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for
 in-vehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
 [10] Z. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, and D. Li, “Network intrusion detection model
 based on improved BYOL self-supervised learning,” Secur. Commun.
 Netw., vol. 2021, pp. 1–23, Oct. 2021.
 [11] X. Zhang, J. Mu, X. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zong, and Y. Li, “Deep anomaly
 detection with self-supervised learning and adversarial training,” Pattern
 Recognit., vol. 121, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108234.
 [12] H. Kye, M. Kim, and M. Kwon, “Hierarchical detection of network
 anomalies: A self-supervised learning approach,” IEEE Signal Process.
 Lett., vol. 29, pp. 1908–1912, 2022.
 [13] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A selfsupervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural
 networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
 [14] W. Wang, S. Jian, Y. Tan, Q. Wu, and C. Huang, “Robust unsupervised network intrusion detection with self-supervised masked context
 reconstruction,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103131.
 [15] M. Abououf, R. Mizouni, S. Singh, H. Otrok, and E. Damiani, “Selfsupervised online and lightweight anomaly and event detection for IoT
 devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 25285–25299,
 Dec. 2022.
5682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[16] B. H. Meyer, A. T. R. Pozo, M. Nogueira, and W. M. N. Zola, “Federated [39] M. Taneja, “An analytics framework to detect compromised IoT devices
 self-supervised learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. using mobility behavior,” in Proc. Int. Conf. ICT Converg. (ICTC),
 Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI), Dec. 2023, pp. 822–828. Oct. 2013, pp. 38–43.
[17] (Aug. 2020). Kitsune Network Attack Dataset. [Online]. Available: [40] A. O. Prokofiev, Y. S. Smirnova, and V. A. Surov, “A method to
 https://www.kaggle.com/ymirsky/network-attack-dataset-kitsune detect Internet of Things botnets,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Russian Young
[18] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards Researchers Electr. Electron. Eng. (EIConRus), Jan. 2018, pp. 105–108.
 the development of realistic botnet dataset in the Internet of Things [41] T. N. Nguyen, Q.-D. Ngo, H.-T. Nguyen, and G. L. Nguyen, “An
 for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset,” Future Gener. Com- advanced computing approach for IoT-botnet detection in industrial
 put. Syst., vol. 100, pp. 779–796, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available: Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11,
 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X18327687 pp. 8298–8306, Nov. 2022.
[19] T. A. Tuan, H. V. Long, L. H. Son, R. Kumar, I. Priyadarshini, and [42] A. Hristov and R. Trifonov, “A model for identification of compromised
 N. T. K. Son, “Performance evaluation of botnet DDoS attack detection devices as a result of cyberattack on IoT devices,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 using machine learning,” Evol. Intell., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 283–294, Inf. Technol. (InfoTech), Sep. 2021, pp. 1–4.
 Jun. 2020. [43] T. Trajanovski and N. Zhang, “An automated and comprehensive frame-
[20] Z. Shao, S. Yuan, and Y. Wang, “Adaptive online learning for IoT botnet work for IoT botnet detection and analysis (IoT-BDA),” IEEE Access,
 detection,” Inf. Sci., vol. 574, pp. 84–95, Oct. 2021. vol. 9, pp. 124360–124383, 2021.
[21] M. Shafiq, Z. Tian, A. K. Bashir, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “CorrAUC: [44] H. Bahsi, S. Nõmm, and F. B. La Torre, “Dimensionality reduction for
 A malicious bot-IoT traffic detection method in IoT network using machine learning based IoT botnet detection,” in Proc. 15th Int. Conf.
 machine-learning techniques,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 5, Control, Autom., Robot. Vis. (ICARCV), Nov. 2018, pp. 1857–1862.
 pp. 3242–3254, Mar. 2021. [45] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to self-
[22] R. Doshi, N. Apthorpe, and N. Feamster, “Machine learning DDoS supervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 detection for consumer Internet of Things devices,” in Proc. IEEE Secur. 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
 Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2018, pp. 29–35. [46] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
[23] I. Letteri, M. Del Rosso, P. Caianiello, and D. Cassioli, “Performance Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
 of botnet detection by neural networks in software-defined networks,” [47] J. Yu, H. Yin, X. Xia, T. Chen, J. Li, and Z. Huang, “Self-supervised
 in Proc. ITASEC, 2018, pp. 1–10. learning for recommender systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
[24] M. Banerjee and S. Samantaray, “Network traffic analysis based IoT Eng., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 335–355, Jan. 2024.
 botnet detection using honeynet data applying classification techniques,” [48] E. Gelenbe and Y. Yin, “Deep learning with random neural networks: I,”
 Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Secur., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 61–66, 2019. in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), 2016, pp. 1633–1638.
[25] C. D. McDermott, F. Majdani, and A. V. Petrovski, “Botnet detection [49] E. Gelenbe and Y. Yin, “Deep learning with dense random neural
 in the Internet of Things using deep learning approaches,” in Proc. Int. networks: II,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Man-Machine Interact. Cham, Switzer-
 Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2018, pp. 1–8. land: Springer, 2017, pp. 3–18.
[26] C. Tzagkarakis, N. Petroulakis, and S. Ioannidis, “Botnet attack detec- [50] E. Gelenbe, “Random neural networks with negative and positive signals
 tion at the IoT edge based on sparse representation,” in Proc. Global and product form solution,” Neural Comput., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 502–510,
 IoT Summit (GIoTS), Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6. 1989.
[27] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-Based detection of IoT botnet [51] E. Gelenbe, “Learning in the recurrent random neural network,” Neural
 attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17, Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 154–164, 1993.
 no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018. [52] O. Brun et al., “Deep learning with dense random neural networks for
[28] C. S. Htwe, Y. M. Thant, and M. M. Su Thwin, “Botnets attack detection detecting attacks against IoT-connected home environments,” in Proc.
 using machine learning approach for IoT environment,” J. Phys., Conf., Int. ISCIS Cyber-Security Workshop. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018,
 vol. 1646, no. 1, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 012101. pp. 79–89.
[29] S. Sriram, R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, and K. Soman, “Network [53] O. Brun, Y. Yin, and E. Gelenbe, “Deep learning with dense random
 flow based IoT botnet attack detection using deep learning,” in Proc. neural network for detecting attacks against IoT-connected home envi-
 IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, Jul. 2020, ronments,” Proc. Comput. Sci., vol. 134, pp. 458–463, Jan. 2018.
 pp. 189–194. [54] M. Nakip and E. Gelenbe, “Mirai botnet attack detection with auto-
[30] Y. N. Soe, Y. Feng, P. I. Santosa, R. Hartanto, and K. Sakurai, “Machine associative dense random neural network,” in Proc. IEEE Global
 learning-based IoT-botnet attack detection with sequential architecture,” Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 01–06.
 Sensors, vol. 20, no. 16, p. 4372, Aug. 2020. [55] E. Gelenbe and M. Nakip, “G-networks can detect different types of
[31] G. De La Torre Parra, P. Rad, K.-K.-R. Choo, and N. Beebe, “Detecting cyberattacks,” in Proc. 30th Int. Symp. Model., Anal., Simul. Comput.
 Internet of Things attacks using distributed deep learning,” J. Netw. Telecommun. Syst. (MASCOTS), Oct. 2022, pp. 9–16.
 Comput. Appl., vol. 163, Aug. 2020, Art. no. 102662. [56] E. Gelenbe, “G-networks: A unifying model for neural and queueing
[32] J. Liu, S. Liu, and S. Zhang, “Detection of IoT botnet based on deep networks,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 433–461, Oct. 1994.
 learning,” in Proc. Chin. Control Conf. (CCC), 2019, pp. 8381–8385. [57] S. Evmorfos, G. Vlachodimitropoulos, N. Bakalos, and E. Gelenbe,
[33] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and “Neural network architectures for the detection of SYN flood attacks
 A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments in IoT systems,” in Proc. 13th ACM Int. Conf. Pervasive Technol. Rel.
 via deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,” Assistive Environments, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–4.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167. [58] A. Beck and M. Teboulle, “A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding
[34] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, “IoT-23: A labeled dataset algorithm for linear inverse problems,” SIAM J. Imag. Sci., vol. 2, no. 1,
 with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” Zenodo, Jan. 2020, doi: pp. 183–202, Jan. 2009.
 10.5281/zenodo.4743746. [59] N.-Y. Liang, G.-B. Huang, P. Saratchandran, and N. Sundararajan,
[35] A. Kumar and T. J. Lim, “Early detection of Mirai-like IoT bots in “A fast and accurate online sequential learning algorithm for feedforward
 large-scale networks through sub-sampled packet traffic analysis,” in networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1411–1423,
 Proc. Future Inf. Commun. Conf. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, Nov. 2006.
 pp. 847–867. [60] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Ann.
[36] M. Chatterjee, A. S. Namin, and P. Datta, “Evidence fusion for malicious Math. Statist., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951.
 bot detection in IoT,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), [61] O. Bousquet, S. Boucheron, and G. Lugosi, “Introduction to statistical
 Dec. 2018, pp. 4545–4548. learning theory,” in Proc. Summer School Mach. Learn., Tübingen,
[37] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan, Germany, 2004, pp. 169–207.
 and A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏoT: A federated self-learning anomaly detection [62] A. Alwosheel, S. van Cranenburgh, and C. G. Chorus, “Is your dataset
 system for IoT,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Distrib. Comput. Syst. big enough? Sample size requirements when using artificial neural
 (ICDCS), Jul. 2019, pp. 756–767. networks for discrete choice analysis,” J. choice Model., vol. 28,
[38] N. V. Abhishek, T. J. Lim, B. Sikdar, and A. Tandon, “An intrusion pp. 167–182, Sep. 2018.
 detection system for detecting compromised gateways in clustered IoT [63] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune:
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Tech. Committee Commun. An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,”
 Quality Rel. (CQR), May 2018, pp. 1–6. in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
NAKIP AND GELENBE: ONLINE SELF-SUPERVISED DEEP LEARNING FOR INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 5683

[64] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for Erol Gelenbe (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” degree from METU, Turkey, the Ph.D. degree
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6. from the Polytechnic Institute of NYU, and the
[65] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating D.Sc. degree from Sorbonne University. He pioa new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characteriza- neered system performance evaluation methods and
 tion,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018, invented the random neural networks, while helppp. 108–116. ing to develop commercial products, including the
[66] K. H. Brodersen, C. S. Ong, K. E. Stephan, and J. M. Buhmann, queueing network analysis package and the man-
 “The balanced accuracy and its posterior distribution,” in Proc. 20th ufacturing simulator FLEXSIM. He has graduated
 Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Aug. 2010, pp. 3121–3124. over 90 Ph.D. students, including 94 women. He is
 currently a Professor with the Institute of Theoretical
 and Applied Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences. Previously, he chairs
 at Imperial College, the University of Central Florida, Duke University,
 Université Paris-Descartes, Paris-Saclay University, and Université de Liège.
 Mert Nakıp (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. He was a Principal Investigator of numerous European Union research projects
 (Hons.) and M.Sc. degrees in electrical-electronics and a Coordinator of FP7 NEMESYS and H2020 SerIoT. He has also been
 engineering from Yaşar University, Izmir, Turkey, supported by the U.S. NSF, ONR, ARO, UKRI, and the industry. He is a fellow
 in 2018 and 2020, respectively, and the Ph.D. of ACM, IFIP, RSS, and IET. He is an Elected Fellow of Academia Europaea;
 degree from the Institute of Theoretical and Applied the French National Academy of Technologies; the Science Academies of
 Informatics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Gliwice, Hungary, Poland, and Turkey; and the Royal Academy of Belgium. His prizes
 Poland, in January 2024. His design of a multi- include the Parlar Foundation Science Award (Turkey), the Grand Prix France
 sensor fire detector utilizing ML achieved the Télécom, the ACM SIGMETRICS Life-Time Achievement Award, the U.K.
 national no. 1 ranking at the Industry-Focused IET Oliver Lodge Medal, and the Mustafa Prize. He was awarded Chevalier de
 Undergraduate Graduation Projects Competition la Lègion d’Honneur, Chevalier des Palmes Académiques, and Commandeur
 organized by Turkish Scientific and Technological du Mérite by France; a Commander of the Order of the Crown of Belgium,
Research Council (TÜBİTAK). His M.Sc. thesis focuses on applying machine Commendatore al Merito, and Grande Ufficiale dell’Ordine della Stella by
learning techniques to massive access of IoT supported by the National Grad- Italy; and an Officer of the Order of Merit of Poland.
uate Scholarship Program of TÜBİTAK 2210C in high-priority technological
areas. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Polish Academy of
Sciences. He is also involved in the DOSS Project. He has participated in
projects funded by TÜBİTAK and European Commission, concerning IoT,
cybersecurity, and machine learning.