Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Computer Networks
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

Open set identification of malicious encrypted traffic based on multi-feature
fusion
Xingwen Zhao, Han Zhang ∗, Hui Li, Xuangui Chen
Xidian University, Xi’an, Shanxi, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: In the current network environment, an increasing amount of malicious traffic is transmitted through encrypted
SSL/TLS channels, carrying control commands and data. With the continuous development of communication protocols
Malicious traffic detection and applications, new types of malicious encrypted traffic are emerging, posing significant challenges for
Open set recognition
 network management (e.g., traffic engineering). Therefore, accurately identifying malicious traffic in complex
Feature selection
 open network spaces has become a hot research topic in network security. In this study, we draw inspiration
Deep learning
 from channel theory in image science and innovatively convert traffic data into Red-Green-Blue (RGB) image
 format to achieve the fusion of multiple features. Inspired by image recognition technologies, we have designed
 a multi-granularity network model that integrates both global and local features, serving as our core network
 architecture. At the top of the model, we have equipped each known category with a unique autoencoder, using
 its generated manifold to replace traditional prototypes for model construction. Classification is accomplished
 through a scoring mechanism that evaluates category membership and by setting thresholds to achieve open
 set recognition of unknown categories. Relying on our self-created dataset,Malicious and Encrypted Traffic
 2024 (MNET2024), we conduct a series of extensive experiments. The results demonstrate that our proposed
 method exhibits outstanding performance in both closed-set and open-set recognition tasks.

1. Introduction enhance SSL/TLS encryption traffic detection systems. Recent studies
 indicate that identification of malicious encrypted traffic primarily
 To ensure the privacy and security of internal data, an increasing relies on machine learning methods, such as convolutional neural netnumber of network communications are now adopting traffic encryp- works (CNN) and decision trees. These approaches have been effective
tion technologies. Widely applied encryption techniques, such as Secure in detecting known types of malicious encrypted traffic. However, in
Sockets Layer (SSL),Virtual Private Network (VPN), and DNS over the real world, due to the continuous development of communication
HTTPS (DoS) [1], however, present a challenge to traditional secu- protocols and applications, there exists a significant amount of unrity detection mechanisms. Firewalls, for instance, are incapable of known types of malicious traffic in the network. Traditional neural
inspecting encrypted traffic, leading to a situation where over 70% networks model the entire feature space by comparing the similarity
of attackers use encrypted protocols to transmit malicious software, between predicted samples and known category features, leading to
conceal their attack activities, and steal sensitive data [2]. As a solu- classification outcomes. This poses a severe issue: an unknown cattion, SSL/Transport Layer Security (TLS) encryption traffic detection
 egory that overlaps with known category feature spaces in specific
technology (also referred to as decryption detection technology) has
 areas is likely to be misidentified as a known class. Consequently,
emerged to fill the gap left by firewalls’ inability to scrutinize encrypted
 these solutions might incorrectly classify malicious traffic as normal
traffic [3] This is achieved by decrypting SSL traffic to inspect entraffic of a known category, resulting in interception failures, and more
crypted data for potential security threats. Although decrypting SSL
 seriously, allowing malicious traffic to infiltrate the system, causing
traffic is instrumental in uncovering hidden threats and thereby imattacks [4]. Thus, these approaches are no longer sufficient to cope with
proving network security, the considerable computational resources required for SSL encrypted traffic detection can diminish the throughput the complexity of the current network environment.
performance of firewalls and potentially compromise user privacy. Although machine learning models have greatly accelerated the
 To protect data transmission and user privacy, most security tools process of extracting features from network traffic [5], most existing
have adopted malicious encrypted traffic identification schemes to solutions have not conducted in-depth research on processing raw

 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: zzh12061128@163.com (H. Zhang).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2024.110824
Received 30 May 2024; Received in revised form 26 August 2024; Accepted 20 September 2024
Available online 26 September 2024
1389-1286/© 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

Fig. 1. Firewall traffic detection example. Outbound detection is utilized to prevent internal network clients from malicious software invasions when accessing external websites [8].
When internal network users visit websites compromised with Trojans by attackers, the firewall security system identifies and blocks such malicious traffic to protect the users.
Inbound detection, on the other hand, protects the internal network from risks of external access. By deploying firewalls within the web server’s network, it ensures that all traffic
passing through is secure.

data for malicious traffic identification, still relying on the original The first category is rule-based pattern matching methods, which
traffic data packets or using serialized traffic data as model input. represent an earlier approach to identifying malicious encrypted traffic.
Furthermore, some solutions converted raw traffic into text or images The open-source intrusion detection system Snort [9] first generates
based on specific rules, for instance, Wang [6] mapped the original a signature set for sample encrypted traffic and compares it with the
traffic directly to two-dimensional grayscale images using byte codes. signature set of malicious encrypted traffic to determine the category of
These methods face two major issues: firstly, neural networks generally the sample. Kim [10] and colleagues designed identification rules based
require input sequences of a fixed length, which may have led to on Signatures, Session IDs, and IPs, showing that the identification
the loss of some information or the introduction of noise; secondly, effect is significantly improved when using multiple rules compared
the abundance of background information make it difficult to extract to a single rule. Papadogiannaki et al. [11] used the frequency and
feature information. location information of packets as rules to design a pattern language
 Open set recognition, by training on known samples in the model, describing packets, achieving an identification rate of 84%, indicatcan not only accurately classify samples within a closed set space ing that a simple regular expression can possess sufficient expressive
but also identify unknown categories [7]. To enable encrypted traffic power. Husák [12] identified clients through fingerprints in the SSL
detection technology to be applied more efficiently and securely in handshake packets, determining if the traffic was malicious based on
network management, we propose a new type of malicious encrypted the client. However, these methods are not suitable for large-scale
traffic open set recognition model and data processing method. This traffic identification; moreover, as rules are updated and the signatures
scheme can monitor traffic in complex network environments and of malicious traffic change, the accuracy of identification may also
accurately identify known categories of malicious encrypted traffic decrease.
without decryption. For previously unseen unknown category traffic, The second method involve decrypting and analyzing the traffic.
our scheme can also timely intercept it and send it to the SSL/TLS Sourabh Saxena [13] utilized transparent SSL proxy tools such as
encrypted traffic detection system for decryption and detection. This SSLsplit, stunnel, socat, and ettercap as intermediaries between the
process significantly reduces unnecessary exposure of sensitive data client and server. These tools decrypted SSL encrypted traffic and
while substantially improving the efficiency of traffic monitoring (see
 forwarded it, ensuring normal communication between parties while
Fig. 1).
 compromising the privacy of the transmitted content.
 Our contributions include:
 The third category employed machine learning for traffic identifica-
 1.We design a feature fusion method for SSL encrypted traffic. We
 tion. Traditional machine learning classification methods included the
comprehensively extract sufficient information from the raw data and
 C4.5 decision tree, random forest, etc. McCarthy et al. [14] utilized
select specific features from statistical patterns and handshake packet
 four machine learning algorithms (AdaBoost, C4.5, RIPPER, and Naive
data to enhance the quality of features. Finally, drawing from channel
 Bayesian) to learn and evaluate 22 features, demonstrating the feasitheory in image science, we map three-dimensional features onto the
 bility of identifying SSL/TLS encrypted applications using flow-based
R, G, B channels, forming RGB images as the representation form for
 statistical features and ML algorithms. Shbair et al. [15] proposed a
model input data.
 multi-level framework-based HTTPS identification method that did not
 2.We develop a malicious encrypted traffic open set recognition
 rely on specific header fields (e.g., easily obtained SNI, TLS certificates,
scheme based on multi-feature fusion. This scheme employs a complex
 etc.). They used C4.5 and random forest algorithms to train on 18
CNN model with multiple branches and feedback mechanisms, capable
of extracting both global and local features of images and facilitating feature data, such as packet arrival time and packet size from client
their interaction. At the top of the backbone network, we insert unique to server (C2S) and server to client (S2C) directions, achieving a
autoencoders for each known category, implementing open set recog- final identification rate of 93.1%. However, a drawback of the C4.5
nition through the reconstruction of feature semantics and a scoring algorithm is its long training time, making it suitable only for small
mechanism. datasets. Yan et al. [16] introduced the concept of ‘‘Burst’’ by studying
 3.This study conducts extensive experiments based on our self- the traffic behavior of WeChat red packets. They segmented the traffic
created dataset MNET2024 and the ISCX VPN-NonVPN dataset. The into multiple Bursts based on sudden changes in communication bytes
experimental results demonstrate that our proposed model significantly and built fingerprints using statistical features such as packet length,
outperforms several baseline methods. TCP handshake counts, inbound and outbound payload, and packet
 numbers. Experiments comparing K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Support
2. Related work Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), and GaussianNB (GNB)
 algorithms showed that the RF algorithm achieved the highest identi-
 In this study, we focus on elaborating on the following four cate- fication rate of 96%, which could further increase to 98% by adding
gories. more trees to the RF.

 2
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 The fourth method utilizes neural networks for traffic identification. Table 1
 Benign SSL/TLS encrypted traffic types.
Ivan Torroledo and others [17] extracted features from certificate
 Name Type Sample number
contents and used deep neural networks to determine the validity of
malicious certificates, achieving a 94.87% accuracy rate. Blake Ander- Dropbox P2P 8342
 Ebay Web browsing 7109
son and others [18] analyzed traffic statistical features and handshake
 Gmail E-mail 8942
fields, extracted features such as packet length and byte distribution, Mega P2P 9231
and employed logistic regression, decision trees, and other methods for NetEase Music Stream media 7302
classification training. Lotfol1ahi et al. [19] proposed a ‘‘Deep Packet’’ Skype Instant messaging 7843
 WhatsApp Instant messaging 7681
traffic identification method, adopting SAE and CNN architectures and
 Youtube Stream media 6993
selecting 1480 bytes of traffic payload as input, cutting off excess data Instagram Stream media 6671
and padding shorter data to unify dimensions. News Break Web browsing 5619
 With the advancements in machine learning, the field of encrypted
malicious traffic identification has witnessed various interdisciplinary
 Table 2
attempts. For instance, Wang et al. [6,20] introduced a new traffic pre- Vicious SSL/TLS encrypted traffic types.
processing method, extracting data through Session and Flow forms and Name CTU nubmer Sample number
converting it into two-dimensional grayscale images for training with Bunitu 140–1 7831
a simple CN-ID model. The experiments showed that the Session+ALL CCleaner 320–2 7457
combination is the optimal training data form. Wang [21] also explored Dridex 346–1 7210
converting data packets into two-dimensional images for input into Emotet 264–1 8002
 HPEMOTET 317–1 7467
CNN models to learn spatial features, then combined with LSTM mod-
 PUA.Taobao 237–1 6901
els to learn temporal features, successfully implementing a real-time Razy 274–1 6987
intrusion detection system. Chen et al. [22] converted flow data into au- Trickbot 327–2 7013
tomatically convoluted images for neural network analysis. Tal Shapira WannaCry 270–1 8021
 Heuristic 317–1 9012
et al. [23] created images from packet sizes and arrival times, named
FlowPic, as input for CNN models. Furthermore, deep learning models
for text processing, voice recognition, and situational analysis have also
been attempted in the encrypted traffic detection field, displaying good 3.2. Feature selection
performance in their respective domains. For example, the BERT [24]
model achieves precise natural language text recognition through con- Hexadecimal Traffic Data Research indicates that the valid content
textual processing, addressing the issue of training a large number of of each Packet Capture (PCAP) packet, when output in hexadecimal
model parameters. However, applying images and other applications in form, displays distinct characteristics, with the majority of effective
the traffic identification domain faces challenges such as: (1) How to bytes falling within the [50,1480] byte range [26]. We read the original
solve the problem of excessive background information or incomplete binary data stream, store it in an array in hexadecimal format, and
feature selection; (2) How to effectively integrate multi-dimensional then map these data directly to channels to generate images without
features. the need for excessive processing of the original data. According to
 studies by Wang et al. [6], the overall effect of using Session is superior
3. Data processing methods to Flow under various conditions, though the differences in results
 are not consistent. Experiments utilizing the ALL layer yielded better
 By analyzing the structure of SSL/TLS protocol encrypted traffic outcomes than those using only the L7 layer. Based on these findings,
data packets, this study introduces an innovative method for processing this study ultimately opts for the Session+ALL traffic representation
traffic data. Initially, we select and extract traffic features across three method, selecting traffic from all layers within the same session as the
 original data stream.
dimensions: raw traffic data, handshake packets, and conventional
 Features sourced from SSL/TLS handshake fields. By analyzing
statistical patterns. The characteristics from these three dimensions
 data packet fields with Wireshark, we discover that different SSL/TLS
complement each other, and the three types of features manage to
 handshakes contain distinct key information. For instance, the cipher
preserve a comprehensive set of characteristics. After standardizing the
 suites, compression methods, and extension information in Client Hello
data, these tri-dimensional feature data are mapped onto the R, G, B
 and Server Hello packets, as well as the certificate information in
channels, transforming them into RGB traffic images to serve as the
 Certificate packets. Typically, to reduce attack costs, malicious software
input data for the model. To balance the number of data samples, we
 families opt for free digital certificates, such as those unconditionally
employ supervised data augmentation techniques to expand datasets
 provided by the Let us Encrypt certification authority. Certificate data
with fewer samples.
 can reveal extensive information related to malicious software families.
 Therefore, certain handshake field values in malicious software traffic
3.1. Data source exhibit significant differences from normal conditions, playing a crucial
 role in identifying malicious encrypted traffic. As shown in the Table 3,
 To meet the research requirements, we develop the MNET2024 we extract fifteen-dimensional features from the handshake fields.
dataset, which includes 10 types of benign encrypted data (such as P2P, Traffic Statistical Features The training data for machine learnweb browsing, emails, etc.) and 10 types of malicious encrypted traffic ing models primarily utilize preprocessed statistical features because
sourced from Stratosphere Lab’s open dataset [25] (like Dridex, Emotet, they can mathematically articulate the characteristics of traffic accuetc.). For malware with limited sample sizes, we supplement the data rately. Thus, this study selects traditional statistical features as the
by running the respective malware in a safe sandbox environment. To third dimension. Moore and others [27] identified 248 statistical feaassess the effectiveness of the proposed model, we categorize the 20 tures of common traffic, encompassing a variety of aspects related to
types of encrypted traffic into groups of malicious and mixed traffic, ports, time, and space; additionally, Kim and others [28] highlighted
randomly assigning unknown categories within the malicious group for that TCP flags, such as the count of data packets with PUSH, Exexperimentation. The specific data distribution is presented in Tables 1 plicit Acknowledgment (ACK), Reset the connection (RST) flags set
and 2. to 1, serve as crucial features. Specifically, the size of data packets

 3
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

Table 3
Handshake field feature extraction.
 ID Description
 1 Ratio of SSL connections that use successful
 2 TLS cipher suites supported by the client
 3 Mean public key length
 4 TLS cipher suites chosen by the server
 5 Parameters for server-side key exchange method
 6 Parameters for client-side key exchange method
 7 SSL and connection record ratio
 8 Number of different certificates
 9 Certificate data
 10 Mean certificate length
 11 Mean number of SAN(Subject Alternate Name)-
 DNS Domains
 12 Indicates if CN in SAN-DNS-domain
 13 Indicates if SNI in SAN-DNS-domain
 14 Mean duration of certificate validity Fig. 2. Data standardization processing module.
 15 Standard deviation of the validity period of certificates

Table 4 127.0.0.1. Due to the fixed values and positions of IP and MAC in the
Flow statistical features.
 traffic, such highly similar data could lead to model learning biases,
 ID Description
 making randomization a necessary step.
 16 Average duration of the connection
 Normalization refers to mapping data of varying scales to the same
 17 Number of PUSH packages
 18 Number of RST packages
 scale, ensuring that the processed data has an equal impact on the
 19 Minimum inter-arrival time of connection model. This process is divided into two parts: base conversion and data
 20 Mean inter-arrival time of connection length unification. RGB pixel values range between 0 and 255, and the
 21 Maximum inter-arrival time of connection decimal conversion range of two hexadecimal values precisely fits this
 22 Standard deviation of interarrival time between
 interval, enabling the mapping of all pixel values. In response to the
 connection
 23 Mean secondary time difference of connection deep learning network’s requirements for input data size, data lengths
 24 Standard deviation of connection’s secondary time are standardized by truncating excessively long data or padding too
 difference short data, thereby unifying the size of images.
 25 Number of ACK packages
 The specific technical method for mapping traffic data to channels is
 26 Byte count in the forward direction (upstream)
 27 Byte count in the backward direction (downstream)
 as follows. First, we read the content of the PCAP file, where the PCAP
 28 Ratio of backward and forward bytes file data is represented in binary format. We read the hexadecimal
 29 Packet count in the forward direction values of the multi-dimensional feature data in two-byte units and
 30 Packet count in the backward direction store them in an array (this is because we have chosen hexadecimal
 31 Mean forward packet length
 as the representation of the raw traffic data in one of the three feature
 32 Mean backward packet length
 dimensions). Finally, for the purpose of value conversion, we convert
 the hexadecimal values in the array to decimal, i.e., converting the
 value range [00, FF] to [0, 255], and then reshape the resulting decimal
in malicious traffic often differs from normal traffic. For instance, array into a two-dimensional array according to the image width, which
in Trojan communications, upstream traffic is significantly smaller, gives us the image matrix. Ultimately, we use the Pillow library [29] to
whereas downstream traffic is considerably larger than normal. Aiming save these matrices as Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format image
to control the host, a Trojan’s communication patterns differ from the files. Features across three dimensions are sequentially transformed
stable characteristics of regular traffic, maintaining communication for into three grayscale images. Due to variations in data size and output
extended periods. Based on these insights, we selected seventeen traffic sequence for each feature dimension, the overlapping of these grayscale
statistical features, as shown in the Table 4. images produces RGB traffic images that display different morphologies, primarily reflected in the colors of the images. To better segment
3.3. Channel fusion images of varying granularities, this paper adopts the image dimensions
 used in pedestrian re-identification [30], settling on a size specification
 The data standardization process depicted in Fig. 2 encompasses of 128 × 64.
three pivotal modules: traffic segmentation, address randomization, From the generated image data, one image per category is randomly
and iterative normalization. The process unfolds as follows. Initially, selected to compose the visualization effect displayed. The behavior
encrypted traffic is divided by Sessions while removing empty data differences among malicious software lead to significant variations
packets and User Datagram Protocol (UDP) data packets; next, the Me- between traffic images across categories, especially for the ten types
dia Access Control (MAC) and Internet Protocol (IP) addresses within of malicious traffic shown in Fig. 3.
the data stream are randomized; then, hexadecimal values of multi- To study the consistency among samples of the same category,
dimensional feature data are read two bytes at a time and stored four categories of samples are randomly selected, and four images
as pixel values in an array; finally, the values within the array are are extracted for comparative analysis. As shown in Fig. 4, despite
converted to decimals, mapping the range [00, FF] to [0, 255], and data differences among the four categories, traffic images within the same
lengths are unified through padding or discarding data, thus completing category generally align.
the standardization. In summary, traffic images within the same category demonstrate
 The publicly available datasets of malicious encrypted traffic are relative consistency, while those between different categories are dismostly captured at proxies, containing destination MAC and IP ad- tinct. Thus, employing image classification methods for encrypted trafdresses that correspond to the proxy tools rather than the actual ad- fic identification in this domain is feasible.
dresses of malicious software families. Proxy tools are typically applied This study supplements the dataset with supervised data augmenlocally, hence their MAC addresses are local, and IP addresses are often tation techniques. The imgaug toolkit [31] provides a wealth of data

 4
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Fig. 6. Effectiveness visualization of the same data augmentation algorithm.

 while Wang [6] chose to work with the entirety of the raw data.
 As depicted in Fig. 6, the distinction between these methodologies is
 visually discernible. However, both of these strategies harness solely
 the dimensional features of raw data streams without deeply engaging
 Fig. 3. Visualization results of twenty sample classes. in the data preprocessing phase, allocating the outcome’s quality to the
 model’s capacity.
 In contrast, the traffic images generated by this method differ
 significantly in appearance from the former two. The width of the
 pictures is roughly the same, but they are longer and are RGB colored
 images. With the current level of knowledge, it is possible to extract
 three-dimensional feature data from SSL/TLS encrypted traffic, and
 the combination of different data in the RGB channels can produce
 255 × 255 × 255 different pixel colors. Consequently, mapping the
 three-dimensional feature data into the three channels generates traffic
 images that can express traffic characteristics more finely.

 3.5. Advantages of regional segmentation in RGB traffic maps

 Fig. 4. Consistency analysis of Samples within the same class. As described in Fig. 7, significant differences exist between Dridex
 and Heuristic traffic maps. In Dridex traffic maps, the G and B channels
 feature sparse data, resulting in the lower half of the image predominantly displaying in red and black—red dominated by non-zero data
 in the R channel, and black indicating zero pixel values. Conversely,
 in Heuristic traffic maps, only the B channel has relatively sparse data,
 leading to approximately one-third of the image presenting in red and
 black. Further comparison reveals that about half of the images in the
 G and B channels of the Dridex traffic maps are pure black, i.e., zero
 pixel values, whereas only about half of the images in the B channel of
 Fig. 5. Renderings of different data enhancement algorithms. the Heuristic traffic maps are pure black. Dividing the Heuristic traffic
 map into thirds shows that the last portion of both the G and B channels
 is pure black.
augmentation algorithms. As illustrated in Fig. 5, this research em- These color differences between RGB traffic maps reflect the similarploys four image enhancement methods — image flipping, cropping, ities and differences among various traffic types, and regional segmenbrightness adjustment, and noise injection — to augment the image tation of different ratios helps the model capture image features across
data. It is observed that the processed images across categories re- more dimensions. Thus, RGB traffic maps demonstrate significant admain macroscopically consistent but differ in details, thereby offering vantages in regional segmentation, providing crucial design insights for
valuable sample supplementation for subsequent model training. subsequent model development.

3.4. Compared to other methods
 4. Method introduction
 In the latest research within the field of traffic identification, deep
learning emerges as one of the most frequently utilized methods. Re- Currently, the field of malicious traffic identification has not yet
searchers typically need to process the raw traffic into text or images solved the problem of identifying traffic categories outside of predeterbased on specific rules before feeding it into deep learning networks mined sets, limiting the application of models to specific scenarios. To
for training and learning. Currently, a common traffic preprocess- address this issue, this study designs a multi-granularity network model
ing approach is to directly map the raw traffic into two-dimensional that integrates both global and local features, and in conjunction with
grayscale images using byte codes. However, there are variations in autoencoders, proposes an open set recognition scheme for malicious
practice. For instance, Li Ding [32] maintained the positional informa- encrypted traffic. For ease of reference, all the symbols used in this
tion in HTTP traffic, including specific markers like the NUL character, paper are listed in Table 5.

 5
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Fig. 8. (a) Prototypical learning. (b) Autoencoder method.

 4.2. Reconstruct latent space features

 In the method proposed in this study, for each traffic category 𝑤,
 we design a corresponding autoencoder 𝐸𝑤 and use 𝐸𝑤 to reconstruct
 the pixel-level latent space feature 𝑝 extracted by the backbone network, yielding the reconstructed feature 𝑝. ̂ The working principle is
Fig. 7. Example of region segmentation of RGB traffic map. (For interpretation of the as follows: the encoder 𝑓 compresses the high-dimensional semantic
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)
 feature 𝑝 into the hidden layer 𝐻, learning the mapping from the
 original feature space to the low-dimensional space ℎ = 𝑓 (𝑝). The
 decoder’s mapping then generates a manifold 𝑟 = 𝑔(ℎ). We take the
Table 5
Symbol table. latent space features extracted from the backbone network as the input
 Symbol Significance to the autoencoder. This approach, which reconstructs samples at the
 pixel level rather than directly reconstructing the original images,
 𝑓 Encoder
 𝑔 Decoder can reduce the influence of background information (i.e., information
 𝐻 Hidden layer irrelevant to the malicious traffic category) on the recognition results,
 𝑤 A category thereby minimizing the reconstruction error as much as possible. The
 𝐸/𝐸𝑤 Autoencoder/class i-specific autoencoder
 reconstruction error for each pixel is calculated using Formula (1):
 𝑝 Pixel-level latent space feature
 𝑝̂ Reconstructed feature semantic graph 𝐷(𝑝, 𝐸𝑤 ) = ‖𝑝 − 𝐸𝑤 (𝑝)‖1 (1)
 𝑟 Manifold generated by autoencoder
 𝐷 Reconstruction error By calculating the reconstruction error between samples and each
 𝑖 Predicted label
 category flow, we can classify them. Applying SoftMax to normalize the
 𝑖𝑥 Class to be predicted
 𝑃 Feature semantic map Logits, the final probability can be defined as shown in Formula (2):
 𝑃𝑖 A collection of feature maps divided according to
 𝑒−𝛾𝐷(𝑝,𝐸𝑤 )
 predicted categories 𝑝(𝑦 = 𝑤|𝑝, 𝐸) = ∑𝑚 (2)
 −𝛾𝐷(𝑝,𝐸𝑗 )
 𝜆 Scale Factor 𝑗=1 𝑒
 𝑚 The total number of known categories
 𝑠∗ Scoring function
 where 𝛾 is a hyperparameter that controls the hardness of probability
 𝐸(𝑠 ∗) About the mean of 𝑠 ∗ distribution. In most prototype learning schemes, the distance between
 𝑆𝑡𝑑(𝑠 ∗) About s* standard deviation samples and prototypes is calculated using Mean Square Error (MSE).
 𝑤1 𝑤2 Detection score weight However, evidence [33] shows that MSE may cause the model to
 overfit, leading to inconsistencies between the prototypes and the actual categories of samples. Therefore, this study adopts Mean Absolute
4.1. Prior knowledge Error (MAE), averaging the predictions for each pixel to make global
 predictions.
 Class prototype methods rely on learning prototypes for each category to achieve open-world recognition. These prototypes are typically 4.3. Unknown category recognition
a set of representative samples selected from the training data, with
each prototype representing a category or cluster. They can be the Autoencoders compress high-dimensional semantic features into a
center of data points (e.g., mean vectors) or specific representative hidden space and minimize reconstruction error, thereby forming a
sample points. Classification is conducted by calculating the distance manifold with diverse features. This diversity is reflected in the relabetween a sample and each prototype. However, the applicability of tionship between categories and features: each category is described
this method is limited due to its lack of fitting capability and diversity by specific parts of the global features.
in prototype representation. A sample activates relevant parts of the global features, while
 Autoencoders are a type of unsupervised learning neural network irrelevant parts remain inactive. Through the autoencoder, a sample
formed by a series of encoders 𝑓 and decoders 𝑔, with an internal activates features related to its category, which does not result in high
hidden layer 𝐻 used to generate a code representation of the input. reconstruction error; conversely, it leads to significant reconstruction
Autoencoders compress input samples from a high-dimensional space error. This property enables the backbone network to learn to activate
to a low-dimensional space (i.e., the hidden layer 𝐻), learning a com- only the features related to the category in collaboration with the
pressed representation of the original image and then reconstructing autoencoder, thereby reducing reconstruction error. The trained model
the original image, thus possessing excellent feature extraction capabil- ultimately extracts only features related to specific categories. For unities. However, a challenge with methods based on autoencoders is that known categories, the activation rate is low because they are untrained
the features learned from reconstructed images might contain irrelevant and not associated with any features. Based on the reconstruction error
information, which could adversely affect performance in both closed and activation values, this study has established a scoring function.
and open sets (see Fig. 8). According to the set scoring mechanism, the model sets a threshold

 6
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

score to ensure that 95% of the known samples are correctly recognized; if a sample scores below the threshold, it will not be recognized
as that category. If rejected by all categories, the sample is considered
to belong to an unknown category.
 Assuming the semantic features 𝑃 of a given test sample and its
predicted label 𝑖. As mentioned in Section 4.1, the autoencoder consists
of a linear decoder and a linear encoder, satisfying 𝑓 (𝜆𝑝) = 𝜆𝑓 (𝑝),
and 𝑔(𝜆𝑝) = 𝜆𝑔(𝑝). Therefore, when constructing a scoring function
based on reconstruction error, what needs to be considered is the linear
relationship between the latent space features 𝑝 and the reconstruction
error ‖𝑝−𝐸𝑖 (𝑝)‖1 . For autoencoders with tanh activation, assuming 𝑓 (𝑝)
is close to zero, then 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝜆𝑝) ≈ 𝜆𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑝). Thus, we have:

‖𝜆𝑝 − 𝐸𝑖 (𝜆𝑝)‖1 ≈ 𝜆‖p − 𝐸𝑖 (p)‖1 , (3) Fig. 9. Scoring mechanism.
 At the same time, we eliminate the scaling factor 𝜆 by dividing
by ‖𝑝‖1 . Additionally, to consider the detection capability of unknown
features based on their magnitude, we introduce an extra ‖𝑝‖1 term.
Thus, the scoring function based on reconstruction error is defined as
follows:
 𝐷(𝑝, 𝐸𝑖 )
𝑠1 (𝑝, 𝑖) = − (4)
 ‖𝑝‖21
 Assuming the feature semantic map 𝑃𝑥 and the predicted class 𝑖𝑥
are obtained from the samples in the training set, we divide the feature
maps into different sets based on the predicted categories, defining the
feature set 𝑇 𝑖 = {𝑃𝑥 |𝑖𝑥 = 𝑖, 𝑥 = 1, 2, … , 𝑛}, where 𝑖 = 1, 2, … , 𝑚. In the
scoring function based on activation patterns, we primarily consider the
average activation level within the same category.
 ∑ ∑ 1
𝜇𝑥 = 𝐩 (5)
 𝑥
 𝑃 ∈𝑇 𝐩∈𝑃
 |𝑇 𝑥 ∥ 𝑃|

 To also take into account the activation levels of different cate-
 Fig. 10. Basic architecture of multi-branch network. Branch 1 extracts coarse (global)
gories, we will further perform category normalization: features of the entire traffic map; Branch 2 bisects the traffic map to extract medium-
 𝜇 grained features of the upper and lower parts; Branch 3 trisects the traffic map to
𝜇̃ 𝑥 = ∑ 𝑥 (6) extract fine-grained features of the top, middle, and bottom parts.
 𝑗 𝜇𝑗

 The division of vectors is performed element-wise. To detect unknowns, samples that activate the same features as those activated by
 image features. The MGN model has achieved unprecedented sucknown categories are more likely to belong to one of those known catcess on three open-source ReID datasets: Market-1501, CUHK03, and
egories. Specifically, the activation strength of each feature is weighted
 DukeMTMC-reID, notably reaching a Rank-1 Accuracy of 96.6% on the
by 𝜇̃ 𝑖 , and the unknown is assessed based on the weighted average
 Market-1501 dataset, which even increased to 97.1% after Re-Ranking,
strength of all features. Additionally, we also perform pixel-level score
 significantly advancing the development of the ReID field.
integration. Based on these, the scoring function is formulated as
 In RGB traffic images, the pixels at the top often contain features
Formula (7):
 from all dimensions, while the pixels in the lower part of the image
 ∑ 1
𝑠2 (𝑃 , 𝑖) = 𝑝⊤ 𝜇̃ 𝑖 (7) may only display features from one to two dimensions. This character-
 𝑝∈𝑃
 |𝑃 | istic allows RGB traffic images and ReID (Re-Identification) pedestrian
 The overall scoring function is derived from normalizing the above images to show different levels of feature granularity in various areas,
two, aiming to standardize the metrics of scoring functions based on exhibiting a high degree of similarity. Drawing inspiration from the
different rules by calculating their mean and standard deviation. This MGN network architecture, we have developed three separate but interprocess is as Formula (8): connected branch networks that share a backbone network to extract
 features of different granularities from the images, thereby obtaining
 𝑠∗ (𝑃 , 𝑖) − 𝐸(𝑠∗ )
𝑠̃∗ (𝑃 , 𝑖) = (8) detailed local feature information. These branch networks share the
 𝑆𝑡𝑑(𝑠∗ ) common features extracted by the main network and then conduct a
 Finally, this paper combines the three normalized scoring functions more thorough analysis of the features, achieving recognition of traffic
through linear combination. The specific scoring process is shown in samples from a holistic to a localized perspective.
Fig. 9, and the final overall scoring function is organized as Formula (9): 5. Malicious encrypted traffic open set recognition scheme based
 on multi-feature fusion
𝑠𝑎𝑙𝑙 (𝑃 , 𝑖) = 𝑤1 × 𝑠̃1 (𝑃 , 𝑐) + 𝑤2 × 𝑠̃2 (𝑃 , 𝑐) (9)
 5.1. Model architecture
4.4. Multiple granularity network
 The multi-branch network model mainly consists of two parts: the
 The Multiple Granularity Network (MGN), initially proposed by backbone network and the branch network. In this paper, the backbone
CloudWalk [34] Technology in 2018, is a dynamic target detection network employs ResNet-50 [35], maintaining the same structure for
model for pedestrian re-identification. Its principal concept involves each layer as its official configuration but only utilizing the first three
segmenting an image into multiple parts to extract finer granularity layers. ResNet-50, a deep network based on the Bottleneck design,

 7
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 5.2. Scheme introduction

 Theoretically, utilizing multidimensional feature data combined
 with category-specific classifier models is expected to enhance the accuracy of open-set recognition. However, this approach also leads to additional cost burdens, including GPU resources and time consumption,
 which may not be justified in certain application scenarios.
 In response to these challenges, this article focuses on the discussion
 and design of multiple comparative experiments. Under the premise
 of reasonable cost control, it evaluates the impact of traditional data
 processing methods versus multidimensional feature fusion strategies
 on recognition accuracy. Additionally, it analyzes the efficiency difference between traditional approaches and the category-specific classifier
 method proposed in this study.
 The research first concentrates on the overall design process of the
 recognition scheme, covering selections from data processing options,
 backbone network selection, and parameter tuning, to the comparative
 analysis of final results. Secondly, to ensure the scheme’s applicability
 in various traffic scenarios, a comparison is made using multi-category
 datasets to specify software configurations and evaluation criteria.
 Furthermore, based on traffic preprocessing techniques and open-set
 recognition models, experiments are designed in a unified experimental
 environment to refine parameter selection. Ultimately, a malicious
 encrypted traffic open-set recognition scheme based on feature fusion is proposed, compared with existing schemes, showcasing the
 comprehensive advantages of this approach.
 The core architecture of this study is illustrated in Fig. 12. The mali-
Fig. 11. Visual semantic feature map of backbone network. (For interpretation of the
 cious encrypted traffic open-set recognition process is divided into five
references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of
this article.)
 major phases: data preprocessing, model training, scheme validation,
 model evaluation, and scheme deployment.
 Compared to other traffic recognition schemes, this proposal guarantees three significant advantages: firstly, it effectively utilizes the
primarily comprises 4 layers, each consisting of several Blocks. Before multidimensional features of malicious encrypted traffic, including
the first Block, there are two layers of operations: a 7 × 7 convo- statistical features extracted based on prior knowledge. Secondly, it
lution layer and a 3 × 3 pooling layer, named conv1 and maxpool, achieves open-set recognition while ensuring the performance of closed
respectively. Using Python’s PyTorch and Matplotlib tools, this paper sets. Thirdly, it supports transfer learning, enabling an end-to-end
visualizes the feature semantic maps output by each layer of the processing flow. The diagram briefly explains the main framework of
backbone network, as shown in Fig. 11, with four key points to note: this scheme. The following sections will detail critical stages such as
Firstly, the input image is a color image based on RGB channels, with data preprocessing, model training, and model evaluation.
a size of [ 3,384,128], meaning it has three channels and a dimension
of 384 × 128, generated using the method described in Chapter 3; 5.3. Model training
Secondly, the initial convolution layer conv1 uses a 7 × 7 kernel
size, and the pooling layer employs 3 × 3 maximum pooling, aiming This module encompasses the backbone network ResNet-50, deto coarsely extract shallow features of the image, some feature maps signed for learning latent space features, and specific autoencoders
show a clear boundary at two-thirds of the way, visually similar to the {𝐸𝑖 }𝑚
 𝑖=1
 for classifying known classes and detecting unknown classes.
original traffic map; Thirdly, from layer1 to layer3, each layer contains The three 256-dimensional semantic feature maps extracted from the
multiple Blocks, each performing three convolution operations, where network are concatenated into a comprehensive semantic feature map
the structure between Blocks in each layer is the same but with slight 𝑃 , which is then input into the specific autoencoder 𝐸𝑖 . This autoenvariations in detail parameters, such as the use of stride 1 convolutions coder equally learns and encodes features of all pixels and reconstructs
in all three layers, but convolutions with stride 2 in layers 2 and 3, the semantic features of 𝑃 . The reconstruction error of the classaiming to reduce the size of the output image and increase the number specific autoencoder is used as Logits, and the logits are multiplied
 by a coefficient 𝛾 to perform pixel-level SoftMax operation. The global
of channels, thereby generating more feature maps; Lastly, Fig. 10
 prediction is obtained by averaging the predictions of each pixel:
includes the feature semantic maps after passing through all the layers
of ResNet-50, including the 2048-dimensional feature maps generated 1 ∑
 𝑝(𝑦 = 𝑤|𝑃 , 𝐸) = 𝑝(𝑦 = 𝑤|𝑝, 𝐸) (10)
by layer4, although layer4 is not used in this model. |𝑃 | 𝑝∈𝑃
 The model’s other component consists of three branch networks, Next, the model is trained by minimizing the negative log probabilwhich operate independently after layer3 of ResNet-50. Each branch ity of the true class 𝑖 using gradient descent, as follows:
undergoes a max pooling process first, with branches 2 and 3 also
undergoing local max pooling, followed by a convolutional operation 𝐿 = − log 𝑝(𝑦 = 𝑖|𝑃 , 𝐸) (11)
that reduces the feature semantic map from 2048 dimensions to 256 For the recognition of unknown classes, this scheme uses the pixel
dimensions. Global feature semantic maps directly use Triplet Loss reconstruction error derived from the autoencoders corresponding to
for loss calculation, while local feature maps, after being connected known classes as input. A scoring mechanism is then employed to
to a fully connected layer, utilize Softmax Loss for loss calculation. assess the probability that an image belongs to an unknown class. After
Moreover, after the pooling layer in each branch, the global feature feeding the data into the model, continuous training is conducted to
maps are additionally fed into a fully connected layer and subjected to reduce the loss value to the lowest threshold, and then the model
Softmax Loss for loss calculation, aiding the model in better learning is packaged and saved for subsequent model evaluation and scheme
the global features of images across all branches. deployment.

 8
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

Fig. 12. Model Evaluation Process for Malicious Traffic Detection Based on Object Detection. Original traffic data serves as the input for the entire model, which after data
preprocessing, is transformed into RGB traffic maps. These features, extracted by the backbone network for their fundamental semantic traits, are subsequently fed into three
branches to capture semantic features of varying granularity. By concatenating the semantic features derived from the three branches, we obtain the ultimate semantic feature
map, 𝑝. Autoencoders (𝐸𝑤 ) for each category 𝑤 encode and reconstruct these pixel-level semantic features. Following that, the pixel reconstruction error from category-specific
autoencoders is used as Logits, with SoftMax operation applied at the pixel level. Then, these pixel-wise predictions are averaged to generate a composite prediction for the entire
image. For the recognition of unknown categories, this is implemented by scoring the image’s unknown traits.

5.4. Model evaluation

 For multi-classification problems, this paper employs macroaveraging or micro-averaging methods [36] to assess the model. Macroaveraging refers to averaging the F1 scores of n binary classification
problems, specifically by calculating the Precision and Recall for each
of the n binary classifications to obtain n F1 scores, and then averaging
these F1 scores to derive the Macro-F1:
 1∑
 𝑛
Macro_𝐹 1 = 𝐹 1𝑖 (12)
 𝑛 𝑖=1
 Fig. 13. Model evaluation process based on target detection.
 Micro-averaging, however, involves summing the True Positives
(TP), True Negatives (TN), False Positives (FP), and False Negatives
(FN) of the n binary classification problems to calculate an overall
 be the number of pictures in 𝑃 𝑟 that satisfy the first hit, the model’s
Precision and Recall, thereby obtaining the Micro-F1:
 ∑𝑛 Rank-1 accuracy is defined as Formula (17).
 𝑖=1 𝑇 𝑃𝑖 𝑛̂
𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = ∑𝑛 ∑𝑛 (13) 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑘 − 1 = (17)
 𝑖=1 𝑇 𝑃 𝑖+ 𝑖=1 𝐹 𝑃𝑖 𝑛
 ∑𝑛
 𝑖=1 𝑇 𝑃𝑖 Correspondingly, the Rank-n value represents the proportion of
𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 = ∑𝑛 ∑𝑛 (14)
 𝑖=1 𝑇 𝑃 𝑖+ 𝑖=1 𝐹 𝑁𝑖
 images hitting within the top n predictions.
 2 ⋅ 𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 ⋅ 𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 This experiment evaluates the effects using accuracy, precision,
𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝐹 1 = (15) recall, and F1 score. Specifically, for describing the performance of
 𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑀𝑖𝑐𝑟𝑜_𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
 open-set recognition, we introduce the Area Under the Receiver Oper-
 The model evaluation process, based on target detection, is illustrated in Fig. 13, where the Gallery Set acts as a database containing ating Characteristic (AUROC) as a threshold-independent metric. This
all target samples, and the Probe Set is the collection of targets to be metric is calculated by comparing the True Positive Rate (TPR) with
recognized. The assessment of model performance is reflected in the the False Positive Rate (FPR) by varying the threshold. If known and
overall effectiveness of target recognition within the Probe Set. unknown classes are entirely separable, the AUROC value reaches 1.
 First, define the set of images to be detected as the Probe set,
containing 𝑛 images. For each image 𝑝𝑟𝑖 in this set, the Probe set can 6. Experiment
be represented as 𝑃 𝑟 = {𝑝𝑟1 , 𝑝𝑟2 , … , 𝑝𝑟𝑖 , … , 𝑝𝑟𝑛 }. Similarly, define all
base images as the Gallery set, containing m images. For each image 𝑔𝑖 The experimental section of this study is divided into three main
in the Gallery set, it can be represented as 𝐺 = {𝑔1 , 𝑔2 , … , 𝑔𝑖 , … , 𝑔𝑚 }. parts: evaluating the preprocessing methods for SSL/TLS encrypted traf-
We define the number of times a sample of the same type as the fic raw data, comparative analysis with other models, and evaluation
image 𝑝𝑟𝑖 in the Probe set appears in the Gallery set as 𝐾𝑝𝑟𝑖 . The target of the open-set recognition scheme. For each part, we have designed
recognition process is as follows: First, extract the feature vector of the corresponding experiments to compare with other schemes and have
image 𝑝𝑟𝑖 from the Probe set and compare it with the feature vectors of detailed the dataset selection and comparison results.
all images in the Gallery set, calculating the distance between them.
Then, according to the size of the distance, sort the Gallery set in 6.1. Dataset preprocessing methods
ascending order, and the re-sorted Gallery set is denoted as 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑖 . In this
process, if there are matching images for the image 𝑝𝑟𝑖 in the Probe set This study maps the raw data stream of encrypted traffic, plaintext
within the Gallery set, then this set of matching images is denoted as handshake packet data of TLS, and traditional statistical feature data to
𝐺̂ 𝑝𝑟𝑖 = {𝑔̂1 , 𝑔̂2 , … , 𝑔̂𝑖 , … , 𝑔̂𝐾𝑝𝑟 }. Assume the matching image 𝑔̂𝑖 ranks 𝑟𝑗 the R, G, and B channels, respectively. Furthermore, by selecting three
 𝑖
in the re-sorted Gallery set 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑖 and ranks 𝑟̂𝑗 in the set of matching different combinations among the R channel, G channel, B channel,
images 𝐺̂ 𝑝𝑟𝑖 . By repeating this process for all images in the Probe set, and a blank channel, we generate three types of traffic maps. The
we can calculate the overall mAP value of the model as Formula (16). blank channel refers to a channel with all-zero data, meaning it con-
 𝑛 𝐾𝑝𝑖 tains no data, hereinafter referred to as the 𝑁 channel (NULL). For
 1 ∑∑( )
𝑚𝐴𝑃 = 𝑟̂ ∕𝑟 (16) instance, Fig. 14 shows the traffic maps of Heuristic type data with
 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑗=1 𝑗 𝑗
 different channel combinations, where RNN represents a multichannel
 When a picture 𝑝𝑟𝑖 in the detection set matches the first identified map composed of the R channel and two 𝑁 channels, and RGN is a
result 𝐺̂ 𝑝𝑟𝑖 (the top-ranked picture after sorting by feature vector dis- multidimensional channel map composed of the R, G channels, and an
tance) as the same type, it is said that 𝑝𝑟𝑖 satisfies the first-hit. Let 𝑛̂ 𝑁 channel.

 9
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Table 7
 The Details of ISCXVPN2016.
 Traffic type Traffic content
 Web browsing
 Firefox,Chrome
 VPN-Web browsing
 Email
 SMTPS,POP3S,IMAPS
 VPN-Email
 Chat
 ICQ,AIM,Skype,Facebook,Hangouts
 VPN-Chat
 Streaming
 Vimeo,Youtube
 VPN-Streaming
 File Transfer
 Skype,FTPS,SFTP
 VPN-File transfer
 VoIP
 Facebook,Skype,Hangouts,Voice
 VPN-VoIP
 P2P
 uTorrent,Transmission
 VPN-P2P

 and processing the right feature data often leads to substantial improvements. Currently, most researchers simply convert the raw traffic
 bytecodes directly into grayscale images for training deep learning
 models, generating images similar to the aforementioned RNN traffic
 maps. Although this approach minimizes manual intervention, the
 quality of recognition is entirely dependent on the model design. Thus,
 leveraging prior knowledge for traffic preprocessing, as in the multidimensional feature extraction process of this scheme, proves invaluable.
 Experimental results confirm that appropriate training data selection
 can significantly enhance the model’s recognition accuracy.
Fig. 14. Illustration of traffic features with multiple dimensions and different
combinations.
 6.2. Comparison with other models

 To demonstrate the characteristics and effectiveness of the afore-
Table 6
Traffic identification results under different dimensional characteristics. mentioned models in our scheme, this section conducts a comparative
 Macro-F1 Micro-F1 mAP Rank-1 Rank-3 Rank-5 Rank-10 analysis of multiple models on the same dataset. The dataset used is
 the VPN-nonVPN (ISCXVPN2016) dataset, which was open-sourced by
 RNN 74.86 75.69 91.83 93.22 93.97 94.21 95.78
 RGN 76.45 78.46 94.39 95.39 96.64 96.72 97.53 Draper-Gil G [37] and others in 2016. The comparative models include
 RGB 76.55 78.58 94.42 95.37 96.82 96.98 97.84 C4.5 proposed by Draper-Gil G and one-dimensional CNN proposed by
 Wang W [6]. In order to differentiate between different models, the
 notation ‘‘model’’ is used throughout. For example, the model proposed
 in this paper is denoted as MGN_OSR.
 In the comparative experiments of this section, the data chosen for Data augmentation techniques are disabled in this study, and
model training include the three aforementioned types of traffic maps. Draper-C4.5, Wang-1CNN, and the model proposed in this paper are
For ease of description, we label them as RNN, RGN, and RGB, re- evaluated on a dataset consisting of 12 classes of traffic, including
spectively. The deep learning model uniformly adopts the architecture emails, as shown in the Table 7.
proposed in this paper, and the evaluation metrics include the micro- The experimental results, as shown in Fig. 15, indicate that our
averaged F1 value, macro-averaged F1 value, the commonly used mAP proposed model performs better overall in terms of precision and
value in the target detection field, and the Rank-n hit rate. Table 6 recall compared to the C4.5 algorithm used by Draper-Gil G. It even
displays the results of traffic recognition under different dimensional outperforms C4.5 by approximately 23% in the VPN-Chat category.
features. Furthermore, compared to the one-dimensional CNN used by Wang W,
 According to Table 6, the recognition performance between RGN our model only achieves slightly lower scores in certain categories such
and RGB does not differ significantly, yet, overall, RGB tends to out- as Streaming and File, but shows a significant improvement overall,
perform RGN. This advantage mainly attributes to the additional di- especially in the Email and Chat categories.
mension of statistical feature data incorporated into RGB, enriching the Additionally, in terms of average precision, Draper-C4.5 achieves
 86.4%, Wang-1CNN achieves 89.3%, and our model achieves 97.8%.
traffic map with more detailed information. However, it is noteworthy
 Regarding average recall, Draper-C4.5 achieves 85.4%, Wang-1CNN
that the top-1 hit rate for RGB is slightly lower than that for RGN, a
 achieves 89.8%, and our model achieves 96.5%. Our model exhibits
result consistently observed across multiple experiments. This might be
 outstanding performance in both metrics.
due to the visual similarity among certain types of RGB traffic maps,
for instance, some WannaCry traffic maps might be misidentified as 6.3. Open set recognition performance
Dridex type. Moreover, both RGB and RGN significantly outperform
RNN, indirectly validating the feasibility and superiority of this scheme. To better demonstrate the recognition performance of the proposed
 The analysis above demonstrates that different combinations of method, this section uses the MNET2024 dataset built in this paper for
multidimensional features of encrypted traffic directly influence the experiments.
model’s recognition performance, with traffic maps utilizing the RGB A group of experiments is randomly selected, with Razy, Trickbot,
combination yielding the best results. This underscores the significant and Wannacry as the unknown class in the first group. The traffic
impact of data preprocessing on the overall scheme, where choosing recognition rate is shown in the Table 8.

 10
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Table 9
 Comparison of AUROC metrics on the unknown class detection task.
 Method MNET2024 ISCXVPN2016 CTU
 C2AE [21] 91.3 92.5 83.3
 MLOSR [19] 93.7 88.2 82.5
 GFROSR [22] 83.1 87.3 80.7
 OSRCI [22] 84.2 65.3 73.2
 GCPL [23] 87.3 86.8 79.4
 PROSER [24] 94.5 87.9 81.2
 MGN_OSR 96.8 92.1 86.5

 ones. With the continuous advancement in technology, the accuracy of
 these recognition schemes has been steadily improving. When ample
 physical and time resources are available, selecting the appropriate
 data format and network model can significantly enhance efficiency.
 Therefore, this section compares the characteristics of different schemes
 to further highlight the efficiency and superiority of our approach. For
 the task of recognizing malicious encrypted traffic, current research
 has shown that the iterative update of technology from surface feature
 extraction to deep learning has led to significant improvements in
 recognition effects. With sufficient computational resources and time,
 choosing the appropriate data processing methods and network models
 can greatly improve the efficiency and accuracy of recognition. This
 section, through a detailed comparison of existing different schemes,
 further demonstrates the significant advantages of our scheme in terms
 of efficiency and performance.
 Comparative schemes include MARK-ELM (2015) [44], VAEN
 (2017) [34], HAST-IDS (2018) [21], LeNet-5 (2019) [23], and HexCNN-
 1D (2023) [26], with the results shown in Table 10.
 In the model evaluation phase, our research’s data preprocessing
Fig. 15. Results of multi-classification experiments. (a) Accuracy results of stage stands out significantly from other approaches. Our scheme inmulti-classification experiments. (b) Recall results of multi-classification experiments.
 tegrates three-dimensional feature data of malicious encrypted traffic,
 whereas other schemes, such as VAEN and HAST-IDS, rely solely on
Table 8 single-dimensional feature data of traffic, opting only for specific seg-
Traffic identification accuracy.
 ments of raw data. The LeNet-5 scheme, on the other hand, constructs
 Name(Benign) Accuracy Name(Malicious) Accuracy
 images based on the size of data packets and their arrival times, without
 Dropbox 98.2 Bunitu 89.2 much human intervention in feature engineering. Thus, our approach
 Ebay 89.2 CCleaner 96.7
 Gmail 96.5 Dridex 99.8
 is unique in extracting multidimensional traffic features. During the
 Mega 97.3 Emotet 97.4 model training phase, we utilize RGB traffic maps as the data carrier,
 NetEase Music 95.2 Heuristic 94.9 extracting multi-granular features of the traffic maps through a multi-
 Skype 93.7 HPEMOTET 98.9 branch CNN model based on ResNet-50. The interaction and feedback
 WhatsApp 98.2 PUA.Taobao 92.4
 among features from different branches endow our scheme with the ca-
 Youtube 96.4 Razy(Unkwon) 97.6
 Instagram 99.5 Trickbot(Unkwon) 95.8 pabilities of multi-granular feature extraction, end-to-end recognition,
 News Break 97.8 WannaCry(Unkwon) 99.3 and transferable learning. In contrast, the HAST-IDS scheme uses both
 CNN and LSTM deep learning models to extract spatial and temporal
 features of traffic, illustrating its multi-granular feature extraction properties as well. Furthermore, this paper explores the new direction of
 This paper compares the proposed method with different but re- open-set recognition, an area not yet extensively studied in the field of
lated architectures, such as autoencoder-based methods [38–40] and malicious traffic recognition.
newer class prototype methods [40–42]. The experiments are conducted using the dataset constructed in this paper (MNET2024), VPN- 7. Conclusion and future work
nonVPN (ISCXVPN2016) dataset, and the CTU malware dataset [43].
The experimental results are shown in the 9. Apart from a slight lag This article proposes an innovative encrypted malicious traffic open
behind C2AE on ISCXVPN2016, our model performs better on the set identification scheme based on multi-feature fusion. The scheme
other two datasets, especially on the dataset constructed in this paper deeply explores the entire process from traffic preprocessing to the
(MNET2024) with an improvement of 2.3%. This also indicates that selection of deep learning models. By converting the original traffic
our scheme can accurately identify unknown classes while ensuring data into RGB images, the scheme not only achieves multidimensional
closed-set performance. traffic selection and fusion but also effectively eliminates redundant
 background information, significantly improving the quality of the data
6.4. Comparison with other plans input into the model. In terms of model selection, we use a multi-branch
 structure network to extract and learn features at different granularity
 In comparing different schemes for the recognition of malicious levels, making the most of all available features. Finally, by modeling
encrypted traffic, researchers have proposed a variety of solutions rang- on the manifold generated by the category-specific encoder, we successing from superficial features to deep features, from machine learning fully achieve open set identification in the field of traffic recognition.
to deep learning, and from simple network architectures to complex Through extensive experiments on our self-built MNET2024 dataset and

 11
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

 Table 10
 A comparison of the characteristics of different schemes.
 Program features MARK-ELM VAEN HAST-IDS LeNet-5 HexCNN-1D MGN_OSR
 Multidimensional feature extraction and fusion # # # # # !
 Multi-granularity vector feature extraction # # ! # # !
 Open set recognition # # # # # !
 Data processing methods # # ! # ! !

the publicly available ISCXVPN2016 dataset, and by comparing with [4] Robert Winding, Timothy Wright, Michael Chapple, System anomaly detection:
other research results, the model shows significant recognition effects Mining firewall logs, in: 2006 Securecomm and Workshops, IEEE, 2006, pp. 1–5.
 [5] Ming Li, Dezhi Han, Xinming Yin, Han Liu, Dun Li, Design and implementation
in both closed and open sets.
 of an anomaly network traffic detection model integrating temporal and spatial
 To further explore the application scenarios of the model, we iden- features, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (1) (2021) 7045823.
tified two issues that need further research in future work. First, [6] Wei Wang, Ming Zhu, Xuewen Zeng, Xiaozhou Ye, Yiqiang Sheng, Malware traffic
although many studies have achieved good results on public datasets, classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning, in:
the real samples faced in industrial environments often have a serious 2017 International Conference on Information Networking, ICOIN, IEEE, 2017,
 pp. 712–717.
imbalance problem, such as a certain type of sample being far more
 [7] Chuanxing Geng, Sheng-jun Huang, Songcan Chen, Recent advances in open set
numerous than another type. This data imbalance may lead to problems recognition: A survey, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43 (10) (2020)
such as model overfitting, a common challenge in machine learning. In 3614–3631.
practical applications, it is almost impossible to achieve consistency in [8] K.K. Sunny Behal, Krishan Kumar, Extrusion: An outbound traffic based approach
the amount of training data samples for all types. Therefore, how to to detect botnets, Int. J. Inf. Telecommun. Technol. 2 (1) (2010) 71–76.
 [9] Snort, URL: https://www.snort.org/.
implement reasonable sampling strategies at the data level (to avoid
 [10] Sung-Min Kim, Young-Hoon Goo, Myung-Sup Kim, Soo-Gil Choi, Mi-Jung Choi,
undersampling or oversampling), adjust network parameters at the A method for service identification of SSL/TLS encrypted traffic with the relation
algorithm level, and use data augmentation techniques to increase the of session ID and server IP, in: 2015 17th Asia-Pacific Network Operations and
sample size are issues that need further exploration. Management Symposium, APNOMS, IEEE, 2015, pp. 487–490.
 Second, with the rapid development of network protocols and ap- [11] Eva Papadogiannaki, Constantinos Halevidis, Periklis Akritidis, Lazaros Koromilas, Otter: A scalable high-resolution encrypted traffic identification engine, in:
plications, the current network environment is becoming increasingly
 Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses: 21st International Symposium,
complex. Open set traffic identification is just the first step; future RAID 2018, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September 10-12, 2018, Proceedings 21,
research should also consider how to build models in a network en- Springer, 2018, pp. 315–334.
vironment that is updated in real-time. Exploring how to use detected [12] Martin Husák, Milan Čermák, Tomáš Jirsík, Pavel Čeleda, HTTPS traffic analysis
unknown category traffic for real-time training of the model, thereby and client identification using passive SSL/TLS fingerprinting, EURASIP J. Inf.
 Secur. 2016 (2016) 1–14.
learning from newly emerging malicious or benign traffic to expand the
 [13] Sourabh Saxena, Demystifying malware traffic, in: SANS Institute InfoSec.(August
model’s recognition capabilities, is also an urgent problem to be solved 2016), 2016.
in future research. [14] Curtis McCarthy, A. Nur Zincir-Heywood, An investigation on identifying SSL
 traffic, in: 2011 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and
Dataset & code availability Defense Applications, CISDA, IEEE, 2011, pp. 115–122.
 [15] Wazen M Shbair, Thibault Cholez, Jerome Francois, Isabelle Chrisment, A multilevel framework to identify HTTPS services, in: NOMS 2016-2016 IEEE/IFIP
 The code and data related to the experiments are available at the Network Operations and Management Symposium, IEEE, 2016, pp. 240–248.
provided link: https://github.com/BeerHan/Code-and-data-for-MGN-O [16] Feipeng Yan, Ming Xu, Tong Qiao, Ting Wu, Xue Yang, Ning Zheng, Kim-
SR. Kwang Raymond Choo, Identifying wechat red packets and fund transfers
 via analyzing encrypted network traffic, in: 2018 17th IEEE International
 Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communica-
CRediT authorship contribution statement
 tions/12th IEEE International Conference on Big Data Science and Engineering,
 TrustCom/BigDataSE, IEEE, 2018, pp. 1426–1432.
 Xingwen Zhao: Methodology, Funding acquisition. Han Zhang: [17] Ivan Torroledo, Luis David Camacho, Alejandro Correa Bahnsen, Hunting ma-
Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, licious TLS certificates with deep neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 11th
Methodology, Data curation. Hui Li: Resources, Funding acquisition. ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, 2018, pp. 64–73.
 [18] Blake Anderson, David McGrew, Machine learning for encrypted malware traffic
Xuangui Chen: Writing – review & editing.
 classification: accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity, in: Proceedings
 of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Declaration of competing interest Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1723–1732.
 [19] Mohammad Lotfollahi, Mahdi Jafari Siavoshani, Ramin Shirali Hossein Zade,
 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial Mohammdsadegh Saberian, Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic
 classification using deep learning, Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
 [20] Wei Wang, Ming Zhu, Jinlin Wang, Xuewen Zeng, Zhongzhen Yang, End-toinfluence the work reported in this paper. end encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 networks, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Data availability Informatics, ISI, IEEE, 2017, pp. 43–48.
 [21] Wei Wang, Yiqiang Sheng, Jinlin Wang, Xuewen Zeng, Xiaozhou Ye, Yongzhong
 Huang, Ming Zhu, HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial-temporal features
 Data will be made available on request.
 using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection, IEEE Access 6 (2017)
 1792–1806.
References [22] Zhitang Chen, Ke He, Jian Li, Yanhui Geng, Seq2img: A sequence-to-image based
 approach towards ip traffic classification using convolutional neural networks,
 [1] Yue Zhao, Yarang Yang, Yiru Niu, Kaijun Wu, Yao Hao, Hong Su, Qi Zhao, A clas- in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data, Big Data, IEEE, 2017, pp.
 sification and identification technology of TLS encrypted traffic applications, in: 1271–1276.
 2021 IEEE 4th International Conference on Big Data and Artificial Intelligence, [23] Tal Shapira, Yuval Shavitt, Flowpic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is
 BDAI, IEEE, 2021, pp. 160–164. as easy as image recognition, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE Conference on
 [2] I. Sandvine, Global internet phenomena report, in: North America and Latin Computer Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2019, pp.
 America, 2016. 680–687.
 [3] What is encrypted traffic detection?, URL: https://info.support.huawei.com/info- [24] José Cañete, Gabriel Chaperon, Rodrigo Fuentes, Jou-Hui Ho, Hojin Kang, Jorge
 finder/encyclopedia/zh/SSL%E5%8A%A0%E5%AF%86%E6%B5%81%E9%87% Pérez, Spanish pre-trained bert model and evaluation data, 2023, arXiv preprint
 8F%E6%A3%80%E6%B5%8B.html. arXiv:2308.02976.

 12
X. Zhao et al. Computer Networks 254 (2024) 110824

[25] Stratosphere Lab. Malware Capture Facility Project, URL: https://mcfp.felk.cvut. [43] CTU Malware Dataset, URL: https://www.stratosphereips.org/datasets-malware.
 cz/publicDatasets. [44] John M. Fossaceca, Thomas A. Mazzuchi, Shahram Sarkani, MARK-ELM: applica-
[26] Yan Zhou, Huiling Shi, Yanling Zhao, Wei Ding, Jing Han, Hongyang Sun, Xian- tion of a novel multiple kernel learning framework for improving the robustness
 heng Zhang, Chang Tang, Wei Zhang, Identification of encrypted and malicious of network intrusion detection, Expert Syst. Appl. 42 (8) (2015) 4062–4080.
 network traffic based on one-dimensional convolutional neural network, J. Cloud
 Comput. 12 (1) (2023) 1–10.
[27] Andrew Moore, Denis Zuev, Michael Crogan, Discriminators for use in
 Flow-Based Classification, Tech. Rep., 2013. Xingwen Zhao received his Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees
[28] Hyunchul Kim, Kimberly C Claffy, Marina Fomenkov, Dhiman Barman, Michalis in Communication Engineering from Xidian University in
 Faloutsos, KiYoung Lee, Internet traffic classification demystified: myths, caveats, 1999 and 2004, respectively. He obtained his Ph.D. in
 and the best practices, in: Proceedings of the 2008 ACM CoNEXT Conference, Computer Software and Theory from Sun Yat-sen University
 2008, pp. 1–12. in 2011. Currently, he is an Associate Professor at the School
[29] Python Pillow, URL: https://python-pillow.org/. of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University, specializing in
[30] Liang Zheng, Liyue Shen, Lu Tian, Shengjin Wang, Jingdong Wang, Qi Tian, Information Security. He is also involved as a board member
 Scalable person re-identification: A benchmark, in: Proceedings of the IEEE in the Intelligent Information Processing Industrialization
 International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1116–1124. Branch of the China Association for the Industrialization of
[31] Image Augmentation for Machine Learning Experiments, URL: https://github. High Technology and is a member of ACM SIGSAC and the
 com/aleju/imgaug. China Cryptology Association.
[32] Ding Li, Yuefei Zhu, Wei Lin, Traffic identification of mobile apps based on
 variational autoencoder network, in: 2017 13th International Conference on
 Han Zhang received her B.S. degree in Computer Science
 Computational Intelligence and Security, CIS, IEEE, 2017, pp. 287–291.
 and Technology from Jiangnan University in 2022,and
[33] Hongzhi Huang, Yu Wang, Qinghua Hu, Ming-Ming Cheng, Class-specific semanis pursuing her M.S. degree in cyberspace security from
 tic reconstruction for open set recognition, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
 Xidian University. Her research in terests primarily in-
 45 (4) (2022) 4214–4228.
 clude malicious encrypted traffic detection and intrusion
[34] Guanshuo Wang, Yufeng Yuan, Xiong Chen, Jiwei Li, Xi Zhou, Learning disdetection.
 criminative features with multiple granularities for person re-identification, in:
 Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2018, pp.
 274–282.
[35] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, Jian Sun, Deep residual learning for
 image recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778. Hui Li received the B.Sc. degree from Fudan University,
[36] Yiming Yang, An evaluation of statistical approaches to text categorization, Inf. in 1990, and the M.A.Sc.and Ph.D. degrees from Xidian
 Retr. 1 (1–2) (1999) 69–90. University, Xi’an,Shaanxi, China,in 1993 and 1998, re-
[37] Gerard Draper-Gil, Arash Habibi Lashkari, Mohammad Saiful Islam Mamun, Ali A spectively.Since June 2005, he has been a Professor with
 Ghorbani, Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related, in: the School of Cyber Engineering, Xidian University.He has
 Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Information Systems Security published more than 170 international academic research
 and Privacy, ICISSP, 2016, pp. 407–414. papers on information security and privacy preservation.
[38] JinJin Lin, Pengfei Chen, Zibin Zheng, Microscope: Pinpoint performance issues His research interests include cryptography, wireless netwith causal graphs in micro-service environments, in: Service-Oriented Comput- work security, information theory, and network coding. He
 ing: 16th International Conference, ICSOC 2018, Hangzhou, China, November served as the Technique CommitteeChair or the Co-Chair for
 12-15, 2018, Proceedings 16, Springer, 2018, pp. 3–20. several conferences.
[39] Jörg Thalheim, Antonio Rodrigues, Istemi Ekin Akkus, Pramod Bhatotia,
 Ruichuan Chen, Bimal Viswanath, Lei Jiao, Christof Fetzer, Sieve: Actionable
 insights from monitored metrics in distributed systems, in: Proceedings of the Xuangui Chen received the B.S. degree in information
 18th ACM/IFIP/USENIX Middleware Conference, 2017, pp. 14–27. security from Xidian University in 2023, and is pursuing
[40] Yuan Meng, Shenglin Zhang, Yongqian Sun, Ruru Zhang, Zhilong Hu, Yiyin her M.S. degree in cyberspace security from Xidian Univer-
 Zhang, Chenyang Jia, Zhaogang Wang, Dan Pei, Localizing failure root causes sity. Her research interests include network traffic anomaly
 in a microservice through causality inference, in: 2020 IEEE/ACM 28th detection and semi supervised detection.
 International Symposium on Quality of Service, IWQoS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–10.
[41] Hong-Ming Yang, Xu-Yao Zhang, Fei Yin, Qing Yang, Cheng-Lin Liu, Convolutional prototype network for open set recognition, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
 Mach. Intell. 44 (5) (2020) 2358–2370.
[42] Da-Wei Zhou, Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan, Learning placeholders for open-set
 recognition, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 4401–4410.

 13