IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024 5009013

 Pixel-Level Contrastive Pretrainer for
 Industrial Image Representation
 Bingke Zhu , Yingying Chen , Ming Tang , Member, IEEE, and Jinqiao Wang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Industrial quality inspection aims to identify
defective parts in industrial production processes. Commonly
used methods for industrial quality inspection rely on feature
representations that have been pretrained on natural image
datasets, such as ImageNet. However, these pretrained models
are not specifically tailored for industrial scenarios and therefore
do not transfer well to downstream industrial tasks. In this
study, we have curated a large-scale industrial production
dataset called Ind-2M, which is specifically collected from
industrial scenarios. This dataset serves to enhance the industrial
representation of pretraining models. Additionally, we propose a
Pixel-level COntrastive (PiCO) pretrainer for industrial image
representation. PiCO not only improves the global industrial
representation through industrial production classification, but
 Fig. 1. Pretraining paradigm for industrial image representations. (a) Existing
also enhances the local industrial representation through pixelnatural image pretraining paradigm learns the common representations from
level self-supervision. Experimental results demonstrate that the natural image dataset and transfers to the downstream industrial tasks
PiCO effectively transfers to downstream industrial tasks, directly. (b) PiCO pretraining paradigm learns the image-level industrial
such as multilabel defect classification and anomaly detection, representations from the large-scale industrial dataset Ind-2M and the
outperforming existing pretrained methods. We hope PiCO can pixel-level representations from the fused images, and then transfers to the
initiate a new paradigm for industrial image pretraining. downstream industrial tasks.
 Index Terms— Ind-2M, industrial image representation, Pixellevel COntrastive (PiCO), pixel-level contrastive learning, automated industrial quality inspection represents a crucial
pretrainer. research area within the instruments and measurements field.
 It plays a significant role in facilitating the advancement
 of surface defect detection technologies, such as Strip Steel
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 Surface Defect [2], [3], [4], [5], glass defect detection [6],

I NDUSTRIAL quality inspection is a critical endeavor that
 seeks to identify and evaluate defects within the realm
of industrial manufacturing [1]. Nonetheless, this process
 [7], pavement defect detection [8], [9], [10], LED defect
 detection, as well as improve industrial anomaly detection
 technologies [11], [12], [13]. This leads to the overall
is confronted with inherent limitations, such as a scarcity improvement of various industrial quality inspection practices.
of proficient inspectors and the substantial time investment In recent years, the field of industrial defect detection has
required to thoroughly examine industrial productions. Conse- garnered significant attention, as evidenced by the growing
quently, there is a pressing need for automated systems capable body of research exploring various approaches. These include
of detecting defects within industrial contexts. Furthermore, supervised defect detection and segmentation techniques [14],
 [15], unsupervised anomaly detection methods [16], [17],
 Manuscript received 6 October 2023; revised 10 December 2023;
accepted 24 December 2023. Date of publication 29 January 2024; date and self-supervised anomaly generation approaches [18], [19].
of current version 31 January 2024. This work was supported in part by Although considerable advancements have been made in
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant defect detection methods over the past few decades, it is
2021ZD0114600; and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62276260, Grant 62206283, and Grant 62176254. The noteworthy that existing techniques commonly rely on feature
Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Wenqiang Liu. representations pretrained on ImageNet [20], a natural image
(Corresponding author: Yingying Chen.) dataset. These pretrained features are then directly transferred
 Bingke Zhu, Yingying Chen, and Ming Tang are with the Foundation
Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy to downstream industrial tasks, as depicted in Fig. 1(a).
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: bingke.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; The pretraining of features using natural image datasets
yingying.chen@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; tangm@nlpr.ia.ac.cn). may not adequately capture the representation needed for
 Jinqiao Wang is with the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, also industrial applications for several reasons. First, natural image
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of datasets lack images from real industrial production settings,
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China, also with the Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan which hinder their ability to effectively represent industrial
430073, China, and also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066,
China (e-mail: jqwang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn). scenarios. Second, critical features required for tasks such as
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2024.3353860 defect detection or anomaly detection in industrial settings
 1557-9662 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 2. Examples of Ind-2M dataset. Left: image examples of industrial products. Right: image examples of industrial defects.

are often localized and small, whereas features in natural regions with the corresponding defective regions, resulting in
image datasets tend to be global and large in scale. This realistic defective product images.
disparity poses a challenge in utilizing natural image datasets In order to obtain the defective regions using the
for industrial representation. Third, in industrial products, the CAM technique, our proposed method, PiCO, incorporates
regions exhibiting defects are often similar in appearance to a hybrid triplet mining loss to constrain the pixel-level
the regions without defects, making it difficult to distinguish representation. This constraint is achieved through supervised
between defective and non-defective features. On the other feature learning. Specifically, when the same defect is inserted
hand, natural image datasets typically consist of objects that into different industrial product images, the feature distance
are more easily distinguishable. between defects within these images should be smaller than
 To address the aforementioned challenges associated with the feature distance between defects and industrial products.
pretraining models for industrial applications, we have curated During the pretraining of the convolutional neural network
a comprehensive dataset called Ind-2M. This dataset has been (CNN) model, we modify the architecture by abandoning
specifically collected from the industrial scenarios, as depicted the last stride of the CNN and instead using the dilated
in Fig. 2. Ind-2M comprises a vast collection of 2.2 million CNN approach, as proposed by [23]. This modification
industrial images, sourced from both publicly available allows us to recover the receptive field, thereby enabling
industrial datasets and data obtained through web crawling. the industrial feature representations to retain more detailed
The dataset encompasses 1.6 million images of non-defective features. PiCO can be also applied to vision transformer
industrial products, as well as 0.6 million images depicting (ViT) [24] without modification. Furthermore, we constrain
various defects found in industrial settings. By leveraging the the pixel-level representation of the features obtained from
Ind-2M dataset, our objective is to facilitate the advancement either the dilated CNN or ViT.
of industrial representation through pretraining models. In our experimental evaluation, we assess the performance
 We additionally propose a Pixel-level COntrastive (PiCO) of PiCO on downstream industrial tasks, specifically multilabel
pretrainer for enhancing industrial image representation, defect classification and anomaly detection. Our results
as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). PiCO is designed to acquire compre- demonstrate that PiCO surpasses existing pretrained methods
hensive industrial representations by performing classification in terms of performance. Notably, pretraining method PiCO
tasks on industrial products. The labels for these tasks are with the large-scale industrial dataset Ind-2M yields a
obtained either from data gathered from the internet or from significant improvement compared to previous pretrained
the product types within the dataset. Furthermore, given that models based on ImageNet.
the Ind-2M dataset includes 0.6 million defect images obtained The primary motivation driving this research stems from
from internet sources, PiCO is capable of learning defect- the inadequacy of existing pretraining methods for industrial
related features through the classification of industrial defect intelligent quality inspection. Consequently, we address this
images. issue by introducing the Ind-2M dataset, a comprehensive
 Moreover, acquiring a sufficient number of defective large-scale dataset specifically designed for pretraining largeproduct images can be challenging. To address this issue, scale industrial models. Furthermore, we propose PiCO,
we present a heuristic data generation approach that allows us a novel approach tailored for pretraining these models.
to generate a substantial quantity of defective product images. In summary, the main contributions of this work can be
This method leverages the classification activation mapping summarized as follows.
(CAM) [21] for product and defect classification within PiCO. 1. We have curated a large-scale industrial dataset, Ind-2M,
By utilizing CAM, we can extract the approximate regions specifically designed to capture real-world industrial
of both the products and defects. Subsequently, we employ scenarios. To the best of our knowledge, Ind-2M
Poisson Blending [22] to seamlessly merge these product represents the first comprehensive industrial dataset for
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

 pretraining industrial image models. Ind-2M dataset is article questions the suitability of this ImageNet pretraining
 available at https://github.com/BingkeZhu/Ind-2M. approach for industrial defect detection tasks. To address this
 2) In this work, we introduce PiCO, a pixel-level issue, this article proposes a large-scale pretraining dataset
 contrastive pretrainer that aims to enhance industrial specifically designed for industrial defect detection tasks.
 image representations. PiCO incorporates both global Additionally, a pixel-level contrastive learning-based pretrainand local representations, employs a heuristic data ing method is introduced for this dataset, aiming to enhance
 generation approach, and leverages pixel-level features. the model’s pretraining feature representation capability for
 Notably, PiCO is model-agnostic, capable of benefiting industrial defect detection tasks and consequently improve
 both CNN and ViT models, thereby facilitating improved accuracy in downstream industrial defect detection tasks.
 industrial representations and enhancing performance on
 downstream industrial tasks.
 B. Anomaly Detection
 3) Through extensive experimentation, we demonstrate that
 both the Ind-2M dataset and the PiCO pretrainer yield Recently, anomaly detection has raised a large amount of
 significant improvements in industrial representations interest for unsupervised defect detection [16], [30], [31].
 compared to previous models pretrained on ImageNet. Anomaly detection trains only on the normal images, and
 We believe that the introduction of the Ind-2M dataset detects the defects on the anomaly images, thus reduces the
 and the PiCO pretrainer marks the beginning of labeling costs. PatchCore [16] uses a maximally representative
 a new era in industrial image pretraining, fostering memory bank of nominal patch features. PaDim [17] makes
 advancements in this domain. use of a pretrained CNN for patch embedding, and of
 multivariate Gaussian distributions to get a probabilistic
 II. R ELATED W ORK representation of the normal class. SSPCAB [32] proposes
 to integrate the reconstruction-based functionality into a self-
A. Industrial Defect Detection supervised predictive architectural building block. Reverse
 Industrial quality inspection is an important step in distillation [33] proposes a T–S model consisting of a teacher
industrial production. Automatic industrial defect detection encoder and a student decoder and introduce a simple yet
can reduce time costs and labor costs effectively, and thus effective “reverse distillation” paradigm accordingly. Recently,
receives much research attention. Feature collection and uniAD [30] is proposed to accomplish anomaly detection
compression network [25] adopt the compressed multiscale for multiple classes with a unified framework with a
feature merging for real-time defect detection. The attention- novel transformer-based decoder. OTB-AAE [34] proposes
guided segmentation network [14] combines UNet and an anomaly detection framework based on adversarial
biConvLSTM to improve the pixel-level welding defect autoencoder (AAE) to capture the normality distribution
detection performance. An encoder–decoder structure [26] of high-dimensional images in industry and introduces the
is proposed to fuse multibranch and multiscale features output-turn-back structure (OTB) and combine L1 loss and
for surface defect detection. Also, a fake-to-real domain structural similarity (SSIM) loss functions to enhance the
transformation GAN is used to transform the rendered samples discriminant capability of the discriminator. SMCC [35]
from the fake domain into the real defect domain. DCAM- utilizes a pretrained model for feature extraction and employs
Net [27] proposes a rapid detection network based on a Gaussian mixture model to cluster and obtain cluster
deformable convolution and attention mechanism. It introduces centers. This enables better discrimination between normal
CLAHE for data augmentation, an EDE-block for capturing and abnormal sample features, as normal sample features are
complex and irregular defects, and a CA module for improved tightly distributed around the cluster centers. By leveraging
defect localization. MANet [8] utilizes the encoder–decoder competition among different tasks in a self-supervised
architecture with MobileNet as the backbone network multitask setting, MTHM [36] learns compact and efficient
for feature extraction. Multiscale convolution kernels are representations for detection tasks. Additionally, introducing
employed in depthwise separable convolution (DSConv) other semantic tasks allows the shared encoder to learn beyond
layers, and a hybrid attention mechanism is incorporated image reconstruction, improving the model’s reconstruction
to infer spatial points and interchannel relationship features. capability for anomalies.
NDP-Net [28] utilizes an encoding module to extract Similar to industrial defect detection tasks, these industrial
multiscale discriminative features and incorporates artificial anomaly detection methods also rely on models pretrained
defects and a pixel-level defect perception loss to enhance on ImageNet. They extract features from the ImageNet
defect detection. Additionally, a reference-based attention pretrained models for feature transformation, enabling the
module and a multiscale defect segmentation module are identification of abnormal regions. It is worth noting that
introduced for precise defect detection and segmentation. ImageNet pretrained features are particularly important in
MRD-Net [29] is a multiscale feature enhancement fusion and anomaly detection tasks. Fine-tuning the pretrained ImageNet
reverse attention network for real-time and end-to-end defect portion of the model can lead to a drastic decrease in
segmentation. performance [30]. Therefore, designing a pretraining method
 In the past, these industrial defect detection methods were specifically suitable for industrial anomaly detection tasks is of
based on fine-tuning a network pretrained on ImageNet using great research significance in order to improve the performance
specific industrial defect detection task data. However, this of industrial anomaly detection models.
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

C. Network Pretraining categories. Then, we can obtain the CAM for product regions
 ImageNet [20] pretraining is the most common network and defect regions. In image blending stage, PiCO fuses the
pretraining method for image representation [37], [38], [39], industrial product images and defect images using Poisson
[40], [41]. Recently, the contrastive learning-based self- Blending, and the previous CAM can be used to guide the
supervised methods like MoCos [42], [43] have attracted much blending process. In pixel-level representations stage, the
attention. Also, the mask reconstruction-based self-supervised previous classifying CNN removes the last striding, and uses
methods like MAE [44] improve the image representations dilation convolution [23] to remedy the receptive field. Then,
of ViT largely. SimCLR [45] simplifies contrastive self- PiCO optimizes the pixel-level representations by the proposed
supervised learning algorithms without requiring specialized hybrid triplet mining.
architectures or a memory bank. SimSiam [46] provides In this section, we will first elaborate on the large-scale
a hypothesis on the implication of stop-gradient, and industrial image dataset, Ind-2M dataset. Then, we will
further shows proof-of-concept experiments. SimMIM [47] introduce three stages of PiCO, respectively. Finally, we will
simplifies MAE-based methods without special designs such present the overall pipeline of PiCO.
as blockwise masking and tokenization via discrete VAE or
clustering. A. Ind-2M Dataset
 The existing network pretraining methods are designed for
general object recognition tasks. However, these methods do In order to acquire robust image representations for
not take into account the characteristics of industrial defect industrial applications, we have curated a comprehensive
detection tasks. For example, these methods are pretrained dataset known as Ind-2M. This dataset is specifically tailored
on the ImageNet dataset, resulting in features that lack for industrial scenarios and comprises a vast collection of
understanding of industrial products and defects, such as the 2.2 million industrial images. The images within Ind-2M are
inability to understand scratches. Additionally, these methods sourced from both publicly available industrial datasets and
are focused on large target areas with prominent features in data obtained through web crawling. Notably, the dataset
the images. However, they may not yield significant results consists of 1.6 million product images and 0.6 million defect
for industrial defects that are less obvious in the image, images.
such as cracks. Therefore, there is a need to research a As shown in Table I, the Ind-2M dataset consists
pretraining method specifically tailored for industrial feature of 18 publicly available datasets, 31 web-crawled indusrepresentation tasks. trial product scene data, and 30 web-crawled industrial
 Existing methods have failed to address the pretraining defect scene data. The open-source datasets include Sewparadigms that are suitable for intelligent quality inspection erML [15], Aluminum Profile [48], Kylberg [49], NEU
in industrial settings for the following reasons: first, surface defect database [2], Severstal [50], DAGM 2007 [51],
obtaining industrial data is challenging because the production RSDDs [52], KTH-TIPS [53], PKU-Market-PCB [54],
environment typically contains a substantial number of normal AITEX [55], elpv-dataset [56], KolektorSDD [57], Deepsamples to ensure production quality, but lacks defect samples. PCB [58], SDNET2018 [59], Fabric Defect [60], Insulator
Second, the defect area in industrial images is often small Defect Image Dataset [61], BSData [62], and TILDA
compared to the entire image, whereas commonly used general Textile Texture-Database [63] datasets. These datasets cover
intelligence recognition datasets like ImageNet primarily 11 different scenes including pipeline damage, aluminum
consist of images where the target occupies a significant profiles, textile industry, steel strip, magnetic tiles, railway
area. Lastly, current methods primarily focus on training the tracks, concrete, printed circuit boards, solar panels, metal,
entire image and do not incorporate pixel-level differential and wires. Each dataset typically focuses on a specific product
contrastive learning, which poses difficulties in accurately category. To enable PiCO classification, we annotate the
identifying defects. In contrast to previous approaches, our images in each dataset with their corresponding product
work specifically targets industrial scenarios. To address the category labels.
issue of difficult access to industrial data, we introduce a large- Additionally, we employ web crawling techniques to acquire
scale Ind-2M dataset and propose a synthetic defect generation industrial product images from the internet. We meticulously
method to augment a large number of defect training samples. amassed a comprehensive dataset of 221 062 images sourced
To tackle the problems of small defect areas and the lack of from a variety of industrial e-commerce websites, industrial
pixel-level differential constraints, this article introduces pixel- image websites, and similar platforms. These images were
level contrastive learning as a solution. acquired by employing 31 carefully selected keywords,
 including height gauge, caliper, gloves, safety helmet, light
 bulb, lighting fixture, cable, clock, shoe covers, screen,
 III. M ETHOD sensor, chemicals, personal protective equipment, transformer,
 Fig. 3 provides an overview of the PiCO framework, which inverter, security products, locator, mirror, pipe inspection
encompasses three distinct stages in each iteration, namely the device, syringe, laboratory equipment, power supply, instruimage classification stage, the image blending stage, and the ments, tools, electrical distribution equipment, cleaning tools,
pixel-level representations stage. electrical and electronic tools, projector, and socket. The
 In image classification stage, PiCO classifies the product aggregation of these images forms our dataset, which focuses
images and defect images with predefined product and defect specifically on industrial products. Consequently, the obtained
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

 TABLE I
C OMPOSITION OF THE I ND -2M DATASET. T HE I ND -2M DATASET C ONSISTS OF 18 P UBLICLY AVAILABLE I NDUSTRIAL DATASETS , 31 W EB -C RAWLED
 I NDUSTRIAL P RODUCT S CENE I MAGES , AND 30 W EB -C RAWLED I NDUSTRIAL D EFECT S CENE I MAGES

industrial product images are associated with specific product punctures, worn areas, misalignments, bubbles, blemishes,
category labels, facilitating subsequent PiCO classification collapses, scratches, burn marks, adhesions, cracks, looseness,
tasks. pitting, decay, peelings, mold, and impurities. This extensive
 Furthermore, we have created the Ind-2M dataset, which collection of images forms our industrially focused defect
encompasses a staggering 0.6 million industrial defect dataset, encompassing a wide range of defect categories found
images meticulously obtained through web crawling. Our within the industrial domain.
comprehensive web crawling process allowed us to aggregate In order to guarantee the integrity and validity of the
a total of 614 002 images, guided by 30 carefully selected collected data through web crawling, we implemented a
keywords. These keywords include cracks, repairs, dents, rigorous validation process. Following the accumulation of a
protrusions, deformations, defects, cuts, holes, fractures, oil substantial volume of industrial product and defect images,
stains, wrinkles, loose threads, contamination, extrusions, we enlisted the expertise of ten highly skilled data engineers
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

who possessed professional training in the domain. These Algorithm 1 PiCO
individuals were tasked with meticulously reviewing and Input: Product Image I A , Product Image I B , Defect Image IC ,
filtering the crawled data. Their extensive knowledge and Random Initialized Model F, Iterative Time T
understanding of industrial products and defects enabled them Output: Pre-trained Model F
to identify and eliminate images that did not align with the 1: for t = 1 : T do
designated product names or correspond to the specified defect 2: if t%2 == 0 then
categories. By employing such manual filtering, we ensured 3: Inputing I A , I B , IC to model F, update the model
the data’s accuracy and adherence to the intended industrial parameters with cross entropy loss.
context, contributing to the overall validity of our dataset. 4: Calculating the CAM of products and defects,
 obtaining S A , S B , SC .
B. Industrial Image Classification 5: else
 6: Fusing I A and IC using CAM S A and SC , with
 The image classification stage serves two purposes in the Poisson Blending, as well as I B and IC , obtaining
PiCO pretrainer. First, it facilitates the acquisition of global I AC and I BC .
semantic understanding capabilities by pretrained models, 7: Using dilated CNN or ViT to obtain the pixel-level
akin to previous supervised pretraining methods employed representations, and using defect masks to split the
in deep learning models. Second, it leverages CAM to product and defect regions.
obtain approximate positions of industrial products and 8: Updating model using hybrid triplet mining loss.
defects, establishing a positional foundation for the subsequent 9: end if
blending of industrial defect images. 10: end for
 During the industrial image classification stage, the CNN or
ViT models are employed to classify the predefined industrial
product categories and industrial defect categories using both
 each challenging defect image, the defects are pasted onto
the industrial product images and defect images. For this
 the selected locations of two product images using Poisson
purpose, PiCO utilizes two fully connected layers, one for
 blending. The fusion consistency of the divergence field is
product classification and the other for defect classification.
 optimized during this process, expressed as follows:
Notably, PiCO ensures that the product images are classified ZZ
without considering the defect categories, and vice versa.
 min |∇ f − v|2 , with f |∂Ω = f ∗ ∂Ω (3)
Subsequently, the CAM can be obtained for both the product f Ω
regions and defect regions by multiplying the category weights
 where f is the fused image, ∇ f is the gradient of f , Ω
with the corresponding feature representations.
 denotes the defect image, and v is the gradient of defect image,
 Formally, given the input industrial product image I P and
 while f ∗ denotes the product image.
industrial defect image I D , the classification process can be
represented as
 D. Industrial Pixel-Level Representation
 X i = F(Ii ), i ∈ {D, P} (1)
 The industrial pixel-level representation stage employs
 Ci = f ci (X i ), i ∈ {D, P} (2) contrastive learning techniques to enhance the discrimination
where X i denotes the feature representations, F denotes the of local detailed features at the pixel level. This enables
CNN or transformer networks, f c denotes the fully connected pretrained models to effectively distinguish industrial products
layers, and C denotes the classification categories. and defects, thereby establishing a strong foundation for
 downstream industrial intelligent defect detection.
 In the pixel-level representation stage, when employing a
C. Industrial Image Blending CNN model for pretraining, the final striding of the CNN
 The industrial image blending stage is capable of is eliminated, and dilation convolution [23] is employed to
synthesizing a substantial number of industrial defect images, address the receptive field. Alternatively, when utilizing a ViT
thereby alleviating the scarcity and challenges associated with as backbone, the vanilla transformer can be used for pixel-level
acquiring such images. Moreover, it generates masks that representations, as the total striding of the ViT is 16. It should
facilitate the subsequent learning of pixel-level representations. be noted that the model in the pixel-level representation stage
 In the image blending stage, PiCO employs Poisson shares weights with the image classification stage.
blending to fuse industrial product images and defect images. Both CNN and ViT architectures play crucial roles in
Guided by the previous CAM, the defects are randomly pasted industrial applications. Consequently, we propose a pixelonto the product regions. Initially, the top 50% challenging level representation pretraining approach for both CNN
samples, denoted as S D , are selected from the defect images and ViT. In CNN architectures, which typically involve
in each batch based on the previous defect classification five downsampling operations in the spatial dimensions,
loss L CE (C D , gt D ). Subsequently, the defect CAM S D is removing a downsampling operation leads to a reduction in
normalized and binarized using a threshold of 0.5 to generate the receptive field for subsequent convolutional operations.
defect masks. The paste product locations are then randomly To tackle this issue, we employ dilated convolutions in each
chosen based on the normalized CAM probability S P . For convolutional layer following the removal of a downsampling
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

Fig. 3. Framework of PiCO. In image classification stage, both of industrial product images and defect images are used to image classification, and
obtain the categories of products as well as defects. In image blending stage, industrial product images and defect images are fused using CAM-guided
Poisson blending. In pixel-level representations stage, the blended images are sent into the shared weights dilated CNN or transformer to learn pixel-level
representations, optimized by the proposed hybrid triplet mining.

operation to effectively enlarge their receptive fields. For more
comprehensive details, please refer to the Deeplab [23]. On the
other hand, in the case of ViT, there are no downsampling
operations in the spatial dimensions, eliminating the need
to remove downsampling operations or employ dilated
convolutions to compensate for the receptive field.
 Then, PiCO optimizes the pixel-level representations by the
proposed hybrid triplet mining. That is, the distance of same
defects from different images is smaller than that of defects
and products. Formally, given the defective product features
FA,C and FB,C , we use the blended mask MC1 and MC2 to
split the features, respectively. Then, we constrain the product
feature R A , R B , and defect feature RC1 , RC2 with hybrid triplet
mining, represented as follows: Fig. 4. Illustration of industrial pixel-level representation. For the same
 industrial defect and two industrial products, we perform pixel-wise separation
 L tri1 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R A , RC1 ) + α]+ (4) in the deep feature space, extracting the product features R A and R B . The
 L tri2 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R B , RC1 ) + α]+ (5) defect features RC1 and RC2 of the same defect on the two products are then
 obtained. We use the hybrid triplet loss to ensure the consistency of RC1 and
 L tri3 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R A , RC2 ) + α]+ (6) RC2 features, while keeping them far apart from the R A and R B features.
 L tri4 = [d(RC1 , RC2 ) − d(R B , RC2 ) + α]+ (7)
where d(·, ·) is the L2 distance between features, and α is
the hyperparameter for triplet loss, which set to 1 by default. Furthermore, we obtain the defect-specific features, RC1 and
Thus, the hybrid triplet loss can be represented as RC2 , corresponding to the same defect across the two products.
 To ensure the consistency of these defect features, while
 L hybrid = λ1 · L tri1 + λ2 · L tri2 + λ3 · L tri3 + λ4 · L tri4 . (8)
 simultaneously maintaining their separation from the product
 In Fig. 4, we illustrate the process of pixel-level repre- features, we employ the hybrid triplet loss strategy. This
sentation. We adopt a pixel-wise separation approach in the loss function effectively preserves the similarity between RC1
deep feature space for the same industrial defect observed on and RC2 , reinforcing their alignment, while simultaneously
two different industrial products. This involves extracting the enforcing a substantial distance between them and the productdistinct product features, denoted as R A and R B , respectively. related features, R A and R B . By employing this approach,
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

we aim to effectively enhance the discriminative power of evaluating the annotated classes. Then, SewerML benchmark
the extracted features, enabling accurate classification and introduces F2CIW metrics to measure the performance using
differentiation of industrial defects on various products within class-importance weights (CIWs)
the deep feature space. PC
 F2c × CIWc
 F2CIW = c=1 PC (10)
E. Overall Pipeline c=1 CIWc

 The complete algorithm of PiCO is depicted in Algorithm 1. where CIWc and F2c are the CIW and F2-score for class c,
In each iteration, the model parameters are updated alter- respectively.
natively through classification and hybrid triplet mining. To assess the ability of the tested methods to handle the
The iterations involve the processes of image classification, absence of classes and avoid solely maximizing the F2CIW
image blending, and pixel-level representation. The product score by continuously predicting classes, SewerML benchmark
classification and defect classification contribute to the also utilizes the F1-score for normal pipes (F1normal ), where
learning of global and local representations, while the hybrid we set β = 1 to evaluate the performance of normal class.
triplet mining aids in acquiring pixel-level representations. The F2CIW computation excludes normal pipes as the normal
 It is worth noting that PiCO is a model-agnostic pretraining case lacks a CIW.
method that can be utilized for both CNN and ViT AUC stands for “Area under the ROC curve.” That is, AUC
models. By incorporating PiCO into the model pretraining measures the entire 2-D area underneath the entire ROC curve.
process, better feature representations can be obtained. 2) SewerML: dataset focuses on the multilabel defect
Rather than proposing a complex neural network architecture, classification problem and contains 1.3 million images
our approach focuses on enhancing the transferability of collected over a nine year period. The data are split into a
features through global and local feature learning in the preset training, validation, and test split, containing 1 million,
pretraining pipeline. This approach allows for significant 130k, and 130k images each [25]. The defect classification
performance improvements in downstream industrial tasks problem consists of 17 different classes as well as the implicit
without introducing additional model parameters, thereby normal class.
preserving computational efficiency. 3) MVTec-AD: dataset is a comprehensive, multiobject, multidefect industrial anomaly detection dataset with
 IV. E XPERIMENTS 15 classes. For each anomalous sample in the test set,
 the ground truth includes both image label and anomaly
 In this section, we will first introduce the datasets and segmentation.
implementation details. Then, we will conduct ablation studies 4) Implementation Details: We implement PiCO on Ind-2M
to validate the effectiveness of each main component of PiCO. dataset with 200 epoch.1 Following the ImageNet pretraining,
Finally, we will report the quantitative comparisons on several we randomly resize images with a ratio of [0.75, 1.25],
downstream industrial benchmarks. and crop the images into size of 224 × 224. Random
 horizontal flipping is used for data augmentation. Also,
A. Experimental Settings RandAugment is used for color jittering and geometry
 1) Dataset and Evaluation Metric: We study the effective- augmentation. For SewerML fine-tuning, we follow the data
ness of PiCO on the multilabel defect classification dataset, augmentation introduced in SewerML paper, i.e., resizing to
SewerML [15], and the downstream anomaly detection and 224 × 224, random horizontal flipping, as well as random
localization dataset, MVTec-AD [1]. For evaluation metric, color jittering. For the downstream task anomaly detection on
we use the F1normal score and F2CIW defect score following MvTec AD dataset, we follow the configuration of uniAD [30],
SewerML [15]. While on MVTec-AD dataset, we use AUC fixing the backbone model, and only training the transformer
score as evaluation metric for both of anomaly detection and decoder. The images are resized to 224 × 224 without data
anomaly localization. augmentation, and the anomaly location can be obtained by
 SewerML benchmark evaluates the model performance the difference between output features and the fixing backbone
using two metrics incorporating domain knowledge, based on features. To ensure a fair comparison between the pretraining
the Fβ metric [64] methods of ImageNet and SewerML, we have ensured that all
 Prc × Rcll hyperparameters in the experiments remain consistent.
 Fβ = 1 + β 2 × 2Prc
 
 (9)
 β + Rcll
 B. Ablation Studies
where Prc and Rcll are the precision and recall of the classifier,
respectively, and β is weighting of recall, such that the recall 1) Pretrained Dataset: In the present study, we aim to
β times more important that precision. explore the influence of utilizing different pretrained datasets
 False negatives in sewer inspections have greater economic for the purpose of industrial image representations. The
consequences than false positives. This is because false obtained experimental findings, as outlined in Table II,
negatives can result in undetected faulty pipes, whereas human effectively demonstrate that the adoption of the Ind-2M dataset
verification of predicted classes precedes any renovation 1 The epoch here is different from the common definition. We define one
decisions. Hence, to incorporate this domain knowledge into epoch as the maximum between the length of product images and the one of
the evaluation, SewerML benchmark sets β = 2 when defect images.
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

 TABLE II TABLE IV
 E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
 I MPACT OF P RETRAINED DATASET. W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON I MPACT OF P IXEL -L EVEL R EPRESENTATIONS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
 VARIOUS DATASET, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON ON VARIOUS P IXEL -L EVEL S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND
 S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

 TABLE V
 TABLE III
 E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
 E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE I MPACT OF THE WAY OF I MAGE B LENDING . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
 I MPACT OF C LASSIFICATION C ATEGORIES . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON ON VARIOUS WAYS OF I MAGE B LENDING ON I ND -2M, AND
 VARIOUS C ATEGORIES ON I ND -2M, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET
 S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

for pretraining purposes leads to significantly enhanced per- TABLE VI
formance when compared to alternative pretraining datasets, E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
 I MPACT OF D ILATED CNN. W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON VARIOUS
such as ImageNet and Sewer-ML. Notably, the model that P IXEL -L EVEL S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL
is pretrained on the Ind-2M dataset exhibits noteworthy ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET
improvements of 1.37% and 0.31% in relation to the F1normal
and F2CIW metrics, respectively, when compared to the model
that is pretrained on ImageNet. Furthermore, in terms of the
F1normal and F2CIW metrics, the model that is pretrained on
Ind-2M outperforms the model that is pretrained on Sewer-ML
by 2.67% and 1.02%, respectively. TABLE VII
 2) Classification Categories: In our study, we investigate E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-50 TO V ERIFY THE
 I MPACT OF H YBRID T RIPLET L OSS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL ON
the influence of classification categories on industrial image VARIOUS P IXEL -W ISE L OSS S ETTINGS ON I ND -2M, AND
representations, as presented in Table III. The experimental F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET
results reveal that the defect categories have a more significant
impact compared to the product categories. Specifically, when
both classification categories are utilized for pretraining, the
model demonstrates superior performance. More specifically,
the model pretrained with both product and defect categories
exhibits a significant improvement over the model pretrained
with product categories alone. This improvement is reflected in findings reveal that the model exhibits remarkable performance
the performance metrics F1normal and F2CIW , where the former in multilabel classification when trained using pixel-level
increases by 2.5% and the latter by 0.78%. This indicates supervision. Notably, the model trained with pixel-level
that incorporating both product and defect categories during supervision surpasses the performance of the model trained
pretraining enables the model to better capture the underlying without such supervision by 0.77% and 1.5% in terms
patterns and features associated with the industrial images. of F1normal and F2CIW , respectively. The results highlight
Furthermore, the model pretrained with both product and the significance of incorporating pixel-level information in
defect categories also outperforms the model pretrained with the training process, as it enables the model to capture
defect categories alone. The improvement is evident in the fine-grained details and spatial relationships within the
performance metrics F1normal and F2CIW , which increase by images. By leveraging pixel-level supervision, the model
1.46% and 0.73% respectively. This suggests that the inclusion becomes more adept at distinguishing subtle differences and
of product categories in addition to defect categories enhances accurately identifying various defects or anomalies present in
the model’s ability to discriminate between different types of industrial images. These findings underscore the importance
defects and accurately classify industrial images. Our findings of considering pixel-level representations when developing
highlight the importance of considering both product and models for industrial image analysis tasks.
defect categories in the pretraining phase of industrial image 4) Image Blending: In order to investigate the impact
analysis models. of different image blending techniques on industrial image
 3) Pixel-Level Representations: In this study, we explore representations, we conducted a comparative analysis as
the impact of pixel-level representations on industrial image presented in Table V. The evaluated blending methods
representations, as depicted in Table IV. The experimental include copy-paste, Poisson blending, and CAM-guided
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 TABLE VIII
 E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED TO V ERIFY THE E FFECTIVENESS
 OF PiCO ON VARIOUS BACKBONES . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL
 ON VARIOUS BACKBONES W ITH D IFFERENT P RETRAINED
 M ETHODS , AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
 S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET

Fig. 5. Curves of the variation of hyperparameter λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , and λ4 under
various settings. (a) Curves of the variation of hyperparameter λ1 . We compare
the performance curves of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under different
λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 1. (b) Curves
of the variation of hyperparameter λ2 . We compare the performance curves
of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under different λ1 hyperparameter settings, TABLE IX
while keeping λ1 = λ3 = λ4 = 1. (c) Curves of the variation of E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ViT-B TO C OMPARE THE
hyperparameter λ3 . We compare the performance curves of ResNet-50 P RETRAINED M ETHODS . W E P RETRAIN M ODEL W ITH VARIOUS
and VGG-16 under different λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping P RETRAINED M ETHODS , AND F INE -T UNE M ODEL ON
λ1 = λ2 = λ4 = 1. (d) Curves of the variation of hyperparameter S EWER ML VALIDATION S ET
λ4 . We compare the performance curves of ResNet-50 and VGG-16 under
different λ1 hyperparameter settings, while keeping λ1 = λ2 = λ3 = 1.

Poisson blending. Our experimental results demonstrate that
CAM-guided Poisson blending exhibits superior performance
compared to both direct copy-paste and Poisson blending
techniques. Specifically, the model pretrained with CAM- entropy loss for pixel-level supervision, this approach faces
guided Poisson blending achieves notable improvements over challenges in effectively distinguishing between intrinsic
the model pretrained with copy-paste in terms of F1normal defects in the product images and blended defects. To address
and F2CIW , with gains of 0.84% and 1.43%, respectively. this issue, we opted to utilize the triplet loss as an
Furthermore, the model pretrained with CAM-guided Poisson indirect means of supervising the pixel-level representations.
blending also outperforms the model pretrained with Poisson The experimental results demonstrate a significant drop in
blending, yielding enhancements of 0.19% and 0.03% in performance when employing the Softmax cross entropy loss
F1normal and F2CIW , respectively. These findings emphasize for supervision. This can be attributed to the inherent limitation
the significance of the image blending method in enhancing of classifying intrinsic defects as belonging to the normal
the performance of industrial image representations. The class. On the other hand, models pretrained with the hybrid
superiority of CAM-guided Poisson blending in comparison to triplet loss exhibit superior performance compared to those
alternative techniques underscores its potential for improving pretrained with the Softmax cross entropy loss, achieving
the quality and effectiveness of pretrained models in industrial improvements of 2.47% and 2.29% in terms of F1normal
image analysis tasks. and F2CIW scores, respectively. These findings highlight
 5) Dilated CNN: We also explore the impact of dilated the effectiveness of the hybrid triplet loss in enhancing
CNNs, as presented in Table VI. By employing dilated the representation learning process for industrial image
convolutions and eliminating the last striding operation in the analysis.
CNN architecture, the resulting features are able to preserve 7) Hyperparameter λ: As shown in Fig. 5, we compared
more fine-grained information. Our experiments demonstrate the various of the hyperparameter λ in loss weight under
that the utilization of dilated CNNs can significantly enhance different settings. First, as shown in Fig. 5(a), we fixed
the performance of pixel-level representations. Specifically, λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 1 and conducted experimental comparisons
we observe improvements of 0.85% and 1.62% in F1normal with different λ1 values for VGG-16 and ResNet-50. Through
and F2CIW , respectively, when employing dilated convolution the comparative experiments, we found that for VGG-16,
in the pretrained model. These findings underscore the the best performance accuracy can be obtained when λ1 =
effectiveness of dilated CNNs in capturing and leveraging 0.5, while for ResNet-50, λ1 = 1.0 yields the best results.
detailed information for industrial image analysis. Similarly, VGG-16 and ResNet-50 also have different optimal
 6) Pixel-Wise Loss: In order to evaluate the impact of hyperparameters for λ2 , λ3 , and λ4 . Therefore, different
the hybrid triplet loss on industrial image representations, networks may have different optimal hyperparameters. For
we conducted experiments as presented in Table VII. While simplicity, we maintained the setting of λ1 = λ2 = λ3 =
it may seem intuitive to directly employ the Softmax cross λ4 = 1 throughout all other experiments.
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

C. Quantitative Evaluation TABLE X
 E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-101 TO V ERIFY THE
 E FFECTIVENESS OF PiCO ON D OWNSTREAM I NDUSTRIAL TASK ,
 1) Backbones Comparison: In order to evaluate the A NOMALY D ETECTION . W E F IX THE M ODEL R EPRESENTATIONS
 AND U SE UNI AD FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION ON
performance of the PiCO and ImageNet pretrained models, MVT EC -AD DATASET
we conducted experiments using different backbones, namely
ResNet-18, ResNet-50, ResNet-101, VGG-16, MobileNetV3,
and ViT-B. The results of these experiments are summarized
in Table VIII. The findings indicate that the PiCO pretrained
model consistently outperforms the ImageNet pretrained
model across all backbones and evaluation metrics. This TABLE XI
suggests that PiCO has the ability to learn superior industrial E XPERIMENTS A RE C ONDUCTED W ITH ResN ET-101 TO V ERIFY
representations on the Sewer-ML dataset, regardless of the THE E FFECTIVENESS OF PiCO ON D OWNSTREAM I NDUSTRIAL
 TASK , A NOMALY L OCALIZATION . W E F IX THE M ODEL R EPRESEN -
specific backbone architecture employed. TATIONS AND U SE UNI AD FOR A NOMALY L OCALIZATION
 2) Comparison of Pretrained Methods: As presented in ON MVT EC -AD DATASET

Table IX, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation to
compare the performance of PiCO with other pretrained
methods, namely ImageNet, MAE, and MoCo v3. The
evaluation was performed on the Sewer-ML dataset, aiming to
assess the effectiveness of PiCO in learning industrial image
representations. The experimental results clearly demonstrate
 the utilization of PiCO in learning representations tailored
that PiCO surpasses the other pretrained methods in terms
 specifically for industrial anomaly detection tasks.
of performance. This suggests that PiCO has the ability
 4) MvTec AD Localization: In order to assess the effectiveto acquire superior representations for industrial images,
 ness of PiCO in the downstream task of anomaly localization,
surpassing the capabilities of other pretrained methods trained
 we conducted a comparative analysis, the results of which
on natural image datasets. Specifically, when compared to
 are presented in Table XI. The experimental findings clearly
ImageNet pretraining, PiCO achieves an improvement of
 demonstrate that the utilization of PiCO leads to a notable
0.58% and 1.5% in terms of F1normal and F2CIW scores,
 enhancement in the performance of the uniAD framework.
respectively. Moreover, in comparison to MAE pretraining,
 It is worth noting that the feature representations employed
PiCO exhibits enhancements of 0.47% and 1.79% in F1normal
 in uniAD remain fixed throughout the anomaly detection
and F2CIW scores, respectively. Lastly, when compared to
 process. However, we posit that PiCO has the capacity to
MoCo v3 pretraining, PiCO demonstrates improvements of
 acquire more refined representations specifically tailored for
0.15% and 1.38% in F1normal and F2CIW scores, respectively.
 industrial scenarios, surpassing the capabilities of ImageNet
These results provide strong evidence that PiCO outperforms
 pretrained models. Remarkably, when uniAD is pretrained
other pretrained methods across various evaluation metrics,
 with PiCO, it achieves a superior performance compared
highlighting its effectiveness in learning representations for
 to its counterpart pretrained with ImageNet, exhibiting an
industrial images.
 improvement of 1.57% in terms of the AUC metric. This
 In addition, we also compared the training efficiency
 substantial advancement further substantiates the efficacy of
of our pretraining method with other pretraining methods,
 PiCO in learning representations that are particularly wellas presented in Table IX. It can be observed that the training
 suited for the task of industrial anomaly detection.
duration of PiCO is slightly increased compared to ImageNet
pretraining, while the training efficiency is similar to that of the
MoCo v3 pretraining method. However, the MAE pretraining V. C ONCLUSION
method requires a larger number of epochs to achieve better In this article, we present the collection of a largepretraining results, resulting in significantly longer training scale industrial production dataset, namely Ind-2M, aimed
time compared to the PiCO pretraining method. at facilitating the pretraining of more effective industrial
 3) MvTec AD Detection: In Table X, we present a compara- image representations. Ind-2M is specifically curated from
tive analysis of PiCO’s performance in the downstream task of industrial scenarios, thereby emphasizing the relevance of
anomaly detection. The experimental results demonstrate that the dataset to pretraining models in the industrial domain.
PiCO exhibits the capability to enhance the performance of the Additionally, we introduce a novel pixel-level contrastive
uniAD method. Notably, the feature representations employed pretraining method called PiCO, which is designed to
in uniAD are pretrained using conventional recognition tasks, learn industrial image representations. PiCO enhances the
thereby prompting our belief that PiCO has the potential global industrial representation through industrial production
to acquire superior industrial representations in comparison classification, while simultaneously improving the local
to the ImageNet pretrained models. Remarkably, the uniAD industrial representation through a pixel-level self-supervised
model pretrained with PiCO surpasses its ImageNet-pretrained approach. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
counterpart by 1.62% in terms of the AUC metric, thereby of both Ind-2M and PiCO in enhancing industrial image
underscoring the substantial improvement achieved through representations. When pretrained on the Ind-2M dataset, PiCO
5009013 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

exhibits strong transferability to tasks such as multilabel defect [20] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition
classification, anomaly detection, and anomaly localization. challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, no. 3, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
 [21] B. Zhou and A. Khosla, “Learning deep features for discriminative
 localization,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las
 Vegas, NV, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 2921–2929.
 R EFERENCES
 [22] P. Pérez, M. Gangnet, and A. Blake, “Poisson image editing,” ACM
 [1] P. Bergmann, K. Batzner, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The Trans. Graph, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 313–318, 2003.
 MVTec anomaly detection dataset: A comprehensive real-world dataset [23] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille,
 for unsupervised anomaly detection,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 129, no. 4, “DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
 pp. 1038–1059, Apr. 2021. atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 [2] Y. He, K. Song, Q. Meng, and Y. Yan, “An end-to-end steel surface Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2018.
 defect detection approach via fusing multiple hierarchical features,” [24] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1493–1504, Apr. 2020, for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
 doi: 10.1109/TIM.2019.2915404. (ICLR), May 2021, pp. 3–7.
 [3] X. Cheng and J. Yu, “RetinaNet with difference channel attention [25] Y. Gao, J. Lin, J. Xie, and Z. Ning, “A real-time defect detection method
 and adaptively spatial feature fusion for steel surface defect detec- for digital signal processing of industrial inspection applications,” IEEE
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–11, 2021, doi: Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3450–3459, May 2021.
 10.1109/TIM.2020.3040485. [26] J. Cao, G. Yang, and X. Yang, “A pixel-level segmentation convolutional
 [4] J. Yu, X. Cheng, and Q. Li, “Surface defect detection of steel strips neural network based on deep feature fusion for surface defect
 based on anchor-free network with channel attention and bidirectional detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
 feature fusion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022, [27] H. Chen, Y. Du, Y. Fu, J. Zhu, and H. Zeng, “DCAM-Net: A rapid
 doi: 10.1109/TIM.2021.3136183. detection network for strip steel surface defects based on deformable
 [5] C.-C. Yeung and K.-M. Lam, “Efficient fused-attention model for convolution and attention mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 steel surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3238698.
 pp. 1–11, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3176239. [28] W. Luo, H. Yao, and W. Yu, “Normal reference attention and
 [6] Y. Chen, J. Pan, J. Lei, D. Zeng, Z. Wu, and C. Chen, “EEE- defective feature perception network for surface defect detec-
 Net: Efficient edge enhanced network for surface defect detection of tion,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi:
 glass,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3268658.
 10.1109/TIM.2023.3320746. [29] P. Lu, J. Jing, and Y. Huang, “MRD-Net: An effective CNN-based seg-
 [7] W. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, D. Xu, and T. Pan, “Development of mentation network for surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 machine vision system for off-line inspection of fine defects on glass Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–12, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3200361.
 screen surface,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–8, 2022, [30] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
 doi: 10.1109/TIM.2022.3190052. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
 [8] J. Chen, Y. Wen, Y. A. Nanehkaran, D. Zhang, and A. Zeb, “Multiscale [31] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT:
 attention networks for pavement defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,”
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–12, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3298391. 2023, arXiv:2308.15366.
 [9] J. Feng, Q. Li, Q. Xiao, and G. Wang, “A method of Rayleigh wave [32] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 combined with coil spatial pulse compression technique for crack defects block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi: Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
 10.1109/TIM.2023.3244850. [33] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
[10] W. Ding et al., “An ensemble of one-stage and two-stage detectors one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 approach for road damage detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
 (Big Data), Dec. 2022, pp. 6395–6400. [34] X. Li, J. Jing, J. Bao, P. Lu, Y. Xie, and Y. An, “OTB-AAE: Semi-
[11] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with supervised anomaly detection on industrial images based on adversarial
 prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. autoencoder with output-turn-back structure,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3300458. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3280508.
[12] K. Xiao, J. Cao, Z. Zeng, and W.-K. Ling, “Graph-based active [35] Y. Liu, X. Gao, J. Z. Wen, and H. Luo, “Unsupervised image anomaly
 learning with uncertainty and representativeness for industrial anomaly detection and localization in industry based on self-updated memory and
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14, 2023, doi: center clustering,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023,
 10.1109/TIM.2023.3279422. doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3271754.
[13] M. Xu, X. Zhou, X. Gao, W. He, and S. Niu, “Discriminative [36] C. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Tan, “MTHM: Self-supervised multitask
 feature learning framework with gradient preference for anomaly anomaly detection with hard example mining,” IEEE Trans. Instrum.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023, doi: Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–13, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2023.3276529.
 10.1109/TIM.2022.3228007. [37] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
[14] L. Yang, S. Song, J. Fan, B. Huo, E. Li, and Y. Liu, “An automatic image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 deep segmentation network for pixel-level welding defect detection,” (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp. 1–10, 2022. [38] J. Fang, B. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and M. Tang, “Explicit attention
[15] J. B. Haurum and T. B. Moeslund, “Sewer-ML: A multi-label sewer modeling for pedestrian attribute recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 defect classification dataset and benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Multimedia Expo. (ICME), Jul. 2023, pp. 2075–2080.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13451–13462. [39] Y. Zhu, B. Zhu, Y. Chen, and J. Wang, “Uncertainty-aware boundary
[16] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler, attention network for real-time semantic segmentation,” in Proc. Chin.
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Pattern Recognit. Comput. Vis. (PRCV). Cham, Switzerland:
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, Springer, 2023, pp. 388–400.
 pp. 14298–14308. [40] B. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “Progressive cognitive human
[17] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A parsing,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 32, no. 1, 2018,
 patch distribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and pp. 7607–7614.
 localization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Nov. 2020, [41] B. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Wang, S. Liu, B. Zhang, and M. Tang, “Fast deep
 pp. 475–489. matting for portrait animation on mobile phone,” in Proc. 25th ACM Int.
[18] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017, pp. 297–305.
 supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. [42] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 pp. 9664–9674. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735.
[19] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “SPot- [43] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He, “An empirical study of training selfthe-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and supervised vision transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 segmentation,” 2022, arXiv:2207.14315. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9620–9629.
ZHU et al.: PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE PRETRAINER FOR INDUSTRIAL IMAGE REPRESENTATION 5009013

[44] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked Bingke Zhu received the B.E. degree from the
 autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing,
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 16000–16009. China, in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree from
[45] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Beijing, in 2021.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [Online]. Available: He is currently an Assistant Professor of pathttp://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html tern recognition and intelligence systems with
[46] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
 in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vision Pattern Recognit., of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 Jun. 2021, pp. 15750–15758. Beijing. His current research interests include pattern
[47] Z. Xie et al., “SimMIM: A simple framework for masked image recognition and machine learning, image and video
 modeling,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. processing, semantic segmentation, and visual anomaly detection.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9643–9653.
[48] Tianchi. (2016). Aluminum Profile Dataset. [Online]. Available:
 https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=140666
[49] G. Kylberg. The Kylberg Texture Dataset V. 1.0. [Online]. Available:
 https://kylberg.org/kylberg-texture-dataset-v-1-0
[50] Kaggle. Severstal: Steel Defect Detection. Accessed: Dec. 2023. Yingying Chen received the B.S. degree from the
 [Online]. Available: https://kaggle.com/competitions/severstal-steel- Communication University of China, Beijing, China,
 defect-detection in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from the University
[51] Kaggle. (2007). Dagm 2007 Competition Dataset. [Online]. of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in 2018.
 Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mhskjelvareid/dagm-2007- She is currently an Associated Professor of
 competition-dataset-optical-inspection pattern recognition and intelligence systems with
[52] J. Gan, Q. Li, J. Wang, and H. Yu, “A hierarchical extractor-based the Foundation Model Research Center, Institute
 visual rail surface inspection system,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 17, no. 23, of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
 pp. 7935–7944, Dec. 2017. Beijing. Her current research interests include
[53] Kth-Tips Dataset. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available: pattern recognition and machine learning, image and
 https://www.csc.kth.se/cvap/databases/kth-tips/credits.html video processing, and intelligent video surveillance.
[54] PKU-Market-PCB. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://robotics.pkusz.edu.cn/resources/dataset/
[55] Aitex Fabric Image Database. Accessed: Dec. 2023. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nexuswho/aitex-fabric-image-database
[56] L. Pratt, J. Mattheus, and R. Klein, “A benchmark dataset for defect
 Ming Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 detection and classification in electroluminescence images of PV
 degree in computer science and engineering and
 modules using semantic segmentation,” Syst. Soft Comput., vol. 5,
 the M.S. degree in artificial intelligence from
 Dec. 2023, Art. no. 200048.
 Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 1984 and
[57] D. Tabernik, S. Šela, J. Skvarč, and D. Skočaj, “Segmentation-based
 1987, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in pattern
 deep-learning approach for surface-defect detection,” J. Intell. Manuf.,
 recognition and intelligent systems from the Chinese
 vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 759–776, May 2019.
 Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2002.
[58] S. Tang, F. He, X. Huang, and J. Yang, “Online PCB defect detector on
 He is currently a Professor with the Institute of
 a new PCB defect dataset,” 2019, arXiv:1902.06197.
 Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
[59] M. Maguire, S. Dorafshan, and R. Thomas. SDNET2018: A current research interests include computer vision
 Concrete Crack Image Dataset for Machine Learning Applica- and machine learning.
 tions. Accessed: Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: [Online]. Available:
 https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/all/48
[60] Tianchi. (2020). Smart Diagnosis of Cloth Flaw Dataset. [Online].
 Available: https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/dataDetail?dataId=79336
[61] X. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Detection
 of power line insulator defects using aerial images analyzed with Jinqiao Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
 convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst., degree from the Hebei University of Technology,
 vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1486–1498, Apr. 2020. Tianjin, China, in 2001, the M.S. degree from
[62] T. Schlagenhauf, M. Landwehr, and J. Fleischer, “Industrial machine Tianjin University, Tianjin, in 2004, and the
 tool component surface defect dataset,” 2021, arXiv:2103.13003. Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligence
[63] I. Andersen. (Oct. 2021). Tilda Fabric Dataset. [Online]. Available: systems from the National Laboratory of Pattern
 https://universe.roboflow.com/irvin-andersen/tilda-fabric Recognition, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
[64] C. J. van Rijsbergen, Information Retrieval. London, U.K.: Butterworth, China, in 2008.
 1979. He is currently a Professor with the National Lab-
[65] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for oratory of Pattern Recognition, Chinese Academy
 large-scale image recognition,” 2014, arXiv:1409.1556. of Sciences. His research interests include pattern
[66] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. recognition and machine learning, large multimodel model, and image and
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324. video analysis.