4744 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 Poison-Resilient Anomaly Detection: Mitigating
 Poisoning Attacks in Semi-Supervised Encrypted
 Traffic Anomaly Detection
 Zhangfa Wu , Huifang Li , Yekui Qian , Yi Hua , and Hongping Gan , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Semi-supervised encrypted traffic anomaly detection [3]. To detect anomalous behaviors in encrypted communicamodels in zero-positive scenarios are susceptible to human labeling tions, researchers employ diverse anomaly detection methods
errors or poisoning attacks, thereby compromising the stability and to identify data that exhibit significant deviations from the
reliability of the model. However, existing methods are insufficient
to address the challenge of reduced inter-class distance caused majority of samples. These approaches help mitigate potential
by poisoning attacks and the inability of reconstruction error to risks and abnormal behaviors in communication networks, enserve as a reliable detection criterion. To alleviate these challenges, suring the security of communication systems and safeguarding
a framework called Poison-Resistant Anomaly Detection (PRAD) user privacy. Given the scarcity of abnormal data in real-world
is proposed to mitigate poisoning attacks and enhance anomaly
 scenarios and the difficulty in obtaining labeled samples due
detection performance. Specifically, a feature encoding module
autoencoder-based is first designed that simultaneously leverages to their concealment by normal data points. Semi-supervised
the Amsgrad gradient descent algorithm and the warm-up strategy learning algorithms have emerged as a promising approach,
to enhance the feature extraction and generalization capabilities, which require only a limited amount of labeled data and reduced
thereby alleviating the reduction of inter-class distance. Addition- labor costs, offering a solid theoretical foundation for anomaly
ally, a feature analysis module is introduced to measure the impact
 detection in encrypted traffic.
of poisoning attacks on inter-class distance and the distribution
of reconstruction errors, which provides valuable prior informa- Semi-supervised anomaly detection methods can be catetion for subsequent anomaly detection tasks. Finally, an online gorized into traditional anomaly detection methods and Deep
clustering-based anomaly detection algorithm that utilizes the ex- Learning (DL) methods. Traditional anomaly detection methods
tracted features and their corresponding reconstruction errors are typically begin by modeling the statistical characteristics of
developed to address the issue of detection criteria. Experimental
 normal data and subsequently identify anomalous data points by
results on public benchmark datasets demonstrate that PRAD exhibits significantly superior poison-resilient capabilities compared detecting those that deviate significantly from this model. Exto other semi-supervised anomaly detection methods in anomaly amples of such methods include the density estimation method
detection tasks under poisoning attacks. LOF [4], the clustering method OC-SVM [5], probability-
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic, online clustering, poisoning based estimation methods such as ECOD [6], COPOD [7],
attack defense, semi-supervised anomaly detection. etc., as well as ensemble learning anomaly detection methods
 such as IForest [8], SUOD [9], LSCP [10], etc. In practical
 applications, traditional anomaly detection methods often face
 I. INTRODUCTION challenges in capturing intricate data patterns and sample depen-
 HE encrypted communication protocols, while safeguard- dencies, and are highly sensitive to noisy data. Consequently,
T ing user data privacy [1], pose challenges to conventional
anomaly detection techniques that operate on plaintext data [2],
 researchers gradually shifted their focus to DL-based anomaly
 detection methods, which typically employ deep neural networks to automatically learn complex feature representations of
 data, enabling the identification of abnormal data. In comparison
 Manuscript received 13 January 2024; revised 7 April 2024; accepted 29 April to traditional anomaly detection methods, DL-based methods
2024. Date of publication 10 May 2024; date of current version 16 August 2024.
This work was supported in part by the Innovation Workstation of State Key
 excel in effectively capturing data patterns and sample features,
Laboratory of Intelligent Gaming under Grant ZBKF-23-03, and in part by the leading to enhanced anomaly detection performance.
Basic Research Programs of Taicang under Grant TC2022JC19. Recommended DL-based anomaly detection methods can be categorized into
for acceptance by Dr. Y. Wu. (Corresponding author: Huifang Li.)
 Zhangfa Wu and Huifang Li are with the School of Electronic Informatwo types based on their training approaches, i.e., Based on
tion, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710129, China (e-mail: End-to-End learning (E2E) methods and based on Represenzhangfa_wu2021100697@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; Lhuifang@nwpu.edu.cn). tation Learning (RL) methods. The E2E-based methods entail
 Yekui Qian is with People’s Liberation Army Air Force Academy, Zhengzhou
450052, China (e-mail: qyk1129@163.com).
 directly mapping input data to output results, bypassing inter-
 Yi Hua is with the School of Aeronautics, Northwestern Polytechnical Uni- mediate processing stages like feature extraction and data transversity, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: yihua@mail.nwpu.edu.cn). formation [11]. In real-world scenarios, E2E-based methods fre-
 Hongping Gan is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical
University, Xi’an 710129, China (e-mail: ganhongping@nwpu.edu.cn).
 quently face significant susceptibility to noise or contaminated
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2024.3397719 data present in the training set. This susceptibility results in the

 2327-4697 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4745

 r Poisoning attacks substantially reduce the inter-class distance, hindering the model’s ability to accurately learn and
 represent normal traffic data. Consequently, this severely
 degrades the performance of anomaly detection.
 r Meticulously crafted poisoned samples exhibit similar distributions to normal samples, rendering the reconstruction
 error ineffective as a classification criterion for anomaly
 detection.

 A. Motivation and Contributions
 In this work, a framework called Poison-Resistant Anomaly
Fig. 1. Change trends of representation features under normal training and
poisoning attacks. (a) represents the data distribution in the original data space Detection (PRAD) is proposed to address the challenge of
and the process of filtering and injecting poisoned samples. (b) represents the detecting anomalies in encrypted traffic, which may arise from
change of spatial features in the hidden layer. The mathematical symbols C and poisoning attacks and lead to diminished inter-class distance and
C  represent the class centers of the original space and the hidden layer feature
space, respectively. The mathematical symbols E(Gn , Gm ) and Ẽ(Gn , Gm )
 unavailable reconstruction errors. PRAD can effectively allevirepresent the inter-class distance under normal training and the inter-class ate poisoning attacks and improve anomaly detection perfordistance under poisoning attack, respectively. mance. Specifically, we first design a feature encoding module
 based on a variant of Variational Recurrent Neural Network
 (VRNN) to address the inherent curse of dimensionality in
model overfitting to the training data and subsequently exhibit- high-dimensional traffic data. The Amsgrad gradient descent
ing subpar performance on the test set. Moreover, a notable limi- algorithm and warm-up strategy are employed to further entation of these methods is their lack of interpretability. RL-based hance PRAD’s feature extraction and generalization capabilanomaly detection methods offer several advantages, including ities, thereby mitigating the reduction of inter-class distance.
effective dimensionality reduction, efficient data storage, and Furthermore, a feature analysis module is designed to quantify
compatibility with conventional anomaly detection algorithms. the impact of poisoning attacks on inter-class distance and
RL-based anomaly detection methods can additionally provide reconstruction error distribution, which can provide valuable
interpretability, rendering them valuable in real-world applica- prior information for subsequent anomaly detection tasks. Fitions. Nevertheless, the presence of human labeling errors or nally, we design an anomaly detection algorithm that employs
data poisoning attacks significantly restricts the applicability of online clustering, which leverages the extracted features and
RL-based semi-supervised anomaly detection algorithms [12]. their associated reconstruction errors. This proposed algorithm
In summary, the E2E-based methods offer a direct mapping performs clustering on the extracted features using a Gaussian
approach but are susceptible to issues like overfitting and data Mixture Model (GMM) and assigns labels to distinct clusters
poisoning attacks. Conversely, RL-based methods provide the based on the corresponding reconstruction errors.
advantages of dimensionality reduction and interpretability but The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as
are also limited by the impact of human labeling errors and data follows:
poisoning attacks in real-world scenarios. r We propose a PRAD framework for detecting encrypted
 To address the limitations of the aforementioned methods, re- traffic anomalies in semi-supervised poisoning attack scesearchers have devised and implemented various improvements narios, which effectively leverages the interdependencies
and techniques aimed at mitigating poisoning attacks in anomaly between labeled samples and data priors for mitigating
detection problems. For instance, Bovenzia et al. [13] proposed poisoning attacks, leading to superior anomaly detection
an enhanced version of KitNet to address the issue of poisoning performance.
attacks in E2E-based learning. This enhancement aims to miti- r We introduce a feature extraction module that utilizes
gate the impact of poisoned data on the E2E-based learning pro- VRNN-based feature encoding, and subsequently utilize
cess. Regarding semi-supervised anomaly detection problems the Amsgrad gradient descent algorithm combined with a
RL-based, researchers often adopt poisoning defense strategies warm-up strategy to alleviate the reduction of inter-class
inspired by traditional anomaly detection algorithms [14], [15]. distance.
These defense strategies employ the proportion of outliers in r We propose feature-based inter-class distance similarity
the dataset to define the threshold of the decision function in the and intra-class reconstruction error distribution-based shift
fitting process. However, these strategies often prove inadequate evaluation for poisoning attack impact estimation.
when confronted with complex attack scenarios, particularly r We design an online clustering algorithm to efficiently
when adversaries construct poisoning attack samples with high detect anomalies in encrypted traffic, which leverages the
similarity to normal samples. Fig. 1 depicts the changes in hidden extracted features and their associated reconstruction erlayer features and reconstruction errors during normal training rors. By clustering the extracted features using a GMM
and under poisoning attacks. In summary, researchers have made and assigning labels to different clusters based on the
some progress to address the shortcomings of existing methods, reconstruction errors, anomalies in the encrypted traffic
but the following challenges still remain: can be efficiently identified.
4746 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 Experimental results demonstrate that PRAD outperforms outcomes [21], [22], [23]. With respect to the construction of
other RL-based semi-supervised anomaly detection algorithms poisoning samples, attacks can be categorized into label manipuin terms of AUCROC and AUCPR scores on both the CTU13 lation and data manipulation. Data manipulation attacks include
and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 datasets. optimization-based methods [24], [25] and training-based methods [26], [27], [28], [29]. The integrity and auditability require-
B. Organization ments imposed by network protocols on encrypted traffic data
 pose significant challenges to anomaly detection in poisoning
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
 attacks based on training, necessitating the predominant use of
briefly reviews related work. Section III describes the threat
 optimization-based methods. Bovenzi et al. [30] demonstrated
model and defense capabilities. Section IV presents the details
 the impact of poisoning attacks, specifically using label flipping,
of the proposed PRAD framework. Section V compares the
 on semi-supervised anomaly detection models.
test results of the PRAD framework and ablation experiments.
 2) Semi-Supervised Poisoning Attack Defense: Data poison-
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
 ing defense can be broadly categorized into traditional data poisoning defense methods and DL-based data poisoning defense
 II. RELATED WORKS methods. Traditional data poisoning defense methods emphasize
A. Semi-Supervised Traffic Anomaly Detection Algorithm preprocessing the data before model training to identify and
 eliminate anomalies, exemplified by data cleaning techniques
 Given the limited availability of labeled abnormal traffic
 employing anomaly detectors [14], [15]. In contrast, DL-based
data, most large-scale traffic anomaly detection tasks are carried
 data poisoning defense methods typically involve preprocessout under zero-positive settings. Traffic camouflage techniques
 ing the dataset before training, such as leveraging knowledge
(such as traffic shaping and link padding) and the “curse of diextracted from a small set of clean data to bolster robustmensionality” resulting from the inherently high dimensionality
 ness [31]. Optimization-based methods enhance the model’s
of traffic data can impede the training and prediction capabilities
 resilience [31], [32], [33], including dynamic model training [32]
of conventional models. DL-based anomaly detection methods
 and loss correction using a trusted small dataset [31]. Within
can effectively address this challenge and substantially enhance
 the context of Android malware detection, label-based semithe performance of anomaly detection in encrypted traffic scesupervised defense, cluster-based semi-supervised defense [34],
narios. Most E2E-based traffic anomaly detection methods leverand deep K-NN [33] defense have been proposed as effective
age neural networks to extract local or global features from traffic
 countermeasures to detect and eliminate poisoned samples.
data. These features are then used in scoring mechanisms or
 Poisoning attack defense methods are designed to mitigate
sample reconstruction errors to evaluate test samples and identhe impact of poisoning attacks on anomaly detection algotify anomalous data [11], [16], [17]. RL-based traffic anomaly
 rithms. However, traditional poisoning defense methods may
detection algorithms also employ neural networks to embed
 be insufficient in eliminating similar poisoned samples, while
the original data into low dimensions using manifold learning
 deep learning-based poisoning defense methods, while depentechniques. This low-dimensional feature representation is then
 dent on affected training samples, cannot ensure the complete
utilized in conjunction with traditional anomaly detection algoeradication of poisoned data. Existing methods also struggle
rithms for anomaly detection tasks [6], [7], [9], [10]. For exdue to limited data availability and similarities in poisoned data
ample, Cao et al. [12] proposed an anomaly detection algorithm
 patterns. The proposed PRAD framework adopts feature encodthat combines deep features extracted from Autoencoders (AEs)
 ing to enhance feature extraction and alleviate the reduction of
with traditional one-class classification. This approach leverages
 inter-class distance. An online clustering algorithm combined
the powerful feature learning capabilities of DL and the concept
 with reconstruction loss is used to effectively detect anomalies.
of manifold learning to transform the original high-dimensional
 PRAD demonstrates superior performance compared to other
data into a low-dimensional space. Subsequently, anomalies are
 methods in mitigating attacks and achieving superior anomaly
classified using an anomaly detection algorithm without altering
 detection performance.
the original data distribution.
 III. THREAT MODEL AND DEFENSE CAPABILITY
B. Semi-Supervised Anomaly Detection Poisoning Attacks and
Defense In this section, we present a threat model for the poisoning
 attack and analyze the advantages it provides to defenders. The
 1) Semi-Supervised Poisoning Attack: Poisoning attacks, as
 threat model includes the adversary’s goal, knowledge, and capaproposed by Barreno et al. [18], pose a threat to the training
 bilities in manipulating training data, as detailed in Section III-A.
phase of Machine Learning (ML) models. Adversaries aim to
 The strategies employed by defenders to effectively prevent
compromise the integrity and reliability of the classifier by
 poisoning attacks are significantly influenced by the information
poisoning the training data. Poisoning attacks employ various
 obtained from these threat models, as discussed in Section III-B.
techniques, such as modifying labels, injecting malicious samples, and manipulating data. These attacks can be categorized
 A. Goal, Knowledge and Capability of Adversary
into two types: untargeted attacks, which aim to degrade a
model’s overall performance [19], [20], and targeted attacks, The adversary’s goal is to undermine the model’s perforwhich aim to manipulate a model’s predictions for specific mance. Their level of knowledge regarding the target ML model
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4747

can vary. In a white-box attack [35], they possess direct access IV. ARCHITECTURE OF PRAD
to training parameters, while in a black-box attack [36], they can
 A. Overview of PRAD
obtain similar data through manipulation techniques. Consider
a victim training an anomaly detection algorithm on a limited An overview of PRAD is shown in Fig. 2. The PRAD comdataset, an adversary who can upload data to the Internet can ma- prises a front-end Data Preprocessing Module (DPM) and three
nipulate parts of the unlabeled dataset. To ensure data integrity primary back-end algorithm modules: Feature Encoding Modand auditability, adversaries may use label-flipping attacks and ule (FEM), Feature Analysis Module (FAM), and GMM-based
optimization-based data manipulation. online clustering Anomaly Detection Module (ADM). Specif-
 Formally, poisoning adversary A in the unlabeled dataset con- ically, FEM extracts the low-dimensional hidden layer feature
structs a set of poisoning examples SP , the input x∗ represents representation z and the reconstruction error e from the input
the adversary’s carefully crafted poisoning samples injected into sample x. FAM then analyzes the differences in features and
the training set, y ∗ = c(x∗ ) represents the desired false target reconstruction losses between normal and abnormal traffic data.
label, NP denotes the maximum number of poisoning samples Subsequently, ADM employs the GMM clustering algorithm to
that the adversary can inject, the neural network model is denoted cluster the hidden layer features z and assigns different clusters
by f , the training algorithm is represented by Ts and x is a based on the average reconstruction loss μeci . Therefore, PRAD
labeled subset of the original dataset X , there we have: captures feature dependencies by combining prior knowledge
 and clustering algorithms to efficiently detect traffic anomalies
 in poisoning attack scenarios.
 SP ← A (x∗ , y ∗ , NP , f, Ts , x) . (1)
 B. Feature Encoding Module
The adversary’s goal is to manipulate the victim’s model such The FEM is used to extract the hidden layer feature reprethat the resulting model f ← T s(SP ∪ X ) classifies the selected sentation z from the input data x to alleviate algorithmic comexample as the desired target, i.e., f (x∗ ) = y ∗ . A constraint plexity. The FEM is constructed using a variant of the VRNN
must be imposed to ensure that the number of poisoned samples architecture [38], which comprises three primary components:
|SP | ≤ P% × Dtrain does not surpass a specified proportion encoder, decoder, and variational lower bound. Specifically, the
P% of the total training data size Dtrain , where Dtrain = FEM employs encoder to extract the latent representation z from
X ∪ SP . In practice, the adversary is typically limited in the the original high-dimensional data x. Subsequently, decoder
amount of data they can poison, often less than 30% of the entire reconstructs the original data, providing the reconstruction error
training set [35], [36]. e and the reconstruction error residual ε. The variational lower
 In the experiment, malicious samples exhibiting a high de- bound is employed to evaluate the convergence of the algorithm.
gree of similarity to normal training samples were meticulously z, e, and ε jointly characterize the deviations of anomalous
selected for poisoning attacks to evade direct elimination dur- samples from the normal data distribution. ADM trained with
ing the data cleaning process [21], [37]. These samples were these three factors is expected to achieve enhanced generalizathen uniformly treated as normal samples through label-flipping tion capabilities on unseen data.
attacks and incorporated into training sessions. Additionally, 1) Encoder: Given N multivariate time series data of norconsidering that the poisoned samples are malicious samples mal traffic flow, a set of observations is represented by x =
very similar to normal data and that the amount of data limits {x(n) }Nn=1 . For each flow, x
 (n)
 = {xn1 , . . . , xnt , . . . , xnT } ∈
the intensity of the poisoning attack, the poisoning proportion in R , where T represents the length of the stream. To infer the
 T

the experiment was controlled to be between 0% ∼ 20%. This current data x(n) , we employ FEM for encoding, which also
is consistent with the poisoning proportion of less than 30% updates the hidden variable h at each time step t. Simultanereported in the literature. ously, the prior probability p(zt |x<t , z<t ) of zt is obtained.
 We input the hidden content of the previous time step ht−1
 into the prior network to generate the mean μpri,t and standard
 deviation σpri,t of the data distribution. Subsequently, we apply
B. Capability of Defender
 this to a random sampling of the standard normal distribution to
 The acquisition of target model knowledge and training data obtain subsequent output calculations and hidden state updates.
by defenders depends on the threat model. Deep-kNN [33] Therefore, we have:
assumes access to ground-truth labels, and Taheri et al. [34]
  2
 
proposed label-based semi-supervised defense and clustering- ztn ∼ N μpri,t , σpri,t ,
based semi-supervised defense. Similar to [34], PRAD operates
under the assumption that an adversary has access to trusted [μpri,t , σpri,t ] = ϕpri (ht−1 ) , (2)
training data and utilizes this access to acquire the distribution
of normal training data, thereby enabling the forging of poisoned where μpri,t and σpri,t represent the mean and standard devisamples that closely resemble legitimate data. The capabilities ation of the prior conditional probability, and ϕ represents the
of defenders may vary under different threat models, as defense parameters obtained by the encoder. By inputting data xnt into
may require access to corresponding resources. the encoder, we obtain our hidden layer feature representation
4748 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2. PRAD consists of four parts, i.e., (a) Data Preprocessing Module (DPM); (b) Feature Encoding Module (FEM); (c) Feature Analysis Module (FAM); and
(d) Anomaly Detection Module (ADM).

ztn through the encoder: required reconstruction residual εi as follows:
  2
 
 ztn |xnt ∼ N μenc , σenc , εi = e i − δ e , (8)
  2
 
 μenc , σenc = ϕenc (ht−1 , ϕx (xt )) . (3) where εi is represents the difference between the reconstruction
 error of the data set and the maximum reconstruction error
 2) Decoder: The decoder’s decoding process aims to recon- in the training set. Essentially, it indicates the direction of
struct the input data xnt . Its output depends not only on ztn but the input data. To sum up, z, e, and ε characterize the input
also on the hidden layer variable ht−1 , we have: samples. Notably, these three elements uniquely represent the
  2
  input samples. With the FEM module, typical anomalies with
 xnt |ztn ∼ N μdec,t , σdec,t ,
   large reconstruction errors can deviate significantly from normal
 2
 μdec,t , σdec,t = ϕdec (ϕz (zt ) , ht−1 ) ,
 n
 (4) samples.
where ϕx and ϕz are feedforward neural networks used to
 C. Feature Analysis Module
extract features from x(n) and z (n) , respectively. Finally, a GRU
neural network is employed to update ht : The purpose of FAM is to analyze the impact of poisoning
 attacks on the zero-positive training set. We analyze the impact
 ht = ϕGRU (xt , z t , ht−1 ) . (5) of the poisoned model on the unlabeled data set Dtest from two
 3) Variational Lower Bound: FEM employs VRNN to en- perspectives: (1) the changes in the feature space caused by the
 poisoned model, and (2) the changes in the distribution of the
hance the accuracy of prior probability prediction, thereby imreconstruction error loss. This analysis also provides a foundaproving data reconstruction and obtaining the correct hidden
layer representation z (n) . The Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) tion for subsequent ADM anomaly identification by providing
 a priori information. Consider a pure training set Dtrain and a
determines its lower bound, so our loss function Lloss is the 
 poisoned training set Dtrain . The training processes of the pure
negative of the optimal lower bound:
 training set and the poisoned training set can be simplified to
 
 
 T Ts (Dtrain ) and Ts (Dtrain ), respectively. The elements of the
Lloss=− E [log p (xt |z <t , x<t ) − KL (Nenc,t ||Npri,t )], unlabeled data set Dtest obtained by different FAM encoding
 t=1 processes f are f (z, eT , εT ) and f (z̃, ẽT , ε̃T ), respectively.
 (6) To quantify the impact of poisoning attacks on normal and
which the first term is to minimize the reconstruction error abnormal data in unlabeled sample sets, we propose two metrics,
log p(xt |z <t , x<t ), while the second term aims to make the i.e., feature-based inter-class distance similarity evaluation, and
posterior distribution Nenc,t closely approximate the prior dis- intra-class reconstruction error distribution-based shift evaluatribution Npri,t . tion.
 Leveraging FEM, the high-dimensional original data x is 1) Feature-Based Inter-Class Distance Similarity Evaluareconstructed into x and the hidden layer feature representation tion: The RL-based method currently employs a classificationz = {fT s (x)|z ∈ RM } (M N ). Additionally, another key based anomaly detection approach to tackle the dimensionality
element is obtained, which is the reconstruction error ei : challenge posed by the high-dimensional nature of traffic data.
 ei = x i − x  i , (7) However, the inter-class distance of the representation data in
 the unlabeled data set obtained through FEM decreases due
where · is the L2-norm, and ei also serves as an indicator to the influence of poisoning attacks on the training set. To
of anomalous samples. Thus, the set of all reconstruction errors quantify the changes in the feature space induced by model
is obtained: e = {e1 , · · · eN } ∈ RN . We select the maximum poisoning, we employ the ratio of the inter-class distance after
reconstruction error δe as the threshold to calculate our final poisoning to the inter-class distance obtained through normal
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4749

encoding as a metric for measuring similarity changes. Consider data classes in the unlabeled dataset Dtest . Let e = {en , em }
z = {z n ∈ Rn∗M , z m ∈ Rm∗M }, (n + m = NT ) as the unla- denote the unlabeled dataset Dtest reconstruction errors obbeled data set representation data obtained by pure encoding, tained by pure encoding, where n represents the number of
where z n represents the hidden layer representation of normal normal samples in the unlabeled data set and m represents the
samples and z m represents the hidden layer representation number of abnormal samples. Similarly, the unlabeled dataset
of abnormal samples, and M is the dimensionality of hidden Dtest reconstruction errors obtained by poisoned encoding can
layer features. Similarly, z̃ = {z̃ n ∈ Rn∗M , z̃ m ∈ Rm∗M } is be obtained: ẽ = {ẽn , ẽm }. The distribution of intra-class rethe unlabeled data set representation data obtained by poisoned construction errors can then be measured by calculating the mean
encoding. {η1 , · · · ηn , ηn+1 , · · · ηn+m } positive numbers, think μ and variance σ 2 :
of these as weights, or better yet, as “multiplication” of axes. Let
Cn (yn ) and Cm (ym ) denote the weighted sum of the distances
 
 n
 1
 n
between the positive class center yn and the positive data points μn = ei , 2
 σn = (ei − μn )2 , (13)
z n , and the weighted sum of the distances between the abnormal i=1
 n i=1
class center ym and the abnormal data points z m , respectively:
 
 m
 1 
 m

 
 n 
 n+m μm = ei , 2
 σm = (ei − μm )2 . (14)
 m i=1
 Cn (yn ) = ηi di (yn ), Cm (ym ) = ηi di (ym ), (9) i=1
 i=1 i=n+1

where di (y) = y − zi represents the Euclidean distance from By comparing the reconstruction error distributions of different
the class center y to zi . The objective is to identify a point y (or a data types in the unlabeled dataset Dtest obtained through pure
set of points) that minimizes the specified “cost function” C(y): encoding and poisoning encoding, we can quantify the impact
   of poisoning attacks on the reconstruction error distribution of
 Gn (z n , ηn ) = arg min Cn (yn ) , y ∈ RM , (10) various data types in the unlabeled dataset Dtest . It is noteworthy
   that under the influence of poisoning attacks, as the attack
 Gm (z m , ηm ) = arg min Cm (ym ) , y ∈ RM , (11)
 intensity increases, the average reconstruction loss distribution
where G is referred to as the weighted geometric median [39], of abnormal data in the unlabeled dataset becomes increaswhich employ the improved Weiszfeld algorithm [40] to solve ingly similar to the average reconstruction loss distribution of
this problem. Subsequently, the impact of the poisoning attack normal data, making the anomaly detection classification task
on the unlabeled data set Dtest can be assessed by calculating progressively more challenging. Our subsequent classification
the Euclidean distance E(Gn , Gm ) between the normal data hypothesis posits that the average reconstruction error distridistribution Gn and the distribution of poisoned data Gm , bution of abnormal data is higher than that of normal data.
which is obtained using the improved Weiszfeld algorithm. This In the entire unlabeled dataset, the number of abnormal data
allows us to compare the inter-class distance of the pure encoded samples is smaller than that of normal samples. Therefore, the
data E(Gn , Gm ) with the inter-class distance of the poisoned bias based on the intra-class reconstruction error distributionencoded data Ẽ(Gn , Gm ), thereby quantifying the impact of based shift evaluation also provides valuable prior information
poisoning attacks. Furthermore, to gain a clearer understanding for subsequent anomaly detection algorithms. The experimental
of the change in inter-class distance after surface poisoning, we results are analyzed in Section V-D2, which corroborate our
opt to measure similarity based on distance. hypothesis.
  (Gn , Gm )
 E
 Sim = , (12)
 E (Gn , Gm ) D. Abnormal Detection Module
where “Sim” represents the feature-based inter-class distance Leveraging the a priori information provided by FAM and the
“similarity” evaluation index. A smaller value indicates a smaller features encoded by FEM, we propose an ADM based on GMM
class distance, making the classification task of normal and online clustering. Specifically, the ADM employs an online
abnormal data more challenging. Section V-D1 presents the GMM clustering algorithm to cluster the encoded features z.
experimental analysis of feature space similarity evaluation for Subsequently, it assigns different clusters based on the average
unlabeled datasets under poisoning attacks. reconstruction loss μeci , thereby achieving anomaly detection.
 2) Intra-Class Reconstruction Error Distribution-Based The detailed process of the ADM module is illustrated in Fig. 3.
Shift Evaluation: Reconstruction errors are commonly em- Consider a set of J mixed multivariate Gaussian distribuployed as indicators for anomaly detection. However, anomaly tions, indexed by the parameter set Θ = {αj , ϑj }, where ϑj =
detection methods based on reconstruction errors become in- {μj , Σj } denote the parameters of the j-th Gaussian distrieffective when the training data is compromised by poisoning bution, where the mean vector is denoted by μj , Σj is the
attacks. In this work, we propose a strategy based on reconstruc- covariance matrix, and αj ∈ [0, 1] is the mixing probability.
tion error distribution shift evaluation to quantify the impact of Suppose that the encoded feature sets z ∈ RNT ∗M obtained by
poisoning attacks on unlabeled datasets Dtest . Specifically, we applying FEM to the original data x ∈ RNT ∗T are i.i.d according
measure the impact of training data poisoning by comparing the to the mixed probability density function. We estimate the pachanges in the reconstruction errors distribution across different rameters Θ using the maximum likelihood estimation procedure,
4750 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 1 
 NT
 Σj = γij (z i − μj ) (z i − μj )T , (20)
 Φij j=1

 where Φij = N T
 j=1 γij . E-step and M-step are calculated
 iteratively until the condition converges according to the
 likelihood function of the formula (16).
 Employing the online GMM clustering algorithm, J (J =
 2) clusters are obtained. Subsequently, the a priori information
 provided by the FAM is leveraged to identify the corresponding
 reconstruction loss for the feature representation in each cluster.
Fig. 3. The ADM consists of (a) encoded feature set; (b) reconstruction error
set; and (c) online GMM clustering algorithm. The last (d) is the cluster result The average reconstruction loss μecj of the two clusters is then
obtained by online GMM clustering. calculated, respectively:
 
 n1 
 n2
 μec1 = eci , μec2 = eci , (21)
as shown in (15), where the log-likelihood is given by (16): i=1 i=1

 ⎛ ⎞ where μec1 and μec2 represent the average reconstruction loss
    of the two clusters, respectively, and n1 and n2 represent the
 L (Θ|z) = p (z i |ϑj ) = ⎝ αj pj (z i |μj , Σj )⎠,
 amount of data contained in each cluster, respectively. The
 i∈NT j∈J
 average loss is compared with the a priori information provided
 (15)
 by FAM. If μec1 > μec2 , then the cluster corresponding to μec2
 ⎛ ⎞
   is considered a normal sample, and the cluster corresponding
 log (Θ|z) = log ⎝ αj pj (z i |μj , Σj )⎠ , (16) to μec1 is an abnormal sample. Conversely, if μec1 < μec2 , then
 i∈NT j∈J the cluster corresponding to μec1 is considered a normal sample,
 and the cluster corresponding to μec2 is an abnormal sample.
where Σj is a symmetric positive definite matrix, z i represents The pseudocode for the online clustering ADM is shown in
the observable elements of the i-th sample, pj (z i |μj , Σj ) rep- Algorithm 1.
resents the probability density of the j-th sample value corresponding to the j-th Gaussian component, and its mathematical E. Training Procedure
expression is as follows:
 A two-stage training strategy is employed to construct PRAD.
 1 T
 Σj−1 (z i −μj )
 In the first stage, pre-training is performed using only the recon-
 P (z i |μj , Σj ) = e−1/2(zi −μj ) . struction loss to train the feature encoding network. During this
 (2π)NT /2 |Σj |1/2
 (17) stage, all unlabeled training samples are utilized to pre-train
Given the structural complexity of (15), the optimal Θ cannot the FEM with the objective of obtaining the entire network for
be obtained by setting the derivative to zero. The Expectation subsequent stages. The fundamental encoding strategy involves
Maximization (EM) procedure [41] is a powerful method for leveraging Amsgrad stochastic gradient descent algorithm and
maximizing the log-likelihood function (16) and finding the the warm-up strategy to train the network, thereby mitigating
optimal parameters. The latter iteratively updates the param- the issue of shrinking inter-class distance caused by poisoning
eters of each Gaussian distribution. Therefore, the parame- attacks. In the second stage, FAM is employed to acquire prior
ter set of GMM consists of {αj , μj , Σj }, where 1 ≤ j ≤ J. knowledge of the data for the subsequent ADM module by utiliz-
And the parameters are estimated under the maximum likeli- ing the extracted features and their corresponding reconstruction
hood setting. Optimization is usually performed using the EM errors. The limited effectiveness of reconstruction error as a
algorithm, which is divided into two steps, i.e., E-step and sole classification criterion is addressed by utilizing a GMM to
M-step: cluster the extracted features. This approach involves assigning
 1) E-step: The posterior probability γij is calculated by the cluster labels based on the reconstruction error values, thereby
 equation, according to the given value of {αj , μj , Σj }: enhancing the classification process.

 αj p (z i |μj , Σj ) V. EXPERIMENTS
 γij = J
 . (18)
 j=1 αj p (z i |μj , Σj ) A. Dataset Description
 2) M-step: A new set of {αj , μj , Σj } can be obtained by In this part of the experiments, the performance of PRAD
 using the aforementioned γij : is assessed on two publicly available encrypted traffic anomaly
 detection datasets, i.e., CTU13 [42] and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-
 1 
 NT 2020 (DoH2020) [43]. Specifically, the CTU13 dataset consists
 Φij
 αj = , μj = γij z i , (19) of botnet traffic combined with normal and background traffic,
 NT Φij j=1
 encompassing 13 types of botnet traffic. The DoH2020 dataset
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4751

 were padded, followed by data normalization. Table I presents
 Algorithm 1: Online Clustering ADM.
 the details of the datasets, each dataset consists of a training
 Input: Encoded feature set set and a unlabeled data set. The training set includes normal
 z = {z 1 , z 2 , . . ., z N T } ∈ RNT ×M ; samples and carefully selected poisoned samples, while the
 The number of clusters J; Reconstruction errors set of z: unlabeled data set comprises a specific proportion of positive
 e ={e1 , e2 , . . ., eNT } ∈ RNT . samples and negative samples. Here, P% denotes the ratio of
 Output: {α1 , . . ., αJ }; {(μ1 , Σ1 ), . . ., (μJ , ΣJ )}; AD. poisoned data in the training set, and η represents the proportion
 1. Initialize the parameters of GMM according to z. of abnormal samples in the unlabeled data set.
 2. Loop Body:
 E-step: Calculate the posterior probability γij by (18)
 M-step: Re-estimate the parameters using data samples
 B. Performance Metrics
 weighted by the posterior probabilities using
 formulas (19) and (20). To gauge prediction performance, the AUCROC metric is
 3. Until the maximum iteration number rmax or the employed, which is particularly susceptible to poisoning attermination condition is reached. tacks. Additionally, AUCPR is utilized to account for sam-
 4. Output 1: The parameter sets of each GMM component ple imbalance in measuring prediction performance. AUCROC
 {(μ1 , Σ1 ), . . ., (μJ , ΣJ )} and {α1 , . . ., αJ }. represents the area under the receiver operating characteristic
 5. Count the number of samples in each cluster, and find curve, while AUCPR denotes the area under the precision-recall
 the corresponding reconstruction error in e. curve. AUCROC characterizes the relationship between the true
 6. Calculate the average reconstruction error of samples in positive rate and false positive rate, whereas AUCPR focuses on
 each cluster according to formula (21), recorded as μec1 the association between precision and recall. While AUCROC
 and μec1 , respectively. evaluates prediction performance for both normal and anomaly
 7. While μec1 = μec2 do categories, AUCPR emphasizes anomaly-centric performance.
 If μec1 > μec2 then It’s worth noting that both AUCROC and AUCPR range from 0
 c1 is an abnormal sample cluster; to 1, with higher values indicating superior performance.
 c2 is a normal sample cluster;
 else
 c1 is a normal sample cluster; C. Competitive Methods and Parameter Settings for PRAD
 c2 is an abnormal sample cluster; 1) Competitive Methods: PRAD is compared with nine
 end while methods: ECOD [6], COPOD [7], KDE [44], OCSVM [5],
 8. Output 2: AD LOF [4], iForest [8], LSCP [9], INNE [45], and SUOD [10].
 Among these methods, KDE, LOF, and IForest do not employ
 TABLE I poisoning attack suppression strategies, while the other six meth-
 DATASETS DETAILS ods all incorporate such strategies. All comparison algorithms
 are implemented using Python’s PyOD library, and the default
 parameters are utilized for all methods. Notably, OCSVM offers
 two poisoning suppression strategies (μ = 0.1 and u = 0.5).
 PRAD is implemented using PyTorch, and experiments are
 conducted using the PyTorch 2.0.0 framework via PyCharm
 2022.2.5 (Community Edition) on computers equipped with a
 GeForce RTX 3090 GPU and an Intel (R) Xeon (R) Silver 4216
 CPU.
 2) Parameter Settings: By default, the input encoder and
 prior encoding in PRAD’s FEM consist of two linear encodings and a layer of Batchnorm1D regularization. The decoder
 is similar, with a GRU neural network as the middle hidden
 layer. The activation function for the middle layer is ReLU,
facilitates the analysis, testing, and evaluation of DoH traffic while the final output layer employs the Sigmoid function as
in covert channels and tunnels, and can be utilized to assess its activation function. The input data dimension is 500, and
encrypted traffic anomaly detection algorithms. In our exper- the dimensionality of the encoded data is 128. It’s worth noting
iments, we carefully selected hundreds of thousands of data that varying the number of hidden layers in FEM (N = 4 by
points from the two datasets for further experimentation. Prior default) can impact the performance of PRAD. The proposed
to employing these datasets for anomaly detector evaluation, PRAD is trained for a total of 175 epochs with a batch size of
standard preprocessing procedures were applied to each dataset. 128, warm-up is 5 epochs. Validation results obtain at the end of
Firstly, the initial 500 bytes of each dataset’s individual data each training phase serve to assess the PRAD’s generalization
stream payload were extracted. Subsequently, excessively long capability and aid in deciding whether to retain the trained FEM.
data streams were truncated, and excessively short data streams The clustering parameter J is set to 2.
4752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 set is subjected to poisoning attacks, each component of the
 unlabeled dataset encoded by the poisoned FEM undergoes
 changes. Specifically, the average reconstruction error distribution of abnormal samples exhibits a continuous decrease, while
 the reconstruction error distribution of positive samples remains
 largely unchanged. More specifically, in the unlabeled sample
 sets of DOH2020 and CTU13, the average reconstruction error
 distribution of normal samples remains stable at approximately
 0.01 and 0.02, respectively. In contrast, the average reconstruc-
Fig. 4. Feature analysis result: (a) feature-based inter-class distance similarity tion error distribution of abnormal samples gradually decreases
evaluation for poisoning impact estimation; (b) intra-class reconstruction error and eventually stabilizes around 0.025 and 0.06, respectively.
distribution-based shift evaluation for poisoning attack impact estimation. Concurrently, the mean distribution of the entire unlabeled
 sample set also exhibits a gradual decrease, ultimately settling
 around 0.015 and 0.03, respectively. It is noteworthy that the
 mean reconstruction error of abnormal samples consistently ex-
D. Effect of Feature Analysis ceeds that of normal samples in both datasets, offering valuable
 1) Feature-Based Inter-Class Distance Similarity Evalua- prior information for the proposed ADM.
tion: In this part, we employ feature-based inter-class distance
similarity to assess the impact of poisoned FEM on unlabeled
data sets when the training set data is subject to poisoning E. Experiment Results With Competitive Methods
attacks. Specifically, the concept of similarity here quantifies In this part, we compare the proposed PRAD with other
the impact of poisoning attacks on the distance between the competing methods. The performance of different algorithms
center of normal samples and the centers of abnormal samples. on data without FEM is evaluated, particularly under varying
It is important to note that lower similarity values indicate a proportions of poisoning attacks. Subsequently, the performance
reduced distance between data points of different classes, posing of feature-encoded data using alternative comparison algorithms
significant challenges for subsequent anomaly detection tasks. is assessed under different degrees of poisoning attacks. PRAD
Fig. 4(a) illustrates that as the intensity of poisoning attacks in the is adopted as a baseline for anomaly detection on poisoned
training set increases, the impact of poisoning attacks intensifies, data, addressing the semi-supervised anomaly detection problem
leading to a continuous decrease in the center distance between trained on the poisoned data in the training set. Comparing the
positive samples and abnormal samples in the unlabeled data set. results in Table II, it is evident that traditional anomaly detection
The DOH2020 experiences the most significant impact, with the algorithms without RL exhibit satisfactory performance on two
distance between the centers of positive samples and abnormal metrics when faced with data poisoning attacks. However, due
samples reduced to only 31% of the original class distance. to the high dimensionality of data attributes, the training cost of
Similarly, in the CTU13, the distance between normal samples these algorithms becomes prohibitively high. Conversely, when
and abnormal samples is reduced to approximately 56% of the utilizing RL-based solutions, traditional anomaly detection aloriginal class distance. The feature-based inter-class distance gorithms struggle in the presence of data poisoning attacks.
similarity evaluation demonstrates that the impact of poisoning As the intensity of poisoning attacks escalates, the inter-class
attacks on the training set leads to a continuous reduction in the distance between normal and abnormal samples progressively
class distance of positive anomaly data in the unlabeled dataset, diminishes, leading to the failure of traditional anomaly detecwhich poses significant challenges for subsequent anomaly de- tion algorithms, especially on the CTU13. The average highest
tection tasks. AUCROC and AUCPR scores across all compared algorithms
 2) Intra-Class Reconstruction Error Distribution-Based on the DoH2020 and CTU13 are 0.821 and 0.533, respectively.
Shift Evaluation: In this part, we employ shift evaluation based Undoubtedly, this poses a significant challenge for the anomaly
on intra-class reconstruction error distribution to quantify the detection task. In comparison to previous anomaly detection
impact of the poisoned FEM module on the reconstruction error algorithms, the proposed PRAD demonstrates superior robustdistribution of positive anomaly samples in the unlabeled data ness against poisoning attacks. Firstly, PRAD maintains excelset when the training set is compromised by poisoning attacks. lent performance levels even without data poisoning attacks.
Fig. 4(b) presents error bar plots depicting the reconstruction Moreover, as the intensity of data poisoning attacks increases,
errors for different components of the unlabeled samples in the PRAD exhibits remarkable resilience in the face of decreasing
DOH2020 and CTU13. As evident from the Fig. 4(b), when inter-class distance. With the increasing proportion of poisoned
FEM is not affected by poisoning, the reconstruction errors data, the anomaly detection indicators AUCROC and AUCPR
for normal samples and abnormal samples in the DOH2020 scores stabilize above 0.980 and 0.986, respectively. Imporunlabeled dataset are 0.01 and 0.1, respectively, with an overall tantly, the PRAD emerges as the frontrunner in the presence of
unlabeled dataset error of 0.025. Similarly, in the absence of various levels of data attack intensity. Additionally, the average
poisoning attacks on FEM, the reconstruction errors in CTU13 AUCROC and AUCPR scores across the two validation datasets
are 0.02, 0.1, and 0.04 for normal samples, abnormal samples, reach an astonishing 0.995 and 0.996, respectively. Thus, PRAD
and the entire unlabeled dataset, respectively. When the training achieves the highest average performance among all competing
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4753

 TABLE II
 AUCROC AND AUCPR OF PRAD AND COMPARISON ALGORITHMS UNDER POISONING INTENSITY OF 0% ∼ 20%

Fig. 5. Clustering results of CTU13 and DoH2020 under different poisoning attack intensities.

approaches. Fig. 5 illustrates the clustering effect of PRAD on selecting VRNN as FEM within the PRAD framework. For
the CTU13 and DoH2020. In the absence of data poisoning comparison, we assess the performance of AE and VAE using
attacks, the inter-class distance between positive and negative the same experimental setup as the VRNN FEM. Table III
data consistently exhibits a clear separation. However, as the presents the experimental results of the nine comparison algointensity of data poisoning attacks gradually intensifies, the dis- rithms. When AE and VAE are employed as FEM and are not
tance between classes gradually diminishes, causing abnormal subjected to data poisoning attacks, their subsequent anomaly
data points to move closer to normal data points. detection performance surpasses that of traditional anomaly detection algorithms, as evident from Table III. Furthermore, their
F. Ablative Analysis simple architecture and low computational complexity make
 them suitable options, especially when handling low-intensity
 1) The Effects of Different Encoding Strategies: We use data poisoning attacks. This flexibility enables the FEM to be
different encoding strategies to demonstrate the rationality of seamlessly integrated as a plug-and-play component. However,
4754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF PERFORMANCE BETWEEN DIFFERENT COMPARISON ALGORITHMS

as the severity of poisoning attacks intensifies, particularly when
the poisoning rate surpasses 10%, the anomaly detection performance on the CTU13 degrades significantly when AE or
VAE is used as the FEM. Specifically, the AUCROC scores
undergoes a steep decline, even falling below that of certain
comparison algorithms. Additionally, the AUCPR scores also
drops to 0.892. Although AE and VAE still surpass traditional
anomaly detection algorithms as the intensity of data poisoning
attacks increases, their overall performance falls short of that
achieved by employing VRNN as the FEM, as indicated by
the average results. These observations validate our choice of Fig. 6. The impact of Amsgrad backpropagation algorithm on anomaly deusing VRNN as the FEM in our experiments. Despite its higher tection results.
complexity compared to AE and VAE, VRNN exhibits superior
experimental performance, particularly when confronted with
the increasing intensity of data poisoning attacks.
 2) Effect of Amsgrad Backpropagation Algorithm on Poison- algorithm, even a moderately intensified poisoning attack results
ing Defense: We investigate the impact of incorporating the in a significant decline in performance across the entire CTU13.
Amsgrad backpropagation algorithm during FEM training on In contrast, on the DoH2020, as the intensity of the poisoning
the overall experimental results. Fig. 6 presents the experimental attack escalates, its performance experiences a gradual decline
results assessed using the AUCROC and AUCPR scores. An before eventually stabilizing. It is noteworthy that the impact
analysis of the AUCROC scores reveals that employing the on the results for the CTU13 is markedly different. As the in-
Amsgrad backpropagation algorithm during FEM training leads tensity of poisoning attacks increases, utilizing the conventional
to noticeable variations in the resulting performance, partic- AdamW algorithm leads to a sharp decrease in the AUCROC
ularly on the CTU13. When using the conventional AdamW and AUCPR scores on the CTU13, causing them to drop to
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4755

Fig. 7. The impact of poisoning attack intensity and data imbalance on anomaly detection performance: From left to right, the results of DoH2020 and CTU13
affected by different poisoning attack intensity and different data imbalance on the two indicators of AUCROC and AUCPR.

approximately 0.75. This substantial decline results in a notable TABLE IV
 TIME COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS OF PRAD AND COMPETITIVE ALGORITHMS
increase in false positives and false negatives. In summary, integrating the Amsgrad algorithm during FEM training effectively
mitigates the issues caused by poisoning attacks in subsequent
anomaly detection tasks. It demonstrates significant benefits in
preserving performance stability and minimizing false positives
and false negatives.
 3) The Joint Effect of Data Imbalance and Poisoning Attacks:
We study the overall performance of PRAD in the context of
data poisoning attacks and data imbalance issues. The results
of these experiments are illustrated in Fig. 7. We investigate
the impact of increasing data poisoning attacks and the growing
problem of data imbalance. In the absence of data poisoning
attacks, PRAD demonstrates robust performance in the face and 13.1 times higher compared to VAE and AE, respectively.
of data imbalance problems. However, as the intensity of data However, the predicted Params of the proposed model is 2.12 M,
poisoning attacks increases and the proportion of abnormal which is around 3.3 times that of VAE and AE. Similarly, the
data decreases, PRAD’s performance on the DoH2020 dataset back end of PRAD employs a clustering ADM based on GMM.
remains remarkably resilient. The AUCROC scores gradually The back end’s training time complexity is O(n2 ), while the
decreases and stabilizes around 0.975. Meanwhile, the AUCPR prediction process time complexity is O(n), indicating that the
scores only experiences a significant decrease when the poison- training of the model’s front-end feature extraction and back-end
ing rate reaches 20%. It is important to note that the CTU13 clustering anomaly detection modules incurs the highest time
displays distinct characteristics. The impact of data imbalance complexity.
becomes more evident as the intensity of poisoning attacks
deepens. Particularly, when the poisoning rate is 20%, and the
abnormal data accounts for 1/6 of the overall test data, the VI. CONCLUSION
effect becomes most pronounced. Similarly, the AUCPR scores In this paper, we proposed PRAD, a semi-supervised enindicator exhibits a more prominent impact of data imbalance crypted traffic anomaly detection framework under poisoning
as the intensity of poisoning attacks intensifies. In conclusion, attack scenarios. Specifically, to solve the inter-class reduction
when confronted with data poisoning attacks, it is crucial to problem caused by poisoning attacks, we first propose a feature
ensure that the proportion of abnormal samples in the total encoding module based on VRNN variants, and then adopt the
dataset is no less than 20% when utilizing PRAD for anomaly Amsgrad gradient descent algorithm and warm-up strategy to
detection. alleviate this problem. In addition, FAM is also introduced to
 4) Time Complexity: In this part, we present a time complex- evaluate the impact of poisoning attacks on inter-class distances
ity evaluation of the proposed PRAD approach. To facilitate and analyze the distribution of reconstruction errors, providing
a comprehensive comparison, we have additionally included important prior information for subsequent anomaly detection
the training complexity analysis of competing algorithms in tasks. Finally, an online clustering algorithm is designed to
Table IV. In the table, n denotes the size of the input data, t repre- effectively detect anomalies in encrypted traffic, which utilizes
sents the number of trees, and ψ represents the subspace sample the extracted features and their associated reconstruction errors
size. We perform a time complexity analysis on each component to effectively identify anomalies in encrypted traffic. Extensive
of the model. Notably, since the front end of the model is based experiments have verified that PRAD can cope with anomaly
on the FEM of VRNN, we employ two indicators: Floating-point detection of encrypted traffic in poisoning attack scenarios. In
Operations (Flops) and Parameters (Params). The training Flops future work, we will address the issue of backdoor attacks in
and Params of the proposed model are approximately 11.9 times encrypted traffic.
4756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 5, SEPTEMBER/OCTOBER 2024

 REFERENCES [25] M. Al-Hawawreh, N. Moustafa, S. Garg, and M. S. Hossain, “Deep
 learning-enabled threat intelligence scheme in the Internet of Things
 [1] Z. Durumeric et al., “The security impact of HTTPS interception,” in Proc. networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2968–2981,
 24th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 1–14. Oct.–Dec. 2021.
 [2] G. D. L. T. Parra, P. Rad, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Implementation of deep [26] P. W. Koh, J. Steinhardt, and P. Liang, “Stronger data poisoning attacks
 packet inspection in smart grids and industrial Internet of Things: Chal- break data sanitization defenses,” Mach. Learn., vol. 111, no. 1, pp. 1–47,
 lenges and opportunities,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 135, pp. 32–46, 2022.
 2019. [27] F. Suya, S. Mahloujifar, A. Suri, D. Evans, and Y. Tian, “Model-targeted
 [3] J. Sherry, C. Lan, R. A. Popa, and S. Ratnasamy, “BlindBox: Deep packet poisoning attacks with provable convergence,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 inspection over encrypted traffic,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Special Int. Group Learn., 2021, pp. 10000–10010.
 Data Commun., 2015, pp. 213–226. [28] C. Zhu, W. R. Huang, H. Li, G. Taylor, C. Studer, and T. Goldstein,
 [4] H. Gao, B. Qiu, R. J. D. Barroso, W. Hussain, Y. Xu, and X. Wang, “Transferable clean-label poisoning attacks on deep neural nets,” in Proc.
 “TSMAE: A novel anomaly detection approach for Internet of Things time Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 7614–7623.
 series data using memory-augmented autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. [29] S. Li et al., “Hidden backdoors in human-centric language models,” in
 Eng., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 2978–2990, Sep./Oct. 2022. Proc. Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3123–3140.
 [5] J. Ahmed, H. H. Gharakheili, C. Russell, and V. Sivaraman, “Automatic [30] G. Bovenzi, A. Foggia, S. Santella, A. Testa, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 detection of DGA-enabled malware using SDN and traffic behavioral “Data poisoning attacks against autoencoder-based anomaly detection
 modeling,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2922–2939, models: A robustness analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2022,
 Jul./Aug. 2022. pp. 5427–5432.
 [6] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. Chen, “ECOD: Un- [31] Y. Li, J. Yang, Y. Song, L. Cao, J. Luo, and L.-J. Li, “Learning from
 supervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative distribution func- noisy labels with distillation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017,
 tions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12181–12193, pp. 1910–1918.
 Dec. 2023. [32] E. Malach and S. Shalev-Shwartz, “Decoupling” when to update”
 [7] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copula- from” how to update”,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 based outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 961–971.
 pp. 1118–1123. [33] N. Peri et al., “Deep k-NN defense against clean-label data poisoning
 [8] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly detection,” attacks,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 55–70.
 ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2012. [34] R. Taheri, R. Javidan, M. Shojafar, Z. Pooranian, A. Miri, and M. Conti,
 [9] Y. Zhao, Z. Nasrullah, M. K. Hryniewicki, and Z. Li, “LSCP: Locally “On defending against label flipping attacks on malware detection sysselective combination in parallel outlier ensembles,” in Proc. SIAM Int. tems,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, pp. 14781–14800, 2020.
 Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 585–593. [35] M. Jagielski, A. Oprea, B. Biggio, C. Liu, C. Nita-Rotaru, and B. Li,
[10] Y. Zhao et al., “SUOD: Accelerating large-scale unsupervised heteroge- “Manipulating machine learning: Poisoning attacks and countermeasures
 neous outlier detection,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Syst., vol. 3, pp. 463–478, for regression learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
 2021. pp. 19–35.
[11] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “KITSUNE: An [36] Z. Tian, L. Cui, J. Liang, and S. Yu, “A comprehensive survey on poisoning
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. attacks and countermeasures in machine learning,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 25th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1–35, 2022.
[12] V. L. Cao, M. Nicolau, and J. McDermott, “Learning neural representations [37] J. Chen, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, C. Wang, and L. Liu, “De-Pois: An
 for network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 49, no. 8, attack-agnostic defense against data poisoning attacks,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
 pp. 3074–3087, Aug. 2019. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3412–3425, 2021.
[13] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. [38] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “A
 Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments via recurrent latent variable model for sequential data,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,” Comput. Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 2980–2988.
 Secur., vol. 128, pp. 103–167, 2023. [39] N. Megiddo and K. J. Supowit, “On the complexity of some common geo-
[14] I. Diakonikolas, G. Kamath, D. Kane, J. Li, J. Steinhardt, and A. Stewart, metric location problems,” SIAM J. Comput., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 182–196,
 “Sever: A robust meta-algorithm for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. Int. 1984.
 Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 1596–1606. [40] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggregation for
[15] J. Steinhardt, P. W. W. Koh, and P. S. Liang, “Certified defenses for federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 1142–1154,
 data poisoning attacks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, 2022.
 pp. 3517–3529. [41] M. Rashid and J. A. Nanzer, “Online expectation-maximization based
[16] H. Lu, T. Wang, X. Xu, and T. Wang, “Cognitive memory-guided autoen- frequency and phase consensus in distributed phased arrays,” IEEE Trans.
 coder for effective intrusion detection in Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 3721–3735, Jun. 2023.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3358–3366, May 2022. [42] S. Garcia, M. Grill, J. Stiborek, and A. Zunino, “An empirical comparison
[17] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A. of botnet detection methods,” Comput. Secur., vol. 45, pp. 100–123, 2014.
 Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture [43] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari, “Detecfor discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” tion of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of encrypted traffic,” in
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., Int. Conf.
[18] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, R. Sears, A. D. Joseph, and J. D. Tygar, “Can Pervasive Intell. Comput., Int. Conf. Cloud Big Data Comput., Int. Conf.
 machine learning be secure?,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Inf., Comput. Commun. Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr., 2020, pp. 63–70.
 Secur., 2006, pp. 16–25. [44] W. Hu, J. Gao, B. Li, O. Wu, J. Du, and S. Maybank, “Anomaly detection
[19] Y. Hua, F. Wan, H. Gan, Y. Zhang, and X. Qing, “Distributed estimation using local kernel density estimation and context-based regression,” IEEE
 with cross-verification under false data-injection attacks,” IEEE Trans. Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 218–233, Feb. 2020.
 Cybern., vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 5840–5853, Sep. 2023. [45] T. R. Bandaragoda, K. M. Ting, D. Albrecht, F. T. Liu, Y. Zhu, and
[20] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks J. R. Wells, “Isolation-based anomaly detection using nearest-neighbor
 to {Byzantine-Robust} federated learning,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. ensembles,” Comput. Intell., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 968–998, 2018.
 Symp., 2020, pp. 1605–1622.
[21] P. Zhao et al., “Garbage in, garbage out: Poisoning attacks disguised with
 Zhangfa Wu received the M.S. degree in electronic
 plausible mobility in data aggregation,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8,
 science and technology in 2020 from the School
 no. 3, pp. 2679–2693, Jul.–Sep. 2021.
 of Electronic Information Engineering, Northwest-
[22] Y. Liu et al., “Trojaning attack on neural networks,” in Proc. 25th Annu.
 ern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, where
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–17.
 he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
[23] A. Shafahi et al., “Poison frogs! targeted clean-label poisoning attacks
 electronic science and technology with the School
 on neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018,
 of Electronic Information Engineering. His research
 pp. 151–178.
 interests include anomaly detection, network security,
[24] W. R. Huang, J. Geiping, L. Fowl, G. Taylor, and T. Goldstein, “MetaPoideep learning, signal processing, and image processson: Practical general-purpose clean-label data poisoning,” in Proc. Adv.
 ing.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 12080–12091.
WU et al.: POISON-RESILIENT ANOMALY DETECTION: MITIGATING POISONING ATTACKS 4757

 Huifang Li received the Ph.D degree from North- Yi Hua received the M.S. degree in signal and inwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in formation processing from the School of Electronic
 2004. From 2010 to 2011, he was with the Univer- and Information Engineering, Southwest University,
 sity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA, as a Chongqing, China, in 2020. He is currently working
 Visiting Scholar sponsored by the China Scholarship toward the Ph.D. degree in aerospace science and
 Council. He is currently a Professor with the School technology with the School of Aeronautics, Northof Electronic Information, Northwestern Polytechni- western Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China. From
 cal University. His research interests include deep 2023, he is with the School of Electrical Engineering
 learning, network security, image processing, quan- and Computer Science, The University of Queenstum information processing, intelligent information land, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, as a joint training
 processing, multimedia information processing, and doctoral student under CSC scholarship. His research
measurement and control technology. interests include distributed signal processing, network security, image processing, robots, path planning, and information fusion of multiple aircraft.

 Hongping Gan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D
 degree in communication and information engineering from the State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian
 Yekui Qian was born in 1980 in Anqing, Anhui, University, Xi’an, China, in 2020. From 2018 to
 China. He received the Ph.D. degree from People’s 2019, he was with the School of Information Tech-
 Liberation Army University of Science and Tech- nology and Electrical Engineering, The University of
 nology, Beijing, China. He is currently a Professor Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia, as a Visiting
 with People’s Liberation Army Air Force Academy, Scholar sponsored by the China Scholarship Council.
 Zhengzhou, China. His research interests include net- He is currently an Associate Professor with the School
 work measurement, vulnerability mining, deep learn- of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
 ing, and network security. Xi’an. His research interests include deep learning,
 compressive sensing, image processing, PolSAR ship detection, and network
 security.