IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 4851

 Practical Cyber Attack Detection With Continuous
 Temporal Graph in Dynamic Network System
 Guanghan Duan , Hongwu Lv , Huiqiang Wang , Guangsheng Feng , and Xiaoli Li , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Deep learning (DL) greatly enhances cyber anomaly data are driving the attack surface to inflate rapidly. Theredetection capabilities through effective statistical network char- fore, the malicious behaviors of cybercriminals can be easily
acteristic. However, previous methods have not fully addressed blended into these complex, massive, and (especially) multwo real-world scenario-driven challenges. 1) Frequent node
access and disconnection sourced from free-bounded 5G/B5G tisource interactive data, just like a needle in a haystack.
cyberspace introduce unfamiliar communication behavior pat- Network threats mixed with frequent interactions, i.e., phishterns, reducing the detection ability of the pre-trained DL model. ing campaigns, unsolicited cryptomining, ransomware, and
2) Low-frequency or sporadic communication behaviors lack information-stealing malware, are intensively becoming a
stable patterns, posing a challenge for existing AI-driven models, systemic challenge. Therefore, the detection of anomalous
including DL-based detection methods. To address these issues,
we propose a cyber anomaly detection framework based on network behaviors among massive interactive data plays an
Continuous Temporal Graph (CTG) neural network from a essential role in ensuring the sustainability and security of
new interaction-centered perspective. The proposed framework cyberspace.
refines the concrete information interaction between network Extensive research has been conducted to analyze and
entities into the CTG evolution process, thereby naturally incor- classify various types of abnormal cyber behaviors, e.g.,
porating new node access behaviors into feature extraction
on CTG neural network. We furthermore present a message expert systems, signature-based network behavior analysis
aggregation scheme on CTG with fusion of spatio-temporal approaches, modern machine learning (ML)-based methods
neighborhood, the actual time distribution and the historical and advanced deep neural network models. However, most
state, thus transforming communication into a more stable of these techniques focus on behavioral attributes rather
pattern for the learning of low-frequency interactions. Extensive than interactive processes. In reality, these methods based on
experiments on 4 novel datasets, including ToN-IoT, UNSWNB15,
CIC-Dark2020, J.P. Morgan payment, demonstrate that our behavioral feature representation often exhibit limited effecapproach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, particularly in tiveness due to some unavoidable factors, such as anonymity
detecting new access and low-frequency behaviors. technology and privacy protection. For instance, signature-
 Index Terms— Graph neural network, intrusion detection, based methods cannot cope with encrypted data [2], while
anomaly detection, semisupervised learning. the additional regulatory and privacy requirements within
 financial services usually disclose limited historical data and
 I. I NTRODUCTION few available features [3].

I T IS estimated that by the end of this year, 5.3 billion
 people and 29.3 billion devices will be interconnected by
prospering networking technologies such as Beyond Fifth-
 Furthermore, targeting better detection performance, other
 researchers are attempting to mine temporal and spatial information in cyberspace by employing graph-based learning
Generation (B5G) and the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) approaches, e.g., Anomal-E [4], a dynamic line graph [5],
[1]. Consequently, people, machines, and things are more a spatial-temporal graph convolutional network [2], a wrongclosely interacting than ever before. The rapid growth of doing monitor [6], and WTAGRAPH [7]. Each of these
networked devices and a significant increase in interactive graph-based methods contributes to achieving superior data
 Manuscript received 28 September 2023; revised 23 February 2024;
 representation capabilities. For the aforementioned successful
accepted 27 March 2024. Date of publication 4 April 2024; date of current works, the topological and temporal information encapsuversion 7 May 2024. This work was supported in part by the National lated in network user interactions reflects distinct behavioral
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62272126, in part by
the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities, in part by the
 characteristics. Understanding these characteristics can aid in
Special Project for Industrial Foundation Reconstruction and High Quality uncovering potential security risks. However, several chal-
Development of Manufacturing Industry by the Ministry of Industry and lenges persist in previous methods.
Information Technology under Grant TC220A04X-1, and in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang under Grant LH2021F001. The
 The first limitation is that the extraction of spatial-temporal
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it features is restricted to a fixed topological structure by the
for publication was Dr. Z. Berkay Celik. (Corresponding author: Hongwu Lv.) existing graph-based methods [4], [5], which hinders the
 Guanghan Duan, Hongwu Lv, Huiqiang Wang, and Guangsheng Feng are
with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineerdiscovery of anomalies from new connections and interacing University, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: lvhongwu@hrbeu.edu.cn). tions. Concretely, these methods generally treat the network
 Xiaoli Li is with the Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore topology as a consistent adjacency matrix during training
138632, and also with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.
 and testing, which means that new topological information is
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3385321 difficult to fully learn and express. However, we are facing a
 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4852 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

more complicated and unbounded cyber environment [29]; for and topological changes between network entity pairs. This
instance, attackers may use new virtual hosts to launch DDos enriched representation capability enhances the effectiveness
attacks, and scammers can utilize new accounts to commit of the detection model.
fraud. • We propose a message aggregation scheme based on
 The second challenge lies in the inefficiency of most spatiotemporal neighborhoods to mitigate the impact of lowanomaly detection methods when confronted with the non- frequency interactions. Our method systematically integrates
uniform distribution of network traffic traces across spatial and interaction behavior details, including contextual neighbortemporal domains. This inefficiency is particularly pronounced hood representations, temporal distributions, and historical
in handling low-frequency communication behavior among states. This comprehensive approach improves detection pernetwork hosts [30], [31]. For instance, statistics from the formance, particularly for occasional interactions.
Ton-IoT, CIC-Darknet, and CIC-IDS2018 datasets show that • Extensive experiments are conducted on 4 datasets
5% of all host pairs have contributed more than 50% of covering different interactive scenarios, including intrusion
the communication behaviors contained in all test sets, while detection in the IIoT [9] and the intranet [10], J.P. Morgan
the frequency of communication between the remaining 95% fraud detection in transactional networks [3] and darknet
of the host pairs is less than 20 times. Traditional deep traffic analysis [11]. The obtained results demonstrate that the
learning (DL) methods have difficulty mining stable statis- proposed method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
tical patterns from these low-frequency sporadic behaviors. approaches.
Additionally, graph-based detection methods such as those This paper is structured as follows. The related works are
of [2] and [5] assume that the spatial topology behind network reviewed in Section II. Section III provides the formal problem
communication is uniformly distributed in the time dimension definition. Section IV describes the employed methodology.
while incorporating spatial-temporal characteristics. Specifi- In Section V, extensive experiments and results are presented.
cally, these methods first extract the spatial information of Section VI is devoted to the conclusions and further work.
each graph snapshot and adopt sequence models to model
the sequence associations between these pieces of spatial II. R ELATED W ORK
information. In the face of these occasional interaction events, A. Abnormal Detection in Interactive Network Behavior
the sequence models adopted by [2] and [5] may not capture
 The detection and mitigation of abnormal interaction
effective information for numerous time slices.
 behaviors have long been prominent trends in the field of
 To address the above issues, we propose a novel adversarial
 cybersecurity, including anomaly detection and darknet analyinteraction behavior detection framework based on a continusis in network traffic. Different from early rule-based methods
ous temporal graph neural network (CTGNN) to capture both
 such as Snort [12], ML- and DL-based methods have been
the attribute and complex behavior information of network
 widely explored to better detect malicious cyber activities with
interactions. Specifically, the proposed framework refines the
concrete information interaction processes between each pair favorable scalability and high accuracy [13]. For instance,
of entities as corresponding interactive edges on a continuous Marteau [14] proposed a semisupervised anomaly detection
temporal graph (CTG) so that the behavior generated by approach based on binary trees with random partitioning. Bita new node access event can be naturally expressed as a ton and Shabtai [15] proposed an anomaly detection technique
CTG update. Furthermore, low-frequency behaviors are no based on PCA and K-means for detecting malicious TCP
longer processed in isolation but are incorporated into an packets, which can carry exploits aimed at a remote desktop
entire spatiotemporal neighborhood for message aggregation, server.
thus transforming them into a more stable pattern for model Compared with above mentioned ML-based methods, flexlearning. By adopting richer cyberspace behavior features ible deep architectures and end-to-end learning processes
during the interaction process, the characteristics of network enable DL-based methods to capture more sophisticated attack
interactions can be more effectively learned, analyzed and patterns. Yang et al. [16] developed a conditional variational
summarized to efficiently distinguish malicious behaviors. The autoencoder with extreme value theory to perform unknown
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. intrusion detection by leveraging flow-level features. Kravchik
 • We propose a cyberattack detection framework leveraging and Shabtai [17] examined a cyberattack detection method for
a CTG to address the challenge posed by fixed topologies industrial control systems based on 1D convolutional neural
in detecting newly connected entity behaviors. For the first networks (CNNs) and autoencoders. Moreover, Zhao et al. [8]
time, the proposed method refines anomaly detection from a presented an error-resilient recurrent neural network (RNN)
macroscopic topology level to a granular level, focusing on for network-induced phenomena, thereby effectively detectconcrete information interactions between pairs of network ing encrypted traffic. The above methods emphasize explicit
entities. This approach naturally accommodates new node attribute features, while implicit behavioral and topological
access behaviors within feature extraction. features are difficult to deal with.
 • To independently track the long-term historical status of
the interaction process, we develop a CTGNN model. Unlike B. Graph-Based Abnormal Interactive Detection
previous methods that primarily rely on sequence relationships Recently, several pioneering works have intensively
to capture historical information [8], our CTGNN model offers explored NIDSs based on GNNs to exploit the spatial infora more detailed analysis by incorporating information updates mation of actual networks to varying degrees. For instance,
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4853

Caville et al. [4] presented a static graph-based intrusion the previous DGNNs tend to aggregate high-frequency node
detection method that leverages edge features and a graph signals from nodes with more connections, making it challengtopology structure in a self-supervised manner. Moreover, ing to fully represent low-frequency or isolated behaviors.
Wang and Zhu [6] integrated the inter- (event-level) and
intra- (property-level) associations of behaviors into a unified III. P ROBLEM D EFINITION
graph for anomaly detection purposes. Furthermore, temporal A. Threat Model
information concerning topological structures has attracted
 Our abnormal cyber behavior analysis task involves detectresearchers’ attention. Among them, Cao et al. [2] mapped
 ing malicious network behaviors by understanding their
a data plane-programmable SDN to a graph and deployed a
 underlying interactive communication processes. Assuming
spatial-temporal graph convolutional network to detect DDoS
 an unbounded network environment, such as the Internet of
attack flows. Similarly, Duan et al. [5] converted network
 Things, 5G or a trading network, would allow possible entities
traffic into a series of line graphs and employed a dynamic line
 access and induce disconnections. Additionally, considering
GNN-based NIDS to achieve improved intrusion detection perthe diverse connection density characteristics of actual netformance. However, the underlying GNNs in the literature [2],
 works, some communication-intensive nodes possess frequent
[4], [5], [6] are all traditional static GNNs, which are limited
 interactions, while other inactive entities only send a small
to invariant topological structures. In other words, it is difficult
 amount of information. Malicious actors can exploit network
for these methods to satisfy actual network environments, such
 entities to carry out various malicious activities, including
as 5G NFV or 6G space-air-ground integrated networks, with
 DDoS attacks, brute-force attacks, money laundering, and
time-varying characteristics, unbounded cyber environments
 fraudulent transactions.
and diverse connection densities.
 We assume that security analysts are capable of recording
 the interactive behaviors between cyber entities. Taking the
C. Dynamic Graph Representation Methods intrusion detection scenario as an example, the network traffic
 interaction can be recorded in the network flow format, which
 Dynamic graph representation is an emerging DL paradigm is indexed by the following default five-tuple: <Source IP,
for learning evolving relationships among various entities Source Port, Destination IP, Destination
across temporal dimensions. In general, dynamic graphs Port, Protocol>. These recordings can represent the
can be broadly classified into two categories: discrete- protocol-related, size-related and time-related basic features
time dynamic graphs (DTDGs) and continuous-time dynamic of the interaction between the server host and the network
graphs (CTDGs). The evolution process of a DTDG can be switch. In addition to the attribute features in the traditional
described by a sequence of static graph snapshots sampled at network security analysis process, we combine the topology,
regularly spaced times. Actually, the spatiotemporal graph and interaction, and timing features between interactive events to
dynamic line graph representations used in the above anomaly introduce more information, which provides a new CTG-based
detection methods [2], [5] can be regarded as different types modeling paradigm for cyber anomaly detection.
of DTDGs.
 Different from a DTDG, a CTDG is modeled as a stream of
 B. Continuous Temporal Graph
serial events that occurs sequentially and has a finer temporal
granularity. Zuo et al. [18] mentioned that snapshot-based An interactive CTG is defined as a directed multigraph
methods (such as [2] and [5]) model temporal correlations as a G = (V, E, Event), where V represents an initial node set,
fixed topological structure, thus ignoring the fine-grained topo- and each e ∈ E denotes a communication link between pairs of
logical variation process. Reference [18] suggested utilizing nodes. Each event ∈ Event represents a bipartite interaction
the neighborhood formation process to describe the evolution event between nodes that corresponds to a network traffic flow
of a node and adopting a Hawkes process to generate the or transaction record. Since multiple interactions directed from
corresponding node representation. Ma et al. [19] proposed host u to host v are permitted in network G, we use different
 timestamps eventu,vt to indicate the interactions among the
a novel CTDGNN framework that continuously updates node
information by capturing the interaction information and the links (u, v). Moreover, when a new node i accesses the
time intervals of edges. TGAT [20] utilizes a graph-based network and communicates with node u, a corresponding interaction event eventi,ut is generated. Intuitively, the CTG can
temporal attention mechanism to capture the temporal neighborhood information of a node, where the positional encoding represent the interaction processes and temporal associations
of the attention mechanism is replaced by a temporal encoding. in a time-varying network. As shown in Fig. 1, each node
Based on that, Rossi et al. [21] added a memory module to denotes a host IP, while each interaction represents a specific
TGAT to trace the long-term dependencies of different nodes. netflow issued from the source host to the destination host.
 However, the above methods impose a certain upper limit In line with real network characteristics, multiple bidirectional
on abnormal cyber interaction detection performance. Specifi- events occur between nodes, each representing different netcally, typical DGNNs usually focus on node embedding-driven work interaction records.
tasks such as temporal link prediction or node classification,
whereas abnormal cyber interaction detection tasks aim at C. CTG-Based Interaction Representation and Classification
the link states and communications between network agents. With the above definition, the task of abnormal cyber
Moreover, the message aggregation mechanisms adopted by interaction detection is formally converted to a classification
4854 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 the proposed CTG does not consist of a fixed adjacency matrix.
 Referring to [19] and [20], the proposed CTG dynamically
 updates the topology structure and edge feature through the
 interaction relationships in chronological order. Particularly,
 in traffic interaction scenarios, the interaction relationship
 is determined by the following quadruple: <Source IP,
 Destination IP, Time, Index>.
 In traditional GNNs, the local neighborhoods of nodes
 are naturally defined by explicit edge connections. Notably,
Fig. 1. An example of the traffic temporal graph constructed from in the interactive CTG, both network topology information
UNSW-NB15 network traffic.
 determined by entities (such as IPs and transaction senders)
 and contextual relationships between interaction events in the
problem in the proposed CTG. Following the terminology time dimension are included. As shown in Figure 1, for event
 t t
 
in [22], we employ an encoder-decoder pair to resolve the u,v at time t, weoconsider
 enn n its 1-hopoo neighborhoods N eu,v =
 e , . . . , eu,n ∪ e1,v , . . . , en,v \ eu,v , . . . , eu,v , where
 0 0
 t− t−
  0 t−
interaction event representation learning and classification
problem, where the encoder maps all interaction events n u,1 o
to corresponding edge embeddings on the CTG. Formally, eu,1 , . . . , eu,n
 0 t− indicates the interaction events launched from
 n o
given a CTG G = (V, E, Event), the goal is to design a source node u, e1,v 0 , . . . , et−
 n,v stands for the interaction
temporal graph encoder f ω : x n×e → Rn×d (d ≪ e) that events received by destination node v, and eu,v
  0
 , . . . , eu,v
 t−
generates a d-dimensional representation for n input events is the set of historical events occurring between u and v.
with e-dimensional interaction features in G. Furthermore, Such neighborhood settings are mainly based on the following
a decoder takes interaction representations as inputs and out- considerations. If an interactive record is a malicious network
puts the prediction ŷ, where each component of ŷ represents behavior, then the initiator of the interaction may send malithe conditional probabilities of each class. Specifically, our cious messages to other entities. Similarly, other behaviors
tasks in this work include classifying interaction events as accepted by the interaction destination of this record may also
benign or malicious and further distinguishing between dif- be malicious behaviors. By defining the local neighborhoods of
ferent attack categories. The learned edge representations can interaction events, we can further design a corresponding mesbe utilized in different ways, including supervised learning, sage passing mechanism, thus fusing the temporal-topological
semisupervised learning, unsupervised clustering, and few- information between interaction events.
shot learning.

 B. Bochner Time Encoder
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY
 Sequence models such as long short-term memory (LSTM)
 As illustrated in Figure 2, the proposed CTGNN is comand gated recurrent units (GRUs) can mainly understand
posed of four components. Specifically, the temporal graph
 contextual relations, but it is difficult for them to model the
builder first constructs a sequence of temporal graphs from
 actual time distribution between interactive events. Therefore,
interaction records and determines the local event neighbora Bochner time encoder [23] is deployed to extract and express
hoods and event features. Next, the Bochner time encoder
 the potential periodicity and translation invariance of the actual
is deployed to map the time span to a d-dimensional vectime distribution among interactive events. Formally, suppose
tor. Subsequently, the interactive event update component
 we are given a function mapping 8 : T → Rd , where T
has the ability to trace and update long-term dependencies
 and Rd are the continuous time domain and a d−dimensional
across the corresponding events. The interaction event aggrevector space, respectively. Assume that for two time points
gation scheme fuses interaction behavior details including
 t1 , t2 ∈ T = [0, tmax ], the corresponding time kernel can
temporal-topological neighborhood information, the actual
 be defined as K (t1 , t2 ) := ⟨8 (t1 ) , 8 (t2 )⟩ and K (t1 , t2 ) =
time distribution and the historical evolution process of each
 ψ (t1 − t2 ) , ∀t1 , t2 ∈ T for some ψ : [−tmax , tmax ] → R.
event.
 We adopt the Bochner time encoder [23] to map the time
 interval to a d−dimensional vector.
A. Continuous Temporal Graph Construction According to Bochner's Theorem, this time kernel K could
 First, we transform the original interactive records into a be expressed as follows:
CTG, as exemplified in Figure 1. Taking the interactive traffic
 K (t1 , t2 ) = ψ (t1 , t2 )
in the UNSW-NB15 dataset as an example, all intercepted Z
traffic flow records are treated as interaction events between eiω(t1 −t2 ) p(ω)dω = Eω ξω (t1 ) ξω (t2 )∗ (1)
  
 =
corresponding source and destination hosts. With this setting, R
each node of the CTG represents a specific IP address. The where ξω (t) = eiωt . Since the probability measure p(ω) is a
edge features of the CTG are different network flow statistics real-valued function, the real part of equation 1 is denoted as:
that depend on the specific flow format and the exported flows,
such as the protocol, duration, number of incoming flow bytes, K (t1 , t2 ) = E ω [cos (ω (t1 − t2 ))]
and number of bytes per packet. It should be emphasized that = E ω [cos (ωt1 ) cos (ωt2 ) + sin (ωt1 ) sin (ωt2 )] (2)
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4855

 Fig. 2. The framework of the dynamic-graph-based NIDS model.

 The above expectation can be approximated by time span feature. Multiple choices could be considered for
 i.i.d the learnable function such as MLP, CNN, Transformers, our
Monte Carlo integral. Assuming ω1 , . . . , ωd ∼ p(ω),
theP time kernel K (t1 , t2 ) could be estimated as model selects MLP as the learnable function.
 d To effectively reduce the computational overhead, the
 i=1 (cos (ωi t1 ) cos (ωi t2 ) + sin (ωi t1 ) sin (ωi t2 )).
 1
d
Therefore, Bochner's theorem motivates the time feature historical state is updated with a batch cycle. We deploy
mapping t 7 → 8B an aggregation mechanism to handle the corresponding
 d (t) as:
 r responses when multiple events occur on a specific link. Let
 t1
 1 J (eu,v t ) denote the events on links (u, v) in a batch;
 , . . . , eu,v
 (cos (ω1 t) , sin (ω1 t) , . . . , cos (ωd t) , sin (ωd t)) (3)
 d the aggregation operation can be written as
In our follow-up design, we combine the Bochner time encoder t+
 r̄u,v t1
 = agg(ru,v , . . . , ru,v
 t
 ) (5)
and GRU to model the time distribution of interaction events
in a more fine-grained manner. Note that we select the average of all responses as the
 aggregation operation. It should be emphasized that the above
 aggregation operation is also performed on other interaction
C. Interactive Event Update Mechanism event sets of different links, such as (u, j) and (v, j). There-
 To understand differentiated interaction processes between after, the historical state h tu,v is updated by applying
different entities, we model their fine-grained behavioral patu,v = Update(h u,v , r̄u,v )
 h t+ t t+
 (6)
terns from an interaction perspective. Specifically, we propose
an interactive event update mechanism to independently track Here, we deploy a GRU as the update function. The new
and summarize the historical evolution of interaction events embedding of the historical state h t+
 u,v is refined by incorpobetween correspondin entities. The interactive event update rating historical information concerning interactive events, the
mechanism maintains a historical state list comprising a set of time distribution and context relationships.
vectors that summarizes the history of events between different
entities. Whenever a subsequent event occurs, its historical D. Interaction Event Contexts Aggregation
state will be updated by the GRU and Bochner time encoder.
 t Typically, GNNs generate node embeddings in a simple
 Formally, the historical state of an interaction event eu,v
 homogenous graph by aggregating neighborhood information
consists of a vector h tu,v with d−dimensional features summat . It should be emphasized and graph topology features for tasks such as node classifirizing the historical evolution of eu,v
 cation, node clustering, and link prediction. For the task of
that since the CTG is a directed graph, we allocate separate
 ′ t ′ . The historical state h t network attack detection, we employ an event aggregation
historical states h tv,u for ev,u u,v is
 t+ occurs, where t+ mechanism to fuse the neighborhood information of events
updated when the subsequent event eu,v
 t+ , and generate a embedding representation for each event at
denotes a time stamp after t. For each subsequent event eu,v (ℓ)
 any time t. Specifically, the temporal representation su,v (t) of
a response signal can be computed as follows:
 event eu,v at layer ℓ can be calculated as
 t
 t+
 = ResPonse h tu,v ∥8(t + − t)∥euv t+
 
 ru,v (4) 
 (ℓ−1) ′
 
 s̃(ℓ)
 u,v (t) = AGG (ℓ)
 si, j (t )∥8(t − t ′
 )
where ∥ indicates the concatenation operation, 8(·) represents  
 (ℓ) (ℓ)
the Bochner time encoder that captures the time distribution, su,v (t) = MLP (ℓ−1)
 su,v (t)∥s̃(ℓ)
 u,v (t) , (7)
 t+ denotes the feature vector of subsequent events. Addiand euv (ℓ−1)
tionally, ResPonse signifies learnable functions that merges the where si, j (t ′ ) represents the temporal representations of
 ′
 neighbor evnets (ei,t j ) ∈ N eu,v
 t at layer ℓ − 1, 8(t − t ′ )
 
current state, the compressed historical state, and the actual
4856 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

denotes the time span feature between neighbor evnets and Algorithm 1 The Overall Process of the Proposed Method
origin events. There are multiple implementations of the AGG 0 , . . . , et ; Cor-
 Input: Interaction events with time steps: e1,2 u,v
operation, including parameterized functions like MLP, Multi- responding feature matrices X ∈ R n×e
Head Attention, Informer, et al. In our practice, we adopt Set hyperparameters: Number of events in each batch, numa multi-head attention mechanism to model the impact of ber of events in the neighborhood of a specific interaction,
different neighbors on event embeddings. The AGG operation labeled data percentage, dropout probability
based on the multi-head attention can be computed as follows: Output: Prediction ŷ
   1: Divide interaction events into batches and establish a
 s̃(ℓ)
 u,v (t) = MultiHeadAttention
 (l)
 q (l) (t), K (l) (t), V (l) (t) CTG, initialize historical state to 0
 q (l) (t) = s(ℓ−1)
 u,v (t)∥8(0)
 2: while not converged do
 3: for each batch = 1 : Maxbatch do
 K (l) (t) = V (l) (t)
 4: Responses for the new events in the current batch
 (ℓ−1) (ℓ−1)
 h i
 t+ ← ResPonse(h t ∥8(t + − t)∥et+ )
 = su ′ ,v ′ (t1′ )∥8(t − t1′ ), . . . , su ′ ,v ′ (t1′ )∥8(t − t N′ ) ru,v u,v uv
 t1
 , . . . , ru,v
 t )
 1 1 N N
 5: Aggregate the response signals agg(ru,v
 (8)
 6: Obtain the updated historical state by aggregated
 signals and previous state h t+u,v ← Update(h u,v , r̄u,v )
 t t+
 (ℓ)
where the initial representation of each event s̃u,v (t) =
(eu,v
 t ∥h t ) exploits both the compressed historical state h t
 u,v u,v
 t . The query q (l) (t) denotes 7:  spatiotemporal neigh-
 Fuse the features from the local
and the current event feature eu,v (ℓ) (ℓ−1)
 
 borhood: s̃u,v (t) ← AGG(ℓ) si, j (t ′ )∥8(t − t ′ )
a reference event, and the keys K (l) (t) and values V (l) (t)
denote the information of its neighbors. In this case, we adopt 8: Compute final embeddings combining neighborhood
 (ℓ) (ℓ−1) (ℓ)
  
scaled dot-product attention to calculate the attention scores information su,v (t) ← MLP(ℓ) su,v (t)∥s̃u,v (t)
of different neighbor events and their temporal distribution, 9: Compute the classification loss L on the labeled data
although in principle, any other type of attention mechanism
can be utilized. Following the typical GNN message passing 10: Gradient descent and model parameter update
mechanism, an MLP aggregates the neighborhood information 11: end for
and the reference event representation. 12: end while
 13: return Prediction ŷ

E. Traffic Events Classifier
 To adapt topology-varying network environments, the pro- V. I MPLEMENTATION AND E VALUATION
posed CTGNN is designed to support any topology during
the test phase, including node connections and disconnections. A. Experimental Implementation and Setup
We initialize new memory structures for nodes and interaction 1) Datasets and Data Preparation: We choose 4 newly
events that are not observed during training. The embeddings published public datasets with spatial information to evaluate
of the new interaction events and their memory are calculated the proposed methods: ToN-IoT 2021 [9], UNSW-NB 15 [10],
by the trained components. During the training phase, all com- Darknet 2020 [11] and J.P. Morgan payments dataset [3].
putational components (i.e., all learnable functions) involved These 4 datasets cover different application scenarios and
in the embedding calculation are expected to contribute to follow different data distributions so that the performance of
the gradient update. Thus, the model first updates the events’ the model can be effectively tested. Specifically, the ToN-IoT
memories by compressing and aggregating the historical signal and the UNSW-NB 15 datasets were both created by the Cyber
at the beginning of each subbatch and then combines the Range Lab of UNSW Canberra. Among them, the ToN-IoT
updated memories and neighborhood features to infer the dataset was created by a realistic Industry 4.0 network environembeddings of the training events. As a result, the gradient ment incorporating a combination of normal traffic and various
update process depends on all computational components ever types of attack traffic. The UNSW-NB15 dataset is a hybrid
calculated. We summarize the training process of the proposed dataset consisting of authentic normal and attack records.
model in Algorithm 1. Its network packet volume is approximately 100 gigabytes,
 In addition, we adopt two different training strategies to test generating 2,540,044 observations with 47 features. The CICthe performance capabilities of our CTGNN. The difference Darknet2020 dataset is published by the Canadian Institute
between them is that the fully supervised process uses all event for Cybersecurity and consists of 134,348 benign samples and
labels from the training dataset, while the semisupervised 24,311 darknet samples with 78 features. The J.P. Morgan
process only utilizes parts of the training dataset labels. payment dataset contains a large variety of transaction types
We combine the representations of temporal events into a representing normal activities as well as abnormal/fraudulent
classification subnetwork that includes a softmax function and activities. The features of the payment data include the number
minimizes the cross-entropy loss for event classification tasks. of clients, time duration, etc.
Furthermore, in the evaluation phase, we calculate the class The data preparation phase consists of the following 2 steps.
probabilities of the test samples and compare them with their We first convert the network flows into a temporal graph as
actual labels to assess the performance of the model. described above, with each network flow corresponding to an
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4857

 TABLE I
 C HARACTERISTICS I NFORMATION OF A LL THE 4 DATASETS

event. Second, preserving the contextual information process, CVAE-EVT [16] synthesized conditional variational auto
we divide the interactive events into 3 groups in order of encoder and extreme value theory to boost known/unknown
their appearance. The first 80% of the interactive events are attack performance in a two-stage training. Since the author
treated as the training set, and the middle 5% and the last conducted unknown attack detection in the second stage,
15% are designated as the validation and test sets, respectively. we only compare with the first stage of the known attack
In combination with the subsequent data preparation process, detection.
we further present the details of these datasets in Table I. More TMG-GAN [32] is a generative adversarial network based
detailed information and the corresponding resource list can attack detection method to deal with imbalanced traffic disbe found in the website repository1234 . The operating environ- tribution. TMG-GAN first performs data augmentation for
ment for the experiments includes a 4.7-GHz i7-10710U CPU, tail attack categories. Subsequently, a three-layer dense DNN
16 GB of RAM, and the 64-bit Windows 10 operating system. classifier is used to identify different attack traffic.
Regarding the utilized software versions, we employ Python MTH-IDS [33] refers to a stacking ensemble model that
3.8, PyTorch 1.9.0, CUDA 11.1, and PyTorch Geometric 2.0.2. enhances multi-attack detection by integrating four tree-based
 2) Evaluation Metrics: Five classic metrics are adopted to algorithms including Decision Tree, Random Forest, Extra
evaluate the performance of our NIDS model, namely, the Trees, and XGBoost. In particular, MTH-IDS trains these clasaccuracy (ACC), recall (DR), false alarm rate, precision and sifiers for initial attack assessment and then uses an additional
F1 score [24] metrics. In the multiclassification experiment XGBoost classifier for final decision making.
conducted to identify different attack types, we use the macro- Anomal-E [4] leverages edge-level and topological infor-
DR and macro-F1 scores as evaluation indicators. They are mation to generate an efficient edge embedding representation
calculated as shown below: for anomaly detection.
 n
 1X
 Macro F1 = F1x (9)
 n B. Experimental Evaluation
 x=1
 n In this section, we evaluate the proposed CTGNN under
 1 X
 Macro DR = D Rx (10) different learning settings. We first present its overall
 n performance, including binary and multiclass classification
 x=1
where Macro F1 and Macro DR are the unweighted means performance, and conduct a detailed comparison between the
of the corresponding F1 and DR scores of different classes, CTGNN and the state-of-the-art baseline methods. Second,
respectively. It’s need to emphasize that macro metrics give we systematically evaluate the proposed model and baseline
equal importance to the majority and minority classes, allow- methods in the face of new access node behaviors as well
ing us to still obtain objective results on imbalanced datasets. as interactions with low frequency. Third, we perform addi-
 3) Baselines: We compare the performance of the proposed tional ablation experiments to evaluate the effectiveness and
method against the following detection methods: contributions of the key computational components used in
 CNN-BiLSTM [25] is a classical DL model that joins a our method. Subsequently, we evaluate the performance of
CNN and bidirectional LSTM to analyze network traffic. our work under a semisupervised setting with fewer label
 Stacked Random Forest [26] is an ensemble ML model participated.
that combines the predictions derived from multiple random 1) Intrusion Detection Scenarios: In the intrusion detection
forest algorithms for the intrusion detection task. We train the scenario, our main goals include (1) detecting anomalous
classifier based on the sklearn.ensemble and mlxtend.classifier network traffic in a network and (2) distinguishing different
modules following the setup developed in the literature [26]. malicious attacks in background traffic for network administrators to respond to. Table II summarizes the binary classification
 1 https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/toniot-datasets
 2 https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset
 performance achieved by the tested methods on the UNSW-
 3 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/darknet2020.html NB15 and ToN-IoT datasets. Overall, the proposed method
 4 https://www.jpmorgan.com/technology/artificial- exhibits remarkable performance in the binary intrusion detecintelligence/initiatives/synthetic-data/payments-data-for-fraud-detection tion scenario, with higher accuracy, a higher anomalous
4858 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE II
 B INARY C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT A LGORITHMS

behavior detection rate, and a lower false-positive rate. For of traffic behavior (i.e., Benign, Backdoor, DDoS, DoS,
example, the detection accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score mitm, ransomware, scanning, and Xss attacks). Fig. 3
and FAR of the proposed method on the ToN-IoT dataset are demonstrates that some of the password attacks in the
99.98%, 99.98%, 99.94%, 99.96% and 0.015%, respectively. TON-IoT dataset are misclassified as DoS and injection
 Several interesting implications can be derived from these attacks; this may be related to the similar context interacresults. Although binary classification is a fairly simple task, tion characteristics of these attack behaviors. We review the
the performance of traditional DL methods such as CNN- source IPs involved in the password attacks (192.168.1.31,
LSTM and CVAE-EVT on the TON-IoT dataset is not as 192.168.1.30), and these source IPs also perform DoS attacks
powerful as expected. We speculate that the relatively worse and injection attacks on parts of the same communication
performance achieved by the traditional DL methods on links. These findings demonstrate from another perspective
the TON-IoT dataset may be attributable to their copious that our method can effectively capture the context interaction
amounts of Boolean or string features, such as dns_query, characteristics of a network. On the UNSW-NB15 dataset,
ssl_version, etc. Furthermore, our proposed CTGNN and the proposed method and baseline methods exhibit worse
the Anomal-E model outperform all of the remaining baseline performance attributes due to the extremely unbalanced data
methods. This implies that by benefiting from implicit topolog- distribution. In this case, the macro-DR and macro-F1 scores
ical features and neighborhood information, GNN methods can of our method are 60.34% and 51.67%, respectively, which
achieve satisfactory performance in binary intrusion detection are also better than those of the other baselines. The proposed
scenarios. Moreover, by comparing the message aggregation methods still maintain good detection rates for each category.
results of the CTGNN to those of the traditional static GNN, 2) Encrypted Traffic Scenario: In the encrypted traffic claswe find that the former achieves better detection performance sification scenario, we mainly conduct binary classification
due to its finer-grained understanding of interaction behavior experiments. Figure 4 presents the performance of the prodetails. We further verify this point of view in the follow-up posed model and the remaining baseline methods. Although
multicategory intrusion detection scenario. the darknet dataset has 78-dimensional attribute features, some
 In the multicategory malicious attack recognition scenario, baseline methods do not perform as expected, especially the
more challenges are encountered, including a copious amounts static graph-based methods mentioned in the literature [4].
of attack categories and an extremely unbalanced data distri- Static graph-based models may not be a panacea for any
bution. We mainly focus on the following indicators in the scenario. We believe that the poor performance of the Anomalmulticlassification setting: the detection rate, the F1 value of E methods may be due to the way they model static graphs.
each category and the corresponding weighted macro value Anomal-E maps all interaction processes (IP: ports) to a
for the whole model. Tables III and IV summarize the detec- complete whole graph, but in encrypted traffic scenarios,
tion performance achieved by the proposed method and the anonymous technologies such as port forwarding, port ranbaseline methods on 16 categories of malicious behaviors in domization and tunneling protocols make it difficult for these
the TON-IoT and UNSW-NB15 datasets, respectively. Overall, methods to capture the spatial characteristics of interactive
the proposed method outperforms all baseline models on most behaviors. Repeated interaction patterns originating from the
attack categories. same machine, such as video services and chat services,
 On the ToN-IoT dataset, the proposed method achieves may produce unpredictable results for static graph modeling
detection rates and F1 scores exceeding 95% for 8 types methods. In contrast, the proposed model can predict the
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4859

 TABLE III
 W EIGHTED AND M ACRO M ETRIC R ESULTS O BTAINED ON THE T O N-I OT DATASET

 TABLE IV
 W EIGHTED AND M ACRO M ETRIC R ESULTS O BTAINED ON THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET

 Fig. 4. The performance achieved by the proposed and baseline methods on
 the CIC-Darknet 2020 dataset.

Fig. 3. Confusion matrix of the multiclass classification results obtained on temporal graph-based models outperform static graph-based
the Ton-IoT 2021 dataset.
 models, indicating the power of a finer-grained understanding
 of interaction behavior details.
 3) Fraud Payment Detection Scenario: In fraud detection
141,481 requests of 28,296 testing interaction records in the datasets, we are faced with extremely uneven data distributions
CIC-Darknet dataset with an accuracy of 99.72%, a detection and quite a few available data features. Fig. 5 shows the
ratio of 98.99%, a precision level of 98.00%, an F1 score of fraud detection results of the proposed model and the baseline
97.18%, and an FAR of 1.01%. It becomes evident that our methods. Notably, the CTGNN consistently outperforms all
4860 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Anomal-E detects 2 of the 4 types of attacks, while our
 proposed method detects 3 categories and achieves higher DR
 and F1 values. On CIC-Darknet2020, facing the encrypted
 traffic generated by the new access IP, SRF’s classification
 DR and F1 score drop by 12.78% and 11.49%, respectively; Anomal-e’s DR and F1 score drop by 16.24% and
 9.92%, respectively. In contrast, the proposed CTGNN method
 still maintains satisfactory performance when confronted with
 these behaviors.
 There are 2 potential reasons for these performance differences. First, we find that 2,544 of the 2,603 newly generated
 flow records only appeared once, which means that pretrained
 DL and ML methods are completely unfamiliar to these 2,544
 records. The network behavior generated by the new access
 nodes contains novel feature patterns that are difficult for
 traditional DL and ML to reason. Although Anomal-E maps
Fig. 5. The performance achieved by the proposed and baseline methods on all network behaviors to a large graph, these behaviors are
the Fraud Payment dataset. isolated nodes in the overall graph structure. Anomal-E does
 not aggregate enough information to distinguish between different anomalous behaviors. Second, through the aggregation
baselines with an accuracy of 96.09%, a detection ratio of of spatial-temporal neighborhood information, the CTGNN
81.80%, a precision level of 78.33%, an F1 score of 80.03%, makes these discrete and isolated behavior patterns continuous
and an FAR of 18.19%. There are two possible reasons for the and compact in the local neighborhood. In other words, the
performance discrepancy exhibited by the baseline methods. CTGNN incorporates these novel behavior patterns into the
First, only 8 features are available, including USD_amount, local node interaction processes that have been more effec-
Sender_Id, Sender_Account, Transaction_Type, tively learned and summarized during the training process,
and Sender_Country, in the entire transaction network, thus better reasoning about these unseen patterns.
so most of the learning methods based on feature represen- 5) Analysis of Behaviors With Low Frequencies: Noting
tations have worse performance. Second, we discover one that most of the behaviors generated by new access nodes
limitation of the static graph-based models such as [4]: they occur only once, we further systematically analyze the impact
may not be the most suitable solutions for these particular of the frequencies of behaviors on the resulting model perforhighly imbalanced datasets. For example, only 69.71% of the mance. Since Anomal-E maps all behaviors to a large graph
fraud behavior in the J.P. Morgan synthetic transaction network (all edges appear only once), we compare the CTGNN with
is detected by Anomal-E, while 34.17% of the macro-average SRF on the ToN-IoT dataset. We first count the communication
DR is reported on the UNSW-NB15 dataset (Table IV). The frequency between each pair of IPs in the test set. Specifically,
traditional message passing mechanism reveals the inclination there are 5,680 IP pairs in the test set that produce 92,208 flow
toward learning majority classes. Due to our fine-grained records, among which 5,463 pairs of IPs have communication
link history modeling method, spatiotemporal interactions, and frequencies below 20, generating 10,497 flow records. Furtemporal patterns, our method successfully overcomes the thermore, the frequency of communication between 5,630 IP
detrimental effects mentioned above in most of our considered pairs is less than 300, corresponding to 22,925 flow records.
datasets. Fig. 6 presents the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
 4) Analysis of New Access Nodes: To further verify the curves produced by the SRF and CTGNN methods, where
impact of behaviors generated by new access nodes on f denotes different communication frequencies.
anomaly detection, we conduct a set of manual verifications As seen from the above figures, although SRF performs
on the ToN-IoT and CIC-Darknet2020 datasets. As shown well on the overall test samples in Fig. 6a, its performance
in Table I, in the testing phase, 2,529 new access nodes in is not stable when faced with low-frequency traffic records
the IIoT network generate 2,603 interaction records, including (shown in Figs. 6b and 6c). In fact, Figs. 6a and 6d reveal
normal traffic as well as four types of attack behaviors, i.e., that the excellent performance of SRF may be mainly con-
DoS, mitm, password, and scanning attacks. In the centrated in the behaviors with the majority frequency, the
CIC-Darknet2020 dataset, 612 new interactive IPs generate frequencies of these behaviors are greater than 300, but only
820 flow records that occupy 2.89% of the total testing accounts for 0.88% of the total IP pairs. In contrast, benefiting
samples. Table V shows the comparison between the results from utilizing the historical state, the local spatiotemporal
obtained by the proposed CTGNN and the suboptimal baseline neighbor information and the actual time distribution, the
methods on these flow records generated by new access nodes. proposed CTGNN alleviates the negative impact of the low-
On the ToN-IoT dataset, the performance of the three methods frequency interaction distributions. As shown in Figs. 6a
on these newly generated records is worse than that attained and 6d, the proposed approach maintains encouraging peron all test samples. To our surprise, SRF does not detect formance for most IP pairs, which is essential for real-world
the abnormal behavior generated by the new access nodes. scenarios.
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4861

 TABLE V
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W HILE C ONSIDERING THE B EHAVIORS G ENERATED BY N EW ACCESS N ODES

Fig. 6. For the Ton-IoT 2021 dataset, RoC curves are generated by SRF with communication frequency (b) f ≤ 20, (c) f ≤ 300, or (d) f >300, as well as
RoC curves on CTGNN with (f) f ≤ 20, (g) f ≤ 300, or (h) f >300.

 6) Ablation Analysis: We conduct additional ablation exper- accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score of the MLP message
iments to demonstrate the contributions of each component of aggregation-based CTGNN drop by 1.26%, 7.64%, 4.22% and
our model to its overall performance. Essentially, we introduce 5.98%, respectively. These results imply that (1) the introduced
historical representations (summarized by the interactive event additional interactive event update mechanism, spatiotemporal
update mechanism), spatiotemporal neighborhood information, neighborhoods, and time interval encoding components are
and the time interval encoding process in the interaction behav- all conducive to improving the performance achieved in the
ior analysis. We design a simple and direct ablation experiment interaction behavior analysis. (2) The adopted computing
to verify the effect of each component on the overall perfor- components are not limited to a specific computing framework,
mance. To eliminate the influence of the multihead attention such as multihead attention; in fact, these components are commechanism on the proposed method, an MLP-based message patible with different feature aggregation schemes, including
aggregation approach is deployed to verify the role of each MLPs and transformers. (3) Neighborhood information has
component in the interaction network analysis. To clarify how a greater impact on model performance than the other two
different components impact the interactive network analysis, computational components.
we conduct ablation studies on the following message aggre- To further explore the expressive ability of our model,
gation strategy variants: (1) a variant without neighborhood we conduct semisupervised learning with 20% of the labels
information, (2) a variant without the interactive event update sampled from the training sets of the ToN-IoT, CIC-Darknet
mechanism, and (3) a variant without time interval encoding. and fraud payment datasets. Considering that the training set
 Fig. 7 presents the overall performance achieved in these accounts for 80% of the total samples, the semisupervised
confirmatory experiments compared with that of the MLP learning process only uses 16% of the labels of the total
message aggregation-based CTGNNs and the base MLP. samples. As shown in Table VI, when only 16% of the labels
These CTGNN variants outperform the vanilla MLP model are utilized for these datasets, the results do not exhibit a
but perform slightly worse than the complete CTGNN. For large gap relative to those obtained when employing 80% of
instance, without neighborhood information aggregation, the the labeled samples. The performance achieved with 16% of
4862 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 (1) A novel network abnormality detection method that
 refines the concrete information interaction processes between
 each pair of entities is proposed, complementing substantial
 detailed behavior information. In the graph-based detection
 methods proposed in previous research [2], [4], [5], the
 extraction of temporal and spatial features is restricted to
 a fixed topology structure. In our work, via a customized
 CTGNN, we refactor the spatiotemporal correlation information as more granular entity interactions, which enhances
 the detection ability of the network and breaks through the
 fixed topology limitation. Experimental results show that this
 method works well on realistic scenarios, including intrusion
 Fig. 7. Results of ablation experiments. detection, darknet analysis, and anti-fraud cases.
 (2) We reveal the inherent shortcomings of traditional
 TABLE VI anomaly detection methods in the face of new node interac-
ACCURACY AND F1 ACHIEVED W ITH D IFFERENT L ABEL P ROPORTIONS tions and low-frequency or sporadic communication behaviors.
 FOR S EMISUPERVISED L EARNING ON 3 DATASETS Although traditional anomaly detection methods perform well
 on the overall test set, their good detection capabilities can
 only cover a small number of network entities that generate
 frequent interactions. The proposed CTGNN systematically
 utilizes the historical state, the local spatiotemporal information of neighbors and actual time decodings to maintain
 good performance in most of the tested node communication
 settings. To our knowledge, this is the first attempt to alleviate
 the negative impact of low-frequency communication in the
 field of anomaly detection.
 (3) Ablation experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
 each component in our proposed model. The key computing components include the CTG update mechanism, local
 spatiotemporal domain information, and time encoder, which
 exhibit good compatibility with various computational models
 and can strengthen their ability to detect anomalies. Furthermore, when only 16% of the total samples are labeled, our
 model achieves classification accuracies of 99.14%, 97.75%,
 and 95.49% on the CIC-Darknet2020, ToN-IoT, and Fraud
 Payment datasets, respectively, which are much higher than the
 Fig. 8. Dimension-reduced visualizations of the embeddings. accuracies achieved by the methods proposed in [4] and [26]
 when trained on 80% labeled samples. In an actual application
 scenario, these characteristics make our model competitive
the labeled samples decreases by only 0.58% and 0.45% on with other state-of-the-art methods via the imposition of a
the CIC-Darknet and ToN-IoT datasets, respectively. In other flexible computing overhead and weaker sample requirements.
words, when only 16% of the samples are labeled, our model
already has sufficient expressive power for distinguishing VI. C ONCLUSION
between different types of behaviors. In various scenarios, the Continuous Temporal Graph Neu-
 Subsequently, we utilize the uniform manifold approxima- ral Network (CTGNN) consistently demonstrates its effectivetion and projection (UMAP) [27] algorithm to reduce the ness in detecting anomalies across both binary and multiclass
dimensionality of the high-level embedding representation classification settings. Specifically, CTGNN achieves outstandobtained by our model. The visualization results in Fig. 8 a ing anomaly detection results, with F1 scores of 97.03%,
show the visualization results obtained with the original sam- 99.96%, 99.18%, and 81.95% on the UNSW-NB15, ToNple distribution of the ToN-IoT datasets. As shown in Fig. 8 b, IoT, CICDarknet, and Fraud Payment datasets in binary
the embedding representation of the network flows obtained classification settings. Moreover, our proposed method attains
with only 16% of the labeled samples already exhibits obvious remarkable detection rates and F1 scores, surpassing 95%,
classification boundaries. This visualization experiment pre- across eight distinct traffic behavior types within the ToN-IoT
sented in Fig. 8 further verifies that our model has sufficient dataset. Notably, CTGNN also achieves the highest macro-F1
expressive ability for distinguishing between different attack score when applied to the UNSW-NB15 dataset.
categories when few labeled samples are utilized. Furthermore, manual verification results underscore the lim-
 7) Summary: Our contributions in this paper, as supported itations of traditional detection methods, revealing oversights
by the experiments above, can be summarized as follows. in the detection of behaviors generated by new access nodes
DUAN et al.: PRACTICAL CYBER ATTACK DETECTION WITH CTG IN DYNAMIC NETWORK SYSTEM 4863

and behaviors characterized by low-frequency occurrences. [16] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
CTGNN effectively addresses these challenges by harnessing variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
the natural interaction processes of network entities in both detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
temporal and spatial dimensions, thereby maintaining robust 2021.
detection performance for these elusive behaviors. [17] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in
 industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,”
 Ablation experiments validate the versatility of the key com- IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197,
puting components within CTGNN, showcasing their ability Jul. 2022.
to enhance anomaly detection across various computational [18] Y. Zuo, G. Liu, H. Lin, J. Guo, X. Hu, and J. Wu, “Embedding
 temporal network via neighborhood formation,” in Proc. 24th ACM
models. As we look ahead, our research will be dedicated SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD). New York,
to addressing the issue of strong data imbalance as well as NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, pp. 2857–2866,
further enhancing the interpretability of abnormal behavior doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220054.
 [19] Y. Ma, Z. Guo, Z. Ren, J. Tang, and D. Yin, “Streaming graph neural
detection methods. Furthermore, improving intrusion detection networks,” in Proc. 43rd Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr.
within the context of concept drift, characterized by shifts in New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,
traffic distribution and feature evolution, represents a challenge pp. 719–728, doi: 10.1145/3397271.3401092.
 [20] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Inductive
warranting considerable attention. representation learning on temporal graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07962.
 [21] E. Rossi, B. Chamberlain, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, F. Monti, and
 M. Bronstein, “Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic
 R EFERENCES graphs,” 2020, arXiv:2006.10637.
 [22] S. M. Kazemi et al., “Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A sur-
 [1] Cisco. (2023). Cisco Annual Internet Report (2018–2023). [Online]. vey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2648–2720, Mar. 2020.
 Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/executive-
 [23] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Self-attention
 perspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.html
 with functional time representation learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 [2] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11.
 and mitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial–temporal graph con- [24] F. D. Keersmaeker, Y. Cao, G. K. Ndonda, and R. Sadre, “A survey
 volutional network,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, of public IoT datasets for network security research,” IEEE Commun.
 no. 6, pp. 3855–3872, Nov. 2022. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1808–1840, 3rd Quart., 2023.
 [3] S. A. Assefa, D. Dervovic, M. Mahfouz, R. E. Tillman, P. Reddy, [25] J. Sinha and M. Manollas, “Efficient deep CNN-BiLSTM model for
 and M. Veloso, “Generating synthetic data in finance: Opportunities, network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Pattern
 challenges and pitfalls,” in Proc. 1st ACM Int. Conf. AI Finance, Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 223–231.
 Oct. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 [26] T. Zebin, S. Rezvy, and Y. Luo, “An explainable AI-based intrusion
 [4] E. Caville, W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, and M. Portmann, “Anomal-E: A self- detection system for DNS over HTTPS (DoH) attacks,” IEEE Trans.
 supervised network intrusion detection system based on graph neural Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2339–2349, 2022.
 networks,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 258, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 110030.
 [27] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform mani-
 [5] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic fold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2018,
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised arXiv:1802.03426.
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714, [28] H. Studiawan, F. Sohel, and C. Payne, “Anomaly detection in operating
 2023. system logs with deep learning-based sentiment analysis,” IEEE Trans.
 [6] C. Wang and H. Zhu, “Wrongdoing monitor: A graph-based behavioral Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2136–2148, Sep. 2021.
 anomaly detection in cyber security,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secu- [29] J. Cao et al., “A survey on security aspects for 3GPP 5G networks,”
 rity, vol. 17, pp. 2703–2718, 2022. IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 170–195, 1st Quart.,
 [7] Z. Yang et al., “WTAGRAPH: Web tracking and advertising detection 2019.
 using graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), [30] O. Ajibuwa, B. Hamdaoui, and A. A. Yavuz, “A survey on AI/ML-driven
 May 2022, pp. 1540–1557. intrusion and misbehavior detection in networked autonomous systems:
 [8] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detec- Techniques, challenges and opportunities,” 2023, arXiv:2305.05040.
 tion towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable [31] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
 Secure Comput., pp. 1–18, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3242134. L. Cavallaro, “INSOMNIA: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
 [9] T. M. Booij, I. Chiscop, E. Meeuwissen, N. Moustafa, and intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
 F. T. H. D. Hartog, “ToN_IoT: The role of heterogeneity and the need Nov. 2021, pp. 111–122.
 for standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion [32] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
 data sets,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 485–496, Jan. 2022. Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for network
[10] N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier Gaussian mix- intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
 ture technique based on automated association features for simulating pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
 and detecting web application attacks,” IEEE Trans. Sustain. Comput., [33] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered
 vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 245–256, Apr. 2021. hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
[11] A. H. Lashkari, G. Kaur, and A. Rahali, “DIDarknet: A contemporary Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 approach to detect and characterize the darknet traffic using deep image
 learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., Nov. 2020,
 pp. 1–13.
[12] B. Caswell and J. Beale, Snort 2.1 Intrusion Detection. Amsterdam, The
 Netherlands: Elsevier, 2004.
[13] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki,
 “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning tech- Guanghan Duan received the B.A. degree in comniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, puting science and technology from Chongqing
 3rd Quart., 2019. University, China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing
[14] P.-F. Marteau, “Random partitioning forest for point-wise and collective the Ph.D. degree in computing science and techanomaly detection—Application to network intrusion detection,” IEEE nology with Harbin Engineering University, China.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2157–2172, 2021. His research interests include graph-based DL meth-
[15] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection ods for modeling network traffic and adversarial
 system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight examples.
 bag servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 3,
 pp. 1164–1181, May 2021.
4864 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 Hongwu Lv received the B.A. degree in information Guangsheng Feng received the B.E. degree from
 and computing science and the Ph.D. degree in Harbin Engineering University (HEU) in 2003, the
 computer applied technology from Harbin Engi- M.E. degree from Harbin Institute Technology (HIT)
 neering University, China, in 2006 and 2011, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree from HEU in 2009.
 respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor He is currently an Associate Professor with
 with the College of Computer Science and Tech- the College of Computer Science and Technolnology, Harbin Engineering University. His research ogy, Harbin Engineering University. His research
 interests include formal modeling and performance interests include the security of edge computing,
 evaluation, particularly regarding the availability of LTE (LTE-A) networks, and wireless channel access
 cloud computing and edge cloud modeling. control.

 Huiqiang Wang received the B.A. degree in com- Xiaoli Li (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Principal
 puter systems and engineering from Harbin Institute Scientist with the Institute for Infocomm Research,
 of Technology, China, in 1982, the M.S. degree A*STAR, Singapore. He is also an adjunct full
 in computer applications from Harbin Shipbuilding professor position with Nanyang Technological Uni-
 Engineering Institute, China, in 1985, and the Ph.D. versity, Singapore. His research interests include AI,
 degree in computer applied technology from Harbin machine learning, data mining, and bioinformatics.
 Engineering University, China, in 2005. He is cur- He has been the Area Chair/a Senior PC Member
 rently a Professor with the College of Computer of leading AI and data mining-related conferences,
 Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering Uni- including IJCAI, AAAI, KDD, and ICDM. He is the
 versity. He has published more than 100 journal Editor-in-Chief of World Scientific Annual Review
 and conference papers. His research interests include of Artificial Intelligence and an Associate Editor
the security of distributed systems, particularly regarding cognitive networks, of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON A RTIFICIAL I NTELLIGENCE and Machine
cloud computing, and indoor positioning. Learning With Applications (Elsevier).