IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024 2549

 Privacy-Preserving Few-Shot Traffic Detection
 Against Advanced Persistent Threats via
 Federated Meta Learning
 Yilun Hu , Jun Wu , Senior Member, IEEE, Gaolei Li , Member, IEEE, Jianhua Li , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Jinke Cheng

 Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) utilizes multiple one after another, causing a huge economic stress around the
zero-day vulnerabilities to threaten critical industrial infrastruc- world. On May 2021, Colonial Pipeline, the largest oil product
ture, having the characteristics of burst, unknown and cross- pipeline operator in the United States, was attacked by a randomain. To resist APT attacks, existing wisdom usually establish a
security monitoring platform that remotely links to the cloud-based
 somware network from the hacker group Darkside. The group
threat intelligence center. However, the real scenario where few exploited the vulnerability of the software to hack into central
victim users are willing to share raw attack samples considering systems, disrupt and steal the computer data, and also take
privacy-preservation, such mentality is hysteretic and cannot iden- the pipeline systems that transport oil and gas in major cities
tify APT attacks quickly without sacrificing additional incentives. on the eastern seaboard offline. Since 2015, OceanLotus, an
To address this issue, a novel privacy-preserving few-shot traffic APT organization in Southeast Asia, has carried out long-term
detection (PFTD) method based on federated meta learning (FML) and continuous cyber attacks in China. The organization often
is proposed. The PFTD treats the APT detection task as a model
generalization optimization process, that transfers the learned
 exploits 0-day/N-day vulnerabilities during intrusion and lateral
knowledge to identify local unknown samples. Client-side models movement. During the Russian-Ukrainian war, the cyber-attacks
in FML achieve knowledge transferring by two-phase updating against Ukraine by groups such as APT28 and AgentTesla were
over both support dataset and query dataset, while the server-side strategically used to support ground operations. The spy Trojans
model obtains global knowledge with model aggregation. These and other malicious codes use custom or encrypted protocols to
processes compile useful knowledge against APT attacks. With a establish covert communication channels and finally bypass the
novel wisdom, we obtained three advantages: 1) High accuracy detection of traditional security devices such as firewalls and
with a few attack samples; 2) Low latency detection for removing
rules matching process; 3) High personalizing to cross-domain intrusion detection systems (IDSs). These new types of attacks,
APT attacks. Extensive experiments based on multiple benchmark especially APT attacks, have brought great challenges to traffic
datasets like CICIDS2017 and DAPT 2020 prove the superiority of detection technology.
proposed PFTD. r APT attacks have many characteristics such as burst, unknown and cross-domain. Existing traffic detection meth-
 Index Terms—Advanced persistent threats, federated meta
learning, few-shot traffic detection, privacy-preserving. ods are limited by the fragmentation of threat intelligence
 and tend to focus more on discovering locally known attack
 behaviors.
 I. INTRODUCTION r Due to privacy concerns or the desire to avoid embarrass-
 RAFFIC detection system is an important research field in
T computer system and network, it is used to detect network
intrusion behavior. However, traffic detection systems cannot
 ment, original APT attack samples cannot be shared timely.
 As a result, the defenders can only resort to remediation
 and damage control after the attack has occurred.
identify unknown attack behaviors [1]. In recent years, secu- To address the above challenges, introducing artificial intelrity incidents caused by unknown cyber attacks have emerged ligence (AI), Big Data analysis and cloud technology in the
 APT detection field has become a trend [2], [3]. For example,
 Manuscript received 15 January 2023; revised 24 May 2023; accepted 2 July AI-based IDS systems aim to extract abnormal/normal features
2023. Date of publication 11 August 2023; date of current version 30 April 2024.
This work was supported in part by the National Nature Science Foundation of from massive network traffic, and distinguishes whether it is be-
China under Grants U21B2019, 62202303, and U20B2048, in part by Shang- nign or malicious traffic. The Big Data framework enhances the
hai Sailing Program under Grant 21YF1421700, and in part by the Defence ability of traffic inspection systems in understanding the increas-
Industrial Technology Development Program under Grant JCKY2020604B004. ingly complex data distribution of intrusion patterns [4]. The
Recommended for acceptance by Dr. He Huang. (Corresponding authors : Jun
Wu; Gaolei Li.) introduction of cloud computing has enhanced the efficiency of
 The authors are with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical traditional traffic detection systems in the face of network attacks
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China, and also with variability, invisibility and unpredictability [5]. Among
with the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies
for Information Security, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: huyilun1218@
 them, deep learning (DL) is considered to be the most important
sjtu.edu.cn; junwuhn@sjtu.edu.cn; gaolei_li@sjtu.edu.cn; lijh888@sjtu.edu.cn; enabling technique that may have great ability to discover APT
jinkecheng@sjtu.edu.cn). attacks. Deep learning-empowered methods utilizes deep neural
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2023.3304556 networks to perform representation learning on network traffic.

 2327-4697 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

The broad range of applications of deep learning-empowered meta-learning method. At the same time, MAML algorithms
methods includes both relationship-oriented deep learning in maintain the personalization of the local model. In the model
which the detector trends to identify the combination methods of training phase, we deployed more than 400 edge devices to
each network attack tools with correlation analysis using Graph simulate real distributed scenarios. All edge devices will jointly
Neural Networks [6], [7], and timing-oriented deep learning in maintain the central model. In the classification phase, we
which the detector tends to judge the intent of a network attack compared the five-classification capabilities of two different
with the connections between traffic features and time sequence classification networks, FPN and Resnet, for malicious network
using Recurrent Neural Networks [8], [9]. traffic.
 However, deploying DL-based APT detection systems in The main contributions of our work are as follows.
cloud-side data centers faces with many challenges. First, cloud- 1) A privacy-preserving few-shot traffic detection (PFTD)
side computing struggles with leakage of the sensitive and con- framework against APT attacks is proposed based on
fidential information; second, since the cloud-side computing federated meta learning. In the PFTD training phase, only
cannot integrate heterogeneous and dispersed threat intelligence 10 samples in each type of attack methods participate in
due to real-time constraints, it is difficult to discover efficient and the model updating process, maximizing the simulation
real-time unknown attacks. In addition, with the influx of a large of real scenarios with a limited number of APT attack
number of edge devices, different suppliers require personalized samples. Besides, our proposed framework realizes the
security defence abilities. Therefore, it is particularly important detection function for unknown samples with leaving data
to deploy intelligent APT detection systems to discover un- from local devices.
known attack behaviors at the edge side. Recently, many studies 2) An edge synergy-empowered FML training algorithm is
have focused on the construction of edge-side APT detection also designed to improve the accuracy of proposed PFTD
systems. For example, Yuan et al. [10] designed a CNN-based framework. On each edge devices, the model-agnostic
intrusion detection system and deployed it on the edge devices meta learning (MAML) unit can quickly obtain a perto identify attack behaviors, which transferred data flows into sonalized FML model that adapts to local small sample
the form of images. Yet, although the DL-based APT detection data through several steps of gradient descent. At the same
technology develops rapidly, there are still numerous challenges time, the great generalization ability brought by the global
when deploying it at the edge side: model ensures that unknown samples can be identified,
 r Due to the complexity and dynamic of the Internet envi- according to its poor prediction values in the classification
 ronment, it is very difficult for existing traffic detection results of each category.
 methods to identify various types of APT attack behaviors 3) To improve the adaptability of proposed PFTD to the hetaccording to limited threat intelligence; erogeneous threat intelligence samples collected by each
 r Since massive heterogeneous devices are connected to edge edge device, we also propose a novel support-query mutual
 networks, it is difficult for existing APT detection methods guidance mechanism to associate the support set and the
 to identify the latest evolved attacks; query set, and then quickly achieve a local personalized
 r Training a chatGPT-like pre-trained model that can fit all model by fine-tuning.
 local datasets on each edge device is very difficult for the The remainder of the article is organized as follows.
 number of APT attack samples is usually nonpublic. Section II discusses the related work. Section III formu-
 Federated meta-learning (FML) has been proved that it can lates challenges, motivations and system model, while Section
improve the personalization and generalization capabilities of IV describes our proposed FML method and training steps.
deep neural networks at edge devices. FML refers to combining Section V introduces the experiment. Section VII draws conmany edge devices (meta-learners) to train a large global meta- clusions.
learner by aggregating model parameters collected on the server.
This global learner has a strong generalization ability because II. RELATED WORK
it has learnt many samples, a personalized model for each node
can be obtained by performing a few steps of gradient descent In this section, we will first introduce the abnormal traffic
using the Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) algorithm detection method for the APT attack, and then the research work
on edge devices. MAML retains the information of different related to Federated Meta Learning is discussed.
sub-tasks in the form of parameter updates during the training
process of each sub-task, so the model trained by meta-learning A. Anomaly Traffic Detection Against APT Attacks
has better generalization ability [11]. At the same time, FML Personalized anomaly traffic detection system is a personprotects the privacy of each edge device. With the assistance of alized network traffic anomaly detection method proposed by
FML, the global model can be personalized to fit the local data. us. Traditional network traffic anomaly detection methods often
 Therefore, in order to solve the problem of intrusion detection use machine learning and deep learning frameworks to detect
in APT attacks which is difficult for edge-side smart devices to abnormal network traffic. There are many machine learning
deal with unknown behavior attacks in the context of federated methods applied to network traffic anormaly detection, such
learning, with the help of the idea of FML, we propose an edge as random forest (RF), support vector machine (SVM), naive
synergy-empowered FML model for few-shot malicious traffic Bayesian network (NBN), logistic regression and other methods.
detection against APT attacks. In our method, the malicious Since traditional machine learning models only learn the attack
traffic detection model is distributed by the central server, and patterns of simple features in TCP/IP packets. The models often
the edge-side nodes jointly maintain the central model using the exhibit high false positive rates [12]. Therefore, deep learning is
HU et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEW-SHOT TRAFFIC DETECTION AGAINST ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS 2551

proposed, in which CNN can comprehensively learn the complex explainable intelligence-driven APT edge defense mechanism.
hierarchical feature representation of TCP/IP data packets; RNN This approach increases the level of protection and defense
can remember past information in a large number of TCP/IP against APTs at the edge.
packets, and the detection efficiency is greatly improved. Xiao
et al. [13] proposed an intrusion detection model based on feature dimensionality reduction and convolutional neural network, B. Federated Meta Learning
which extracts and analyzes data features for classification by Federated meta learning (FML) is the framework that combinconvolutional neural network. The experimental results show ing federated learning and meta-learning [25]. Fallah et al. [26]
that the prediction accuracy of the model can reach 94.00%. used meta learning to implement personalized and differentiated
Althubiti et al. [14] used a long short-term memory network, training for federated learning. The federated learning (FL)
a special recurrent neural network (RNN), to build an intru- framework is first proposed as standard federated training (Fesion detection model, which achieved a prediction accuracy of dAvg) [27], [28], [29]. FL has made great contributions in ensur-
84.83% on the CICDS001 data set. In addition, many methods ing information security during Big Data exchange, protecting
has further improved the detection accuracy by combining the terminal data and personal data privacy. Wu et al. [30] designed
models. Andresini et al. [15] proposed an intrusion detection a blockchain-empowered privacy preservation architecture for
model that combines generative adversarial network (GAN) 5G-enabled drone communications. Yang et al. [31] present a
and convolutional neural network (CNN). The model achieves design of blockchain-based crowdsourcing FL system for IoT
93.29% accuracy on the KDD99 data set. Hassan et al. [16] devices manufacturers to learn customers better, the use of difbuilding an intrusion detection model by combining a CNN ferential privacy (DP) protects the privacy of customer data and
with a long short-term memory network. The experimental improves the accuracy of the model. Besides that, the blockchain
results show that the prediction accuracy of the model can reach will audit all client updates during federated training so that the
97.17%. system can be held accountable for model updates to prevent
 In recent years, the design of edge-side intrusion detection malicious clients or manufacturers. Moon et al. [32] reviewed the
system has became a new research direction. Kumar et al. [17] application of FL methods in the field of healthcare, including
proposed the development of distributed intrusion detection COVID-19, mammograms, and brain tumor segmentation. They
systems (DIDS) using emerging and promising technologies believed that compared with traditional centralized models,
such as blockchain on stable platforms in cloud infrastructure. FL-based models improved the model performance. While FL
The collaborative intrusion detection system (CIDS) developed models in wearable healthcare do not significantly outperform
by Sharma et al. [18] protects edge devices against cyber at- centralized models, FL provides better results in terms of data
tacks such as denial of service (DoS) and distributed denial of privacy. Li et al. [33] proposed a federated deep learning method
service (DDoS) under the multi-access edge computing (MEC) called DeepFed to develop a novel federated learning framework
architecture. After 2 years, Sharma et al. [19] proposed a new for multiple industrial CPSs that can collectively build a compure edge-based hybrid CIDS architecture based on CIDS to prehensive intrusion detection model in a privacy-preserving
complement the previous work. Nie et al. [20] proposed a manner. As the most representative method in few-shot learning,
GAN-based multi-stage deep learning framework to achieve model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [34], which treats the
intrusion detection against multiple attacks at the edge network. designed meta-learner as an optimizer that learns to update the
Yin et al. [21] proposed a data collaboration mechanism that parameters of any model, was proposed to solve the problem of
offloads the training model to distributed edge devices to achieve small amount of data and strong heterogeneity in edge devices
cooperative privacy protection for IoT. in federated learning. The work of Jiang et al. [35] and Li
 There are many detection methods for APT attacks. In re- et al. [36] corroborate that the FML model is a personalized
cent years, APT attack detection methods based on provenance global model with strong generalization ability. Apart from that,
graphs have achieved good results. The team at the University FML has made great contributions in multiple fields. A FML
of Illinois at Chicago proposed the SLEUTH [22] method in method proposed by Zhao et al. [37] reduced the BER perfor-
2017. Based on log data, it uses causal relationship tracking and mance and complexity of classical matched filter (MF)-based
provenance graphs to construct a model and finally reconstructs detectors; it demonstrated that FML is useful in an acoustic
APT attacks. On this basis, the team introduced two methods, radio cooperative wireless network environment outperforms
Poirot [9] and Holmes [7] in 2019. Poirot introduced cyber federated learning-based systems and has higher generalization
threat intelligence (CTI) and graph matching algorithm based ability. Zhang et al. [38] used a federated meta-learning approach
on provenance graph. Holmes designed the high-level scenario to improve the accuracy of wireless traffic prediction at the
graph (HSG) to realize the mapping of low-level (log, alarm) edge. Additionally, FML has made significant contributions in
information to high-level. In 2021, the team further proposed several fields. This work trains an inductive network through
the Extrator [23] method. It introduces natural language pro- meta-learning, applies the FSL architecture to NLP tasks in a
cessing (NLP) into the CTI report, so as to realize the precise federated environment, reduces the communication frequency
extraction of attack behavior in CTI. It also uses semantic between nodes, and has good compatibility for devices with
role labeling (SRL) for semantic analysis to understand the small amounts of data [39]. Jiang et al. [40] proposed a Federated
relationship between attack behaviors and convert unstructured Meta-Location Learning (FMLL) method that improves the
text into provenance graphs. In addition, due to the lack of accuracy of fine-grained location prediction on smartphones in
explanation for decision-making in AI-based CTI and the mas- 5 G scenarios. The FML model designed by Elgabli et al. [41]
sive deployment of edge devices, Li et al. [24] proposed an can be fine-tuned to new tasks with a small number of samples
2552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

in a distributed environment, and the model reduces the energy performs few-shot learning by training a model on a set of source
consumption of computation. tasks that is only a few gradient descent steps away from a good
 The success of federated learning depends on the fact that task-specific model. Deploying meta-learning models on edge
the data in each data center is independent and identically dis- devices can meet the personalized learning needs of non-IID
tributed (IID). Personalized federated learning (PFL) can solve data, and the source tasks distributed by the central server can
the problem of data heterogeneity in federated learning and the match the personalized task models of edge devices after several
lack of personalization of models for local tasks or data sets. steps of gradient descent.
Tan et al. [42] divided PFL into two categories: global model Therefore, building malicious detection models with federpersonalization and learning personalized model. Global model ated meta-learning will bring many benefits. First, deploying
personalization focuses on the training ability of the global FL the model on edge devices in a distributed environment can
model on non-IID data, while learning personalized model fo- effectively alleviate the computational cost of the central server
cuses on achieving model personality during the training phase. and greatly reduce the response time. Secondly, the introduction
Considering that this article mainly focuses on the problem of meta-learning can help the central model to quickly adapt
of non-independent and identical distribution of edge device to local data samples, and the generalization ability is greatly
traffic data, we mainly research articles related to global model enhanced; the model’s processing ability to unbalanced data is
personalization. [43], [44], [45] These three papers all add a greatly improved.
regular term on the basis of the federated average. The FedProx
algorithm dynamically controls the number of updates of each
node in each round of communication through the gamma in- B. System Model
equality; the novelty of the L2GD algorithm is that it controls
node training and server aggregation through probability; the In traditional machine learning tasks, algorithms tend to
advantage of the Ditto algorithm is that the local model is first focus on one specific task. In a network traffic-based attack
optimized according to the FedAvg algorithm, and then a regular behavior discovery system, a basic task is to use a classiterm is added to continue to optimize the local model, and finally fier to label network traffic. That is, we have K samples
optimization results are sent to the server without a regular term. and M labels denoted as follows: D = {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), · · ·
Fallah et al. [26] regarded the training phase of FL as the training (xi , yj ) · · · (xK , yM )}, xi ∈ R, yi ∈ {0, 1, 2 · · · M }. The main
phase of meta-learning, regarded the personalization phase of FL goal is to build a multi-class classifier where xi is the input to
model as the testing phase of meta-learning, and migrated the the model, yj will be the output, and yj is a possible estimate of
meta-learning model to personalized federated learning. the sample labels. In the traditional supervised learning scenario,
 the number of samples K is very large, and the data set containing
 all samples will be simply divided into two parts D(train) and
 III. PROBLEM FORMULATION D(test) . However, in APT attack behavior detection, the number
 of samples is limited, and the entire task will be regarded as a
A. Challenges and Motivation small sample learning task. The conditional supervised learning
 Traditional malicious detection models are often deployed at method often used in few shot learning will face the problem
the center of distributed systems. This tends to present some of overfitting. In addition, in a distributed scenario, the traffic
challenges: data samples collected by each device are not balanced, so the
 1) Less fault tolerance, central models tend to be fragile intrusion detection model should be retrained in order to adapt
 when faced with multivariate and heterogeneous data. The to new local data. Besides, the attack behavior detection system
 retraining process of the model is accompanied by a huge for APT often maps the attack behavior to the cyber kill chain.
 waste of resources. To address these differences, we propose the FML framework to
 2) The volume of traffic data aggregated by distributed de- implement abnormal traffic detection, and accordingly, as shown
 vices is huge, and the traffic data of distributed devices in Fig. 1, our proposed method no longer focuses on a single task
 is unbalanced. Data cleaning, preprocessing, standardiza- but on multiple tasks, allowing the model to learn. The entire
 tion, and normalization will lead to huge consumption of federated meta-learning model is divided into three levels. The
 computing resources. bottom layer presents data sources which cover gateways, fire-
 3) There is a delay in the response time of the malicious walls and base stations. In our model, each edge node represents
 detection system deployed in the center, which is often an independent edge device, and each edge device will train a
 caused by two reasons. On the one hand, it is the computing local personalized model through meta-learning on the basis of
 delay caused by the huge amount of data, and on the other the initial model and update the parameters of the local model to
 hand, it is the physical delay caused by the distributed the central server. The weight parameters will be aggregated at
 devices being far away from the central server. the server and new parameters counted by the aggregation algo-
 The advantages of meta-learning itself can improve the effi- rithm will be redistributed to each device.
ciency of malicious detection models. First, meta-learning can In the FML framework, considering the limited number of
deal with the problem of data imbalance brought by distributed advanced persistent threats samples, the training task of the
systems. When faced with the problem of data imbalance, meta- device will be regarded as a few-shot learning task. In addition,
learning can process the head and tail data differently, adaptively the introduction of the FML framework will solve the problem
learn how to re-weight, or formulate a domain adaptive problem. of unbalanced traffic data on edge devices. The specific method
Second, meta-learning has a strong generalization ability, it will be described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
HU et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEW-SHOT TRAFFIC DETECTION AGAINST ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS 2553

 Algorithm 1: FedMeta with MAML.

Fig. 1. An overview of Federated Meta Learning in staged APT detection at
edge devices.

 TABLE I
 SYMBOL LIST

 IV. THE PFTD WORKFLOW Fig. 2. The system model of proposed PFTD based on federated meta learning.

 In abnormal traffic detection scenarios, where the number of
samples with supervised information is limited or impossible
to obtain, few-shot learning is proposed to learn from a limited model defines a hypothesis space H, which consists of h(; θ) s,
number of samples with supervised information. For the conve- to approximate the ĥ. FSL is a continuous optimization process
nience of reading, the explanation of related symbols is shown whose purpose is to searches Hto find the θ that parameterizes
in Table I. the best h∗ ∈ H. The performance of FSL is measured by the
 loss function l(ŷ, y), where ŷ is the predicted value and y is the
A. Few-Shot Learning Formulation observed output.
 In the FSL task, the dataset D is divided into two parts Dtrain
and Dtest . Training set Dtrain = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 where I is small, B. Edge Synergy-Empowered FML Model Training
testing set Dtest = {xtest }. In FSL we denote the ground truth The structure of the FML model is shown in Fig. 2. Suppose
joint probability distribution of input x and output y by p(x, y). there are N devices and 13 different attack types of traffic
The ĥ represents the optimal hypothesis from x to y, which data in the federated meta-learning scenario. The edge synergyis descovered by fitting Dtrain and testing on Dtest . The FSL empowered feature of the FML model is reflected in the training
2554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

process. The entire FML model will complete the training pro-
 Algorithm 2: Personalized FedAvg Algorithm.
cess under the cooperation of these N edge devices. Each edge
device will pass the parameters to the central server and get
the initial parameters by means of average aggregation. In the
meta-training stage, 400 devices (from 0 to 399) will be used to
train a well-initialized model. In the meta-testing stage, 4 devices
(from 400 to 403) will be used to verify the generalization ability
of the model and the ability to identify unknown samples. The
traffic data contains 14 categories, O represents benign traffic
and from A to M are 13 different types of attack samples.In
the meta-training stage, considering the limited number of APT
attack samples, each device extracts 4 types of traffic data from
A − I with O as support and query sets Strain , each type has K
samples. We define Su = {A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I} samples
a set Su [i] of i types of attack data from Su (i from 0 to 4).
Strain = {Su [4], O}.
 In the meta-testing stage, in order to verify the generalization
of the model against non-IID local data and the ability to identify
unknown attacks, we trained J-M samples on the test device according to different proportions. We define Sv = {J, K, L, M }
samples a set Sv [j] of j types of attack data from Sj (j from
1 to 4). On each edge device we extract 4 types of attack data
from A to M with normal traffic data O as support and query set
Stest . Stest = {Sv [j], Su [4 − j], O}.
 The goal of traditional FL can be expressed as:
 n
 C. Personalizing to Individual Edge Devices
 1
 min f (w) := fi (w) (1) In order to generalize the model from a single edge device
 w∈Rd n i=1 to multiple devices and ensure that each edge device can obtain
 a model adapted to local data with only a few steps gradient
The optimization objective can be defined as: descents. We implement federated meta-learning using the Per-
 FedAvg method [26]. The algorithmic structure of the entire
 fi (w) := E(x,y)∼pi [li (w; x, y)] (2) FedAvg method is shown in Algorithm 2. For each edge device,
 its meta function Fi (ω) can be defined as:
 The algorithmic structure of the entire federated metalearning with MAML is shown in Algorithm 1, which modified Fi (ω) := fi (ω − α∇fi (ω)). (3)
from the research of Chen et al. [46]. The training process of The optimization objective can be defined as:
MAML includes two levels of parameter update and transfer.
 n
First, the initialization parameter θ0 is used to train the task- 1
specific model, and then the loss of all tasks is used to update min Fi (ω) := fi (ω − α∇fi (ω)). (4)
 ω∈Rd n i=1
the initialization parameters of the model. Under the federated
setting, each client downloads the initialization parameters of Here α is the learning rate, n is the number of tasks involved
the model from the server, uses the support set to train the in training. This formula could ensure that the central model
model, and then sends the test loss obtained by the query set to can capture the differences between different edge devices, and
the server. The server side saves the initialization of the model each device can modify the initial model according to its own
and collects the test loss sent back by the clients of each mini data. Algorithm 2 describes the entire FML implementation
batch. The messages transmitted between server and client are process. The optimization objective Fi (ω) is the average of all
only model initialization parameters and test loss. Specifically, meta-functions. On each edge device, the gradient of the local
in Algorithm update stage, n edge devices sampled from Ut will functions ∇Fi (ω) needs to be computed first:
receive an initial parameter θ for MAML process. Afer model
training, loss function gu is calculated and the new parameters ∇Fi (ω) = (I − α∇2 fi (ω))∇fi (ω − α∇fi (ω)). (5)
θ is send to the server. In model training stage, each edge device Since computing ∇fi (ω)is expensive, so take a batch of data Di
samples support set Strain and query set Stest . During the to get an unbiased estimate:
training process, the support set and the query set guide each
 
other and transfer knowledge. Different from the traditional FL ˜ i (ω, Di ) := 1
 ∇f ∇li (ω; x, y). (6)
method, the parameters finally passed by the edge device are |Di |
 (x,y)∈D
 i
generated under the mutual guidance of the support set and the
query set. The whole process is shown in the Model Training At the kth round of communication, the server sends the cur-
MAML process in Alforithm 1. The loss function gu will return rent global model to several randomly selected edge devices, and
to server. each edge device performs t rounds of local gradient updates.
HU et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEW-SHOT TRAFFIC DETECTION AGAINST ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS 2555

 TABLE II TABLE III
 THE ATTACK TYPES OF CICIDS2017 AND DAPT2020 MULTI-CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY CONFUSION MATRIX

 DAPT2020 dataset will eventually map data traffic to the five
 stages of APT attacks.
We optimize the meta-model based on the support set, where β
is the learning rate of the local update, i represents user i, k + 1 B. Metrics
refers to using the meta-model parameters of the kth round for
training, and t is the number of local iterations: Accuracy and macro F1 score are used as evaluation metrics.
 Accuracy represents the ratio of correctly classified samples to
 i
 ωk+1,t i
 = ωk+1,t−1 ˜ i (ω i
 − β ∇F k+1,t−1 ). (7) all samples. When the data is unbalanced, the accuracy rate
The last step is to use the query set to calculate the loss and its cannot reflect the classification effect of the class with a small
 i
gradient to ωk+1,t based on the optimized meta-model ωk+1,t i
 : number of samples. In addition to the accuracy index, the macro
 average F1 score is used as the evaluation criterion, which is the
  
 ˜ i (ωk+1,t−1
 ∇F i
 ) := I − α∇ ˜ 2 fi (ωk+1,t−1
 i 
 , Dti )
 average of five F1 scores as shown below.
 m
   F 1 scorei
 ˜ i ωi ˜ i i 
 i M acro F 1 = i (10)
 ∇f k+1,t−1 − α∇fi (ωk+1,t−1 , Dt ), Dt . (8) m
 i The basic unit of meta-learning is a task, so the evaluation
 Each edge device sends the local ωk+1,t to the server, and the
 of meta-learning performance needs to calculate the accuracy
server updates the global model by calculating the average of
 of classification results according to the confusion matrix, as
ωk+1 :
 shown in Table III. For multivariate classification tasks, the
 1  classification results correspond to the following two results:
 ωk+1 = ωi (9)
 rn i∈Ak k+1,τ 1) True Positive (TP): Normal samples are classified as
 normal;
 V. EXPERIMENTS 2) False positive (FP): Normal samples are classified as malicious (false positive);
A. Datasets
 Based on this, precision can be defined as shown below.
 Our proposed method is evaluated on the DAPT 2020 dataset.
 TP1
Only csv data obtained from CICFlowMeter feature extraction Accuracy = (11)
was used. External and internal network traffic were mixed TP1 + FP5 + FP6 + FP7 + FP8
together. The original data table contains 85 columns with 83
features and 2 labels. Columns 1 to 7 of the table data are traffic C. Experimental Settings
identification features, and all of them except the protocol col- Experiments were performed using the following hardware
umn were removed. Another 12 columns were removed because and software platforms: Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum CPU @
they were recorded the same on all traffic. The CICIDS2017 2.50 GHz, 128 GB RAM, NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, Ubuntu
dataset contains benign and recent common attacks similar to 20.04.3 LTS, CUDA 11.3, and PyTorch 1.12.1.
real-world data (PCAPs). To apply the federated meta-learning approach, the dataset
 The DAPT2020 dataset contains 5 days of network traffic, is resampled and distributed across different edge devices. The
including normal traffic and 7 kinds of APT attack traffic. dataset is divided into 70% and 30% parts for training and testing
CICDIS2017 contains 5 days of network traffic data, including edge devices respectively. In particular, the 15 traffic data in
normal traffic and 14 types of malicious traffic. The specific the data-stealing stage are manually divided into the latter. For
attack types of the two datasets are shown in Table II. As shown training and testing edge devices, we set up their classification
in Fig. 2, in the training phase, we will randomly sample 4 tasks in different ways. For training edge devices, we split the
types of malicious traffic, plus normal traffic, a total of five data by “activity”. Each edge device randomly has data of 5
types of traffic data. For each type of traffic, we will draw 10 activities, and each activity has 15 traffic. For the test edge
samples as data sources to build tasks. Each task is defined as a device, we split the data by “stages”. Each edge device has 15
few-shot five-classification task to distinguish between normal flows per attack phase. Finally, each edge device has a different
traffic and different kinds of malicious traffic. In the testing 5-classification task to simulate the different distribution of
phase, we select 4 types of traffic as unknown traffic to test the traffic classes on each node. For all edge devices, 10 samples
detection accuracy of the FML model when there are unknown of each class are used as the support set and 5 samples are used
types of attacks locally. Specially, he classification task on the as the query set.
2556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

Fig. 3. Detection results of experiments on the CICIDS2017 dataset.

D. Results
 1) Compatibility Test: In the FML scenario, the number of
edge devices affects the training effect of the model. We compared the impact of different numbers of edge devices on the
accuracy of the model when the local unknown sample types
are both 2. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 4. Two
conclusions can be drawn:
 1) The more edge devices, the higher detection rate of the
 model. The increase in the number of edge devices allows
 the central model to fit a greater number and variety of
 samples. Of course, this improvement is not unlimited.
 When the number of edge devices is sufficient to cover
 enough sample types, the accuracy of the model will no
 longer improve.
 2) Scenarios with a small number of edge devices are not
 suitable for deploying FML models. When the number of
 edge devices is only 20, the model accuracy is lower than
 default initialization. The limited number of edge clients Fig. 4. Comparisons of the detection accuracy against different numbers of
 means that they vary greatly, which is not guaranteed that edge devices.
 the central model has learned enough sample features
 during the training process. This leads to experimental
 results lower than default initialization. Meanwhile, When variance. This leads to the fact that the offset between 20
 the number of edge clients increases by a small amount, and 40 is larger than that of 40 and 60.
 the models learned by the central server are quite different. 2) Comparative Experiment: We tested our method on two
 When the client base is large enough, the number of clients different datasets: CICIDS2017 and DAPT2020. The detection
 will increase less and has less impact on the overall model results of experiments on the CICIDS2017 dataset are shown in
HU et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEW-SHOT TRAFFIC DETECTION AGAINST ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS 2557

 TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF DETECTION RESULTS, THE NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND CLASSIFICATION METHOD IN THE PROPOSED METHOD AND RELATED RESEARCH WORKS

Fig. 3. In this experiment, we compare the accuracy of anomalous traffic detection systems in three scenarios, training the
samples in central server, deploying a federated meta-learning
model, and fine-tuning a local model before testing. The neural
networks used for classifying are FCN (Fully Connected Network) and Resnet. Form Fig. 3(a) to (c) and from Fig. 3(d) to (f),
the number of unknown class in attack data was set differently.
The experimental results show that, comparing with training the
samples in center server, deploying the federated meta-learning
model can improve the edge device’s recognition accuracy of
attack samples. In the case of a small number of unknown attack
types, the detection accuracy of the test edge device after model
fine-tuning is also improved compared with the accuracy of the
traditional central server training model. However, the results
of model fine-tuning drop when the number of unknown attack
types grows. This result occurs because the local sample is quite
different from the sample fitted by the central model.
 The detection results of experiments on the DAPT2020
dataset are shown in Fig. 5. This experiment studies a fivecategory problem, and malicious traffic will be mapped to the
five attack stages in the APT attack. The settings of this experiment remain unchanged, and the neural networks used for
classification are FCN and Resnet. We compared the detection
accuracy on default initialization, federated meta learning and
FML with fine-tuning. In this experiment we did not test the
model for unknown class samples recognition ability, but instead
focuses on detecting the detection ability of FML in different
datasets. The results show that the application of FML improves
the detection accuracy of traditional centralized training while
using FCN as the classifier. The difference from the results of
the CICIDS2017 dataset is that the accuracy produced by model
fine-tuning is not stable above the default initialization. The
reason for this phenomenon is that different attack stages often
have traffic data generated by similar system behaviors. The
FCN network does not fully learn this classification method.
However, when resnet is used as the classifier, the results of
the three cases do not show a large difference as the number of
training rounds increases. The occurrence of this phenomenon
has a certain relationship with the residual structure of the resnet
model. The deeper network layer makes the classification results Fig. 5. Detection results of experiments on the DAPT2020 dataset.
of the model relatively stable, so under the effect of FML and
fine-tuning, the degree of discrimination is not obvious. types of unknown samples. The results show that under a FCN
 Detailed results of comparative experiments are shown in classification network, when the number of unknown species
Table IV. In the test of the CICIDS2017 dataset, we add different is small, the application of FML can improve the detection
2558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF DATASETS, UNKNOWN ATTACK NUMBER AND DETECTION RESULTS IN PROPOSED METHOD

accuracy by about 10%, and finally reach more than 80%. Model
fine-tuning also has better detection accuracy. When the number
of unknown species is large, the accuracy rate decreases. Due
to the powerful classification function of ResNet, the FML does
not improve the accuracy rate significantly, but it also has a
certain effect. The first reason for the difference in accuracy
improvement is that different DNN networks have different
matching degrees with data. Resnet may be more suitable for
classifying traffic data, so the improvement in accuracy rate
is not as obvious as FCN. Secondly, another reason is that
Resnet’s residual structure has more advantages than FCN in
the face of deep networks. Resnet solves the problem of gradient
disappearance encountered in the case of deepening the network.
So in the default training stage, it has a higher accuracy rate. In
the test of the DAPT2020 dataset, we classified the five APT
attack stages corresponding to the samples. The experimental
results show that under the FCN classification network, the
application of FML improves the accuracy of the model, and
the F1 score also improves. However, due to the classification
performance of the Resnet network, in the FML scenario, the
classification accuracy has not improved.
 Considering that the classification networks in CICIDS2017
and DAPT2020 are both five-category, we conducted a migration experiment of the model, which trained the model on
CICIDS2017 and tested it on DAPT2020. In the FCN network,
as shown in Fig. 6(a), after 40 rounds of local edge device
training on the DAPT2020 dataset, the central model learned
from CICIDS2017 can well adapt to local samples, and the
accuracy rate increases to 70%. The accuracy of the model after
fine-tuning is several percentage points higher than the previous
experiment. In the resnet network, as shown in Fig. 6(b), after
40 rounds of training, the accuracy of the model is the same as
the previous experiment. It can be seen that the FML model has
certain migration capabilities.
 Table V shows the comparison of detection results, the number
of samples and classification method in the proposed method
and related research works, which is extended from the work of
Xu et al. [47]. On the whole, there is a certain gap between our
detection accuracy and previous work, but considering that we
 Fig. 6. Detection results of experiments when training on CICIDS2017 and
use a multi-classification network, and FML will have a certain texting on DAPT2020.
HU et al.: PRIVACY-PRESERVING FEW-SHOT TRAFFIC DETECTION AGAINST ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREATS 2559

impact on the results in the selection of model aggregation [11] W. Zheng, L. Yan, C. Gou, and F.-Y. Wang, “Federated meta-learning for
algorithms, so consider from this perspective, our proposed fraudulent credit card detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 Intell., 2021, pp. 4654–4660.
method is feasible. [12] K. Atefi, H. Hashim, and M. Kassim, “Anomaly analysis for the classification purpose of intrusion detection system with k-nearest neighbors
 and deep neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Conf. Syst., Process Control,
 VI. CONCLUSION 2019, pp. 269–274.
 [13] Y. Xiao, C. Xing, T. Zhang, and Z. Zhao, “An intrusion detection model
 In this article, we proposed a novel detection method based based on feature reduction and convolutional neural networks,” IEEE
on federated meta learning framework to implement few-shot Access, vol. 7, pp. 42210–42219, 2019.
 [14] S. A. Althubiti, E. M. Jones, and K. Roy, “LSTM for anomaly-based
abnormal traffic detection. For this purpose, a virtual federated network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 28th Int. Telecommunication Netw.
meta-learning scenario with hundreds of edge devices and two Appl. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–3.
different five-class classification networks: FCN and ResNet [15] G. Andresini, A. Appice, L. D. Rose, and D. Malerba, “GAN augmentation
were constructed for learning. The proposed method accom- to deal with imbalance in imaging-based intrusion detection,” Future
 Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 123, pp. 108–127, 2021.
plishes this task by training a FML-based abnormal traffic train- [16] M. M. Hassan, A. Gumaei, A. Alsanad, M. Alrubaian, and G. Fortino, “A
ing and detection model. In order to adapt to the characteristics of hybrid deep learning model for efficient intrusion detection in Big Data
APT attacks, we only use a small number of labeled samples for environment,” Inf. Sci., vol. 513, pp. 386–396, 2020.
 [17] M. Kumar and A. K. Singh, “Distributed intrusion detection system using
training, and use FCN and ResNet to implement five-category blockchain and cloud computing infrastructure,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf.
tasks and identify unknown attack behaviors. On the edge device, Trends Electron. Informat., 2020, pp. 248–252.
we use the MAML method to realize the personalized adjustment [18] R. Sharma, C. A. Chan, and C. Leckie, “Evaluation of centralised vs
of the central model to the local data, so that the central model can distributed collaborative intrusion detection systems in multi-access edge
 computing,” in Proc. IFIP Netw. Conf. (Netw.), 2020, pp. 343–351.
quickly adapt to the local data and achieve high classification [19] R. Sharma, C. A. Chan, and C. Leckie, “Hybrid collaborative architecaccuracy. At the same time, the combination of MAML and tures for intrusion detection in multi-access edge computing,” in Proc.
federated learning protects the information security and privacy IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–7.
of edge devices. Experimental results show that the proposed [20] L. Nie et al., “Intrusion detection for secure social Internet of Things based
 on collaborative edge computing: A generative adversarial network-based
small-shot APT detection method achieves state-of-the-art per- approach,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 134–145,
formance in FML scenarios. Our work shows that federated Feb. 2022.
meta-learning methods can maintain the performance of APT [21] B. Yin, H. Yin, Y. Wu, and Z. Jiang, “FDC: A secure federated deep
 learning mechanism for data collaborations in the Internet of Things,”
attack detection methods in distributed scenarios, which will IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6348–6359, Jul. 2020.
inspire other researchers to design better deep neural networks [22] M. N. Hossain et al., “Sleuth: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
for APT attack detection along this direction. from cots audit data,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 487–504.
 [23] K. Satvat, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “Extractor: Extracting
 attack behavior from threat reports,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur.
 Privacy, 2021, pp. 598–615.
 REFERENCES [24] H. Li, J. Wu, H. Xu, G. Li, and M. Guizani, “Explainable intelligencedriven defense mechanism against advanced persistent threats: A joint
 [1] Y. Wu, H.-N. Dai, H. Wang, Z. Xiong, and S. Guo, “A survey of intelligent
 edge game and AI approach,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 network slicing management for industrial IoTT: Integrated approaches
 vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 757–775, Mar./Apr. 2022.
 for smart transportation, smart energy, and smart factory,” IEEE Commun.
 [25] S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Qu, Y. Zhu, and L. You, “Reinforcement learning
 Surveys Tut., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1175–1211, Secondquarter 2022.
 based incentive mechanism for federated meta learning: A game-theoretic
 [2] P. A. A, A. Maryposonia, and P. V. S, “An efficient network intrusion detecperspective,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Conf. Tools with Artif. Intell., 2022,
 tion system for distributed networks using machine learning technique,”
 pp. 1152–1159.
 in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Trends Electron. Informat., 2023, pp. 1258–1263.
 [26] A. Fallah, A. Mokhtari, and A. Ozdaglar, “Personalized federated learning
 [3] T. Ye, G. Li, I. Ahmad, C. Zhang, X. Lin, and J. Li, “FLAG: Few-shot
 with theoretical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning approach,”
 latent dirichlet generative learning for semantic-aware traffic detection,”
 Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 300, no. 12, 2020.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 73–88, Mar. 2022.
 [27] B. Ghimire and D. B. Rawat, “Recent advances on federated learning
 [4] W. Zhong, N. Yu, and C. Ai, “Applying Big Data based deep learning
 for cybersecurity and cybersecurity for federated learning for Internet of
 system to intrusion detection,” Big Data Mining Analytics, vol. 3, no. 3,
 Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8229–8249, Jun. 2022.
 pp. 181–195, 2020.
 [28] G. Li, J. Wu, S. Li, W. Yang, and C. Li, “Multitentacle federated learning
 [5] L. Chen, M. Xian, J. Liu, and H. Wang, “Intrusion detection system in
 over software-defined industrial Internet of Things against adaptive poicloud computing environment,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun.
 soning attacks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1260–1269,
 Netw. Secur., 2020, pp. 131–135.
 Feb. 2023.
 [6] W. W. Lo, S. Layeghy, M. Sarhan, M. Gallagher, and M. Portmann, “E-
 [29] Z. Yang, G. Li, J. Wu, and W. Yang, “Propagable backdoors over
 GraphSAGE: A graph neural network based intrusion detection system for
 blockchain-based federated learning via sample-specific eclipse,” in Proc.
 IoT,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2022, pp. 1–9.
 IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022, pp. 2579–2584.
 [7] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrish-
 [30] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and
 nan, “HOLMES: Real-time apt detection through correlation of suspicious
 federated learning for privacy-preserved data sharing in industrial IoT,”
 information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, pp. 1137–
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 4177–4186, Jun. 2020.
 1152.
 [31] Y. Zhao et al., “Privacy-preserving blockchain-based federated learning
 [8] T. A. Tang, L. Mhamdi, D. McLernon, S. A. R. Zaidi, and M. Ghogho,
 for IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1817–1829,
 “Deep recurrent neural network for intrusion detection in SDN-based
 Jan./Feb. 2022.
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Netw. Softwarization Workshops (NetSoft),
 [32] S. Moon and W. H. Lee, “Privacy-preserving federated learning in health-
 2018, pp. 202–206.
 care,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Electron., Inf., Commun., 2023, pp. 1–4.
 [9] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. N. Venkatakrishnan,
 [33] B. Li, Y. Wu, J. Song, R. Lu, T. Li, and L. Zhao, “Deepfed: Federated
 “POIROT: Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber
 deep learning for intrusion detection in industrial cyber–physical systems,”
 threat hunting,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5615–5624, Aug. 2021.
 2019, pp. 1795–1812.
 [34] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast
[10] D. Yuan et al., “Intrusion detection for smart home security based on data
 adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017,
 augmentation with edge computing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.,
 pp. 1126–1135.
 2020, pp. 1–6.
2560 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 11, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2024

[35] Y. Jiang, J. Konečný, K. Rush, and S. Kannan, “Improving feder- Gaolei Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 ated learning personalization via model agnostic meta learning,” 2019, from Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, and the
 arXiv:1909.12488. Ph.D. degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
[36] G. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Wei, and Y. Liu, “Few-shot multi-domain knowledge Shanghai, China. During 2018–2019, he visited at
 rearming for context-aware defence against advanced persistent threats,” Muroran Institution of Technology, Muroran, Japan,
 2023, arXiv:2306.07685. granted by the China Scholarship Council Program.
[37] H. Zhao, F. Ji, Q. Li, Q. Guan, S. Wang, and M. Wen, “Federated He is currently an Assistant Professor with the School
 meta-learning enhanced acoustic radio cooperative framework for ocean of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
 of things,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 474–486, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research interests
 Apr. 2022. include adversarial machine learning and privacy pro-
[38] L. Zhang, C. Zhang, and B. Shihada, “Efficient wireless traffic prediction tection. He was the recipient of the best paper awards
 at the edge: A federated meta-learning approach,” IEEE Commun. Lett., from the IEEE ComSoc CSIM Committee, Chinese Association for Cryptologic
 vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1573–1577, Jul. 2022. Research (CACR) and IEEE Globecom student travel grant Award. He is a
[39] N. Muthukumar, “Few-shot learning text classification in federated envi- reviewer of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTINGC,
 ronments,” in Proc. Smart Technol., Commun. Robot., 2021, pp. 1–3. TII, TCCN, and PC member of AAAI, IEEE Globecom, IEEE ICC, IEEE VTC.
[40] X. Jiang et al., “Federated meta-location learning for fine-grained location
 prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), 2021, pp. 446–
 456.
[41] A. Elgabli, C. B. Issaid, A. S. Bedi, M. Bennis, and V. Aggarwal, “Energyefficient and federated meta-learning via projected stochastic gradient
 ascent,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–6. Jianhua Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.,
[42] A. Z. Tan, H. Yu, L. Cui, and Q. Yang, “Towards personalized federated M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. University, Shanghai, China, in 1986, 1991 and 1998,
 28, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3160699. respectively. He is currently a Professor/Ph.D. Super-
[43] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith, visor and the Dean of Institute of Cyber Science and
 “Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shang-
 Syst., vol. 2, pp. 429–450, 2020. hai, China. He is also the Director of National Engi-
[44] O. Marfoq, G. Neglia, A. Bellet, L. Kameni, and R. Vidal, “Federated neering Laboratory for Information Content Analysis
 multi-task learning under a mixture of distributions,” Proc. 35th Conf. Technology, the Director of Engineering Research
 Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 34, 2021. Center for Network Information Security Manage-
[45] T. Li, S. Hu, A. Beirami, and V. Smith, “Ditto: Fair and robust federated ment and Service of Chinese Ministry of Education,
 learning through personalization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, and the Director of Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration
 pp. 6357–6368. Technologies for Information Security, China. He is the Vice President of
[46] F. Chen, M. Luo, Z. Dong, Z. Li, and X. He, “Federated meta-learning with Association of Cyber Security Association of China. He was the Chief Expert
 fast convergence and efficient communication,” 2018, arXiv:1802.07876. with the information security committee experts of National High Technology
[47] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) of China. He was
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics the leader of more than 30 state/province projects of China, and authored or
 Secur., vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020. coauthored more than 300 papers. He authored or coauthored six books and
 has about 20 patents. His research interests include information security, signal
 process, computer network communication. He made three standards and has
 Yilun Hu received the B.S. degree in communication five software copyrights. He was the recipient of the Second Prize of National
 engineering from Beijing Jiaotong University, Bei- Technology Progress Award of China in 2005.
 jing, China, in 2016, and the M.S. degree in informatics from Northeastern University, Boston, MA,
 USA, in 2019. He is currently working toward the
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
 University, Shanghai, China. His research interests
 Jinke Cheng received the B.S. degree from Xidian
 include Internet of Things, machine learning, and
 University, Xi’an, China, in 2022. He is currently
 cybersecurity.
 working toward the M.S. degree with the School of
 Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His
 Jun Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. research interests include machine learning for cyberdegree in information and telecommunication studies security and cybersecurity for machine learning. He
 from Waseda University, Shinjuku City, Japan, in has participated in many projects, including National
 2011. He is currently a professor with the School Natural Science Foundation of China, and CCF-Ant
 of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, group funding.
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research interests
 include the intelligence and security techniques of
 Internet of Things (IoT), edge computing, Big Data,
 5 G/6 G. He is the Chair of IEEE P21451-1-5 Standard
 Working Group for Internet of things. His publications have received a few distinctions, which include
the Best Paper Award of IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
in 2020, Best Paper Award of International Conference on Telecommunications
and Signal Process in 2019, Best Conference Paper Award of the IEEE ComSoc
Technical Committee on Communications Systems Integration and Modeling in
2018. He was the Track Chair for VTC 2019, VTC 2020 and the TPC Member
of more than ten international conferences including ICC, GLOBECOM. He is
an Associate Editor for the IEEE SYSTEMS JOURNAL and IEEE NETWORKING
LETTERS. He was the Guest Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL
INFORMATICS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION, IEEE
SENSORS JOURNAL, Sensors, Frontiers of Information Technology Electronic
Engineering (FITEE).