IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024 11751

Produce Once, Utilize Twice for Anomaly Detection
 Shuyuan Wang , Qi Li , Member, IEEE, Huiyuan Luo, Chengkan Lv , Member, IEEE,
 and Zhengtao Zhang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Visual anomaly detection aims at classifying and I. I NTRODUCTION
locating the regions that deviate from the normal appearance.
Embedding-based methods and reconstruction-based methods
are two main approaches for this task. The embedding-based
methods typically predict the anomaly by measuring the distances
 U NSUPERVISED anomaly detection has drawn much
 attention in recent years [26], [32], [54], since it requires
 no defect samples for training [25], [29], [31], which benbetween the deep representations of the test samples and a efits the scenario where the collection of defect samples
limited number of nominal samples, which enables these methods is costly, e.g. industrial detection [28], [30]. There are two
to be efficient but struggle in providing a fine-grained pixellevel anomaly location. The reconstruction-based methods rely
 main approaches for anomaly detection, reconstruction-based
on the pixel-level reconstruction errors to locate the anomaly, methods and embedding-based methods. The reconstructionthereby the anomaly predictions are fine-grained. However, there based methods train a reconstructive network to build a normal
are repetitive feature extractions and usually extra modules to version of the input [27], as shown in Figure 1. Generally,
guarantee the quality of the reconstructed images, resulting the deviation lies solely in the abnormal regions before and
in unsatisfactory detection efficiency. In a nutshell, the prior
methods are either not efficient or not precise enough for
 after reconstruction. By analyzing the reconstruction errors,
the industrial detection. To deal with this problem, we derive the anomaly can be located [2], [49], [54]. As illustrated
POUTA (Produce Once Utilize Twice for Anomaly detection), in Figure 2, due to the analysis on pixel-level reconstrucwhich improves both the accuracy and efficiency by reusing the tion errors, the reconstruction-based methods are endowed
discriminant information potential in the reconstructive network. with the capability to locate the anomaly at the fine-grained
We observe that the encoder and decoder representations of
the reconstructive network are able to stand for the features pixel-level. However, there are strict requirements for the
of the original and reconstructed image respectively. And the reconstructive network. Specifically, abnormal regions should
discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive representa- be repaired to normal, while the normal regions are supposed
tions provides roughly accurate anomaly information. To refine to remain unchanged. Otherwise, the reconstruction errors will
this information, a coarse-to-fine process is proposed in POUTA, not conform to the anomaly, resulting in failure in detection,
which calibrates the semantics of each discriminative layer by
the high-level representations and supervision loss. Equipped as shown in the carpet of Figure 2. Prior studies [6], [33]
with the above modules, POUTA is endowed with the ability always design extra modules for the reconstructive network to
to provide a more precise anomaly location than the prior arts. meet the aforementioned requirements. Due to the intricate
Besides, the representation reusage also enables to exclude the structure, the reconstruction-based methods fall flat when
feature extraction process in the discriminative network, which comparing the inference time with the embedding-based methreduces the parameters and improves the efficiency. Extensive
experiments show that, POUTA is superior or comparable to the ods. The embedding-based methods typically exploit the deep
prior methods with even less cost. Furthermore, POUTA also representations to do a feature matching between the test
achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art few-shot sample and the nominal samples, as indicated in Figure 1.
anomaly detection methods without any special design, showing Since the nominal samples for feature matching are usually
that POUTA has strong ability to learn representations inherent limited in number [16], the embedding-based methods achieve
in the training data.
 tremendous progress on the detection efficiency. However,
 Index Terms— Anomaly detection, detection efficiency, repre- the deep representations are typically of lower resolution
sentations reusing. than the input, which makes the embedding-based methods
 to struggle in providing a fine-grained pixel-level anomaly
 location, as shown in Figure 2. In a nutshell, both of the above
 Manuscript received 21 December 2023; revised 29 April 2024; methods have some deficiencies, and it is an ambitious goal
accepted 20 June 2024. Date of publication 28 June 2024; date of current version 27 November 2024. This work was supported in part by the for the prior arts to provide a fine-grained pixel-level anomaly
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20482, Grant location efficiently.
62303458, Grant 62303461, and Grant 62076240; in part by Beijing Municipal There are two approaches to overcome the aforementioned
Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4222054; and in part by the Youth
Innovation Promotion Association of the Chinese Academy of Sciences under deficiencies. For the embedding-based methods, to obtain the
Grant Y2023143. This article was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Tao. fine-grained location, it is necessary to analyze the shallow
(Corresponding author: Zhengtao Zhang.) representations to add details about the anomaly. RD [18]
 The authors are with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: wangshuyuan2020@ia.ac.cn; qli@ follows this way, which utilizes a distillation mechanism
nlpr.ia.ac.cn; huiyuan.luo@ia.ac.cn; chengkan.lv@ia.ac.cn; zhengtao.zhang@ and introduces a student network to upsample the features
ia.ac.cn). from the teacher network to measure the shallow representa-
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3420775. tions, as depicted in Figure 1. Specifically, RD believes the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2024.3420775 teacher network which is pre-trained on other dataset (such as
 1051-8215 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
11752 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 Fig. 3. In POUTA, the representation distributions of the last reconstructive
Fig. 1. The network architectures of the reconstruction-based method
 encoder layer and the first reconstructive decoder layer are visualized by
(DRÆM [5]), embedding-based method (PatchCore [16]), the improved
 t-SNE [42]. The red points correspond to the representations of the abnormal
embedding-based method (RD [18]) and the proposed POUTA which is
 regions, and the green ones refer to the normal representations. Each column
improved based on the vanilla reconstruction-based method [5].
 on the right represents the input, the anomaly predicted only by the differences
 in representation of the aforementioned two layers, and the ground truth,
 respectively.

 capsule of Figure 2. Even if the reconstructed image is of high
 quality, it is still a challenging problem to indicate anomaly
 completely when the color of abnormal region is close to
 the normal one. The second lies in the excessive computing
 consumption caused by the repetitive feature extraction in
 the reconstructive and discriminative network. Both of them
 extracts the features of the input in their encoders. It seems
Fig. 2. The qualitative examples of the embedding-based method impossible to solve both of the above problems simultane-
(PatchCore [16]), the improved embedding-based method (RD [18]), recon- ously within the conventional reconstruction-based paradigm,
struction-based method (DRÆM [5]), and the proposed POUTA.
 as achieving better performance necessitates enhancing the
 quality of reconstruction, which inevitably leads to increased
 computing consumption. This enlightens us to propose a new
ImageNet) has the ability to demonstrate the anomaly well, reconstruction-based paradigm.
while the student network trained only on the current dataset We argue that, in the reconstructive network, the encoder
does not have this ability. Therefore, the cosine distance and decoder representations are able to stand for the hierarbetween the features of the teacher network and student chical representations of the input and reconstructed images.
network reveals the anomaly location. However, modeling or It is more suitable for the discriminative network to locate
feature matching the shallow representations is sophisticated. the anomaly by analyzing the discrepancies between the
As shown in Figure 2, the predicted location of RD is finer symmetric representations in the encoder and decoder directly.
than the embedding-based method, but as it identifies anomaly To verify our assumption, the encoder and decoder representain the feature layer whose resolution is close to that of the tions are visualized in Figure 3. Figure 3 indicates that, in the
input, the predicted anomaly location is not as fine-grained encoder, most of the abnormal representations are apart from
as that of the reconstruction-based methods. It is because that the normal ones. While in the decoder, since the abnormal
the shallow representations are not as homogeneous as the regions are repaired to normal, their representations are shifted
deep ones, it requires to record the shallow representations to the distribution of the normal data. The above phenomelaborately to obtain an accurate anomaly location, which is ena are consistent with our assumption. Since the normal
costly and may deprive the efficiency. Therefore, we turn to regions and the abnormal regions in the input have different
another solution, improving the accuracy and efficiency of the appearances, they naturally belong to different distributions.
reconstruction-based methods. While the abnormal regions are repaired to normal in the
 Recent reconstruction-based methods follow a paradigm, reconstructed image, their representations will shift to the
which involves a reconstructive network and a discriminative normal distribution in the decoder. Therefore, it is feasible
network [5], [35], [48], as demonstrated in Figure 1. The to identify the anomaly by the representation discrepancies
discriminative network is employed to locate the anomaly between encoder and decoder. As shown in Figure 3, by anaby analyzing the discrepancies between the original and lyzing the disparities between the last reconstructive encoder
reconstructed images, demonstrating significantly better per- layer and the first reconstructive decoder layer, the anomaly
formance than simply measuring the absolute distance between can be located roughly accurately.
these two images. Despite the impressive efforts, two critical Based on the above conclusion, we derive a neat and
issues still exist. Firstly, this paradigm yet relies on the effective approach, POUTA (Produce Once Utilize Twice
reconstruction errors to identify anomaly. The requirements for for Anomaly detection), as an effective remedy for the
the reconstructive network are strict as usual. While the quality reconstruction-based methods on both accuracy and efficiency,
of the reconstructed image is sometimes not so ideal, resulting fully reusing the discriminant information potential in the
in the unsatisfactory prediction, as shown in the carpet and reconstructive network. POUTA is established with a view
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11753

Fig. 4. The qualitative examples and visualizations (provided by Grad-CAM [4]) of the vanilla reconstruction-based (DRÆM [5]-like) and POUTA.

to the availability of the multi-scale reconstructive represen- normal ones, the vanilla method fails to locate anomalies
tations, aggregating hierarchical symmetric representations to without surprise, but POUTA still identifies anomaly precisely.
identify anomaly through a lightweight coarse-to-fine discrim- Besides, the discriminative network in POUTA directly reuses
inative network, as shown in Figure 1. Specifically, in the the reconstructive representations, which distinctively allows
discriminative network, firstly, there is a MSS (Multi-scale for the exclusion of feature extraction in the discriminative
Semantic Supervision) module to ensure clear differentia- network, thereby improving efficiency. In summary, by directly
tion for the abnormal regions between encoder and decoder reusing informative representations, POUTA relaxes the strict
representations. Secondly, a differential module named FCM requirement for reconstructive network, and this new paradigm
(Feature Contrast Module) is designed to analyze the distri- is able to achieve higher accuracy at lower cost.
bution shift of the same representation between the encoder Our main contributions can be listed as follows:
and decoder in the feature space. The representations of the • Different from previous reconstruction-based methods,
normal regions remain in the same distribution, while those the discriminative network in POUTA directly reuses the
of the abnormal ones shift, which can serve as a signal for representations in the reconstructive network, which filled
detection. In addition, HSG (High-level Semantic Guidance) the gap that the previous arts are typically inefficient.
module calibrates the hierarchical representations output by • POUTA utilizes the discrepancies between the reconstruc-
FCM progressively, resulting in rich and precise spatial details. tive representations to locate the anomaly, which provides
It can be observed that our method compares the shallow more accurate and complete anomaly information than
representations in the encoder with their symmetric decoder the previously used reconstruction error, endowing the
representations. While the anomaly information drawn from capability to identify the anomaly more precisely.
the discrepancies between these representations is calibrated • Experimental results show the superiority of the proby the deep semantics through the HSG module and also the posed unsupervised method POUTA. It outperforms
MSS module, which enables the prediction to be more accurate the state-of-the-art methods on MVTec AD and VisA
and fine-grained simultaneously. dataset and achieves a comparable performance with the
 Due to reusing the reconstructive representations, POUTA best-performing supervised method on DAGM dataset.
suffices to identify anomaly more precisely than the vanilla • POUTA also achieves superior performance on few-shot
reconstruction-based method with even lower cost. We take anomaly detection without any special design, which
Grad-CAM [4] to visualize the semantic differences captured indicates that POUTA has strong ability to learn repreby the vanilla method and POUTA in Figure 4. There is no sentations inherent in the nominal data.
significant discrepancy between the reconstructed images from
both methods, while POUTA obtains more complete semantics II. R ELATED W ORK
of anomaly regions through the representations and therefore Anomaly detection is an unsupervised detection task, where
the predictions of POUTA are more precise. This indicates that only the normal data is involved amid training [58]. The
the reconstructive representations are more informative than anomaly detection model is required to distinguish between
reconstruction errors. It is reasonable since the information samples being drawn from the training data distribution and
loss occurs when reconstructing an image from its representa- those outside its support [16], [61]. Given respective nomtions. As a result of this loss, the pixel-level reconstruction inal samples and test samples, anomaly detection can be
errors might be incomplete, or even inaccurate, potentially converted to calculating distances between the nominal deep
leading to detection failures in certain cases, especially those representations and the test ones, or analyzing the differences
of fine-grained anomalies. As shown in Figure 4, the colors before and after reconstruction, which corresponds to the
of the abnormal regions in wood and pill are close to the embedding-based methods and reconstruction-based methods.
11754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

A. Embedding-Based Methods autoencoder [10]. Since the anomaly is located by analyzing
 The embedding-based methods typically extract the deep the pixel-level differences between the images before and after
representations and then calculate the distance to k near- reconstruction, the anomaly prediction is always fine-grained.
est nominal neighbors or the probability in the distribution. The early arts predicts the anomaly by the reconstruction error,
DeepSVDD [39] and MLBFD [59] propose to find the data typically in L1 distance [26], [27]. EaLDL [60] employs the
centers and set corresponding radii. Data where the distance L2 distance to calculate the reconstruction error. A threshold
from its corresponding center exceeds the radius is considered is set to distinguish normal and abnormal regions. Including
as an anomaly. This approach is effective in fault diagnosis the reconstruction error, SSR-AE [62] also calculate the L2
task. While DeepSVDD extracts the deep representations distance between the applied and predicted transformation on
describing the entire image, which limits the model to obtain- the original image, in order to enlarge the gap of anomaly
ing only the existence of the anomaly but not to locating scores between normal and abnormal images. SSAGAN [63]
it. To mitigate this problem, PatchSVDD [3] extracts the applies Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) to calculate the
deep representations for the image patch, which provides prediction error between the actual pixels and the predicted
the rough anomaly location. Similarly, PaDim [40] generates ones provided by a self-attentive predictor. Besides, a selfpatch embeddings from the pretrained network to estimate supervised rotation angle prediction task is proposed to enlarge
the Gaussian distribution moments (mean and covariance) for detection errors for abnormal pixels. TAC-Net [64] transforms
patch-level Mahalanobis distance. GLCF [28] points out that the instances and incorparates contrastive learning during the
the performance of prior arts are limited since only the local training stage. The anomaly score is also measured by PSNR.
knowledge is relied to identify anomaly. Therefore, GLCF These methods are effective in certain practical applications,
proposes a two-branch approach to extract the local and global such as process monitoring and video anomaly detection.
features, respectively. Despite improving the performance, the Recently, to meet the requirements of more complex and
efficiency degrades. Other distribution learning methods can changing industrial scenarios, there is a paradigm shift towards
also be utilized, such as the normalizing flow (NF) [41]. Dif- analyzing the reconstruction errors using a discriminative
ferNet [36] takes the NF to measure the anomaly. To obtain the network [5], [21], [35], [48], [51]. Namely, the vanilla framemore informative representations, CSflow [37] builds a cross- work comprises a reconstructive network and a discriminative
scale NF, which enables the model to predict the anomaly more network in series. The input of the discriminative network
precisely while increase the model scale at the same time. contains only the input image and the reconstructed image.
Some works turn the anomaly detection task into a matter of However, the procedure that compresses the representations to
distances to k nearest neighbors. SPADE records the nominal build a reconstructed image inevitably results in information
representations extracted from a pretrained network in a mem- loss, which may ultimately lead to inconsistencies between
ory bank, and then calculates the average distances between the reconstruction errors and the anomalies. Lots of effort has
the test data and k nearest nonimal neighbors [15]. To notably been invested in enhancing the quality of the reconstructed
reduce the inference cost, PatchCore [16] subsamples the image to ensure that the reconstruction errors provide more
memory bank. Moreover, Patchcore extracts locally aware precise anomaly information. And most turns to incorporate
patch features to achieve high performance. The traditional an additional module into the reconstructive network, such as a
embedding-based methods suffer from the coarse anomaly memory bank [6], [10], [24], [27], codebook [21], or attention
prediction. RD [18] proposes to utilize a distillation mech- mechanism [26], [33]. Turning the reconstruction sub-task
anism into the embedding-based method. A student network to the image inpainting task, where the input is gridded
is employed to upsample the representations of the teacher and then reconstructed in patch [11], [22], [23], [46], also
network, allowing to modelling the shallow representations facilitates the construction of a high-quality reconstructed
whose resolution is close to the input. This approach slightly image. It also proposes to utilize the mathematical expectation
alleviates the difficulty of modelling the shallow representa- map of the training dataset as the supplement of normal
tions, but also results in a predicted anomaly map that is not appearance [33], aiming to assist the reconstructive network
as fine-grained as that of the reconstruction-based methods. to build a high-quality normal image. Based on the paradigm
Unlike RD, we choose a different solution to consider both the composed of a reconstructive network and a separate disefficiency and accuracy, improving the reconstruction-based criminative network, NIGSF [25] provides an insight into the
methods by reusing the reconstructive representations. In this normal appearance through another normal image, which is
paper, our POUTA is compared with PatchCore and RD, beneficial for identifying semantic anomaly. But the unavoidknown for their efficiency and finer location, respectively, able inconsistencies between the input and the introduced
among the above methods. The embedding-based methods one in details might lead to misjudgment. Despite being a
generally enjoys higher efficiency than the reconstruction- smaller model, the performance drops on certain metrics.
based methods, but the anomaly locations are generally not The above methods aim to build a high-quality reconstructed
as fine-grained as the reconstruction-based methods. image, which follows the vanilla idea to locate the anomaly
 by analyzing the pixel-level reconstruction errors. It is costly
 but still can not deal with certain anomaly, such as the color-
B. Reconstruction-Based Methods close-to-normal one. Aiming at improving both the accuracy
 The reconstruction-based anomaly methods reconstruct and efficiency, it is necessary to propose a new paradigm.
a normal version of the input, typically through the Our method opts to reuse the reconstructive representations,
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11755

which provides more precise anomaly information, endowing Perlin generator [44] is used to determine the abnormal region.
our method to achieve better performance with less costs than M is a binary map, which indicates the regions on a random
the vanilla method. Perlin noise map that is greater than a random threshold
 between 0 and 1. M is a zero matrix when the input is
C. Few-Shot Anomaly Detection a normal image, all the numbers in the Perlin noise map
 are smaller than the threshold at this time. This situation
 Few-shot anomaly detection aims to indicate the anomaly rarely happens, in general, the inputs are mainly images with
with only a few nominal samples as the training support [20]. synthetic anomalies. β is a random number between 0 and 0.8.
TDG [9] incorporates a hierarchical generative module to The input in Figure 5 exemplifies the synthetic image.
model the distribution of multi-scale patches. To enhance There are three parts in reconstructive network: the encoder,
the representations, TDG uses image transformations and the mapping layer, and the decoder. Given the input image, the
optimizes discriminators to distinguish between real and fake encoder outputs hierarchy representations FEi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4).
patches, as well as between different transformations applied Then, the mapping layer maps the representation FE4 to the
to the patches. The anomaly predictions are obtained by aggre- normal latent space, and outputs as FM . Subsequently, the
gating the patch-based votes of the correct transformations. decoder samples up FM and obtains the multi-scale normal
Similarly, RegAD [20] applies the transformations as well, representations FDi (i = 4, 3, 2, 1). Finally, an image with
but on the features, learning the category-agnostic feature normal appearance Ir is reconstructed. Ir is supposed to be the
registration flexibly. Therefore, RegAD can detect anomaly same with the original one Iori . Therefore, the reconstructive
in new categories with just a few normal images, without loss L r ec is calculated between Ir and Iori by the mean
requiring fine-tuning [20]. MSMC [43] proposes to employs a square error (MSE) and structure similarity index measure [34]
global memory bank and an individual memory bank to record (SSIM). As mentioned in [5], MSE is a regular reconstruction
the features of the entire image and a single object respectively. loss but assumes the independence between neighboring pix-
The prior few-shot anomaly detection methods implement els. Following recommendations in [5], we add SSIM loss into
focused design for the few-shot context, whereas our method the reconstruction loss.
POUTA is initially designed for the typical anomaly detection.
Despite this, POUTA still exhibits considerable performance L r ec = L M S E (Ir , Iori ) + L SS I M (Ir , Iori ) (3)
on the few-shot anomaly detection, indicating strong learning
ability towards the representations inherent in the training data. B. The Coarse-to-Fine Discriminative Network
 The discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive
 III. M ETHOD representations can accurately indicate the anomaly positions
As depicted in Figure 5, instead of analyzing the pixel-level in some cases, as shown in Figure 2. While we find that
reconstruction errors in the vanilla method, POUTA predicts the anomaly information contained in the reconstructive repthe anomaly by analyzing the discrepancies in the symmetric resentations is coarse, which makes the indicated anomaly
reconstructive representations. POUTA is a neat and effec- positions in other cases unclear or incomplete (we will present
tive framework which comprises two networks that we will these cases in ablation study). Previous methods follow the
describe in sequence: self-supervised learning with recon- vanilla paradigm to compress the representations into images.
structive network (III-A) and coarse-to-fine discriminative Nevertheless, the compression inevitably results in the loss
network (III-B). of information, which leads to the pixel-level reconstruction
 errors not align with the anomalies. To address this, the
A. Self-Supervised Learning With Reconstructive Network previous methods focus on enhancing the quality of the
 reconstructed image by using sophisticated skills [6], [33],
 Different from conventional methods, the reconstructed
 which typically requires extra space or computing resources.
image does not need to repair the anomaly flawlessly, and it is
 Instead, the reconstructive representations are directly
sufficient to offer a tendency towards repairing it in POUTA.
 employed as discriminative representations in this paper. This
Therefore, no additional elements are added to produce a
 approach eliminates the information loss associated with the
flawless reconstructed image, and the reconstructive network
 compression from representations to images. To obtain a more
is requested to rectify the synthetic anomaly using contextual
 precise result, we propose a coarse-to-fine strategy to anainformation, which has been proven to be an effective strategy
 lyze the discrepancies between the symmetric reconstructive
to enhance the representational learning ability [12], [17], [53].
 representations. Three well-designed modules are proposed
 The synthetic abnormal image Iin is generated by seamto detect and refine the anomaly location. Specifically, the
lessly blending an augmented image Iaug within a predeter-
 Feature Contrast Module (FCM) initially acquires the coarse
mined region M of an image Iori from the training dataset.
 anomaly information within the reconstructive representations,
 Iin = Iori ⊙ (1 − M) + Iaug ⊙ M (1) which is the coarse stage. And then the High-level Semantic
 Iaug = β × g(Iori ) + (1 − β) × Iun (2) Guidance (HSG) and Multi-scale Semantic Supervision (MSS)
 refine the anomaly information, and identify the anomalies
where Iaug is formed by merging a transformed version g(·) of precisely.
the original image Iori (e.g. translation, rotation or identity) 1) FCM: FCM treats the encoder representations FEi
with an image Iun obtained from an unrelated dataset [13]. (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) and the decoder representations FDi
11756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 5. The vanilla method and the proposed POUTA. Vanilla method is composed of an autoencoder-like reconstructive network and a U-Net [45]-like
discriminative network, where the discriminative network obtains only the concatenation of the input and reconstructed image. While in POUTA, the
discriminative network obtains the representations of the symmetric layers in the reconstructive network. The reconstructive representations contains more
precise information about anomaly than the pixel-level reconstruction errors, which enables POUTA to identify anomaly more precisely. Each layer (except
the first one) in the discriminative network involves a coarse(FCM module)-to-fine(HSG and MSS module) process.

(i = 1, 2, 3, 4) as the features of the input and reconstructed contained in FCi (i = 1, 2, 3), a natural idea is to filter the
image respectively. By analyzing the discrepancies between shallow FCi with the deep one FC(i+1) .
them, the preliminary anomaly information exists in the As illustrated in Figure 5, the last refined representation
contrastive feature maps FCi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4). Specifically, ′
 FC(i+1) i = 2, 3 or FC4 are used to filter the current represenas demonstrated in Figure 5, FEi and FCi (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) tation FCi (i = 1, 2, 3). Specifically, the deep representation
go through their respective 1 × 1 convolutional layers. Next, a ′
 FC(i+1) i = 2, 3 (or FC4 ) is firstly upsampled to the current
1 × 1 convolutional layer is used to capture the discrepancies resolution, and then passes through a 3 × 3 convolution. Next,
(distribution shift) between them by their channel-wise con- it generates weight maps at spatial dimension Wsp(i) and
catenation, and its output is denoted as FCi . FCi contains the channel dimension Wcn(i) as filters. To generate the spatial
roughly precise information about the anomaly location. weight map Wsp(i) , a 1 × 1 convolution is added to adjust
 2) HSG: HSG aims to refine the anomaly information the channel number to 1. As for the channel-wise weight
in FCi . And the refined version is denoted as FCi ′ (i = map Wcn(i) , a global average pooling is used to adjust the
1, 2, 3). Generally speaking, the shallow representations (high- spatial size to 1 × 1, and then Wcn(i) is generated by a
resolution) contain the information about anomaly details, but 1 × 1 convolution. By multiplying Wsp(i) and Wcn(i) to FC(i) ,
 a refined contrastive feature map FC(i)′ is obtained:
they are also susceptible to interference from noise. And
modelling the shallow representations is too sophisticated (
to be absolutely accurate, due to the various details in the f sp(i) (FC(i+1)
 ′
 ), i = 1, 2
 Wsp(i) = (4)
shallow representations. Although the deep representations f sp(i) (FC4 ), i =3
(low-resolution) generally cannot provide detailed anomaly (
information, they reveal accurate anomaly semantics and are f cn(i) (FC(i+1)
 ′
 ), i = 1, 2
 Wcn(i) = (5)
less affected by noise. To refine the anomaly information f cn(i) (FC4 ), i =3
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11757

 ′
 FCi = Wsp(i) ⊙ FCi ⊙ Wcn(i) , i = 1, 2, 3 (6) AD is a benchmark dataset for visual anomaly detection,
 which contains 5,354 images in 15 image categories. VisA
where the f sp(i) represents the operations of upsample and contains 10,821 images with 9,621 normal and 1,200 abnormal
convolution, and f cn(i) represents the operations of upsample, samples. As for MPDD, it incorporates 1,346 samples in
convolution and global average pooling. FCi ′ is involved to
 6 classes. Since abnormal images only exist in the testing
refine the next contrastive feature map FC(i−1) (i = 2, 3). set for MVTec AD, MPDD and VisA, they are mainly used
 3) MSS: POUTA establishes on the observation that the to train unsupervised anomaly detection methods. Different
representations of the encoder and decoder in the reconstruc- with the above datasets, DAGM has defect images in training
tive network refer to the features of the input and reconstructed set and is mainly used to train supervised anomaly detection
image respectively. Under this observation, we further propose methods. It contains 16100 images in 10 categories. Note that
a multi-scale semantic supervision (MSS) module to refine the POUTA doesn’t use any real defect images to train the model
anomaly information by ensuring a clear discrepancy between on all of the datasets, and it is only trained on the normal
the symmetric reconstructive representations. MSS requires images in training data with the synthetic anomalies.
 ′ (i = 1, 2, 3) and F
FCi C4 to be able to predict the abnormal 2) Metric: In order to have a fair comparison with
regions M p(i) through their corresponding predictive head. other methods, both the image-level classification perfor-
As shown in Figure 5, the predictive head consists of an mance (CLS) and pixel-level location performance (LOC)
upsample layer, a 1 × 1 convolution for dimensional reduction are exploited in this paper. The metric to measure CLS and
and a softmax layer. Note that MSS module is only used during LOC is the area under the receiver operating characteristic
training. To supervise the anomaly prediction of each layer, curve (AUROC). We notice that many methods report high
we add semantic supervision loss L SS(i) to each predictive performance on MVTec AD, even close to 1, on AUROC
head, which is represented as: metric. Therefore, we add another metric, average precision
 L SS(i) = L f ocal (M p(i) , M)+ L 1 (M p(i) , M), i = 1, 2, 3, 4 (AP) to measure LOC. On MVTec AD dataset, both CLS
 and LOC are evaluated. Since the annotations of DAGM is
 (7)
 coarse, only the CLS is tested. Similar with other state-of-thewhere L 1 (·) denotes the ℓ1 -norm-based loss function, art methods, CLS is measured on VisA and MPDD.
L f ocal (·) is the focal loss [7], M is a binary map for ground 3) Implementation Details: λ1 , λ2 , λ3 and λ4 in Eq. 8 are
truth, which indicates the abnormal regions. It can be noticed empirically set to 0.4, 0.3, 0.2 and 0.1 respectively. To confirm
that we use the L1-norm in Eq. 7 because it has been verified the reweight parameters α1 , α2 , and α3 in Eq. 10, we conduct
to be beneficial in segmentation more accurately, and retains 25 groups of experiments as shown in Figure 6. We first adopt
less edge information than the L2-norm [52]. MSS forces the AP metric to evaluate the performance, due to AP is more
intermediate representations to pay more attention to anomaly sensitive to performance changes than AUROC. Since the
information. The total loss of MSS L M SS is the weighted sum performances of the current methods vary acutely on carpet,
of L SS(i) on each scale: cable, pill, toothbrush, and transistor classes, as demonstrated
 on Table II, we thereby test the performance of the reweighted
 4
 X POUTA on these five objects. The distribution of the average
 L M SS = λi L SS(i) (8)
 performance on them is close to a normal distribution, the
 i=1
 mean locates around α1 = 1.0, α2 = 1.0, α3 = 1.0, which is
 Finally, the channel-wise aggregation of FC1 ′ , F ′ , F ′ and
 C2 C3 finally adopted in POUTA. POUTA is trained for 600 epochs
FC4 is required to predict a pixel-level anomaly heatmap M p . with a batch size of 8. The learning rate of the Adam optimizer
Inspired by the vanilla method [5], the image-level anomaly is set to 0.0002 and multiplied by 0.2 at epoch 480 and epoch
score S is the maximum of the 21 × 21 average pooling result 540. Images are resized to 224 × 224.
of M p . The loss of the predicted heatmap L pr e is measured 4) Training Algorithm: Every experiment is trained from
by focal loss and L1 loss. L pr e presses the predicted anomaly scratch, and initialized randomly, including the few-shot expermap M p to be as close to M as possible. iment. All the networks in POUTA is trained simultaneously
 as shown in Algorithm 1. L total will force the reconstruc-
 L pr e = L f ocal (M p , M) + L 1 (M p , M) (9) tive network to keep the features of the input in encoder,
The total loss of POUTA L total are represented as follows: repair the features of the abnormal regions in mapping layer,
 and upsample the normal features in decoder. Regarding the
 L total = α1 L r ec + α2 L pr e + α3 L M SS (10) discriminative network, L total endows it with the ability to
 L total forces the reconstructed image Ir and predicted identify the discrepancies between the symmetric reconstrucanomaly map M p to be as close to Iori and M as possible, tive representations. Figure 7 exhibits an example of L total loss
respectively. curve, which demonstrates that despite slight fluctuations, the
 overall tendency is a gradual decline that ultimately converges.
 IV. E XPERIMENT B. Anomaly Detection
A. Experimental Setup The proposed POUTA is compared with previous methods
 1) Dataset: POUTA is evaluated on MVTec AD [14], on MVTec AD, VisA and DAGM. The comparison results are
VisA [19], MPDD [68] and DAGM [47] dataset. MVTec shown in Table I, II, III and V.
11758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

 orientation, as well as the background. They prevent POUTA
 from modeling the normal appearance of cable, causing to
 judge these changes as anomalies. For the average performance
 of CLS, POUTA attains a comparable performance with SOTA
 results.
 And for the LOC results in Table II, POUTA also demonstrates satisfactory performance in the majority cases, with
 little performance difference in the remaining cases. In addition, POUTA shows better average performance than the
 improved embedding-based method RD [18]. For the AUROC
 metric, POUTA surpasses the SOTA by 2.6% on transistor,
 which is because of the more complete anomaly location
 predicted by POUTA, especially when the anomaly is large.
 The performance improvement is more clear on AP metric.
Fig. 6. The average performance of carpet, cable, pill, toothbrush, and
transistor on AP metric. It can be seen that the best performance achieves On wood, cable, and transistor, POUTA outperforms the SOTA
when α1 = 1.0, α2 = 1.0, α3 = 1.0. by 6.9%, 9.1%, and 7.0%. On the average LOC results,
 POUTA is 0.3% and 2.9% higher than SOTA measured by
 pixel-level AUROC and AP metric respectively.
 Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm
 A qualitative comparison with the vanilla method
 Data: original training image Iori
 Result: reconstructed image Ir , anomaly prediction in MSS
 (DRAEM [5]) and embedding-based method (PatchCore [16])
 M p(i) , i = 1, 2, 3, 4, final predicted anomaly map M p is presented in Figure 8, indicating that POUTA is able to
 random initialization precisely predict the anomaly with more details. The improved
 for epoch ← 1 to 600 do embedding-based method, RD [18] provides finer anomaly
 Synthesize abnormal image Iin from Iori as in Equ. 1; location than the embedding-based method PatchCore [16],
 Reconstructive network:
 compute reconstructed image Ir ; while it is still cruder than the one of POUTA. It is worth
 Calculate reconstruction loss L r ec as in Equ. 3; mentioning that, Figure 8 shows POUTA is able to identify
 Discriminative network: the minor anomalies, since the information about the minor
 Each FCM: compute FCi , i = 1, 2, 3, 4; anomalies can be delivered to POUTA by the discrepancies
 Each HSG: compute FCi ′ , i = 1, 2, 3;
 between the low-level reconstructive representations.
 MSS: compute M p(i) , i = 1, 2, 3, 4;
 Calculate MSS loss L M SS as in Equ. 8; 2) VisA: As shown in Table III, POUTA outperforms the
 Compute the final anomaly prediction map M p prior methods on most cases. Especially on capsules and
 Calculate prediction loss L pr e as in Equ. 9; macaroni2, POUTA shows 21.0% and 17.1% improvement
 Calculate total loss L total as in Equ. 10; on the image-level AUROC metric. Both of these are the
 Back propagate L total to optimize POUTA.
 end categories where the position of the object changes drastically
 per image. This indicates that POUTA is more flexible than
 others to adapt to these position changes. And as for the
 average classification performance, POUTA is 0.4% higher
 than the SOTA. Sample segmentations in Figure 9 offer a
 qualitative anomaly localization of POUTA, showing that
 POUTA can locate the anomaly accurately.
 3) MPDD: Table IV depicts the quantitative results on
 MPDD. POUTA also outperforms others, including the
 improved embedding method RD [18], on most classes and
 average performance. This is particularly evident in the bracket
Fig. 7. The loss curve of L total during training POUTA on connector. brown and bracket white, where the color of the anomaly is
 often close to that of the normal one. While POUTA learns
 the anomalies semantically by the discrepancies between the
 1) MVTec AD: We report the quantitative classification reconstructive representations, which enables it to identify the
(CLS) and location (LOC) results of the prior methods and color-close-to-normal anomalies. The only area for improve-
POUTA on MVTec AD dataset in Table I and II, respectively. ment lies in bracket black for 1.6% less than the SOTA
PatchCore in this section is conducted using its official code on AUROC metric, as POUTA considers some changes in
with 1% training data as coreset remaining. As depicted by detail, such as the lighting changes as anomalies, as shown
Table I, POUTA shows highest classification performance on in column 2 of Figure 10. Other qualitative results of POUTA
most cases, and outperforms the improved embedding-based in Figure 10 indicates that POUTA can identify most of the
method RD [18] in all classes except for metal nut. Especially anomalies accurately. The predicted maps in columns 4, 6,
on capsule, POUTA outperforms the runner-up by 1.4%. 7, 8, and 9 in Figure 10 are almost identical to the ground
We also notice that the difference between POUTA and the truth. In certain instances, such as columns 3 and 5, the
best result is 2% on cable, which may due to changes in cable’s ground truth labels are crude. While as a reconstruction-based
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11759

 TABLE I
 I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF THE VANILLA M ETHOD DRÆM, S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
 M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD AND O UR M ETHOD POUTA ON MVT EC AD DATASET.
 T HE B EST R ESULT FOR E ACH C LASS I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE II
 P IXEL -L EVEL L OCATION (LOC) ( IN %) OF THE VANILLA M ETHOD DRÆM, S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
 M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD AND O UR M ETHOD POUTA ON MVT EC AD DATASET. T HE B EST
 R ESULT FOR E ACH C LASS I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE III
I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED M ETHODS , E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHODS ,
 AND O UR POUTA ON V IS A DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE IV
 I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS AND O UR POUTA ON MPDD
 DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

method, POUTA provides a more fine-grained location in it is challenging to model the normal appearance in POUTA,
columns 3 and 5. Due to the varying shooting angles of the leading to some misjudgments in the anomaly predictions for
training images and the limited number of training images, columns 3 and 5.
11760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 8. The qualitative results of PatchCore [16], RD [18], DRAEM [5], and POUTA on MVTec AD [14].

Fig. 9. The qualitative results of POUTA on VisA dataset [19].

Fig. 10. The qualitative results of POUTA on MPDD dataset [68].

 4) DAGM: In addition, the quantitative evaluations on embedding-based method, RD [18] on all the categories except
DAGM dataset are presented in Table V. POUTA outper- for Class4. It is worth mentioning that on Class8, POUTA
forms all the unsupervised methods, including the improved is 38.6% higher than PatchCore, which measures anomaly
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11761

 TABLE V
 I MAGE -L EVEL C LASSIFICATION (CLS) ( IN %) OF S EVERAL U NSUPERVISED M ETHODS , S UPERVISED M ETHODS , AND O UR POUTA
 ON DAGM DATASET (AUROC). T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

 TABLE VI design for the few-shot detection in POUTA. This is a sur-
I MAGE -L EVEL F EW-S HOT C LASSIFICATION (CLS) (AUROC IN %) OF prising result, showing that POUTA has a strong ability to
 THE P RIOR F EW-S HOT A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS (I NCLUDING
 TDG [9], D IFFER N ET [36], R EG AD [20], AND POUTA ON MVT EC
 learn representations inherent in the training data.
 AD DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD Figure 11 demonstrates the qualitative results of POUTA for
 both the few-shot and regular anomaly detection. As shown in
 Figure 11, the obvious anomaly can be identified by POUTA
 even in the 2-shot setting. When rising the k to 8, the
 prediction for the obvious anomaly can rival the one provided
 by the model trained on the entire data, indicating that POUTA
 is able to learn a near accurate distribution of the normal data.
by calculating the distances between the test sample and the As for the subtle anomaly, it is challenging for the few-shot
coreset’s training samples. However, the texture of Class8 model to precisely locate the anomaly. The location accuracy
varies, which makes it to be impossible to include all possible increases with the number of training images rising. The subtle
textures in the training data, resulting in a non-ideal detection anomaly can be partially predicted in some cases with the
performance. While POUTA learns the distribution of the 8-shot setting, but it is still not as comprehensive as the pretexture in the reconstructive network, which results in minimal dicted anomaly map output by the model trained on the entire
texture changes before and after reconstruction, leading to dataset. In that the subtle anomaly tends to be close to the
more accurate detection results. The average performance is edge of the normal data distribution, definitely requiring more
also higher than the prior unsupervised methods. Besides, training data to construct an accurate distribution. In terms
POUTA achieves a comparable performance with the best of the changable object, the prediction accuracy is obviously
supervised methods. While POUTA requires no real anomaly related to the number of the training images k. The qualitative
for training, which enables POUTA to be more flexible to the result under k = 8 is close to the one under entire data training,
situation where the real anomaly is hard to collect. and much more accurate than the one under k = 2 and k = 4.
 This is due to the fact that the more training images there
 are, the more the model acquires information about the object
C. Few-Shot Anomaly Detection in various rotations, leading to a better understanding of its
 POUTA represents satisfactory performance on MVTec AD normal appearance.
with the entire training data. To assess the performance with The performance of POUTA under a few-shot setting can
a limited number of training images, we conduct a few-shot be summarized as follows: The performance is determined by
experiment. Few-shot anomaly detection becomes a hot topic whether the k training images can represent comprehensive
recently since it is suitable for practical applications where the information about the normal appearance to enable the model
normal samples are hard to collect as well. Experiments are to clearly define the boundary between normal and abnormal.
also done to analyze the effectiveness of POUTA on this task. As for the obvious anomaly, it significantly differs from the
 We train POUTA only with the support set (k training normal appearance, making it easy to identify. Regarding the
images, k = 2, 4, 8) for each category. All the settings keep subtle anomaly, it is always on the edge of the normal data
the same with the ones in regular anomaly detection, we just distribution and thereby close to the decision boundary. When
reduce the number of the training images. Table VI demon- k is small, it is challenging to fit the learned decision boundary
strates the quantitative results of TDG [9], DifferNet [36], closely to the real one, making it possible to take certain
RegAD [20] and POUTA on MVTec AD. TDG and TegAD subtle anomaly as normal. When it comes to the changeable
are designed for the few-shot anomaly detection methods, and object, a few training images may not be sufficient to help
DifferNet is an embedding-based anomaly detection methods the model fully understand the normal appearance. Hence, the
with the normalizing flow. Moreover, the qualitative results are anomaly prediction is not satisfactory when k is small, but
represented in Figure 11. the results markedly improve even with a few training images
 Table VI indicates that POUTA achieves better performance added (from k = 2 to k = 8).
than the prior few-shot anomaly detection methods. In 2-shot, The reconstructive representation distributions of POUTA
4-shot, and 8-shot, POUTA surpasses the run-up by 4.5%, in few-shot and regular anomaly detection are visualized in
3.7%, and 4.8%, respectively. Whereas there is no special Figure 12. It can be seen that, similar with the distributions in
11762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 11. The qualitative few-shot and regular anomaly detection results of POUTA on MVTec AD [14].

 TABLE VII
 A BLATION S TUDY OF POUTA ON MVTec AD. T HE B EST
 R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD

Fig. 12. The visualization of the encoder and decoder representations of
POUTA through t-SNE [42]. The red points correspond to the representations 1) Quantitative Results: The quantitative results are shown
of the abnormal regions, and the green ones refer to the normal representations.
 in Table VII. Vanilla refers to the vanilla method as shown in
 Figure 5 (a), which utilizes only the pixel-level reconstruction
regular anomaly detection, the distributions in the few-shot errors to analyze the anomaly. POUTA-base is POUTA without
setting also follow the rule: In the encoder, the normal HSG and MSS modules, that is, there is no refined step in
and abnormal representations are separated from each other the discriminative network and the coarse information from
(though not obvious), while in the decoder, they are distributed reconstructive network is directly used to locate the anomaly.
together as the abnormal representations have been repaired POUTA-basezHSG and POUTA-base+MSS add only HSG or
to normal. Besides, the visualization shows that with a few MSS module to POUTA-base respectively. And POUTA adds
more training images (from 2-shot to 8-shot), the distribution both HSG and MSS modules to POUTA-base.
established by POUTA is greatly improved, approaching to 1) Reconstruction errors vs representation reusing:
the distribution of the entire data training. For example, the Experiments Vanilla and POUTA-base in Table VII are
normal and abnormal representations are separated more and conducted to verify the effectiveness of the represenmore clearly from each other in the encoder. This confirms tation reusing. The results shows that by reusing the
the strong ability to learn the inherent distribution of normal reconstructive representations instead of the pixel-level
data. reconstruction errors, the performance improves. This
 demonstrates that reusing representations from the
D. Ablation Study reconstructive network provides more accurate anomaly
 To investigate the effect of each component in POUTA, five information than the conventional reconstruction errors.
groups of ablation experiments are conducted on MVTec AD. 2) HSG module: To investigate the effectiveness of HSG,
All the experiments share the same implementation details. experiments POUTA-base and POUTA-base+HSG are
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11763

 conducted. POUTA-base+HSG adds only HSG module TABLE VIII
 to POUTA-base, and the results show improvement in T HE C ALCULATION C OST (FLOP S ), PARAMETERS AND AVERAGE
 I NFERENCE T IME P ER I MAGE OF VANILLA R ECONSTRUCTION -BASED
 terms of the detection performance in Table VII. This M ETHOD (S AME A RCHITECTURE W ITH DRÆM [5]),
 shows that HSG module can be used to refine anomaly E MBEDDING - BASED (PATCH C ORE [16]), I MPROVED
 information. However, we also find that adding HSG E MBEDDING -BASED M ETHOD (RD [18]), AND POUTA.
 T HE B EST R ESULT I S H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD
 only has marginal performance improvement. Due to
 the lack of MSS, the representations of the encoder
 and the decoder cannot represent the features of the
 original and reconstructed image fully. The semantic
 differences between the last few encoder representations
 and the first few decoder representations might not be
 obvious enough, resulting in unclear information about RD [18], there is no discernible difference in inference
 the abnormal regions at the high-level semantics, which times between POUTA and RD, and the parameters of
 affects the ability to guide the low-level representations. POUTA are considerably less than those of RD. Besides,
 3) MSS module: POUTA-base+MSS adds MSS module POUTA demonstrates superior performance in terms of
 to POUTA-base. As shown in Table VII, the detection accuracy, as shown in Table I and II.
 performance increases by adding MSS module. MSS 2) Qualitative Results: The qualitative results are exhibited
 requires each layer of discriminative network to predict in Figure 13. Also, we take Grad-CAM [4] to visualize the
 the anomaly precisely, which enhances the ability to semantic differences captured by the five groups of models in
 distinguish the normal and abnormal regions. While Figure 13.
 without HSG, each layer predicts the anomaly based 1) Reconstruction errors vs representation reusing:
 on the representations of the current scale, which might Figure 13 demonstrates that the reconstructive reprebe not robust and accurate enough since it has not sentations enable the model to capture more accurate
 been calibrated by the high-level semantic information. anomaly semantics, resulting in POUTA-base to locate
 Therefore, adding only MSS module provides limited the anomaly more completely and precisely than Vanilla.
 improvement. 2) HSG module: As shown in Figure 13, the visualization
 4) The coarse-to-fine process: POUTA adds both HSG and of Grad-CAM shows that the addition of HSG enables
 MSS modules to POUTA-base. There is a significant the model to capture more accurate semantic differences,
 performance increase as shown in Table VII. POUTA leading to predicting anomalies more precisely. This
 also shows a noticeable improvement when compared indicates that by introducing the high-level semantic
 with POUTA-base+HSG and POUTA-base+MSS. The information to the low-level feature through HSG modabove results demonstrate that the collaboration between ule, it does benefit to calibrate the semantics. But the
 HSG and MSS plays an important role in refining gains are limited, since without MSS, the high-level
 the semantic information about the anomaly, allowing semantic difference is not clear enough to describe the
 a better performance than adding only one or neither anomaly, which weakens the ability to guide the lowmodule. level representations.
 5) Parameters, computation and inference time. We 3) MSS module: As exemplified in Figure 13, itPOUTAcalculate the average inference time (including the base+MSS alleviates the misjudgment problem in
 time for deep network, and time for feature match- POUTA-base through MSS module. We take t-SNE [42]
 ing if it is an embedding-based method) per image to visualize the representation distribution before and
 on the embedding-based method PatchCore [16], after mapping layer (the last encoder representations and
 the improved embedding-based method RD [18], the the first decoder representations) in the reconstructive
 reconstruction-based method Vanilla, and the proposed network with or without the MSS module, as shown
 method POUTA. Also, the computational cost (FLOPs in Figure 14. It can be seen that, the main differences
 and parameters of each model) are calculated. Calcula- exist in the distributions of the encoder, where the
 tion and parameters are metrics for network, while half encoder representations are significantly more separable
 of the procedure in PatchCore [16] is not completed with MSS, leading to a more obvious distribution shift
 by network, thereby only the inference time of [16] between the encoder and decoder. The above phenomare measured and compared. The results are shown in ena verifies that MSS effectively improves the ability
 Table VIII. The parameters of POUTA are obviously less to distinguish the normal and abnormal information.
 than those of Vanilla, while the computation is slightly However without HSG, the anomaly predictions of
 less than that of Vanilla. This is because POUTA utilizes POUTA-base+MSS are still not ideal enough in some
 the existing information more extensively and refines it. cases as shown in Figure 13, indicating that even if
 It can be seen from the inference time that POUTA is MSS module is added, HSG module is still necessary
 significantly more efficient than Vanilla, and marginally to calibrate the semantics.
 more efficient than PatchCore. Despite the floating 4) The coarse-to-fine process: As presented in Figure 13,
 point operations (FLOPs) of POUTA are slightly higher the anomaly predictions are significantly more precisely
 than those of the improved embedding-based method after adding HSG and MSS modules simultaneously.
11764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

Fig. 13. The qualitative examples and visualizations (proivded by Grad-CAM [4]) of vanilla method, POUTA-base and POUTA. POUTA obtains a more
comprehensive set of anomaly information to locate the anomaly more precisely.

 the anomaly, allowing a significantly better performance
 than adding only one or neither module.

 V. L IMITATION AND F UTURE P OTENTIALS
 As depicted in Figure 15, POUTA fails in some cases. The
 two cables placed on the bottom are the blue one on the left
 and the gray one on the right in the training data, but this input
 reverses their positions. POUTA points out the reversion and
 marks it on the predicted anomaly map. While the ground truth
 does not consider this to be an anomaly. POUTA shows the
 capability to identify numerous subtle anomalies, as indicated
 in Figure 8. While it is possible for POUTA to provide
 incomplete predictions when the anomaly is very insignificant,
 as presented in the second and third columns in Figure 15.
 It is possible to happen, since the minor anomalies always
Fig. 14. We take t-SNE [42] to visualize the representation distribution before locate closely to the decision boundary, and the inconsistency
and after mapping layer (the last encoder representations and the first decoder
representations) in reconstructive network under with or without MSS module.
 between the fitted decision boundary and the real decision
The red points correspond to the representations of the abnormal regions, and boundary is almost unavoidable. In the toothbrush shown in
the green ones refer to the normal representations. Figure 15, including the abnormal regions identified by the
 ground truth, POUTA also highlights additional regions where
 the bristles appear disorganized. But ground truth considers
 With HSG, the semantic information of each layer in them as normal. And it is the same with the chewing gum in
 the discriminative network is more accurate, since it Figure 15, POUTA also highlights the bumpy regions, which
 has been calibrated by the high-level features, further are not considered as anomalies by the ground truth.
 enabling MSS to achieve better supervision effect. And We propose POUTA as a lightweight and efficient model
 MSS enables the distribution discrepancies between for the regular anomaly detection. POUTA demonstrates a
 encoder and decoder to be more obvious and makes strong capability to learn the inherent distribution of normal
 the high-level semantic anomaly information to be more data, even in the few-shot setting. On the other hand, we find
 clear by the supervision loss. The collaboration between that POUTA is not suitable for the general anomaly detection
 HSG and MSS refines the semantic information about (GAD). General anomaly detection aims to train a single
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11765

 [5] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discriminatively
 trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2021, pp. 8330–8339.
 [6] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memoryaugmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 pp. 1705–1714.
 [7] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
 dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
 [8] J. Wang and A. Cherian, “GODS: Generalized one-class discriminative
 subspaces for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 8200–8210.
 [9] S. Sheynin, S. Benaim, and L. Wolf, “A hierarchical transformationdiscriminating generative model for few shot anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
Fig. 15. Examples of failure cases. pp. 8495–8504.
 [10] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14372–14381.
anomaly detection model that can generalize to identifying [11] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
anomaly in various datasets [65], [66], [67]. In general, there block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13576–13586.
are a large number of parameters in the GAD model, which are
 [12] M. Z. Zaheer, J. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is gold: Redefining
much larger than those in POUTA. As a lightweight model, the adversarially learned one-class classifier training paradigm,” in Proc.
it is challenging for POUTA to accurately build the normal IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
appearances of numerous datasets in a single model. pp. 14183–14193.
 [13] M. Cimpoi, S. Maji, I. Kokkinos, S. Mohamed, and A. Vedaldi,
 The anomaly detection towards the object in 3-dimension “Describing textures in the wild,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
(3D) recently draws much attention. By replacing the recon- Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 3606–3613.
structive network with a 3D-aware network, it is possible to [14] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
achieve 3D anomaly detection through POUTA. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
 VI. C ONCLUSION [15] N. Cohen and Y. Hoshen, “Sub-image anomaly detection with deep
 pyramid correspondences,” 2020, arXiv:2005.02357.
 In this paper, we verifies that reusing the reconstructive [16] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler,
representations is more reliable than the pixel-level recon- “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc.
struction errors for reconstruction-based anomaly detection. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 Jun. 2022, pp. 14318–14328.
Then a new approach named POUTA is proposed locating [17] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Selfthe anomaly by analyzing the distribution shift between the supervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc.
reconstructive encoder and decoder, which enables to predict IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 pp. 9659–9669.
the anomaly more precisely with lower cost than the vanilla [18] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
method. Moreover, POUTA further refines the anomaly infor- one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
mation by HSG and MSS modules in each discriminative layer, Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9737–9746.
 [19] Y. Zou, J. Jeong, L. Pemula, D. Zhang, and O. Dabeer, “Spotwhich also enhances the separability between the symmetric the-difference self-supervised pre-training for anomaly detection and
reconstructive representations. Finally, POUTA outperforms segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 392–408.
the prior methods on MVTec AD, VisA and DAGM dataset, [20] C. Huang, H. Guan, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, M. Spratling, and Y. F. Wang,
and achieves a comparable results with the best-performing “Registration based few-shot anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 303–319.
supervised methods on DAGM dataset. Surprisingly, POUTA [21] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DSR a dual subspace realso achieves better performance than the state-of-the-art few- projection network for surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
shot anomaly detection methods without any special design, Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 539–554.
 [22] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
showing that POUTA has strong ability to learn representations for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
inherent in the training data. Art. no. 107706.
 [23] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer
 block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 R EFERENCES vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024.
 [1] X. Yan, H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Hu, and P.-A. Heng, “Learning semantic [24] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition memory bank
 context from normal samples for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, May 2021, pp. 3110–3118. vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Aug. 2023.
 [2] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “GANomaly: [25] P. Xing, Y. Sun, D. Zeng, and Z. Li, “Normal image guided segmentation
 Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. framework for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
 14th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2019, pp. 622–637. Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 4639–4652, Jun. 2024.
 [3] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly [26] X. Zhang, J. Fang, B. Yang, S. Chen, and B. Li, “Hybrid attention
 detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis. (ACCV), and motion constraint for anomaly detection in crowded scenes,” IEEE
 Nov. 2020, pp. 375–390. Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2259–2274,
 [4] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and May 2023.
 D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via [27] K. Wu, L. Zhu, W. Shi, W. Wang, and J. Wu, “Self-attention memorygradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. augmented wavelet-CNN for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
 (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626. Syst. Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 1374–1385, Mar. 2023.
11766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2024

[28] H. Yao, W. Yu, W. Luo, Z. Qiang, D. Luo, and X. Zhang, “Learn- [52] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method
 ing global-local correspondence with semantic bottleneck for logical for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,”
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835.
 no. 5, pp. 3589–3605, May 2024. [53] P. Liznerski et al., “Explainable deep one-class classification,” in Proc.
[29] Y. Zhong, X. Chen, Y. Hu, P. Tang, and F. Ren, “Bidirectional spatio- Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–25.
 temporal feature learning with multiscale evaluation for video anomaly [54] J. Yang, K. Zhou, Y. Li, and Z. Liu, “Generalized out-of-distribution
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 12, detection: A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2110.11334.
 pp. 8285–8296, Dec. 2022. [55] J. Guo, S. Lu, L. Jia, W. Zhang, and H. Li, “ReContrast: Domain-
[30] Q. Zhou, S. He, H. Liu, T. Chen, and J. Chen, “Pull & push: Leveraging specific anomaly detection via contrastive reconstruction,” 2023,
 differential knowledge distillation for efficient unsupervised anomaly arXiv:2306.02602.
 detection and localization,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., [56] T. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zhao, X. Du, B. Jiang, and L. Geng, “Reconstruction
 vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 2176–2189, May 2023. from edge image combined with color and gradient difference for
[31] C. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Xia, and G. Feng, “Learning appearance- industrial surface anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2210.14485.
 motion synergy via memory-guided event prediction for video anomaly [57] J. Bozic, D. Tabernik, and D. Skocaj, “Mixed supervision for surfacedetection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 34, no. 3, defect detection: From weakly to fully supervised learning,” Comput.
 pp. 1519–1531, Mar. 2024. Ind., vol. 129, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 103459.
[32] Y. Zhang, X. Nie, R. He, M. Chen, and Y. Yin, “Normality learning [58] J. Liu et al., “Deep industrial image anomaly detection: A survey,” Mach.
 in multispace for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Intell. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 104–135, Feb. 2024.
 Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3694–3706, Sep. 2021. [59] K. Huang, S. Wu, B. Sun, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “Metric learning-
[33] S. Wang, C. Lv, Z. Zhang, and X. Wei, “Dual-branch learning with based fault diagnosis and anomaly detection for industrial data with
 prior information for surface anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. intraclass variance,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35,
 Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023. no. 1, pp. 547–558, Jan. 2024.
[34] W. Zhou, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image [60] K. Huang, H. Zhu, D. Wu, C. Yang, and W. Gui, “EaLDL: Elementquality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE aware lifelong dictionary learning for multimode process monitoring,”
 Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Dec. 25, 2023, doi:
[35] C. Lv, F. Shen, Z. Zhang, D. Xu, and Y. He, “A novel pixel-wise defect 10.1109/TNNLS.2023.3343937.
 inspection method based on stable background reconstruction,” IEEE [61] P. Yan et al., “A comprehensive survey of deep transfer learning for
 Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–13, 2021. anomaly detection in industrial time series: Methods, applications, and
[36] M. Rudolph, B. Wandt, and B. Rosenhahn, “Same same but DifferNet: directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 3768–3789, 2024.
 Semi-supervised defect detection with normalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE [62] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervision-augmented deep autoencoder for
 Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2021, pp. 1907–1916. unsupervised visual anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52,
[37] M. Rudolph, T. Wehrbein, B. Rosenhahn, and B. Wandt, “Fully no. 12, pp. 13834–13847, Dec. 2022.
 convolutional cross-scale-flows for image-based defect detection,” in [63] C. Huang et al., “Self-supervised attentive generative adversarial net-
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022, works for video anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
 pp. 1088–1097. Syst., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 9389–9403, Nov. 2023.
[38] D. Racki, D. Tomazevic, and D. Skocaj, “A compact convolutional neural [64] C. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Wen, Y. Xu, Q. Jiang, and Y. Wang, “Abnormal
 network for textured surface anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Winter event detection using deep contrastive learning for intelligent video
 Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., Oct. 2018, pp. 1331–1339. surveillance system,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
[39] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. pp. 5171–5179, Aug. 2022.
 Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. [65] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
[40] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis- Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
 tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,” [66] J. Zhu and G. Pang, “Toward generalist anomaly detection via in-context
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489. residual learning with few-shot sample prompts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
[41] D. P. Kingma and P. Dhariwal, “Glow: Generative flow with invertible Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 17826–17836.
 1×1 convolutions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 31, [67] Y. Cao, X. Xu, C. Sun, X. Huang, and W. Shen, “Towards generic
 2018, pp. 1–10. anomaly detection and understanding: Large-scale visual-linguistic
[42] L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,” model (GPT-4V) takes the lead,” 2023, arXiv:2311.02782.
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, pp. 2579–2605, Nov. 2008. [68] S. Jezek, M. Jonak, R. Burget, P. Dvorak, and M. Skotak, “Deep
[43] C. Huang, A. Jiang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Multi-scale memory com- learning-based defect detection of metal parts: Evaluating current methparison for zero-/few-shot anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2308.04789. ods in complex conditions,” in Proc. 13th Int. Congr. Ultra Modern
 Telecommun. Control Syst. Workshops (ICUMT), 2021, pp. 66–71.
[44] K. Perlin, “An image synthesizer,” ACM SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph.,
 vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 287–296, Jul. 1985. [69] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time
 unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional nor-
[45] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional netmalizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis.
 works for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf.
 (WACV), Jan. 2022, pp. 98–107.
 Med. Image Comput. Comput.-Assist. Intervent., vol. 9351, 2015,
 pp. 234–241. [70] X. Zhang, M. Xu, and X. Zhou, “RealNet: A feature selection network with realistic synthetic anomaly for anomaly detection,” 2024,
[46] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
 arXiv:2403.05897.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process. Italy: Springer, May 2022,
 [71] J. Tebbe and J. Tayyub, “Dynamic addition of noise in a diffusion model
 pp. 394–406.
 for anomaly detection,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04463.
[47] M. Wieler and T. Hahn. (2007). Weakly Supervised Learning
 for Industrial Optical Inspection. [Online]. Available:
 https://hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/content/weakly-supervised-learningindustrial-optical-inspection
[48] S. Yamada, S. Kamiya, and K. Hotta, “Reconstructed student-teacher
 and discriminative networks for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
 Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2022, pp. 2725–2732. Shuyuan Wang received the M.Sc. degree from
[49] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Skip-GANomaly: the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
 Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder–decoder anomaly Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China, in 2023. Her
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 1–8. research interests include 3D vision (especially 3D
 editing) and anomaly detection.
[50] D. Dehaene, O. Frigo, S. Combrexelle, and P. Eline, “Iterative energybased projection on a normal data manifold for anomaly localization,”
 2020, arXiv:2002.03734.
[51] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg:
 Segmentation guided denoising student-teacher for anomaly detection,”
 2022, arXiv:2211.11317.
WANG et al.: PRODUCE ONCE, UTILIZE TWICE FOR ANOMALY DETECTION 11767

 Qi Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree Chengkan Lv (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
 from China University of Petroleum in 2011 and degree from Shandong University, Jinan, China,
 the Ph.D. degree from the Institute of Automation, in 2017, and the Ph.D. degree from the Insti-
 Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, tute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
 China, in 2016. He is currently an Associate Profes- (CASIA), Beijing, China, in 2022. He is currently
 sor with the New Laboratory of Pattern Recognition an Assistant Researcher with CASIA. His research
 (NLPR), State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Arti- interests include neural networks, computer vision,
 ficial Intelligence Systems, Chinese Academy of and anomaly detection.
 Sciences, and also with the School of Artificial
 Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research interests include face
recognition, computer vision, and machine learning.

 Huiyuan Luo received the B.S. degree from Zhengtao Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
 Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China, B.Sc. degree from China University of Petroleum,
 in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree from Changchun Dongying, China, in 2004, the M.Sc. degree from
 Institute of Optics, Fine Mechanics and Physics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China,
 Chinese Academy of Science, Changchun, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in control science
 in 2021. Since 2022, he has been a Post-Doctoral and engineering from the Institute of Automation,
 Researcher and an Assistant Researcher with the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing,
 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sci- in 2010. He is currently a Professor with Chinese
 ences (CASIA), Beijing, China. He has been Academy of Sciences (CAS) Engineering Labengaged in saliency detection, industrial anomaly oratory for Intelligent Industrial Vision, Beijing.
 detection, unsupervised learning, and intelligent His research interests include visual measurement,
 manufacturing. micro-assembly, and automation.