IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024 1271

ProFi: Scalable and Efficient Website Fingerprinting
 Patrick Krämer , Member, IEEE, Benedikt Baier , Niklas Landerer,
 Philip Diederich , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Alexander Griessel , Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Oliver Hohlfeld, Andreas Blenk , Martin Mieth, and Wolfgang Kellerer , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Website Fingerprinting (WFP) attacks infer the Negotiation (ALPN) extension [6]. This poses a severe
websites or webpages a user is visiting from encrypted traffic. To problem to censors since encrypting every transfer forces them
date, it remains uncertain if WFP can attack many users from to choose between censoring all traffic or none [7]. Censoring
a central location in an online scenario. We close this gap with
P RO F I, a WFP attack that detects websites based on the initial all traffic, as done before [8], can be expensive and severe
TLS connection from the client to the server using at most the ties to large portions of the Internet. In 2019, at least 10 % of
connection’s first 30 packets. P RO F I achieves a precision and the Alexa top 1 Million websites supported ESNI and would
recall of 86.51 % and 85.35 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 % have been unavailable [7]. Thus, adversaries must rely on other
and 78.71 % in an open-world scenario, which is competitive to methods to analyze users’ communication. We thus believe
state-of-the-art (SoA) WFP attacks, while taking a fraction of the
time of SoA attacks to classify a webpage. Further, we imple- that Website Fingerprinting (WFP) [9] will become relevant
ment P RO F I as a micro service-based prototype and evaluate the beyond anonymity networks such as the The Onion Router
attack in an online scenario with real traffic traces. We show that (Tor) network. WFP allows adversaries to infer visited web-
P RO F I can monitor up to 100 websites at 10 G, corresponding sites from encrypted traffic using patterns in the data exchange
to up to 424 webpages per second. We also show that P RO F I has between client and server.
the potential to interfere with a victim’s webpage access.
 However, launching WFP attacks at scale in the network
 Index Terms—Website fingerprinting, machine learning, pri- is challenging. The attack is likely to occur at a location
vacy, time series modeling, probabilistic graphical models. that allows the monitoring of multiple users, i.e., the attack
 must operate live in the network at higher link rates (say
 I. I NTRODUCTION 10 Gbit/s) on a traffic aggregate. Previous attacks [9], [10],
 NCRYPT every transfer [1] is a major step towards
E securing the privacy of Internet users: DNS over TLS1
(DoT) [2], and DNS2 over HTTPS3 (DoH) [3] secure the
 [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
 [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32],
 [33], [34], [35] are not applicable in this scenario. Previous
user’s DNS queries; HTTPS with the Encrypted Server attacks are evaluated offline, target individual users, and use
Name Indication (ESNI) extension [4], and its successor, Machine Learning (ML) models that take milliseconds to evalthe Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) extension [5], secure the uate and thus do not scale to high-volume links. Further, most
communication between clients and remote servers. Hence, previous attacks use features calculated from entire page loads,
adversaries, legitimate or not, can no longer analyze DNS i.e., require extracting individual page loads from the traffic
traffic, packet payload, the Server Name Indication (SNI), aggregate. Extracting page loads is difficult considering that
or the information in the TLS Application-Layer Protocol simply detecting the onset of one concurrent page load in a
 single user scenario is already challenging [19], [22], [29],
 Manuscript received 1 September 2022; revised 6 February 2023
and 23 May 2023; accepted 13 September 2023. Date of publication [36]. Thus, it remains unclear if WFP poses a threat beyond
25 September 2023; date of current version 7 February 2024. This work is the surveillance of individuals. Consequently, the goal of this
partially funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) as part of the work is to design, implement and evaluate a WFP attack that
ADVISE project (grant ID - 438892507) and the SDN APP AWARE project
(grant ID - 316878574), and by the Germany Federal Ministry of Education can operate live in the network to establish the potential threat
and Research (BMBF) as a part of the SoftwareCampus initiative (grant ID WFP poses to general Internet users.
01IS17049) and the AI.NET PROTECT project (grant ID 16KIS1318). The To show that WFP is a threat in a general setting, we
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for
publication was L. Y. Chen. (Corresponding author: Patrick Krämer.) design, implement, realize, and evaluate P RO F I (PRObabilistic
 Patrick Krämer, Benedikt Baier, Niklas Landerer, Philip Diederich, FIngerprinting). In contrast to previous work, P RO F I’s design
Alexander Griessel, and Wolfgang Kellerer are with the Chair of includes three aspects beyond the mere detection rate: Data
Communication Networks, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich,
Germany (e-mail: patrick.kraemer@tum.de). availability during operation, inference speed, and continu-
 Oliver Hohlfeld is with the Distributed Systems Group, University of ous operation. P RO F I uses Probabilistic Graphical Models
Kassel, 34127 Kassel, Germany. (PGMs) [37] to model the initial TLS connection established
 Andreas Blenk is with the T CED INW-DE, Siemens AG, 81739 Munich,
Germany. during webpage retrieval based on the direction, size, and TLS
 Martin Mieth is with the Deep Packet Inspection Development, ipoque records among the connection’s first 30 packets, which are, as
GmbH - A Rohde & Schwarz Company, 04109 Leipzig, Germany. we show in a prototypical implementation, readily obtainable
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2023.3318508
 1 Transport Layer Security (TLS). in practice. Contrary to previous attacks, P RO F I handles traffic
 2 Domain Name Service (DNS). aggregates without further processing because of the flow-
 3 Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS). based classification. P RO F I shows competitive performance
 1932-4537 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 1. Classifications per second that P RO F I and state-of-the-art (SoA)
approaches achieve in an offline setting on one Central Processing Unit (CPU)
core. Values are obtained for models from Section IV-D on our data described
in Section V-A.
 Fig. 2. P RO F I attack scenario.

to three state-of-the-art WFP attacks, achieving precision and
recall of 86.51 % and 85.35 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 % II. ATTACK S CENARIO
and 78.71 % in an open-world scenario. Further, the PGMs Fig. 2 illustrates the attack scenario of P RO F I: Multiple
have few parameters, enabling inference within microsec- users share a common access point to the Internet—a typical
onds. In contrast to previous attacks, P RO F I’s ML models Internet access scenario (e.g., home network or public WiFi).
allow P RO F I to classify thousands of webpages per second, The user view: The users are situated behind a Network
as Fig. 1 shows. The PGMS further simplify the continuous Address Translation (NAT)-capable router, as in a typical home
operation of the attack since the PGMs readily indicate data or campus network, which renders a realistic attack scenario.
drift through their log-likelihood. Other ML models require The users share the same public Internet Protocol (IP) address;
more involved monitoring, e.g., by observing and evaluating hence, they cannot be differentiated by their IP addresses.
samples during production [38]. Further, the PGMs enable Since most of today’s Web traffic is carried by large Content
a modular microservice-based implementation amenable to Delivery Networks (CDNs) [40], [41], [42], we focus on a
deployment on top of, e.g., Multi-Access Edge Computing scenario where users retrieve webpages from CDNs. We focus
(MEC) [39] infrastructure. We evaluate the performance of on CDNs since CDNs serve many popular websites [30], and
the resulting system in testbed measurements. We show that websites can use CDNs to hide from censors [43]. Since a
P RO F I’s microservice-based implementation can handle more CDN server can deliver any website hosted by the CDN,
than 400 webpage accesses per second on a 10 G link at full this makes the attack more challenging since the server’s IP
rate. Overall, our contributions are as follows: address does not identify one website. We do not investigate
 • Collection of an extensive dataset of traffic from 4 800 the effect of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) on the attack.
 webpages of 96 websites collected over 70 days. More than two third of Internet users do not use a VPN [44].
 • Implementation of a TLS dissector for feature extraction. The attacker view: The goal of the attacker (e.g., a censor)
 • Design, implementation, and evaluation of P RO F I , a is to discern the website a user is accessing, where a web-
 PGM-based WFP attack that is designed for the operation site consists of multiple webpages. The attacker is situated on
 live in the network. the path between the NAT router and the CDN. Contrary to
 • A microservice-based testbed implementation and evalu- previous WFP attacks, the attacker has no access to the private
 ation of P RO F I. network of the users. However, the attacker still has access to
 • We show that P RO F I can handle 100s of website accesses traffic in both directions. The traffic is encrypted with TLS, and
 per second. This is the first implementation and evalua- the SNI and ALPN extensions in the TLS handshake are also
 tion of a WFP attack’s potential to operate live in the encrypted. This prevents usage of either feature for fingerprintnetwork and has relevance beyond WFP, i.e., extends to ing [8]. Further, the attacker knows only the public IP of the
 ML-based traffic classification in general. NAT router for every user. Furthermore, as websites are hosted
 • The design of a readily-implementable defense against on CDNs, attackers cannot fingerprint websites based on the
 P RO F I reducing precision and recall to less than 10 % IP addresses of destination (cache or edge) servers. Thus, we
 and 20 % while causing a bandwidth overhead of 150 %. investigate a scenario where the attacker is left with statistical
 The remainder is organized as follows. Section II intro- information about the frequency, volume, and direction of data
duces the attack scenario, Section III introduces background transfers within a flow.
information and related work. Section IV presents the design Per-Flow Classification: Our attack classifies based on the
of the P RO F I attack and the defense method. Section V intro- first TLS connection the user’s client establishes to retrieve
duces the dataset and analyzes the training process. Section VI a webpage. Our attack uses observable features of the traffic,
evaluates the classification performance of the P RO F I attack such as the frame size, TLS record size, and the direction
and compares P RO F I to three baselines. Section VII presents of packets. The underlying assumption that we confirm in
the microservice-based implementation of P RO F I, and evalu- our evaluation is that the server and client exchange unique
ates its throughput, scalability, and labeling speed. Section VIII information in the initial flow, which reflects in a specific patdiscusses ethical considerations, and Section IX concludes this tern of exchanged packets in the network. Thus, the attack
paper. can classify each flow individually, sidestepping the extraction
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1273

of individual webpage calls from the traffic aggregates, as the websites a victim visits. That is, the attacker can train
previous attacks require, which is very challenging to perform the attack model for every visited website—no other webin practice. Previous work shows that even solely identifying sites are visited. This is the easiest variant of the attack. In
the start of overlap for two overlapping webpage calls of a the more realistic open-world scenario, the attacker does not
single user is difficult [19], [22], [29], [36]. know which websites the victim access. That is, the victim also
 Practical feasibility: Since we want to investigate whether visits websites that were not included in the attacker’s train-
WFP is a threat to the general public, the attack must be ing data. Generally, the open-world scenario is considered the
able to process large traffic volumes, requiring fast and effi- more challenging scenario. We evaluate both scenarios.
cient WFP mechanisms. Further, the attack must be deployable WFP attacks: Many recent attacks perform webpage fingerand continuously operational, i.e., we consider not only train- printing, e.g., try to detect the landing pages of websites [9],
ing and evaluation but also the full life cycle of an ML [11], [12], [15], [16], [18], [19], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25],
application [38]. Therefore, we decided against more com- [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33], [34], [36], [50], [51],
plex models like Random Forests, Support Vector Machines [52]. Fewer works perform the more challenging website fin-
(SVMs), and Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).4 Specifically, gerprinting [13], [20], [26], [35]. Except for [18], [19], [22],
there is a trend of using DNNs for WFP [23], [24], [27], [26], [35], [36], previous work makes the single-page-load
[29], [34]. However, these DNNs are large, with many lay- assumption [19], i.e., users load only one webpage and there
ers and parameters. For example, Var-CNN [27] uses two is no background traffic. All previous work evaluates their
Convolutional Neural Networks with 18 layers and an input attacks under a single-user assumption, i.e., only one active
layer with 5 000 neurons each. Despite their size, simpler user or process generates traffic. Closest to our approach is the
ML models can outperform DNNs on traffic classification work of Shen et al. [28], Zhuo et al. [26], Hoang et al. [30],
tasks [45]. Further, executing DNNs requires specialized hard- and Trevisan et al. [35]. Shen et al. classify normal TLS trafware and a specifically designed system architecture to operate fic from one website and use only traffic from TLS sessions
online in the network [46]. Further, DNNs are susceptible to with the SNI of the top-level domain, the first 100 packets
shortcut learning, and results are difficult to verify [47]. Thus, of a webpage load and the kNN classifier. Zhuo et al. use a
we focus on simple ML models that run on commodity hard- Profile Hidden Markov Model (PHMM) and consider subseware and are easy to interpret. This makes the development quent webpage accesses of a single user. Hoang et al. build
and deployment of WFP attack faster and the attack more fingerprints from the IP addresses of webpage calls and is
severe, but also helps in understanding WFP attacks to mitigate thus computationally efficient. Trevisan et al. [35] use perthem. flow features and a Random Forest classifier to label flows
 with domain names. In contrast, P RO F I uses a novel WFP
 III. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK classification method based on PGMs and anomaly detection
 that makes P RO F I easy to train and execute. The main contri-
 WFP infers the websites a user is accessing from passive bution of this work is the evaluation of the attack in a testbed,
network traffic observations [12]. i.e., the investigation if and at what scale WFP can be executed
 Website vs. webpage: Attacks can infer websites and online in the network and interfere with user traffic. P RO F I is
webpages [13]. A webpage is identified by a spe- different from previous WFP attacks on the Tor network in the
cific Unified Resource Locator (URL). A website con- following ways. P RO F I makes predictions for flows and does
sists of multiple webpages below a Second Level Domain not need access to all packets of each webpage call. Further,
(SLD). For example, www.nih.gov/grants-funding P RO F I does not assume the monitoring of an individual user.
and www.nih.gov/research-training are two web- WFP defenses: A number of mechanisms to mitigate WFP
pages from one website. Related work often performs WFP attacks exists [14], [17], [31], [53], [54], [55], [56], [57], [58],
on the level of webpages, e.g., the landing page—here, the [59], [60], [61], [62], [63], [64], [65], [66], [67], [68], [69]. The
attacker has to learn a model that recognizes only this single goal of the defenses is to mitigate WFP in the Tor network.
page. This task is easier than learning a model for arbitrary To mitigate WFP, the defenses mutate various aspects of the
webpages of one website. A website’s webpages show dif- communication to render previously identified features useless.
ferent content, resulting in different packet sequences. Thus, However, mitigating WFP attacks results in bandwidth and
website fingerprinting has to cope with a larger variance in latency overheads. We consider a simple defense based on the
the data compared to webpage fingerprinting [13], making padding of TLS records. The defense is similar in spirit to
the data more difficult to model [48], [49]. P RO F I performs existing defense methods such as CS-BuFLO [17]. Instead of
the more challenging website fingerprinting attack, i.e., P RO F I the Tor network, the defense focuses on the TLS protocol and
extracts patterns that generalize from examples of webpages uses only mechanisms available in the current TLS standard.
of websites to the traffic of unseen webpages of that site. General traffic classification: Beyond WFP, statistical
 Open vs. closed world: Two evaluation scenarios exist approaches have been used for general network traffic classifor WFP attacks: the closed-world and the open-world sce- fication [70], [71]. These works focus on broadly identifying
nario [12]. In the closed-world scenario, the attacker knows application classes, e.g., P2P, e-mail, or Web, using behav-
 4 Random Forests and SVMs can also yield large models that take millisec- ioral analysis [72] or detecting SSH and Skype flows [73] or
onds to evaluate a sample and thus not suitable for WFP attacks at scale. For Android Apps [74], both using flow-level features. Similarly,
example, CUMUL in Fig. 1 is based on an SVM. TLS features were used to identify services (e.g., Web vs.
1274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

video) and applications (e.g., Facebook chat vs. Google
Drive) [75] or Web services [76]. Unlike application or service detection, P RO F I focuses on performing WFP attacks in
both an open and a closed-world scenario. However, the principle behind P RO F I could be applied to more general traffic
classification, which we leave as future work.
 Real Time Traffic Classification: FENXI [46] introduces a
system that uses specialized hardware accelerators for deep
learning to accelerate and enable the application of deep
learning to packet processing. ILSY [77] implements four
ML models in programmable data planes with the P4 lan- Fig. 3. Data-flow diagram of the classification procedure of P RO F I. Italic
guage and shows the limitations of these approaches. Similarly, script identifies meta-data.
Xavier et al. [78] investigate how ML algorithms can be executed in the data plane. N2Net [79] and BaNaNa Split [80]
discuss the implementation of binarized neural networks in the symbols and labels the sequence with a classifier. More fordata plane. Pacheco et al. [81] review ML-based solutions to mally, the attack consists of three functions: The S YMBOLIZER
network traffic classification. In contrast to previous work, we σ, the C OORDINATOR, and the C LASSIFIER κ. In addition,
do not rely on special hardware nor highly optimized frame- there are three data sources and sinks, the Network, a C ACHE
works targeting specific application scenarios only. Instead, we to store intermediate results, and persistent storage for the classhow how existing frameworks and commodity hardware can sification results. First, P RO F I receives a packet u ∈ U from
be used to realize WFP attacks. the network. The set U corresponds to all IP packets occurring
 during a TLS session. A S YMBOLIZER σ converts the packet
 into an ordered set of abstract symbols M ⊂ W, where W is
 IV. ATTACK M ODEL AND D EFENSE the set of all possible symbols. M together with a flow identifier is passed to the C OORDINATOR. The C OORDINATOR
 This section introduces P RO F I’s classifier using probabilisaccumulates Mt = σ(ut ) derived from T packets u1 , . . . , uT
tic models of packet sequences and the associated feature
 of the same flow. Once the Tth packet of a flow arrives, the
engineering. The classifier is designed for computational effi-
 C OORDINATOR passes the accumulated sequence of symbols
ciency, i.e., relies on models with few parameters. Further,
 to a C LASSIFIER κ. The C LASSIFIER determines whether the
the classifier is designed for implementation as micro-services
 flow is a M AIN F LOW from one of the monitored websites
in a cloud-native deployment scenario. The design aligns
 y ∈ Y and returns the result to the C OORDINATOR, where it
with future networking concepts that feature networking on
 is stored.
top of a MEC infrastructure, thus increasing P RO F I’s attack
potential. The design assumes that P RO F I is situated between
the user and the CDN, routing is symmetric, and no VPN B. Extracted Features
is used. Further, this section introduces three state-of-the-art To classify flows, P RO F I uses packet-level data from, at
approaches to WFP as baselines for later evaluations. most, the first 30 packets, corresponding to the 10th percentile
 of M AIN F LOW lengths from our collected data. The exact
 number of packets used by P RO F I is subject to parameter
A. Overview optimization of the attack.
 To operate on the flow level, P RO F I learns the character- P RO F I extracts features on the level of the packet and the
istics of the first TLS connection that is established between level of the TLS records. For each packet, P RO F I extracts the
a user’s client when retrieving a webpage. We refer to this size in bytes, the TLS record types, and the direction, i.e.,
connection as M AIN F LOW. Thus, classifiers in P RO F I answer whether the packet travels from the client to the server or
the question: Is this flow a M AIN F LOW to a webpage of one the other way around. For each TLS record in the packets
of the websites that should be detected? Specifically, P RO F I P RO F I extracts the TLS record length, the TLS record type,
does not require correlating flows from an individual client and the direction. Since existing tools such as ssldump do not
to make a prediction. Furthermore, P RO F I requires only sam- provide all of these features, we implemented a custom trafples of M AIN F LOWs from monitored websites during training, fic dissector that extracts the features from the packet capture
i.e., P RO F I does not require samples of M AIN F LOWs from files. P RO F I does not use timing information between packets
unmonitored websites or flows other than M AIN F LOWs. As a or TLS records. Latency, especially on the Internet, expresses
consequence, P RO F I doesn’t have to extract flows constitut- high variance not caused by the visited website [82]. Instead,
ing a webpage retrieval from the traffic aggregate, i.e., the data geographic location and difficult-to-observe conditions such
P RO F I requires is readily available during operation. Further, as the network load explain the latency’s variance [82].
detecting webpage calls based on the initial connection can Including latency would thus increase the requirements for
enable active interference, e.g., by dropping all traffic for a data collection to avoid the risk of overfitting.
specific IP for a short time after the call is detected. Fig. 4 illustrates the extracted features for two websites:
 Fig. 3 illustrates the high-level operation of P RO F I. The www.google.es and www.primevideo.com. Negative
attack translates a flow’s packets into a sequence of nominal numbers in Fig. 4 correspond to traffic sent from the
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1275

Fig. 4. Frame-/TLS record sizes: negative (positive) values indicate traffic send by the client (server), resp.

client to the server. Positive numbers indicate the opposite
direction. Fig. 4 shows clear differences in the constructed
sequences for the websites. For example, Fig. 4(a) shows
that www.google.es has a high variance during the
TLS handshake, and the client sends larger packets to the
server. In contrast, www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(b)
has a different handshake behavior, and the client sends
fewer data to the server. Also, the order is important: for
example, www.google.es in Fig. 4(a) has characteristic dips between records seven and ten. The sequence of
www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(b) has small records after
the handshake until frame 15, after which the record sizes
become highly variable. Moreover, websites can have a multimodal behavior. For example, www.google.es in Fig. 4(a)
has three TLS handshakes that vary in size and number
of TLS records. The varying handshake lengths then shift
the entire sequence. The remaining steps in P RO F I, i.e., the
S YMBOLIZER and the C LASSIFIER, have to preserve and
extract these patterns.
 Lastly, the sequences constructed from TLS records and Fig. 5. Shows how the TLS 1.3 handshake and one packet of application
frames can differ. For example, the sequence of frame sizes data are mapped to a sequence of symbols. For illustration, the handshake is
 simplified. The sequence diagram shows the flow of packets, and labels on
for www.primevideo.com in Fig. 4(c) differs markedly the arrows indicate TLS records. The resulting sequences for packet and
from the TLS record sizes in Fig. 4(b). TLS can package record are below the diagram.
multiple records into one Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
segment. Similarly, a TLS record can span multiple TCP segments. Thus, the sequences of TLS record sizes and the frame Formally, we define the S YMBOLIZER as a function σ : U ×
sizes that carry the records can differ strongly. In fact, the way T → 2W . The set T corresponds to the element for which
TLS records are packaged into TCP segments is a discriminat- a symbol should be created, i.e., packet or record. The
ing feature on its own [76]. In our collected data, the number output is an ordered set of symbols. The order is established
of TLS records and packets is approximately equal on average with the help of a function pos : W ∪ R → N+ , which returns
but varies from website to website, confirming the potential the position of the passed element inside the flow. The symbol
value of this feature. is formed by combining the record type(s), size, and direction.
 To represent the record types, the S YMBOLIZER uses the corresponding decimal code from the TLS standard. For example
C. Symbolizer 23 for application_data records, and 22 for records in
 The S YMBOLIZER converts the features extracted for each the handshake, e.g., 22:1 for the client_hello and 22:2
packet and record into a sequence with nominal elements that for the server_hello [83]. Further, the S YMBOLIZER repthe C LASSIFIER can process. Each sequence element is con- resents the direction through a letter C when the sequence
structed from three features: direction, size of record or packet, element originates at the client, and S when the sequence
and TLS record type(s). The size of the packet or record is element originates at the server.
numerical and the direction, and TLS record types are nomi- For instance, Fig. 5 shows an example mapping the beginnal. We map the direction, size, and record types to an abstract ning of a TLS connection to a sequence of symbols. For
symbol. To reduce the observation space and account for small brevity, this paragraph will elaborate on the fourth packet in
deviations in the lengths of packets and records, we discretize Fig. 5 only. The fourth packet in Fig. 5, referred to as u, travthe packet and record lengths. els from the server to the client and carries three application
1276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

data records. The packet u has a size of 1310 Bytes. The largest likelihood, i.e., the model under which the observation
records have lengths of 510, 399 and 401 Bytes. For a T has the highest probability [85]. However, MLCs are not suited
of packet, packet u would be mapped to one symbol for an open-world scenario. An MLC will always return a
{(23|23|23;1310;S)}, i.e., σ returns a singleton-set. In label, even if every model has a probability of zero.
the case of T of record, packet u is mapped to three sym- To overcome this issue, we treat classification as anomaly
bols. One symbol per record: {(23;620;S), (23;340;S), detection. The classifier’s PGMs modeling each website’s
(23;350;S)}. M AIN F LOW represent the normal behavior. If observation
 For both sequence elements packet and record, sym- shows anomalous behavior, i.e., has a low probability under the
bols are categorical, i.e., symbols can be interpreted as separate PGM describing the website’s behavior, the classifier rejects
characters in an alphabet. Thus, two symbols that look similar, the observation. We define anomalous behavior based on the
e.g., (23;620;C) and (23;620;S) are different - just as anomaly score βy (O) of a website as:
two characters such as e and c are different. log p(y(O))
 The input to the C LASSIFIER is the union of the return val- βy (O) :=  . (1)
 γ maxj log py Xyj
ues of σfor the first n packets of a flow F := {u1 . . . , un }:
O := u∈F σ(u). This forms a sequence with nominal Here, py (O) corresponds to the model of website y ∈ Y, and
elements that are sorted based on the order in which the γ ∈ R+ is a scaling factor. The score βy (O) corresponds to
corresponding packets occur in the flow. the ratio of the log-likelihood of the model for website y to the
 largest log-likelihood from the training set. The free parameter
 γ can be used to tune the ratio. The interpretation of the ratio is
D. Classifier as follows: If βy (O) ≤ 1, then the given sequence fits equally
 The S YMBOLIZER returns sequences with nominal ele- well to the model as the training data. If βy (O) > 1, then the
ments, and P RO F I uses ML techniques that can operate on sequence is less likely than all training sequences.
those. We consider two ML techniques: first-order Markov In the closed-world scenario, the classifier returns the web-
Chains (MCs) [76], and Profile Hidden Markov Models site of the model with the smallest score. This results in a
(PHMMs) [84], [85]. In addition, we consider as base- multi-class classifier that returns a label y ∈ Y for every obserlines the k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN) classifier [86] with the vation. In the open-world scenario, the classifier uses the score
Levenshtein distance [87] to measure similarity, the SVM- to turn each PGM into a binary classifier. If βy (O) > 1, then
based CUMUL [20] attack, and the set-based IPFP [30] the model rejects the observation O, i.e., observation O does
attack. All techniques are trained on a dataset X consisting not correspond to a M AIN F LOW of website y. If βy (O) ≤ 1,
of calls to multiple webpages of websites. We denote with then observation O is labeled as an instance of website y. This
Xij the jth webpage of the ith website. results in 3 cases: 1) All models reject sequence O, 2) one
 MC and PHMM belong to the class of Probabilistic model accepts O, and 3) multiple models accept sequence O.
Graphical Models (PGMs). The PGMs describe the nominal In case one, the sample is classified as background traffic. In
sequences, the S YMBOLIZER converts M AIN F LOWs to, with case two, the sample is classified as the website the model
the language of probability theory [37]. That is, one PGM rep- corresponds to. In case three, the classifier returns the website
resents M AIN F LOWs of one website y ∈ Y. We chose PGMs whose model has the smallest score.
over other ML models because PGMs have few parameters, are Adjusting γ allows trading false positives for false negainterpretable, extensible, and signal data drift. A small num- tives. A value smaller one reduces the risk of false positives
ber of parameters is important to make P RO F I memory and and increases the risk of false negatives, i.e., the classifier is
computationally efficient, allowing P RO F I to scale to many stricter. A value larger one increases the risk of false positives
concurrent webpage accesses. At the same time, a small num- and reduces the risk of false negatives, i.e., the classifier is
ber of parameters aids the interpretability of the model, which more lenient in its opinion of what is normal.
is further improved through the specific structure of, e.g., the This approach has five advantages: 1) PGMs for websites
PHMM [84]. PGMs are readily extensible, e.g., it is straight- can be trained independently from each other. Thus, models
forward to include additional variables that can improve the for new websites can easily be added, and existing ones can
classification [37], e.g., the information of the CDN that is be updated without changing other models, and P RO F I does
contacted. Lastly, PGMs model the data directly and thus pro- not need samples for the background class, as, e.g., CUMUL
vide a measure of how well the model fits the data. This is an does. 2) We can vary the pre-processing steps for each webimportant aspect for the operation of P RO F I since it allows the site independently. Varying the pre-processing steps changes
detection of data drift, i.e., the data distribution in operation the observation spaces for PGMs. Thus, the log-likelihood of
changes over time compared to the distribution of the training PGMs cannot be directly compared since the log-likelihood
data. An effect that has been previously reported [51] and that is not calibrated [37]. The anomaly score solves this problem
we also find in our data. by quantifying how normal an observation behaves compared
 PGMs do not return a specific label. Instead, PGMs compute to others of the same class. 3) The likelihood of the PGMs
the likelihood, i.e., the probability py (O) of a sequence O can be used to detect changes in the data distribution and thus
given the model for website y [37]. A Maximum Likelihood indicate a reduction in reliability [37]. 4) The PGMs P RO F I
Classifier (MLC) can use the likelihood for classification: An uses are computationally efficient and can consume data in a
MLC returns the label corresponding to the model with the streaming manner. That is, the symbols extracted from packets
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1277

by the S YMBOLIZER can be fed one-by-one into the models login. We decided against including this type of traffic since
without the need to store the full sequence. its acquisition requires tools such as Selenium, or virtualized environments that could impact the feature distribution.
E. Defense Websites are known to detect such technologies, potentially
 blocking or responding in different ways than normal [89].
 We implement and evaluate a defense based on the padding
 Further, to log in, users normally have to access a publicly
in the TLS record protocol, which we call Random TLS
 accessible landing page first. Similarly, we did not passively
Record Size Defense (RT LS RS). RT LS RS randomly draws
 listen to real traffic since we did not have access to such a
TLS record sizes from a uniform distribution U (lmin , lmax ),
 monitoring location.
and pads records to the desired length if necessary. After each
record, RT LS RS randomly chooses between adding the next
record to the data or handing the current data to the transport B. Data Split and Training Procedure
protocol. Thus, the sizes and sequence of packets and TLS We evaluate MC, PHMM, kNN, CUMUL, and IPFP in a
Records change - the features that P RO F I uses to detect pat- closed-world and an open-world scenario. We divide the webterns. The TLS 1.3 [83] standard allows the padding of TLS sites into two sets: Foreground Sites and Background Sites. The
records to arbitrary sizes up to 214 Bytes. Thus, the defense Foreground Sites are the sites that the classifiers should detect.
can readily be implemented in SSL libraries. The Background Sites are the sites that should be ignored. In
 Characteristics that are not protected with this defense the closed-world scenario, the classifiers must differentiate the
are the TLS handshake and characteristic exchanges between pages in the Foreground Sites. In the open-world scenario, the
client and server. The handshake protocol does not sup- classifiers must detect whether traffic belongs to a page from
port padding [83]. Thus we leave the messages as they are. the Foreground Sites, and if so, from which one. We create the
Characteristic exchanges, i.e., a specific sequence of contacts sets by randomly assigning websites to one of the two sets,
between client and server, could, in principle, be obfuscated such that each website type is represented in each set. For
with deterministic sending of decoy packets, albeit at the example, we ensured that both sets contain sites with adult
expense of more bandwidth overhead. Our evaluation shows content, news pages, etc.
that the simple defense suffices to thwart P RO F I. The classifiers are trained on M AIN F LOWs from all 70 days
 Our goal with RT LS RS is to present an easy-to-implement from the Foreground Sites. Flows other than M AIN F LOWs are
and effective defense against P RO F I. RT LS RS is not intended not used for training, as their characteristics differ from those
to outperform previous WFP defenses. In principle, exist- of M AIN F LOWs, thus hampering the ability of the PGMs to
ing WFP defenses should also effectively mitigate P RO F I. model the M AIN F LOWs’ characteristics. For training, we split
However, existing defenses, e.g., HTTPOS [64] or CS- the webpages of a website into three disjoint sets: training,
BuFLO [17], are often complex to implement and require validation, and test set. The training set contains 60 % of the
continuous effort to maintain, which might hinder their webpages, the validation and test sets contain 20 % each. For
adoption. hyper-parameter optimization, we fit the models to the training
 set and evaluate the performance on all 70 days in the val-
 V. M ODEL T RAINING idation set. For CUMUL, we include a background class in
 the open-world scenario as suggested in [20]. The background
A. Data Acquisition
 class consists of traces of one webpage from every website in
 To evaluate the attack, we consider 96 websites located in the Background Sites. We select the parameters that resulted
three popular CDNs. For each CDN, we selected the top 30 in the best precision on the validation set. That is, we prefer
websites based on the Alexa Top 1000 [88]5 ranking. For each the models with fewer false positives. For the final results, we
website, we selected 50 random sub-pages using a javascript- train the classifiers on the combined training and validation
enabled Web-crawler. We obtain a data set consisting of 4 800 set with the selected hyper-parameters and evaluate them on
webpages. We gathered traces of every webpage daily for 70 all 70 days in the test set.
days. We loaded every website with Chromium and the Firefox
browser in headless mode. This resulted in 100 samples for
 C. Hyper-Parameter Optimization
each website, and a total of 9 600 traces per day. In total, we
collected 3 TB of traces. We use a grid-search for hyperparameter optimization.
 Docker containers were executed on three separate physical Table I lists the parameter space. The Binning Method, number
machines running Ubuntu 20.04 and used to isolate traffic of of bins, number of packets, and sequence element is optimized
webpage access and to maintain equal conditions for all pages. for PHMM, MC and kNN. For kNN, we convert each of the
The browser is started from inside the docker container in symbols a packet is mapped to into Unicode characters and
headless mode. We traced traffic for 7 s, after which the docker concatenate the characters to a string. As a hyperparameter
container is terminated. Traffic was collected inside the docker for kNN, we vary the number of neighbors. In case of the
container with the tcpdump utility. PHMM, we vary its length. For CUMUL, we evaluate the
 The gathered data is limited in that it does not con- hyper-parameter space of the SVM as suggested in [20]. IPFP
tain mobile traffic and webpages that require a previous does not have hyperparameters.
 In the case of kNN, we apply the same function σ to
 5 As of May 1st , the Alexa service is no longer available. M AIN F LOW packets from all websites. That is, the same
1278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 TABLE I
 PARAMETER S PACE O PTIMIZED OVER in Fig. 6 indicate how many models used the respective
 sequence type. Fig. 6 shows that 25 PHMMs use records and
 25 PHMMs use frames. The PHMMs using records require up
 to 10 packets only, i.e., the records contained in the first 10
 packets of each M AIN F LOW. PHMMs using frames require 5,
 10, 15 and 30 packets. For the MC models, 23 use frames,
 and 27 records as sequence elements. The length of sequences
 varies. For both, MC and PHMM, more than 50 % of the models require only five packets. Note that the models with TLS
 records as sequence elements can get sequences longer than
 the number of packets, since one packet can carry more than
 one TLS record, especially during the handshake.
 The fact that many MC and PHMM models rely on the
 first 5 packets is surprising. The first 5 packets contain mostly
 the TLS handshake. Depending on the TLS configuration, the
 size of the handshake packets and records varies. For example,
 servers and clients can have different extensions and exchange
 certificates of varying sizes [83]. Fig. 4 illustrates this, showing that even for a single website, the TLS handshake varies.
 The differences between the websites are enough for the PGMs
 to distinguish websites from each other.

 E. Summary
Fig. 6. CDF of the discrete sequence lengths and sequence types of PHMM PGMs can represent the M AIN F LOWs of websites. The
and MC. Numbers in the figure give the total count of models that use the
corresponding sequence type.
 results show that many websites can be distinguished with
 as little as the first 5 to 10 packets. This is in contrast to
 previous work on WFP, which relies on all packets sent dur-
Sequence Element from the same number of packets from all ing the page-load. Future work on PGM-based attacks could
M AIN F LOWs of all websites are mapped to a symbol with the improve the emission model and address potential multi-modal
same binning method and number of bins. behavior in the data. Currently, the models rely heavily on the
 In the case of MC and PHMM, we take advantage of the fact N ONE binning method, particularly models for websites with
that models for websites are independent. We vary the function dynamic content. The N ONE binning method requires many
σ for every website. Thus, each model has its own function σ. training samples to get sufficient data since the packet and
A flow U is converted to a unique sequence for every model. record sizes are not compressed, i.e., every size that occurs
With this approach, it is possible to tune the conversion to normally must be captured. Here, non-discrete emission modsymbols in such a way that the PGMs can model them well, els might better compress the emissions and reduce the risk of
and at the same time, differentiate them from sequences of overfitting and the required samples. The mix of discrete and
other websites. The parameters of the model are estimated continuous features makes the improvement of the emission
only on the samples of the corresponding website. model challenging. Similarly, our data shows that webpages
 can express multi-modal behavior. This poses a challenge
 to the used PGMs, since their ability to capture multi-
D. Selected Hyperparameters modal sequences is limited. Investigating the performance
 The best configuration for kNN uses 9 neighbors and the of mixture models, e.g., a mixture of MC and PHMMs to
size and direction of the TLS records in the first 30 packets of model one website could be an interesting aspect for future
the M AIN F LOW. The classifier has 40 bins with record sizes of work.
E QUALW IDTH binning. The best configuration for CUMUL We believe that the attack can be thwarted by randomizing
is γ = 211 and c = 23 . or standardizing packet and record sizes due to the reliance
 MCs and PHMMs have diverse configurations, indicating of the models on packet and record sizes since S INGLE B IN
that it is beneficial to tune the pre-processing for each website reduces the average precision to only 20 % on the validaindependently. Of special interest are the selected sequence tion set. Performance decreases because S INGLE B IN removes
lengths and sequence elements, impacting the computational the packet and record size information, leaving only direccost of the attack. Longer sequences require more packets tion and TLS record type as information. Randomizing packet
and more processing. Relying on TLS record information and record sizes has a similar effect since randomizing essenrequires the additional parsing of TLS headers. Fig. 6 shows tially removes size information from the data. Furthermore,
the Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) for the best the large number of models that work well with only five
PHMM and MC models. The CDFs show the distribution over packets indicate that the TLS handshake is important for clasthe sequence lengths and sequence elements. The numbers sification. Standardizing the TLS handshake, i.e., handshakes
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1279

use the same sequence and size of packets independent of the
concrete TLS settings, could help mitigate WFP as well.

 VI. E VALUATION
 The evaluation focuses on the metrics precision := TPTP +FP
and recall := TPTP +FN , where TP are the true positives, FP the
false positives, and FN the false negatives [86]. High precision
means reliability, i.e., retrieved instances usually belong to the
predicted class. High recall means that the classifier retrieves
most of a class’s samples. Usually, there is an interdependence Fig. 7. Precision and recall for the closed-, and open world scenario, with
between precision and recall, i.e., improving a classifier’s defense (-def) scenarios, filtered traffic from server to client (-fs2c), and from
recall comes at the cost of reduced precision, and vice versa. client to server (-fc2s).
P RO F I’s classifier can trade precision for recall by adjusting
the parameter γ appropriately. We do not discuss the accuracy
of the classifiers since the accuracy has little expressiveness.
With almost 100 classes, a classifier can achieve 99 % accuracy
by predicting one class for all samples [86], analogous to classification problems with imbalanced classes. Here, precision
and recall better reflect a classifier’s performance.
 We evaluate P RO F I’s classifier in an open- and closed-world
scenario, with and without defense, and under asymmetric
routing. Further, we compare P RO F I’s classifier against three
baselines. We evaluate RT LS RS by sampling record sizes from Fig. 8. Line plot showing precision and overhead as a function of RT LS RS’
a uniform distribution with a lower limit of 100 and an upper upper sizes.
limit in the set {100i + 100 Bytes | i = 0, . . . , 16}.
 With asymmetric routing, packets traveling from server to
client can take a different route than packets from client unobserved. For fs2c, the traffic from the server to the client
to server [90]. Thus, P RO F I might not observe both direc- is unobserved. Markers indicate the average, horizontal bars
tions. Since asymmetric routing frequently occurs in Wide the median, and small dots are actual samples. Each sample
Area Networks [90], evaluating P RO F I under its influence is corresponds to the average for one website in the Foreground
important. Sites across all days. For example, a sample with 95 % recall
 To relate P RO F I’s performance to that of previous means that the model missed 5 % of the webpages belonging
attacks, we evaluate three baselines: kNN, CUMUL [20], to the website across all days.
and IPFP [30]. kNN has been used in previous MC and PHMM achieve better precision and recall in the
attacks [16], [19], [21] and operates on the same fea- closed-world scenario, which is expected. In the closed-world
ture space as P RO F I, i.e., on the sequence of packets and scenario, MC achieves an average precision of 86.5 % and
TLS frames. kNN stores the training data verbatim and is an average recall of 85.4 %, and the PHMM of 75.7 %, and
thus a strong baseline [86]. CUMUL [20] is one of the most 73.4 %, respectively. In the open-world scenario, the precision
cited WFP attacks and uses Support Vector Machines (SVMs) and recall reduce to 68.9 % and 78.7 % for MC, and 58.6 %
and traffic features from the full page load. IPFP [30] is a and 70.8 % for PHMM. However, the distribution of precision
recent attack leveraging the IP addresses that occur during and recall is skewed, as Fig. 7(c) shows. Both models achieve
the page-loads to form fingerprints. a median precision and recall of > 99 % in the closed-world
 kNN, CUMUL, and IPFP are not directly applicable in scenario. The median precision for MC in the closed-world
the attack scenario in Section IV. kNN has a large memory scenario is 99.9 %, and 94.2 % for the PHMM. In the openoverhead and is costly to evaluate even with appropriate data world scenario, the median precision drops for both models
structures. CUMUL and IPFP require access to all flows of close to the average. This indicates that the PGMs confuse
a page load, making them hard to use with traffic aggre- Background Sites with Foreground Sites. Still, both models
gates. Especially IPFP relies heavily on correctly extracting have a precision of >90 % for one-third of the Foreground
page loads from traffic aggregates, a mostly open problem. Sites in the open-world scenario.
In contrast to kNN, CUMUL’s SVM is not suited to model
variable-length sequences with nominal elements. B. RT LS RS Defense
 Fig. 8(c) shows the precision and the overhead as a func-
A. Closed World vs. Open World tion of the uniform distribution’s upper size. Fig. 8 shows that
 Fig. 7(c) shows violinplots for precision and recall for the the precision is low for all upper limits, ranging between
open- and closed-world scenarios with and without defense. 8 % and 12 %, with a minimum of 8.71 % for an upper
Asymmetric routing is indicated with the endings fc2s and size of 6 100 Byte. In contrast, Fig. 8(b) shows that the overfs2c. For fc2s, the traffic from the client to the server is head increases linearly with the upper size. An upper size of
1280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 9. Development of precision over multiple days. Fig. 10. Development of the NLL for the MC trained on one day. The shaded
 area is the bootstrapped 99 % CI of the mean.

100 Bytes has the smallest overhead with 150 %. The upper Fig. 9(b) shows the average precision per day when training
size of 6 100 has an overhead of 425 %. We thus investigate on traces of the first day. Fig. 9(b) shows that the precision
the RT LS RS’ effect on the classification performance for an decreases over time. The average precision of MC and PHMM
upper size of 100 Bytes. This reduces the average precision to drops to 66.2 % and 42.5 %. This behavior is not unexpected
9.35 % while keeping overhead low. and has previously been observed [51]. This indicates that
 Fig. 7(c) shows that the RT LS RS defense from Section IV-E attackers must continuously gather new data to update the
effectively mitigates P RO F I. The RT LS RS defense reduces the deployed models for websites with dynamic content.
precision and recall of both models to ∼20 % in the closed- Fig. 10 illustrates this and shows the average Negative
world scenario. In the open-world scenario, RT LS RS reduces Log Likelihood (NLL)6 and its 99 % Confidence Interval
the precision of both models to less than 10 %. The recall is (CI) for the MCs fitted to data from www.medium.com
less affected and reduces to ∼19 %. (Fig. 10(a)), and www.ebay.co.uk (Fig. 10(b)). Fig. 10
 The RT LS RS defense thus has two effects: The models shows two examples of distributional drift that can occur in
miss many webpages (low recall), and the credibility of the an operative system: A slow and steady drift and a sudden
retrieved webpages is small (low precision). On average, more change.
than 90 % of the webpages the models classify as belonging to Fig. 10(a) shows that the average NLL has an increasing
a specific website belong to another. Still, even in the presence trend indicating that the input diverges from the data the
of defense, a few websites exist for which P RO F I achieves high model was fitted with. To continuously operate the system,
precision and recall, as Fig. 7(c) shows. the adversary thus has to continuously update its training data
 and model to track the drift in the input’s data distribution.
C. Asymmetric Routing In contrast, Fig. 10(b) shows a sudden jump after 42 days.
 This indicates a persistent change in the input data’s distribu-
 Fig. 7(c) shows that the effect of asymmetric routing on tion, making the model unreliable. The change is caused by
P RO F I’s performance depends heavily on the direction of a different length of the server’s TLS finished record. If
unobserved traffic. If traffic from the server to the client such a change occurs, the adversary must collect new samples
remains unobserved, the average precision and recall of MC to adjust the model to the new input distribution.
and PHMM deteriorate to less than 6 %. The advantage of PGMs is that they readily detect drift in
 If traffic from the client to the server remains unobserved, the input’s distribution. Further, PGMs allow the investigathen the average precision of MC and PHMM reduces by tion of what changed [37], [76]. Here, the PGMs allow the
∼3 %. Similarly, the distribution of the recall for the PHMM identification of the transitions with low probability, directly
shifts towards lower values, as Fig. 7(c) shows. The median pinpointing the change in the exchanged messages.
recall reduces by >13 %, while the average reduces by 0.7 %.
For the MC, the average recall improves from 78.7 % to
 E. Comparison to Baselines
81.6 %, while the median stays high at 98.9 %.
 This outcome is reasonable. Few packets travel from client Table II shows the average precision and recall for MC
to server, amounting to TLS messages and HTTP commands and PHMM, and the three baselines kNN, CUMUL, and
with small variance, making websites hard to differentiate. IPFP in the closed-, and open-world scenario. Table II shows
Most packets travel from server to client and have a high vari- that P RO F I is competitive to state-of-the-art models. In the
ance, as Fig. 4 shows. Missing traffic from the server to the closed-world scenario, kNN is the best model with an averclient deprives the PGMs of much of the information they use age precision of 91.8 % and an average recall of 91.44 %.
for classification. kNN achieves this at the expense of increased memory and
 computational requirements, whereas P RO F I relies on com-
D. Training Data Evaluation putationally cheap ML models with few parameters. Fig. 1
 illustrates this fact and shows the number of pages per sec-
 Fig. 9(a) shows the average precision over days when train- ond classifiers classify in an offline setting. Fig. 1 shows
ing on all training data. Fig. 9(a) shows that the precision of all that kNN achieves short of 10 classifications per second,
models remains approximately constant over time. The recall
scores show similar behavior. 6 The NLL is uncalibrated and cannot be compared between models.
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1281

 TABLE II
 P RECISION , R ECALL AND ACCURACY FOR PHMM, MC, AND THE the CDN. Extending the classifier with this information could
 BASELINES IN THE O PEN AND C LOSED S CENARIO be an interesting avenue for future work.

 VII. P ROTOTYPE D ESIGN & R ESULTS
 This section presents a micro-service-based prototype that
 implements the P RO F I attack. The prototype is based on readily available open-source software and Commodity of the
 Shelf (COTS) hardware to showcase the potential threat P RO F I
 poses and give an impression of the scale WFP attacks might
 operate at, e.g., by operating on MEC infrastructure. After
whereas MC and PHMM achieve between 30 000 and 100 000 establishing the ML-related performance in the previous secclassifications per second.7 tion, this section’s evaluation focuses on networking-related
 In the open-world scenario, IPFP is the best model with performance indicators.
a precision of 80.6 % and a recall of 85.2 %. In contrast
to P RO F I, IPFP requires additional pre-processing steps to A. Design & Architecture
extract a user’s page-load from the traffic aggregate. The 1) Design: NFV and COTS. We believe that the princiauthors do not provide a solution to this problem. Detecting for ple of NFV is a good fit for P RO F I. NFV can realize each
one user whether the user loads more than one page and detect- PGM as one Virtual Network Function (VNF). NFV enables
ing the onset of the second page load is already a challenging the scaling of ProFi across multiple servers, horizontal scaling
task [19], [22], [29], [36]. Extracting one page load from traf- of expensive PGMs, and the deployment of new, or updating
fic aggregates with high precision is much more complex and of existing PGMs at runtime. This makes P RO F I amenable
will have limited accuracy in practice. to the deployment on top of MEC infrastructure. The low
 computational cost of the PGMs alleviates the need for spe-
F. Summary cial hardware accelerators and lowers the burden of deploying
 Our results show that PGMs classify traffic based on the first ProFi in practice.
5 to 30 packets of the first initiated TLS session when retriev- Middlebox Design. A middlebox allows the attacker to
ing a webpage and are competitive to state-of-the-art attacks. interfere with a victim’s traffic. The prototype could drop the
This simplifies WFP attacks since page loads do not have to remaining packets of a flagged flow. The alternative, i.e., mirbe retrieved from a mix of traffic. Furthermore, our evalua- roring traffic to an analysis server, does not easily allow this
tion shows that the attack works with only the traffic from type of interference since switches start to sample traffic at
the server to the client, i.e., can handle asymmetric routing. high rates, which will result in incorrect classifications.
In addition, the computational and memory complexity of the 2) Architecture: We implement the prototype on top of
PGMs is low and could allow adversaries to perform WFP in the OpenNetVM platform [92]. OpenNetVM is a highreal-time and at scale. Our results show that the PGMs have a performance, zero-copy NF platform supporting containerizahigher recall than precision. In scenarios where the precision tion that simplifies the development of VNFs. The prototype
is of interest, the attacker can trade recall for precision by implements the classification procedure from Fig. 3 using
setting the classifier’s parameter γ to a value smaller one. A a micro-service-based architecture. Fig. 11 shows the strucvalue smaller one requires a log-likelihood at inference time ture of the prototype. We map the procedure in Fig. 3 into
that is smaller than the largest log-likelihood at training time, five services, i.e., VNFs: The TLSFilter, TLSRecDet,
i.e., for which the learned model fits better than the worst Symbolizer, PGM, and Coordinator.
model during training. Fortunately, the RT LS RS defense that The TLSFilter extracts TLS traffic and forwards it to the
SSL libraries can readily implement thwarts the attack at the TLSRecDet. The TLSRecDet extracts TLS Records from
cost of a 150 % increase in bandwidth. the traffic and passes this information to all Symbolizers.
 Finally, we note that an adversary could easily improve Each Symbolizer converts the extracted meta-data into a
P RO F I by conditioning the probability of a website on addi- discrete symbol and forwards the symbol to one PGM. The
tional variables such as the visited CDN, the time of the day, or PGM processes the symbol and, once the PGM processed a
other correlated variables. For example, calculating the proba- configured amount of symbols for a flow, forwards an anomaly
bility for a website y could then be p(y | O)p(y | c)p(y | t), score to the Coordinator. The Coordinator labels a
where c identifies the CDN the website is located on and t the flow based on the received anomaly scores.
time of the day. For example, conditioning on the CDN would VNFs communicate with each other using User Datagram
essentially reduce the hypothesis space to just the websites in Protocol (UDP) packets. This makes the deployment of P RO F I
 to a cluster simple. The micro-service-based architecture
 7 Data structures to improve the inference time, e.g., KDTrees, are not enables the scaling, addition, and updating of models with
applicable since they require real-valued inputs [91]. Our input consists of new parameters. For example, additional PGMs or data prepasequences with nominal elements. Further, experiments using the packet size rations can easily be added by starting a new service. Already
of the first 30 packets as input features showed that the KDTree reduced the
inference time not as strongly as expected, i.e., only by a factor of three running services can be scaled as needed by deploying new
compared to a linear scan. This is not unexpected [91]. instances.
1282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

Fig. 11. Testbed setup and prototype structure. Circles correspond to processes, i.e., VNFs. Rectangles to data sources and sinks. The prototype is implemented
on top of OpenNetVM. VNFs in OpenNetVM exchange information via UDP packets.

 TABLE III
 T RACE S TATISTICS Fig. 12(c) shows that between 1 and 8 PHMMs can be
 co-located on one CPU core. The values are similar across
 workloads. Fig. 12(c) shows that between 6 and 8 MCs can be
 co-located on one CPU core. A CPU core can fit more MCs
 than PHMMs, which is expected since the PHMM requires
 more computational resources to compute the log-likelihood
 of a sequence. Depending on the models’ sizes, the prototype
 could run between 20 and 100 PGM services.
 3) Impact on User Traffic: Dataplane traffic traverses only
B. Prototype Results the TLSFilter service. Fig. 12(a) illustrates the average
 1) Material and Methods: The prototype operates on a processing times of the TLSFilter as violinplot. Each vioserver with an Intel Xeon CPU E5-265 with 24 cores, 126 GB lin is computed from 20 runs. Fig. 12(a) shows that the
RAM, and an Intel X540-AT2 network card with two 10 Gbit/s TLSFilter is cheap and takes on average between 0.2 µs
ports (Fig. 11). The server is connected back-to-back to a sec- and 0.33 µs for each packet. Fig. 12(a) shows that the numond server with identical hardware running MoonGen [93]. ber of packets needed for classification affects the processing
MoonGen replays PCAPs constructed from the traces we time of the TLSFilter function. This is expected since more
collected according to Section V-A, i.e., not with passively packets result in a larger state of the TLSFilter function,
collected traces. MoonGen replays the PCAPs as fast as pos- which increases the processing time.
sible, i.e., at the full 10 Gbit/s. The prototype can use 17 out of 4) Time-to-Label (TTL): The TTL is the duration between
the 24 cores for PGMs. OpenNetVM blocks four cores, and the last required packet entering the prototype and when
three cores are allocated to the TLSFilter, TLSRecDet, the label is available [46]. For example, if 30 packets are
and Coordinator. required to classify a flow, then the TTL is the difference
 We create two challenging workloads and one regular work- between the arrival time of the 30th packet and the time the
load to benchmark the prototype. Table III lists the workload Coordinator labels the flow. We do not use the arrival time
characteristics. The regular workload consists of a random of the first packet because this would introduce noise. The TTL
sample of webpage calls. The adversarial workloads high- would not only depend on the latency of the prototype but also
pps, and high-fps challenge the prototype with a higher packet on the inter-arrival time of packets in the trace.
and flow rate than the regular workload. This challenges the We evaluate the TTL for the small and big PGM variants.
TLSFilter, TLSRecDet, and PGM services, respectively. We measure the TTL with one PGM each. Fig. 12(b) shows
Each trace has a volume of around 13 GB, resulting in a 10 s violin plots of the TTL. Fig. 12(b) shows a large variance in
measurement on 10 G. the TTL, ranging from 0.001 ms up to 1 000 ms. The median
 2) Number of Classifiable Websites: Fig. 12(c) shows the TTL for small models is at ∼0.01 ms for PHMM and MC.
number of PGM services that can be co-located on one CPU The median values for the big PGMs vary. The big MC has
core. We evaluate a small and large MC and PHMM model. a median TTL of ∼100 ms, and the PHMM of ∼0.06 ms.
The big PHMM model has 639 parameters. The small PHMM However, the distribution of TLLs for the PHMM is heavy
has 114 parameters. The MC models have 11 078 and 5 param- tailed, resulting in an average of ∼200 ms.
eters respectively. The big model require 30 packets, the small
models 5 packets for classification. For each PGM and work- C. Summary
load, we vary the number of PGMs in {1, . . . , 10}. We report We implemented a prototype that classifies traffic with
the highest number of co-located PGMs that could handle the PGMs and evaluated it with real traffic traces. The prototraffic. type can hold 10 Gbits, corresponding to up to 424 Website
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1283

Fig. 12. (a) Distribution of average processing times of the TLSFilter. (b) Time-to-label for small/large PGMs on the average workload. (c) Number of
PGMs on one CPU core. Suffixes -S/-L refer to small/large model.

calls per second. Statistical traffic classification with PGMs scale, we design and evaluate P RO F I, a Website Fingerprinting
is thus feasible in the network at line rate. Our evaluations (WFP) attack on the flow level that de-anonymizes encrypted
show that the prototype can monitor up to 100 websites. The network traffic of websites that Internet users visit. To scale
results of this section have an impact beyond the WFP use- to large traffic aggregates, P RO F I uses computationally cheap
case since the P RO F I could also label traffic for legitimate Machine Learning (ML) models and requires only the direcreasons. tion, packet size, and TLS record types of, at most, the first
 At the same time, our work opens up new research oppor- 30 packets of a flow. P RO F I achieves a precision and recall
tunities in the area of traffic classification. We present the first of 86.51 % and 85.53 % in a closed-world, and 68.90 % and
design of a micro-service-based system able to perform WFP 78.71 % in an open-world scenario with 96 websites and
at the network edge. The investigation of how such systems, 4 800 webpages. To show that P RO F I could be deployed
e.g., for statistical traffic classification, might be operated on by ISPs or other censoring entities at scale, we show that
top of a MEC infrastructure with computing facilities at dif- P RO F I can operate as a middlebox in an online scenario and
ferent distances to the user could be an interesting avenue of evaluate a prototype implementation in a testbed with real
future work. traffic traces. We show that P RO F I has the potential to process up to 424 websites/s at 10 G—a scale that is required
 VIII. E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS to run the attack on the Internet, yet a scale to which current WFP attacks are not applicable. Further, the prototype
 We carefully take steps to ensure that all captured data is
 shows that P RO F I can label traffic within one millisecond
in compliance with ethical standards. First, no personal data
 after receiving the last required packet, which could allow
was collected during crawls of public and popular websites.
 active interference with users’ traffic. The results suggest
Second, we limit the crawling rate to ensure that the websites
 that WFP can be performed at scale and threatens user priare not impacted. We limit crawls to 100 per day for websites
 vacy. Yet, we show that the attack can be mitigated by
within the Alexa Top 1 000 Ranking to minimize the impact
 standard features available in TLS 1.3. To improve Internet
of our study.
 privacy, we posit that such defense mechanisms should find
 P RO F I demonstrates the ability of an adversary to launch
 their way into TLS libraries to protect user privacy on the
WFP attacks at scale. This raises an ethical question, as cen-
 Internet. Further, our analysis shows that standardizing the
sors can use published attacks to violate user privacy. To
 TLS handshake could help to improve privacy since P RO F I
mitigate this effect, we present a defense that can readily be
 frequently relied on characteristics of the handshake for
implemented alongside the attack. In addition, we believe that
 classification.
the preemptive exposure of potential vulnerabilities is neces-
 Future work on PGM-based WFP attacks could investigate
sary to develop effective and efficient countermeasures. With
 the inclusion of auxiliary data into calculating the probabilour results we show the practicability and severity of WFP,
 ity of a website to improve the classification performance. In
sending an impulse to discuss the implementation of defense
 addition, attacks using tree-based learners could be evaluated.
mechanisms not only in the Tor network, but also in common
 Tree-based models can potentially operate in the match-action
SSL libraries, and the TLS standard.
 pipeline of switches [77] if small enough. We believe the necessary feature engineering and network integration to be chal-
 IX. C ONCLUSION lenging, making this evaluation an interesting aspect for future
 Despite the success of the encrypt-everything movement work. Further, the operation of the proposed microservicethat resulted in a substantial deployment of TLS, Internet based implementation on top of MEC infrastructure could
users are still at risk of pervasive monitoring attacks. To show be an interesting avenue for future work in statistical traffic
the feasibility of pervasive monitoring of Internet traffic at classification.
1284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 R EFERENCES [26] Z. Zhuo, Y. Zhang, Z.-L. Zhang, X. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Website
 fingerprinting attack on anonymity networks based on profile hidden
 [1] R. Barnes et al., “Confidentiality in the face of pervasive surveillance: Markov model,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 5,
 A threat model and problem statement,” IETF, RFC 7624, Aug. 2015. pp. 1081–1095, May 2018.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7624 [27] S. Bhat, D. Lu, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “Var-CNN: A data-
 [2] Z. Hu, L. Zhu, J. Heidemann, A. Mankin, D. Wessels, and P. E. Hoffman, efficient Website fingerprinting attack based on deep learning,” Proc.
 “Specification for DNS over transport layer security (TLS),” IETF, RFC Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2019, no. 4, pp. 292–310, 2019. [Online].
 7858, May 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/ Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2019/popets-2019-0070.php
 rfc7858 [28] M. Shen, Y. Liu, S. Chen, L. Zhu, and Y. Zhang, “Webpage fingerprint-
 [3] P. E. Hoffman and P. McManus, “DNS queries over HTTPS (DoH),” ing using only packet length information,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Shanghai,
 IETF, RFC 8484, Oct. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor. China, 2019, pp. 1–6.
 org/info/rfc8484 [29] W. Cui, T. Chen, and E. Chan-Tin, “More realistic website finger-
 [4] C. Huitema and E. Rescorla, “Issues and requirements for server name printing using deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS, Singapore, 2020,
 identification (SNI) encryption in TLS,” IETF, RFC 8744, Jul. 2020. pp. 333–343.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8744
 [30] N. P. Hoang, A. A. Niaki, P. Gill, and M. Polychronakis, “Domain
 [5] E. Rescorla, K. Oku, N. Sullivan, and C. A. Wood (Internet Eng. name encryption is not enough: Privacy leakage via IP-based web-
 Task Force, Fremont, CA, USA). TLS Encrypted Client Hello. site fingerprinting,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2021,
 (Aug. 2021). [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/ no. 4, pp. 420–440, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/
 draft-ietf-tls-esni-13 popets/2021/popets-2021-0078.php
 [6] S. Friedl, A. Popov, A. Langley, and S. Emile, “Transport layer secu-
 [31] T. Pulls and R. Dahlberg, “Website fingerprinting with website oracles,”
 rity (TLS) application-layer protocol negotiation extension,” IETF, RFC
 Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2020, no. 1, pp. 235–255, 2020.
 7301, Jul. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
 [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2020/popets-2020-
 rfc7301
 0013.php
 [7] Z. Chai, A. Ghafari, and A. Houmansadr, “On the importance of
 [32] T. Wang, “High precision open-world website fingerprinting,” in Proc.
 encrypted-SNI (ESNI) to censorship circumvention,” in Proc. FOCI,
 IEEE SP, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 152–167.
 Aug. 2019, p. 19.
 [33] Q. Sun, D. R. Simon, Y.-M. Wang, W. Russell, V. N. Padmanabhan, and
 [8] K. Bock, L.-H. Merino, D. Fifield, A. Houmansadr, and D. Levin.
 L. Qiu, “Statistical identification of encrypted Web browsing traffic,” in
 “Exposing and circumventing China’s censorship of ESNI.” Jul. 2020.
 Proc. S&P, 2002, pp. 19–30.
 [Online]. Available: https://gfw.report/blog/gfw_esni_blocking/en/
 [34] K. Abe and S. Goto, “Fingerprinting attack on ToR anonymity using
 [9] M. Liberatore and B. N. Levine, “Inferring the source of encrypted
 deep learning,” in Proc. APAN, Hong Kong, 2016, pp. 1–6.
 HTTP connections,” in Proc. ACM CCS, 2006, pp. 255–263.
[10] S. E. Coull, M. P. Collins, C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, and M. K. Reiter, [35] M. Trevisan, F. Soro, M. Mellia, I. Drago, and R. Morla, “Does domain
 “On Web browsing privacy in anonymized NetFlows,” in Proc. SS, name encryption increase users’ privacy?” ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
 Boston, MA, USA, 2007, pp. 1–14. Commun. Rev., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 16–22, Jul. 2020.
[11] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting: [36] W. Cui, T. Chen, C. Fields, J. Chen, A. Sierra, and E. Chan-Tin,
 Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial “Revisiting assumptions for website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc.
 Naïve-Bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM CCSW, Chicago, IL, USA, 2009, ACM AsiaCCS, Auckland, New Zealand, 2019, pp. 328–339.
 pp. 31–42. [37] D. Koller and N. Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles
[12] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website finger- and Techniques—Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning.
 printing in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. ACM Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2009.
 WPES, Chicago, IL, USA, 2011, pp. 103–114. [38] S. Studer et al., “Towards CRISP-ML(Q): A machine learning pro-
[13] X. Cai, X. C. Zhang, B. Joshi, and R. Johnson, “Touching from a dis- cess model with quality assurance methodology,” Mach. Learn. Knowl.,
 tance: Website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM CCS, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 392–413, 2021.
 Raleigh, NC, USA, 2012, pp. 605–616. [39] ETSI. “Multi-access edge computing (MEC).” 2021. [Online]. Available:
[14] K. P. Dyer, S. E. Coull, T. Ristenpart, and T. Shrimpton, “Peek-a-boo, https://www.etsi.org/technologies/multi-access-edge-computing
 I still see you: Why efficient traffic analysis countermeasures fail,” in [40] C. Labovitz, S. Iekel-Johnson, D. McPherson, J. Oberheide, and
 Proc. IEEE SSP, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 332–346. F. Jahanian, “Internet inter-domain traffic,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM,
[15] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Improved website fingerprinting on ToR,” in New Delhi, India, 2010, pp. 75–86.
 Proc. ACM WPES, Berlin, Germany, 2013, pp. 201–212. [41] B. Ager, W. Mühlbauer, G. Smaragdakis, and S. Uhlig, “Web content
[16] T. Wang, X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “Effective cartography,” in Proc. IMC, Berlin, Germany, 2011, pp. 585–600.
 attacks and provable defenses for website fingerprinting,” in Proc. SEC, [42] T. Böttger, F. Cuadrado, and S. Uhlig, “Looking for hypergiants in
 San Diego, CA, USA, 2014, pp. 143–157. PeeringDB,” ACM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 13–19,
[17] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A sys- 2018.
 tematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting [43] D. Fifield, C. Lan, R. Hynes, P. Wegmann, and V. Paxson,
 defenses,” in Proc. CCS, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, 2014, pp. 227–238. “Blocking-resistant communication through domain fronting,” Proc.
[18] X. Gu, M. Yang, and J. Luo, “A novel website fingerprinting attack Priv. Enhancing Technol., vol. 2015, no. 2, pp. 46–64, Jun. 2015.
 against multi-tab browsing behavior,” in Proc. IEEE CSCWD, Calabria, [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/2015/popets-2015-
 Italy, 2015, pp. 234–239. 0009.php
[19] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “On realistically attacking ToR with web- [44] P. Jauniškis. “VPN statistics: Users, markets, & legality.” Accessed:
 site fingerprinting,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2016, no. 4, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://surfshark.com/blog/vpn-users
 pp. 21–36, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/popets/ [45] K. Ismailaj, M. Camelo, and S. Latré, “When deep learning may not
 2016/ be the right tool for traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE IM, Bordeaux,
[20] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at Internet scale,” in Proc. France, May 2021, pp. 884–889.
 NDSS, San Diego, CA, USA, 2016, p. 6. [46] M. Gallo, A. Finamore, G. Simon, and D. Rossi, “FENXI Fast in-
[21] J. Hayes and G. Danezis, “K-fingerprinting: A robust scalable website network analytics,” in Proc. ACM SEC, 2021, p. 1–8.
 fingerprinting technique,” in Proc. SEC, 2016, pp. 1187–1203. [47] R. Geirhos et al., “Shortcut learning in deep neural networks,” Nat.
[22] Y. Xu, T. Wang, Q. Li, Q. Gong, Y. Chen, and Y. Jiang, “A multi-tab Mach. Intell., vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 665–673, Nov. 2020.
 website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. ACM ACSAC, 2018, pp. 327–341. [48] K. P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (Adaptive
[23] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprint- Computation and Machine Learning Series). Cambridge, MA, USA:
 ing: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” MIT Press, 2012.
 in Proc. ACM CCS, 2018, pp. 1928–1943. [49] W. Aqeel, B. Chandrasekaran, A. Feldmann, and B. M. Maggs, “On
[24] P. Sirinam, N. Mathews, M. S. Rahman, and M. Wright, “Triplet finger- landing and internal Web pages: The strange case of Jekyll and
 printing: More practical and portable website fingerprinting with N-shot hyde in Web performance measurement,” in Proc. ACM IMC, 2020,
 learning,” in Proc. ACM CCS, London, U.K., 2019, pp. 1131–1148. pp. 680–695.
[25] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juárez, T. v. Goethem, and W. Joosen, [50] A. Hintz, “Fingerprinting websites using traffic analysis,” in Proc. PET,
 “Automated website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. vol. 2482, 2002, pp. 171–178. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.
 NDSS, San Diego, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 1–8. com/chapter/10.1007/3-540-36467-6_13
KRÄMER et al.: ProFi: SCALABLE AND EFFICIENT WEBSITE FINGERPRINTING 1285

[51] M. Juarez, S. Afroz, G. Acar, C. Diaz, and R. Greenstadt, “A critical [78] B. M. Xavier, R. S. Guimarães, G. Comarela, and M. Martinello,
 evaluation of website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. ACM CCS, 2014, “Programmable switches for in-networking classification,” in Proc. IEEE
 pp. 263–274. INFOCOM, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[52] X. Gong, N. Kiyavash, and N. Borisov, “Fingerprinting websites using [79] G. Siracusano and R. Bifulco. “In-network neural networks.” 2018.
 remote traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM CCS, Chicago, IL, USA, 2010, [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.05731
 pp. 684–686. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10. [80] D. Sanvito, G. Siracusano, and R. Bifulco, “Can the network be the AI
 1007/978-3-319-45744-4_2 accelerator?” in Proc. ACM NetCompute, 2018, pp. 20–25.
[53] M. Juárez, M. Imani, M. Perry, C. Díaz, and M. Wright, “Toward an [81] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar,
 efficient website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. ESORICS, vol. 9878, “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network traf-
 2016, pp. 27–46. fic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
[54] T. Wang and I. Goldberg, “Walkie–talkie: An efficient defense against vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019.
 passive website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. USENIX Security, [82] T. Häiland-Järgensen, B. Ahlgren, P. Hurtig, and A. Brunström,
 Aug. 2017, pp. 1375–1390. “Measuring latency variation in the Internet,” in Proc. CoNEXT, 2016,
[55] D. Lu, S. Bhat, A. Kwon, and S. Devadas, “DynaFlow: An efficient pp. 473–480.
 website fingerprinting defense based on dynamically-adjusting flows,” [83] E. Rescorla, “The transport layer security (TLS) protocol version 1.3,”
 in Proc. ACM WPES, 2018, pp. 109–113. IETF, RFC 8446, Aug. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.
[56] W. De la Cadena et al., “TrafficSliver: Fighting website fingerprinting org/doc/html/rfc8446
 attacks with traffic splitting,” in Proc. CCS, 2020, pp. 1971–1985. [84] A. Krogh, M. Brown, I. S. Mian, K. Sjölander, and D. Haussler,
[57] R. Meier, V. Lenders, and L. Vanbever, “DITTO: WAN traffic obfusca- “Hidden Markov models in computational biology: Applications to
 tion at line rate,” in Proc. NDSS, Apr. 2022, p. 2. protein modeling,” J. Mol. Biol., vol. 235, no. 5, pp. 1501–1531, 1994.
[58] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An effi- [85] C. V. Wright, F. Monrose, and G. M. Masson, “On inferring application
 cient defense against statistical traffic analysis,” in Proc. NDSS, San protocol behaviors in encrypted network traffic,” J. Mach. Learn. Res.,
 Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2009, p. 2. vol. 7, pp. 2745–2769, Dec. 2006.
[59] G. Cherubin, J. Hayes, and M. Juárez, “Website fingerprinting defenses [86] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: Practical Machine
 at the application layer,” Proc. Privacy Enhanc. Technol., vol. 2017, Learning Tools and Techniques, 3rd ed. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
 no. 2, pp. 186–203, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://petsymposium.org/ Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.
 popets/2017/popets-2017-0023.php [87] F. P. Miller, A. F. Vandome, and J. McBrewster, Levenshtein Distance:
[60] E. Chan-Tin, T. Kim, and J. Kim, “Website fingerprinting attack miti- Information Theory, Computer Science, String (Computer Science),
 gation using traffic morphing,” in Proc. ICDCS, 2018, pp. 1575–1578. String Metric, Damerau Levenshtein Distance, Spell Checker, Hamming
[61] S. Yu, G. Zhao, W. Dou, and S. James, “Predicted packet padding for Distance. London, U.K.: Alpha Press, 2009.
 anonymous Web browsing against traffic analysis attacks,” IEEE Trans. [88] “Alexa—The Web information company.” Accessed: May 14, 2020.
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1381–1393, Aug. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.alexa.com/
[62] H. M. Moghaddam, B. Li, M. Derakhshani, and I. Goldberg, [89] H. Chen, H. He, and A. Starr, “An overview of Web robots detec-
 “SkypeMorph: Protocol obfuscation for ToR bridges,” in Proc. ACM tion techniques,” in Proc. IEEE Cyber Security, Dublin, Ireland, 2020,
 CCS, Raleigh, NC, USA, Oct. 2012, pp. 97–108, li2012. pp. 1–6.
[63] W. Cui, J. Yu, Y. Gong, and E. Chan-Tin, “Realistic cover traffic to [90] W. John, M. Dusi, and K. claffy, “Estimating routing symmetry on single
 mitigate website fingerprinting attacks,” in Proc. IEEE ICDCS, 2018, links by passive flow measurements,” ACM TRAC, Randburg, South
 pp. 1579–1584. Africa, Rep. TR 2010, Mar. 2010.
[64] X. Luo, P. Zhou, E. W. W. Chan, W. Lee, R. K. C. Chang, and [91] R. Weber, H.-J. Schek, and S. Blott, “A quantitative analysis and
 R. Perdisci, “HTTPOS: Sealing information leaks with browser-side performance study for similarity-search methods in high-dimensional
 obfuscation of encrypted flows,” in Proc. NDSS, 2011, p. 2. spaces,” in Proc. VLDB, 1998, pp. 194–205.
[65] S. Shan, A. N. Bhagoji, H. Zheng, and B. Y. Zhao. “A real- [92] W. Zhang et al., “OpenNetVM: A platform for high performance
 time defense against Website fingerprinting attacks.” 2021. [Online]. network service chains,” in Proc. ACM HotMIddlebox, Florianopolis,
 Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.04291 Brazil, 2016, pp. 26–31.
[66] J. P. Degabriele, “Hiding the lengths of encrypted messages via Gaussian [93] P. Emmerich, S. Gallenmüller, D. Raumer, F. Wohlfart, and G. Carle,
 padding,” in Proc. ACM CCS, ACM, 2021, pp. 1549–1565. “MoonGen: A Scriptable high-speed packet generator,” in Proc. IMC,
[67] X. Liu, Z. Zhuo, X. Du, X. Zhang, Q. Zhu, and M. Guizani, “Adversarial Tokyo, Japan, 2015, pp. 275–287.
 attacks against profile HMM website fingerprinting detection model,”
 Cogn. Syst. Res., vol. 54, pp. 83–89, May 2019.
[68] J. Gong and T. Wang, “Zero-delay lightweight defenses against website
 fingerprinting,” in Proc. Security, 2020, pp. 717–734.
[69] R. Nithyanand, X. Cai, and R. Johnson, “GLOVE: A bespoke website fingerprinting defense,” in Proc. ACM WPES, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, Patrick Krämer (Member, IEEE) received the
 2014, pp. 131–134. M.Sc. degree from the Technical University of
[70] T. T. T. Nguyen and G. Armitage, “A survey of techniques for Internet Munich (TUM), Germany, in 2017. He joined the
 traffic classification using machine learning,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Chair of Communication Networks, TUM, in April
 Tuts., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 56–76, 4th Quart., 2008. 2017, where he is currently working as a Researcher
[71] H. Kim, K. Claffy, M. Fomenkov, D. Barman, M. Faloutsos, and K. Lee, and a Teaching Assistant. His research is focused on
 “Internet traffic classification demystified: Myths, caveats, and the best self-driving networks that learn to utilize the flexipractices,” in Proc. ACM CoNEXT, 2008, p. 11. bility offered by modern networking technologies.
[72] T. Karagiannis, K. Papagiannaki, and M. Faloutsos, “BLINC: Multilevel
 traffic classification in the dark,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Comput.
 Commun., vol. 35, 2005, pp. 229–240.
[73] R. Alshammari and A. N. Zincir-Heywood, “Can encrypted traffic be
 identified without port numbers, IP addresses and payload inspection?”
 Comput. Netw, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1326–1350, 2011.
[74] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network Benedikt Baier received the B.Sc. degree in electritraffic,” in Proc. EuroS P, Mar. 2016, pp. 439–454. cal engineering and information technology from the
[75] I. Akbari et al., “A look behind the curtain: Traffic classification in an Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany,
 increasingly encrypted Web,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., in 2020. In April 2020, he joined the Chair of
 vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–26, Feb. 2021. Communication Networks, TUM. His research is
[76] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify focused on quantum networks and enhancing classiencrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789. cal networks with quantum technologies.
[77] Z. Xiong and N. Zilberman, “Do switches dream of machine learning? Toward in-network classification,” in Proc. ACM HotNets, 2019,
 pp. 25–33.
1286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2024

 Niklas Landerer received the B.Sc. degree in elec- Andreas Blenk received the Doktor-Ingenieur (Dr.-
 trical engineering and information technology from Ing.) degree (summa cum laude) from Technische
 the Technical University of Munich (TUM) in 2020, Universität München (TUM) in May 2018. He is a
 where he is currently pursuing the master’s degree. Research Scientist with Siemens AG, where he has
 In 2020, he joined the Chair of Communication been a part of the Industrial Networks and Wireless
 Networks, TUM, as a Research Assistant. Group (T CED INW-DE) since April 2022. In his
 current role, he is focused on the automation, measurement, and validation of industrial networks and
 is involved in defining and writing blueprints for
 the Siemens AG networking portfolio. Prior to joining Siemens AG, he was a member of the Chair
 of Communication Networks, led by Prof. W. Kellerer, at TUM beginning
 in June 2012. From 2018 to 2022, he continued his work at TUM as a
 Postdoctoral Fellow, further honing his expertise in the field of communica-
 Philip Diederich (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) tion networks. During this time, he also served as a Senior Research Fellow
 received the B.Sc. degree in electrical engineer- with the Communication Technologies Group, Faculty of Computer Science,
 ing and information technology from the Technical University of Vienna from March 2019 to January 2022.
 University of Munich (TUM), Germany, in 2019.
 He joined the Chair of Communication Networks,
 TUM, in November 2021. His research is focused
 on software-defined networks and resource management in network function virtualization.

 Martin Mieth received the M.B.A. degree and
 the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and
 information technology. As the Vice President of
 Engineering, he is responsible for all aspects of
 ipoque’s OEM network analytics solutions with a
 Alexander Griessel (Graduate Student Member,
 strong focus on innovation and research partner-
 IEEE) received the Bachelor of Science and Master
 ships with universities. Before his current position,
 of Science degrees in electrical and computer engihe successfully led the Deep Packet Inspection
 neering from the Technical University of Munich
 Development Department and established an inin 2020 and 2022, respectively, where he is curhouse research team dedicated to ML and AI. He can
 rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Chair of
 rely on more than nine years of managing experience
 Communication Networks, specializing in resource
 for several specialized teams, all while applying agile values and methods.
 allocation mechanisms in semantic communication.
 Before joining ipoque, he worked for the German Federal Armed Forces as
 an IT Officer in charge of numerous software development and IT projects.

 Oliver Hohlfeld received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
 degrees in computer science from the Darmstadt
 University of Applied Sciences, Institute Eurecom, Wolfgang Kellerer (Senior Member, IEEE) is a
 and the Darmstadt University of Technology, and the Full Professor with the Technical University of
 Ph.D. (Dr. rer. nat.) degree from TU Berlin. He is a Munich, heading the Chair of Communication
 Full Professor with the University of Kassel, where Networks, Department of Electrical and Computer
 he heads the Distributed Systems Group. Before, Engineering. Before, he was for over ten years with
 he was a Full Professor with the Brandenburg NTT DOCOMO’s European Research Laboratories.
 University of Technology, heading the Chair of He currently serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE
 Computer Networks. Before, he was with RWTH T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE
 Aachen University and with TU Berlin/Deutsche M ANAGEMENT and an Area Editor for Network
Telekom Innovation Laboratories. He was a Visiting Scholar with the Group Virtualization for IEEE C OMMUNICATIONS
of Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin–Madison, USA. S URVEYS AND T UTORIALS.