IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024 6661

 Regularity Learning via Explicit Distribution
 Modeling for Skeletal Video Anomaly Detection
 Shoubin Yu , Zhongyin Zhao, Haoshu Fang , Andong Deng, Haisheng Su, Dongliang Wang,
 Weihao Gan, Cewu Lu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Wei Wu

 Abstract— Anomaly detection in surveillance videos is chal- Pixel-based methods [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], have been extenlenging but important for ensuring public security. Different sively studied for VAD. Recently, thanks to the success of
from pixel-based anomaly detection methods, pose-based meth- pose estimation, pose, as a clean and well-structured data,
ods utilize highly-structured skeleton data, which decreases the
computational burden and also avoids the negative impact attracted the attention of researchers [9], [10], [11], [12].
of background noise. However, pose-based methods lack an Since pose is immune from background noise and also prealternative dynamic representation akin to the explicit motion serve the privacy related to human as compared to using the
features, such as optical flow, employed by pixel-based methods. raw data, the pose-based method is viewed as a promising
In this paper, a novel Motion Embedder (ME), a label-efficient approach and is expected to compete with the pixel-based
scheme without extra annotation efforts, is proposed to provide counterparts.
a pose motion representation for the structured posed data
from a probability perspective. Furthermore, a novel task- Despite the advantages of pose-based methods, as demonspecific Spatial-Temporal Transformer (STT) is deployed for strated in prior research, their performance gains remain
self-supervised pose sequence reconstruction. These two modules relatively limited. We assert that this is due to the inherent
are then integrated into a unified framework for pose regularity differences between image anomaly detection, which relies
learning, which is referred to as Motion Prior Regularity Learner solely on static features (e.g., appearance), and VAD, which is
(MoPRL). MoPRL achieves competitive results on multiple chalmore dependent on dynamic features. For instance, as shown
lenging datasets while minimizing computational costs. Extensive
experiments validate the versatility of the proposed modules and in the top half of Figure 1, the man in the red box may be
provide insights for future research. judged as normal if only given the right frame, while the
 confidence of this assertion could be strengthened if the left
 Index Terms— Video anomaly detection, label-efficient motion
prior, regularity learning. frame is visible since he is jumping. The incorporation of
 motion features, such as optical flow, in pixel-based methods
 I. I NTRODUCTION enhances these models’ sensitivity to dynamics and motion
 anomalies. That is why we can easily tell different motions by
V IDEO Anomaly Detection (VAD) [1] represents a critical
 and challenging task within the realm of computer vision,
aimed at identifying frames containing abnormal events, such
 observing lighter areas in the optical flow map in Figure 1 top
 right.
as criminal activities and traffic accidents. The reliance In contrast, pose-based methods lack such an intuitive
on context, large variety, and rarity of abnormal events, motion representation. Previous pose-based methods [9], [10],
make it extremely difficult to collect anomalous events for [11], [12], [13], [14] utilize the entire pose trajectory, comconventional supervised model training [2]. Consequently, prised of a sequence of static coordinates, with motion
un/self-supervised methods are usually employed to learn implicitly incorporated.
normal patterns, allowing anomaly detection to be approached The development of motion features for pose-based methods
as the identification of out-of-distribution [3] that deviates is both logical and crucial for enhancing pose-based VAD
from the training distribution. performance. However, two primary challenges warrant further consideration when conceptualizing such a pose motion
 Manuscript received 2 April 2023; revised 15 June 2023; accepted feature: i) obtaining a dense motion descriptor analogous
2 July 2023. Date of publication 17 July 2023; date of current version to optical flow for pose keypoints is difficult due to their
12 August 2024. This article was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Tang.
(Shoubin Yu and Zhongyin Zhao are co-first authors.) (Corresponding author: highly structured, discrete nature and the higher semantics
Shoubin Yu.) compared to pixel values. ii) replicating the optical flow
 Shoubin Yu is with the Department of Computer Science, The University approach to train a “pose motion flow” detector would be
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA (e-mail:
shoubin@cs.unc.edu). resource-intensive, as optical flow algorithms in previous
 Zhongyin Zhao, Haoshu Fang, and Cewu Lu are with the Department pixel-based methods predominantly rely on supervised learnof Electrical and Computer Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, ing and extensive ground truth annotation, while also being
Shanghai 200240, China.
 Andong Deng is with the Department of Computer Science, University of
 susceptible to scene changes. As a result, our objectives are
Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816 USA. to: i) Develop label-efficient strategies to represent motion
 Haisheng Su, Dongliang Wang, Weihao Gan, and Wei Wu are with Sense- features for discrete poses. ii) ensure that these features
Time Group, Hong Kong. capitalize on well-structured data and can be easily adapted
 Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3296118. to various VAD scenarios without necessitating an additional,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3296118 burdensome learning process.
 1051-8215 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 In this paper, we propose a novel Motion Prior Regularity Learner (MoPRL) to achieve the aforementioned
goals in pose-based methods. MoPRL is composed of two
sub-modules: Motion Embedder (ME) and Spatial-Temporal
Transformer (STT). Specifically, Motion Embedder is
designed to extract the spatial-temporal representation of input
poses from the perspective of probabilistic. Inspired by the
commonly used frame gradients and optical flow in pixelbased methods, we model the pose motion based on the firstorder difference, or so-called displacement, between the center
point of the poses among adjacent frames. However, directly
applying such differences as the motion representation is oversimplified. Given the common assumption that the anomaly Fig. 1. In pixel-based methods, optical flow is a commonly-used motion
rarely happens, we further transform such displacement into feature; however, a similar feature could not be obtained via pose modality.
 In this paper, we propose a distribution-based pose motion representation from
the probability domain. In detail, we obtain the motion prior, the perspective of probability. Best viewed in color.
which represents an explicit distribution of displacement on the
training data, by statistics. In this way, as shown in the bottom
 framework with the optical flow [23] as additional input.
half of Figure 1, to represent corresponding motion, every pose
displacement is mapped to a certain probability based on the In [24], Nguyen et al. proposed a cross-channel translamotion prior. Notably, such intuitive motion representation is tion framework to learn the coherence between motion and
directly deduced from the training data itself in a statistical appearance. In a recent work [25], Liu et al. exploited the
manner, which avoids introducing extra annotations, making Conditional Variational Autoencoder to capture the correlation
it suitable for large-scale VAD datasets. Spatial-Temporal between the frame and the optical flow. Recently, pose-
Transformer is then deployed as a task-specific model to based methods have been popular because of their efficiency
learn the regular patterns with the input of poses and their and immunity from background noise. In [10], the authors
motion features from Motion Embedder. Different from previ- proposed a connected RNN for learning pose regularity with
ous Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) or Convolution Neural decomposed keypoints. In [9], Rodrigues et al. deployed a
Network (CNN)-based frameworks, the transformer is adopted multi-timescale prediction framework to model trajectories.
for its self-supervised and sequential structure, which naturally Moreover, Markovitz1 et al. [11] learned poses graph embedfits our task. dings with autoencoders and generated soft assignments via
 To sum up, the contributions of this paper are four-fold: clustering. Moreover, Zeng et al. [12] proposes a hierarchical
 graph neural network capture scene semantics. However, it is
 • Motion Embedder is proposed as a label-efficient scheme
 rather no attempt to obtain a sophisticated dynamic feature
 to represent pose motion in the probability domain for in pose-based methods. In this work, we proposed a novel
 video pose regularity learning. Motion Embedder to generate pose motion representation from
 • Motion Prior Regularity Learner (MoPRL) is proposed,
 the probability domain.
 which consists of the Motion Embedder and the Spatial-
 Temporal Transformer, to model regularity in motionembedded poses. B. Vision Transformer
 • MoPRL delivers competitive performance on the two Transformer [26] has gradually become a mainstream
 most challenging datasets while maintaining minimal framework for the computer vision community [27], [28], [29],
 computational costs. [30], [31] for its tremendous potential in sequence modeling.
 • Comprehensive experiments are conducted to verify the It has achieved competitive even superior performance comeffectiveness of each module, and more insights for future pared with CNN-based methods in image classification [32],
 work based on the failure cases are provided. [33], [34], object detection [35], semantic segmentation [36],
 etc. Dosovitskiy et al. [32] viewed an image as a patch
 II. R ELATED W ORKS sequence and constructed ViT to achieve effective recognition.
 Carion et al. [35] regarded the object detection problem as a
A. Self-Supervised Video Anomaly Detection set direction prediction task and solve it with a transformer-
 Different from supervised/weakly supervised [15], [16], based encoder-decoder called DETR. Similarly, SETR [36] is
[17], [18] video anomaly detection where abnormal classes proposed for image context modeling in semantic segmenlabels are accessible for model training, in self-supervised tation. Transformer is also deployed to estimate 3D human
video anomaly detection, anomalies are recognized as outliers pose as in [37]. The authors build a divided temporal-spatial
of the distribution of normality. The pixel-based frame- transformer to model the pose sequence. HOT-Net [38] fully
work handles the problem by reconstruction and prediction. exploits the correlation between joints and object corners to
In [19], Hasan et al. reconstructed the normal appearance [20] obtain a more accurate estimation. In video anomaly detection,
and motion [21] features to learn video regularity. In [22], Feng et al. [7] first apply transformer structure on the tempothe authors leveraged sparsing coding to enforce adjacent ral dimension with pixel input. Different from related transframes to be encoded with similar reconstruction coeffi- former works, MoPRL is proposed with a spatial-temporal
cients. In [4], Liu et al. proposed a future frame prediction transformer and motion-embedded pose input.
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6663

 III. M ETHODS a predefined distribution (e.g., Rayleigh or Gaussian) to fit
 In this section, we introduce our proposed pose-based the discretized distribution and obtain its continuous version,
video anomaly detection method called Motion Prior Reg- which we refer to as motion prior. In the end, we leverage both
ularity Learner (MoPRL), which introduces a new motion the normalized pose and its motion probability, which reprerepresentation abstracted from the statistical distribution for sent spatial and temporal information, respectively, to obtain
label-efficient training purposes. As shown in the left of the motion-embedded pose. We will introduce ME in detail in
Figure 2, MoPRL consists of two sub-modules: Motion the following subsections.
Embedder (ME) and Spatial-Temporal Transformer (STT). 1) Displacement Calculation: The displacement is the
We first utilize a pose detector to obtain the pose trajectories. first-order difference between each pose, and can be regarded
Unlike pixel-based methods, which adopt the widely-used as an average velocity during a short period. Thus, we consider
optical flow as the motion representation, MoPRL models the utilizing displacement to construct the foundation of motion
posed-based motion representation as a probability distribution representation. Empirically, such displacement is:
according to the statistical velocity and fuses spatial and q
temporal representation via the ME. Then, STT is applied vi = (x̃i+1 − x̃i )2 + ( ỹi+1 − ỹi )2 (1)
to learn the spatial-temporal regularity with a self-supervised vi
 vi = (2)
reconstruction task. In this way, the model learns the distri- (wi + h i )
bution of the normal samples; thus, the anomalies could be where vi represents the average velocity from pose Pi to
detected according to the Frame Anomaly Score. pose Pi+1 . Similar to what we have done to pose, we also
 normalize the velocity to obtain a normalized version v i which
A. Task Definition eliminates the influence of perspectives. Nonetheless, directly
 Given the training set Dtrain = {F1 , . . . , Fm } and the test leveraging v i as the motion representation is oversimplified
set Dtest = {(F1 , L 1 ), . . . , (Fn , L n )}, where Fi represents the that the essence of a normal motion (normality is common)
frames and L i ∈ {0, 1} indicates the label of normality or would be overlooked, leading to the spatial-temporal feature
anomaly. There are only normal samples in the training set cannot be effectively represented. We resolve this issue from
and both normal and abnormal ones in the test set. We denote the perspective of probability.
Fi = {S1 , . . . , Sl } and Si = {P1 , . . . , Pt }, which means each 2) Probabilities as Scaling Factors: We first obtain the
frame contains l trajectory sequences of human pose and each statistic of the velocity, , by counting the modes of their
sequence consists of t single poses. We denote Pi = {Ji,1 , . . . , normalized version in the training set. Then, in order to obtain
Ji,k }, where Ji, j means the j-th joint in the i-th pose, and a continuous distribution, we fit this discretized data with
k represents the maximum number of joints in single pose. f . Intuitively, f can be regarded as parameter estimation
Moreover, joint Ji, j is represented as a coordinate (xi, j , yi, j ). for a certain distribution. In this paper, we have tried two
A sliding window strategy is applied to match a single frame different ways to fit the distribution. The one is non-linear
with its corresponding trajectories. The goal of pose-based least squares with the predefined scheme. The other is the
VAD is to distinguish the anomaly with L i = 1 in the test neural networks. We name such fitted continuous distribution
set according to those human poses. as Motion Prior ρ. Based on the fact that different prior
 models its low-frequency part in different manners, we should
 carefully select an appropriate prior to ensure that it fits
B. Pose Pre-Processing more with the real-world distribution, which is believed to be
 Following the prepossessing operation proposed in [10], beneficial for the quality of the representation derived from
we decompose the original pose into a locally normalized Motion Embedder. As shown in the right bottom of Figure 2,
pose and a global center point. We first calculate the center we can tell that the real distribution of the displacement
point (x̃i , ỹi ) and the size (wi , h i ) of the human box according corresponds more to the Rayleigh distribution. And the further
to the maximum and minimum coordinates of the keypoints, experimental results also demonstrate that prior fitted by
and then normalize the pose as P i = [J i,1 , . . . , J i,k ] based Rayleigh distribution achieves the best performance. Next,
on the human box size, where J i, j = (x i, j , y i, j ) is the in order to obtain a versatile representation that contains both
normalized coordinates. The normalized pose P i unifies the temporal and spatial information, we expect to combine the
scale in different distances, so even tiny changes in far can be normalized pose, which stands for spatial information, and the
captured. motion prior, which is actually the temporal representation,
 we consider employing the probability in motion prior as a
 scaling factor, and the scaling mechanism is as follows:
C. Motion Embedder
 Since dense motion features, such as optical flow, cannot ρ = f (), (3)
be obtained, pose-based methods lack effective motion rep- Pi
resentations. In this work, we propose a multi-step approach P̂i = , (4)
 ρ(v i )
to get the intuitive pose motion and embed it with the pose
via the novel Motion Embedder (ME). We first calculate where P̂i = [ Jˆi,1 , . . . , Jˆi,k ] is the pose feature after the
normalized displacement between adjacent poses in sequence scaling operation and represents motion embedded pose that
and then obtain an explicit discrete distribution describing the fuses the spatial and temporal information for the i-th pose.
training dataset displacement statistic. After this, we choose This is exactly the reason that we call this module Motion
6664 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 2. Left: Overview of the proposed Motion Prior Regularity Learner (MoPRL). MoPRL has two sub-modules: one is Motion Embedder, and the other
is Spatial-Temporal Transformer. Right top: Motion Embedder translates pose motion into the probability domain and embeds motion features into pose
appearance. Right bottom: Comparisons of several typical priors with the pose velocity statistic on the training set of two datasets. Best viewed in color.

Embedder. It is worth noting that, to avoid numerical error,
we additionally deploy an affine transformation to the scaling
factor, for it may be used as a denominator. Consequently,
as shown in the right top of Figure 2, we can obtain a pose
with a larger size if the emergence frequency is lower. P̂i will
then be used as the input of the following module.

D. Spatial-Temporal Transformer
 To learn the regularity of human pose trajectories, we proposed to utilize a transformer to process the motion embedding
aforementioned, because of its acknowledged advantage of
modeling sequential data. However, the orthodox transformer
model results in a computational complexity of O((N × Fig. 3. Left: Structure of Spatial-Temporal Transformer. The gray patches are
T )2 ) (where N is the number of joints in a single pose, masked tokens. Self-Attention is conducted on joints ID or time dimension
 for spatial or temporal attention. Right: Basic Self-Attention block for spatial
T is the pose number in a single trajectory) and grows and temporal attention. Best viewed in color.
exponentially with the increasing N and T . Thus, following [39], we divided the attention mechanism into spatial
and temporal parts to decrease the computational complexity input trajectory sequence with a certain probability and set
to O(N 2 + T 2 ). We call this variant of the transformer them to zero only during training (as shown in Figure 3, the
a Spatial-Temporal Transformer (STT). Specifically, STT gray patches in the input represent masked pose embedding.).
contains an L s -layer spatial transformer and an L t -layer And then we map it into the embedding space to obtain the
temporal transformer. Aiming to fully exploit the potential joint vector z i, j ∈ RC , where C is the embedding dimension,
of STT, we view L s and L t as hyperparameters and exper- as the following equation:
imentally identify their value, which will be shown in the j
experiment section. As shown in Figure 3, we also illus- z i, j = E · mask( Jˆi, j ) + E spe , (5)
trate details of the proposed Spatial-Temporal Transformer.
In the following subsections, we introduce the details of where mask(·) is the mask function that operated on Jˆi, j with
STT. a certain probability, E ∈ RC×2 the learnable embedding
 j
 1) Masked Pose Embedding: Before the transformer blocks, matrix. Moreover, E spe ∈ RC represents a learnable spatial
we first obtain the embedding of joints. Specifically, for position embedding (SPE) deployed to encode the spatial
joint Jˆi, j , we adopt the mask operation [40] on pose sequences position of the j-th joint in a single pose. Notably, the mask
as data augmentation. With masking, the model can reconstruct operation only works during the training. We then obtain
masked joints with nearby joints information only. This mask- the embedding of the i-th pose as Z i = [z i,0 , . . . , z i,N ].
ing is designed to help the model learn contextual information As a result, the embedding matrix for the trajectory is Z =
and avoid overfitting. we randomly select joints in the whole [Z 1 , . . . , Z T ].
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6665

 2) Spatial Transformer: We manage to model the trajectory F. Inference
Z ∈ RT ×N ×C on a spatial domain with a L s -layer Spatial We introduce the mechanism, Frame Anomaly Score, that
Transformer. To be noticed, we conduct self-attention on the the proposed method detects frame-level anomaly with human
dimension of joint number, i.e., N . Without loss of generality, pose trajectories. Firstly, an anomaly score Am,n , where n and
we denote the input trajectory of the l-th layer as Z l , where m represent the n-th trajectory in the m-th frame, will be
l ∈ [1, L s ]. The multi-layer attention operation is given by: obtained from each pose trajectory via MoPRL. The anomaly
 ′
 score Am,n is the L 1 norm of the difference between S and
 l
 Q = Z ln · W Q , K = Z ln
 l
 · W K , V = Z ln
 l
 · WV , (6) S. Then, since each frame may contain multiple trajectories,
 √
 Ẑ l+1
 = so f tmax(Q K / C)V + Z ,
 T l
 (7) we select the highest Am,n as the frame-level anomaly score
 Z l+1 l+1
 = Layer N or m( f c( Ẑ ln ) + Ẑ l+1 ), (8) Am , the higher frame anomaly score Am suggests the higher
 possibility for the current frame to be abnormal.
where Q, K , V is the query, key and value matrix, W Q , W K , ′
 Am,n = ||S − S||1 . (12)
WV ∈ RC×C the corresponding project heads. The subscript
 Am = Max(Am,n ) (13)
ln indicates a tensor after layer normalization. so f tmax and
 f c represent softmax operation and fully-connected layer,
respectively. Actually, we leverage multi-head self-attention as IV. E XPERIMENTS
our attention operation for stronger representation. As it has In this section, we first introduce the experimental details
been a common structure, we ignore its formulation here for of the proposed MoPRL. Extensive experiments are then
simplicity. Please refer to [26] for more details. conducted on two challenging datasets to evaluate the effec-
 3) Temporal Transformer: We then model pose trajectories tiveness and superiority of MoPRL with qualitative examples.
on the temporal domain with a L t -layer Temporal Trans- More experiments and reports, like hyperparameters setting,
former. Taking the output Z L s of Spatial Transformer as input, pose estimator analysis, score strategy analysis, qualitative
we first incorporate temporal position information for each examples, and limitations are also discussed.
joint embedding as follows:
 j A. Datasets and Setup
 z = z i,L sj + E t pe , (9)
 Datasets. We evaluate our method on the three most challenging datasets: ShanghaiTech [22] contains 330 training videos
where z i,L sj represents the j-th joints embedding in the i-th and 107 testing ones. It consists of 13 training scenes and
frame of Z L s , E t pe a learnable temporal position embedding 12 testing scenes. And HR-ShanghaiTech [10] is a subset
(TPE). Thus, the trajectory embedding matrix can be obtained of ShanghaiTech containing only Human-Related anomalies
accordingly. Following the same steps in Equation 6, 7 and 8 with 101 testing videos. Corridor [9], a recent large-size
in the aforementioned spatial transformer, we finally obtain dataset for video anomaly detection, contains 10 abnorthe spatial-temporal output Z o . mal classes in a single scene. UCF-Crime [41] contains
 1900 untrimmed videos with a total duration of 128 hours
 from real-world surveillance scenes (e.g., street, indoor.). This
E. Self-Supervised Training dataset encompasses 13 anomaly categories, representing a
 In this subsection, we introduce our self-supervised training diverse range of backgrounds. We further curated a subto learn the regularity in human pose trajectories. Specifically, set, dubbed Human-Related-UCF-Crime (HR-UCF-Crime),
we achieve this via the commonly used reconstructive method. specifically for pose-based methods by excluding the ‘Explo-
With the help of a reconstruction head, we are able to learn sion’ and ‘Accident’ classes, as they aren’t human-related.
the distribution of the normal samples. 1) Pose Estimator: We adopt the same pose estimator with
 1) Reconstruction Head: As shown in the left side of other compared methods to avoid the variance caused by pose
Figure 2, taking motion-embedded trajectory [ P̂1 , . . . , P̂t ] as quality. Specifically, we use the tools [42], [43] to obtain
input, the Reconstruction Head, a single linear layer with the trajectories as in [11] on ShanghaiTech. While for the
layer normalization following [37], recovers the normalized Corridor dataset, we extract trajectories with tools [44], [45]
trajectory S = [P 1 , . . . , P t ] from the output Z o . as in [9]. For UCF-Crime [41], we adopt tools [42], [43] to
 extract trajectories at 5 fps. Each pose joint is provided with
 ′ a confidence score.
 S = H eadr ec (Z o ) (10)
 2) Implementation Details: We apply AdamW [46] opti-
 2) Objective Functions: The final objective function can mizer with an initial learning rate of 5e − 5 and adopt a
be described as follows, where ωi, j is the confidence score warm-up schedule with 1000 steps. Empirically, the layers
 ′ number of Spatial Transformer and Temporal Transformers are
of each pose joint coming from the pose detector, and J i, j is
 ′ both set to 2. The batch size is 256 and the dimension of vector
the reconstructed joint in S . Similar to the operation in [9],
 embedding is 128. Each trajectory contains 8 poses (T = 8)
we also normalize the raw confidence.
 and each pose contains 17 joints for AlphaPose [42] results
 T X
 N and 25 joints for OpenPose [44] results (e.g., N = 17 or 25).
 X ′
 Loss = ωi, j ||J i, j − J i, j ||2 (11) To obtain the pose sequences, we sample the pose trajectory
 i=1 j=1 using sliding windows with a window size of 16 and stride of
6666 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE I TABLE II
 AUC C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER P OSE -BASED M ETHODS . SHT: C OMPARSION OF M ODEL PARAMETERS AND T ESTING S PEED
 S HANGHAI T ECH . *: R ESULTS A RE T RAINED AND B ETWEEN O UR M O PRL AND OTHER M ETHODS .
 T ESTED BY O URSELVES S OME R ESULTS C ITED F ROM [48]

 pose-based methods in Table III. For a long time, selfsupervised video anomaly detection (only normal data avail-
2. Following BERT [40], the mask ratio of poses is set to 0.15. able during the training) depends on detector-free algorithms.
We normalize the frame-level anomaly scores in each scene Researchers aim to model better normal data distribution under
for final evaluation as in [10] and [24]. And all experiments are finer constraint designs. HF2-VAD [25] achieves 76.20% on
conducted on the entire dataset without division by scenarios. ShanghaTech without any detector. Even so, compared with
 3) Evaluation Metrics: Following the conventions, the early detector-based methods like OCAE [5], it still lags a
frame-level Area Under Curve (AUC) is calculated as the large gap (8.70%). Recently, HSC [64] leverage both pose and
evaluation metric. Since there is no tracklet-level label in pixel information into use, it increases the performance but
both datasets, all related methods report frame-level only. also highly increases the model complexity. Those researches
All anomaly scores are concatenated into one list and only demonstrates detectors benefit video anomaly detection by
one ROC curve is on the entire dataset. If there is scene addressing the location problem. Compared with object detecnormalization, scores will be concatenated after normalization. tors [59], [66], [67], pose detectors [42], [44], [65] address
 human location as well, and extract lighter and well-structured
B. Comparison With the Posed-Based State-of-the-Arts information, pose, for next stage. However, such poses discard rich RGB information like scene and light inevitably
 Table I illustrates the comparison results of our MoPRL
 as well as optical flow [23] and deep RGB features [32],
with other state-of-the-art on two popular datasets respectively.
 [60] extraction. Therefore, pose-based methods should out-
We can observe that our method can obtain competitive perperform their pixel-based and detector-free rivals easily,
formance improvement compared with other pure pose-based
 while competing with pixel-based and detector-based ones.
methods on all conducted datasets. Furthermore, we conduct a
 MoPRL achieves comparable performance on two mainstream
comparison of the running costs among pose-based methods,
 datasets among pose-based methods and is comparable with
as shown in Table II, It becomes evident that our proposed
 OCAE [5] on ShanghaiTech. Furthermore, we observe that
MoPRL significantly reduces resource consumption, utilizing
 Weakly-supervised methods outperform self-supervised methapproximately 1/95 of the model parameters and 1/6 of the
 ods significantly due to the availability of coarse-grained
running time compared to the previous state-of-the-art. This
 labels. Nonetheless, self-supervised methods are still crucial
finding indicates that our label-efficient motion representation
 for studying more efficient video anomaly detection as they
strategy enables the tiny yet efficient model to perform well
 eliminate the need for annotations during training and can
on these tasks, even rivaling the capabilities of larger models.
 handle various anomalies through out-of-distribution detection.
 Besides, We find that our method can not only detect obvious anomalous events (e.g., “Biking”), but also is capable of
observing some subtle activities, such as “Robbing” happening D. Ablation Studies
at a far distance away from the camera. Besides, MoPRL
 In this section, we control all hyper-parameters and conduct
is sensitive to the anomalies with extreme movements (e.g.,
 module-level ablation. As shown in Table IV, our baseline
“running” and “pushing”) rather than the appearance-based
 is a linear auto-encoder that includes only an encoder and
anomaly events (e.g., “holding the suspicious object”), which
 a decoder. The proposed Motion Embedder is applied to other
is reasonable owing to the fact that original RGB information
 pose-based methods [10] to show the generalization ability and
(e.g., clothing and belongings) is absent. However, more
 necessity of motion representation.
object-related anomaly classes (e.g., “wearing a mask”) are
 1) Motion Representation: As shown in Table IV, with the
included in the Corridor dataset, which accounts for the reason
 help of ME, significant AUC improvement can be observed
why performance achieved in the ShanghaiTech dataset is
 even without sequence modeling (+11.45%), which demonhigher than the Corridor dataset by a large margin (+11.27%).
 strates that motion representation is essential for pose-based
In short, MoPRL achieves non-trivial performance boosts from
 methods. Without loss of generality, we continue to evaluate
both efficiency and effectiveness.
 the necessity of motion representation in a classical multi-task
 pose-based method named MPED-RCNN [10], which adopts
C. Comparison With Pixel-Based Methods RNN for sequence modeling of input pose embedding. To be
 In this section, we list recent representative weakly/self- clarified, we reproduce the MPED-RCNN method to fit the
supervised pixel-based methods as well as self-supervised proposed motion prior of ME, and only the reconstruction task
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6667

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON I NCLUDING WEAKLY- SUPERVISED PIXEL - BASED METHODS , SELF - SUPERVISED PIXEL - BASED METHODS , AND SELF - SUPERVISED
 POSED - BASED M ETHODS OF T HEIR S ETTING AND F RAME -L EVEL AUC ON T WO P OPULAR DATASETS . H ERE , W E O MIT T RACKING A LGORITHMS
 IN THE P OSE -D ETECTOR FOR S IMPLIFICATION . M IX : W E U SE B OTH A LPHAPOSE AND O PENPOSE TO A LIGN W ITH O UR
 M AIN C OUNTERPARTS . *: THE R ESULTS R EPRODUCED ON THE N EW DATASET BY U S

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON W ITH [10] AND S TUDY OF E ACH P ROPOSED M ODULE ON S HANGHAI T ECH . ME R EPRESENTS THE M OTION E MBEDDER ,
 AND STT I S THE S PATIAL -T EMPORAL T RANSFORMER . ∗: THE R ESULTS A RE R EPRODUCED BY U S . †: O NLY
 R ECONSTRUCTION TASK W ITH THE N ORMALIZED P OSE

with a locally normalized pose is applied to align the setting of fast, and the evaluation result goes down. It means the model
our MoPRL for a fair comparison. As expected, the proposed is overfitting even with a 15% pose mask. Under such a
method can bring consistent performance improvement as setting, we argue that STT actually learns an identical mapping
listed in Table IV. It confirms that ME can truly benefit other which is a shortcut, rather than the normal data distribution.
pose-based methods, and the motion representation should Combining with ME, STT can boost the overall performance
be accounted as an essential factor in developing pose-based by a great margin (+5.89%). It reveals that STT module can
methods. However, the huge contrast of performance gain in further model the temporal inter-dependencies with discrimdifferent frameworks (11.45% vs. 1.40%) also raises a concern inative motion clues provided by ME. We also observe that
that such a distribution-based hand-crafted feature extractor is RNN [68] adopted in [10] actually leads to the performance
still not an optimal way for all pose-based methods. declination (−4.52%) when ME is applied. It demonstrates
 2) Sequence Modeling: We explore the impact of sequence that the step-by-step RNN model actually limits the performodeling which is considered as the core of spatial-temporal mance gain from such motion features. We hypothesize that,
regularity learning. STT can only bring slight performance unlike transformer-based STT benefiting from big data, the
improvement (+1.28%) without motion representation. When cascaded and history-dependent RNN underfits such a large
there is no ME, the input and output of STT are both nor- data size with limited model capacity. Thus, we argue that
malized poses. We observe the training curve down extremely the normalized poses are inferior to describing the motion
6668 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 4. a: comparison on different motion prior distribution types. b: comparison on different spatial-temporal fusion types. c: comparison on different
position embeddings. d: comparison on different mask ratios. Experiment on ShanghaiTech.

dynamics of pose trajectories, which hinders the potential TABLE V
of such sequence modeling. This is also observed in Nat- P ERFORMANCE AND C OMPLEXITY C OMPARISON A MONG ATTENTION
 M ECHANISMS . E XPERIMENT ON S HANGHAI T ECH
ural Language Processing domain, RNN is weak to capture
long-term changes which leads to the creation of LSTM [69]
and transformer. The visualization of reconstructed poses from
STT and RNN in the following parts further confirms this
assumption. Compared with STT, the RNN model reconstructs
poses with huge deviations even for normal samples. And such
deviation actually shadows the distinction between normality
and anomaly brought by the motion prior. Conclusively, both
motion representation and sequence modeling are important TABLE VI
and indispensable. S TUDY OF THE M ODEL D EPTH OF S PATIAL AND T EMPORAL E NCODERS
 R ESPECTIVELY. E XPERIMENT ON S HANGHAI T ECH

E. Analysis on Motion Embedder
 1) Motion Prior Type: ME is designed to represent intuitive
pose motion by probability prior. Such prior directly controls
the probability of pose motion, so the selection of prior matters
to the final performance. In this section, we compare different
priors. As shown in Figure 4 a, blue charts represent prior fitted
by non-linear least squares with different schemes. The result may just be moved from their original spatial location and
shows the larger difference between the selected prior and perturbed by the fusion. It demonstrates the effectiveness of
the statistical distribution on the training dataset is, the more the proposed fusion operation and also shows that appropriate
the performance of MoPRL declines (16.34% with a uniform fusion is essential for spatial-temporal regularity learning.
prior and 12.78% with a Gaussian prior). It demonstrates that
the model can indeed benefit from appropriate prior. And the
gain will increase if the discrepancy between the prior and the F. Analysis on Spatial-Temporal Transformer
real-world distribution decreases. We also use neural networks 1) Pose Masking and Position Embedding: We verify
to fit the prior. We build a network with three linear layers, the effectiveness of pose masking and position embedding.
and an activation function, and train it with statistical data. We leverage pose masking as an operation of data augmen-
The network is frozen, and only output probability for scaling tation. As shown in Figure 4 c, model performance first
during SST training. The results show that neural networks improves as the pose mask ratio increases and then drops
achieve comparable performance but with more computation. to about 79.01%, which demonstrates that the model benefits
We conclude this as the noisy data due to the pose estimator from appropriate masking augmentation. However, the model
error harms the network fitting, while the fixed scheme is would fail to handle regularity learning under a too-large
immune to this better. ratio. Furthermore, we also evaluate the performance change
 2) Spatial-Temporal Fusion Type: In order to obtain the brought by different position embedding strategies. As shown
spatial-temporal input for STT, ME fuses the motion prior into in Figure 4 d, different position embedding utilized on MoPRL
poses. Hence, the fusion operation mentioned in Section III-C bring consistent performance increment.
should be thoroughly explored to verify its effectiveness. 2) Attention Mechanism: A major concern of transformer-
In this section, besides the division, we also deploy other based models is their exponentially increasing complexity
common operations to conduct such fusion. As shown in with input size. As shown in Table V, we list comparative
Figure 4 b, the results show that MoPRL is less sensitive to results among different attention mechanisms for quantitative
different scale-related operations (multiply with 81.54% and evaluation. We establish the baseline as the model without
division with 83.35%). While the common fusion strategy in any attention but with motion prior. The joint attention reppixel-based methods, e.g., addition, does not work in pose- resents the vanilla transformer taking the entire sequence as
based methods, impairing the model performance compared input. It improves only 2.52% with the heaviest computation.
with baseline (61.36% versus 67.29%). In this case, poses Moreover, observing the declination compared with spatial
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6669

 TABLE VII TABLE IX
AUC R ESULT OF M O PRL T RAINED W ITH D IFFERENT P OSE E MBEDDING P ERFORMANCE W ITH D IFFERENT R ATIO OF A BNORMAL N OISE D URING
 D IMENSIONS . E XPERIMENT ON S HANGHAI T ECH T RAINING . E XPERIMENT ON S HANGHAI T ECH

 TABLE VIII
 E VALUATION W ITH D IFFERENT S CORING S TRATEGIES the region-level metric in [70]. On ShanghaiTech, MoPRL
 achieves 78.26%, and MPED-RCNN (Rec) achieves 68.49%.
 3) Cross-dataset Evaluation: We re-evaluate Corridor with
 the model trained on ShanghaiTech only. The results are
 70.16% under the ShanghaiTech motion prior. Further,
 we evaluate the model trained on merged data (ShanghaiTech
 + Corridor) with a merged motion prior. MoPRL achieves
 82.45% on SHT and 70.93% on Corridor. The cross-dataset
only (2.15%) or temporal only (2.28%) cases, we claim that results further indicate that MoPRL has scene adaptation
the indifferent attention among the entire sequences would which is regarded as a challenge in pixel-based methods
actually harm the performance. Furthermore, the temporal as mentioned in [71]. And the performance decrease may
modeling matters more to the performance with the most come from pose changes in different camera angles in various
significant boosting (3.89%), which demonstrates that motion scenes.
information is essential to video anomaly detection. The 4) Robustness to Abnormal Noise During Training: In this
highest performance with Spatial-Temporal Attention shows section, we evaluate the robustness of the proposed MoPRL
the effectiveness of our design. to abnormal samples using experiments on ShanghaiTech.
 3) Model Depth: In this section, we ablate several combi- We rank video samples by their IDs and create new training
nations of layer depth in both spatial and temporal dimensions. datasets by combining the original normal training data with
The results listed in Table VI demonstrate that MoPRL does the original abnormal testing data. The remaining test samples
not actually benefit from a deeper attention structure. The are used for evaluation. We vary the ratio of abnormal videos
deepest model brings a 2.02% decrease compared with no using multiple thresholds. Table IX shows that when introduc-
STT. Compared with the deepest spatial attention which brings ing 20% noise in the training data, the performance of MoPRL
an average 1.26% decrease, the deepest temporal attention only decreases by 1.41%. This demonstrates the robustness of
leads to a more significant average drop (-1.59%). MoPRL to abnormal noises during training, making it suitable
 4) Embedding Vector Dimension: The pose embedding is for real-world scenarios where perfect filtering of abnormal
an essential component of MoPRL, which encodes the core data is difficult.
information of the input data and plays as a bedrock for the following spatial-temporal transformer. According to Table VII, H. Visualization
we find that too small an embedding dimension impedes
the performance, which indicates that a larger dimension is This section provides straightforward evidence to demonnecessary to encode pose coordinates completely. strate both the weakness and strength of MoPRL via several
 reconstructed poses visualization and anomaly score visualization. We also provide visualization of the Spatial-Temporal
G. Diverse Evaluation Transformer structure for better understanding. We further
 In this section, we conduct evaluations with different scoring offer a comparison among different methods via visualization
strategies, metrics, and datasets to further explore and evaluate to explain the results in Table IV.
MoRPL under different conditions. 1) Reconstructed Pose: In this section, we compare differ-
 1) Scoring Strategies: It should be noticed that scene nor- ent reconstruction results between MPED-RNN [57] and our
malization is not applicable in real-world applications, and MoPRL here to elucidate the difference in model capacities.
more discussions are needed. To address this concern, we re- To show the inner reconstructed errors intuitively, we use
evaluated MoPRL with different strategies, including L 1 with the mean error of two endpoints to represent an edge error.
norm, L 2 with norm, L 1 without norm, and L 2 without norm And a warmer color indicates a higher error. Our ground
(where “norm” represents scenario normalization). As shown truth comes from pose estimator [42]. All poses are extracted
in Table VIII, we conclude that scenario normalization benefits from the ShanghaiTech dataset. We hypothesize that the
performance on the whole dataset, but MoPRL still shows its model capacity of RNN actually limits performance gain
stable and comparable performance without such operation. from the motion prior. As shown in Figure 5, MoPRL can
It also demonstrates that our proposed method, MoPRL, can reconstruct normal poses with less reconstruction error, while
distinguish anomalies in normal data well. MPED-RCNN offers a poorer ability in recovering normal
 2) Region-level Evaluation: Besides Frame-level evalua- poses.
tion, region-level metrics benefit anomaly locating. However, We further assume that such deviation on normal samonly ShanghaiTech provides pixel-level labels. Besides, only ples shadows the distinction between normality and anomaly
frame-level results are reported in all related pose-based brought by the motion prior. We also provide abnormal cases
methods. Herein, we re-evaluate MoPRL and baseline with for intuitive comparison. Compared with the reconstruction of
6670 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 5. Comparison among ground truth and reconstructed normal pose trajectories from different methods. We select both abnormal and normal samples
for comparison. A warmer color represents a higher reconstruction error. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 6. Frame-level anomaly scores (blue lines) and the ground truth labels (red lines) in ShanghaiTech, and their corresponding AUC under the scene.
We calculate AUC in each scene separately for this visualization. Best viewed in color.

Fig. 7. Frame-level anomaly scores (blue lines) and the ground truth labels (red lines) in Corridor, and their corresponding AUC under the scene. We calculate
AUC in each scene separately for this visualization. Best viewed in color.

abnormal cases by MPED-RCNN [57], the outputs of MoPRL changing the pose shape. Meanwhile, compared with RNN
differ from the ground truth more in the pose scale rather than taking step-by-step inputs, MoPRL adopts the transformer,
shape since we embed motion into the pose via scaling without which is good at global information modeling and takes all
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6671

inputs simultaneously. In this case, The abnormal poses are motion features to construct a completed pose motion reprereconstructed with a larger size as well as error. sentation for related tasks. The motion prior is influenced by
 For quantitative results, we report the mean reconstruction varying camera angles and surveillance scenes, necessitating
error on abnormal and normal poses in different models. Since the generation of individual motion priors for each scene
trajectory-level labels are not available, we use frame-level to enhance anomaly detection effectiveness. This constraint
labels to label all poses in a frame. MoPRL gets 3.08 on hinders the generalization of the proposed method. Moreover,
anomaly and 2.20 on normality (40.0% relative gap), while the speed bottleneck of pose-based pipelines lies in the feature
MPED-RNN (Rec) gets 21.72 on anomaly and 16.13 on extraction, i.e., pose estimation and tracking process, which
normality (34.7% relative gap). It reveals that MoPRL can usually runs at 15 fps. Thus, the end-to-end speed could be
distinguish anomalies better even with less reconstruction ∼14 fps.
error.
 2) Anomaly Score: As shown in Figure 6, in ShanghaiTech VI. C ONCLUSION
Scene 08_0157 and 04_0050, both anomalies (skateboarding In this paper, we propose a novel Motion Prior Regularity
and balance biking) are related to motion more and correspond Learner (MoPRL) for pose-based video anomaly detection.
to a relatively normal appearance. The performances in both Intuitively, MoPRL takes pose motion probability from the
scenes achieve over 98%. On the contrary, in ShanghaiTech prior statistics on the training dataset as motion representation
Scene 08_0179, MoPRL fails to capture the skateboarder with through a label-efficient module, Motion Embedder (ME).
a slow speed. And in ShanghaiTech Scene 01_0053, the slow Then, MoPRL models pose trajectories regularity with a
vehicle cheats MoPRL successfully with both occluded pose Spatial-Temporal Transformer (STT) equipped with divided
and regular motion speed. The performances on those two attention. It should be noted that via introducing the novel
scenes dropped to about 60%, which verifies our discussion in motion prior as an additional representation, we do not cost
the paper. It demonstrates MoPRL benefits from the proposed extra annotation efforts, which makes our model competitive
Motion Embedder, which strengthens the motion features but in large-scale VAD datasets. MoPRL achieves competitive
still lacks the diversity of representation. As shown in Figure 7, results on two challenging mainstream datasets with minimal
besides the similar conclusion that MoPRL is sensitive to computational cost. Ablation studies and failure case analyses
the motion speed anomaly (like chasing) but fails to capture provide more insights for future works.
the motion direction anomaly (like wandering), we observed
an interesting difference between Corridor Scene 000276 and R EFERENCES
000287. Both scenes contain the same type of abnormal events
 [1] R. Chalapathy and S. Chawla, “Deep learning for anomaly detection: A
in that people carry a suspicious object (box) with normal survey,” 2019, arXiv:1901.03407.
motion. MoPRL achieves high performance when the object [2] M.-I. Georgescu, A. Barbalau, R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M. Popescu,
does not occlude the human. When the human is hidden behind and M. Shah, “Anomaly detection in video via self-supervised and multithe object, the performance decreases. It demonstrates MoRPL task learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12737–12747.
can capture the appearance-related anomaly, and the quality of [3] J. Yang, K. Zhou, Y. Li, and Z. Liu, “Generalized out-of-distribution
poses matters to the final result. detection: A survey,” 2021, arXiv:2110.11334.
 [4] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for
 anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 V. D ISCUSSION Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545.
 [5] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
A. Failure Cases auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
 in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 Pose-based methods depend heavily on the quality of the (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7834–7843.
estimated poses. Therefore, when the pose estimator fails to [6] M. Zaigham Zaheer, J.-H. Lee, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Old is
extract the pose structure, MoPRL would have poor perfor- gold: Redefining the adversarially learned one-class classifier training
 paradigm,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
mance (e.g., when the objects are occluded or fast-moving). (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14171–14181.
Besides, the tracking algorithm often captures inaccurate tra- [7] X. Feng, D. Song, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Ni, and H. Chen, “Convolutional
jectories in a crowd scene, which directly leads to a serious transformer based dual discriminator generative adversarial networks for
impediment for MoPRl to detect. Moreover, failure cases are video anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia,
 Oct. 2021, pp. 5546–5554.
also observed in object-relative anomalies (e.g., human with a [8] S. Leroux, B. Li, and P. Simoens, “Multi-branch neural networks for
trailer or a mask, etc.) and motion direction anomalies (e.g., video anomaly detection in adverse lighting and weather conditions,” in
sudden turning around.). The absence of RGB information Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2022,
 pp. 3027–3035.
probably causes this, and Motion Embedder alone cannot
 [9] R. Rodrigues, N. Bhargava, R. Velmurugan, and S. Chaudhuri, “Multicapture directional features. timescale trajectory prediction for abnormal human activity detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Mar. 2020,
 pp. 2615–2623.
B. Limitations [10] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
 “Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
 Although this work adopts the high-level pose features videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
extracted from the video, we still find it too challenging to (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 11988–11996.
only take the displacement for pose motion modeling. Other [11] A. Markovitz, G. Sharir, I. Friedman, L. Zelnik-Manor, and S. Avidan,
 “Graph embedded pose clustering for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
essential characteristics, like motion direction, are ignored. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
Thus, in the future, we suggest fully considering all possible pp. 10536–10544.
6672 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 34, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

[12] X. Zeng, Y. Jiang, W. Ding, H. Li, Y. Hao, and Z. Qiu, “A hierarchical [35] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and
 spatio-temporal graph convolutional neural network for anomaly detec- S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in Proc.
 tion in videos,” 2021, arXiv:2112.04294. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2020, pp. 213–229.
[13] Z. Fan, S. Yi, D. Wu, Y. Song, M. Cui, and Z. Liu, “Video anomaly [36] S. Zheng et al., “Rethinking semantic segmentation from a sequencedetection using CycleGan based on skeleton features,” J. Vis. Commun. to-sequence perspective with transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Image Represent., vol. 85, May 2022, Art. no. 103508. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 6877–6886.
[14] W. Pang, Q. He, and Y. Li, “Predicting skeleton trajectories using a [37] C. Zheng, S. Zhu, M. Mendieta, T. Yang, C. Chen, and Z. Ding, “3D
 skeleton-transformer for video anomaly detection,” Multimedia Syst., human pose estimation with spatial and temporal transformers,” in Proc.
 vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1481–1494, Aug. 2022. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 11636–11645.
[15] Y. Tian, G. Pang, Y. Chen, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans, and G. Carneiro, [38] L. Huang, J. Tan, J. Meng, J. Liu, and J. Yuan, “HOT-Net: Non-
 “Weakly-supervised video anomaly detection with robust temporal fea- autoregressive transformer for 3D hand-object pose estimation,” in Proc.
 ture magnitude learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. 28th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 1–12.
 (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 4955–4966. [39] G. Bertasius, H. Wang, and L. Torresani, “Is space-time attention all
[16] Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Zhang, W. Fok, X. Qi, and Y.-C. Wu, “MGFN: you need for video understanding?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.
 Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for weakly-supervised (ICML), 2021, pp. 1–31.
 video anomaly detection,” 2022, arXiv:2211.15098. [40] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
[17] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “CLAWS: Clus- of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
 tering assisted weakly supervised learning with normalcy suppression arXiv:1810.04805.
 for anomalous event detection,” in Computer Vision–ECCV. Glasgow, [41] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
 U.K.: Springer, Aug. 2020, pp. 358–376. surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[18] S. Li, F. Liu, and L. Jiao, “Self-training multi-sequence learning with Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
 transformer for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proc. [42] H.-S. Fang, S. Xie, Y.-W. Tai, and C. Lu, “RMPE: Regional multi-
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 36, no. 2, 2022, pp. 1395–1403. person pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
[19] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and L. S. Davis, Oct. 2017, pp. 2353–2362.
 “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. [43] Y. Xiu, J. Li, H. Wang, Y. Fang, and C. Lu, “Pose Flow: Efficient online
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 733–742. pose tracking,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf. (BMVC), 2018, pp. 1–12.
[20] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human [44] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y. Sheikh, “OpenPose:
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using part affinity fields,”
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2005, pp. 886–893. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 172–186,
 Jan. 2021.
[21] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, and C. Schmid, “Human detection using oriented
 histograms of flow and appearance,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. [45] L. Chen, H. Ai, Z. Zhuang, and C. Shang, “Real-time multiple
 (ECCV). Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2006, pp. 428–441. people tracking with deeply learned candidate selection and person
 re-identification,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo (ICME),
[22] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349. [46] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[23] E. Ilg, N. Mayer, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox,
 [47] Y. Jain, A. K. Sharma, R. Velmurugan, and B. Banerjee, “PoseCVAE:
 “FlowNet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with deep networks,”
 Anomalous human activity detection,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 Recognit. (ICPR), Jan. 2021, pp. 2927–2934.
 pp. 1647–1655.
 [48] C. Huang et al., “Hierarchical graph embedded pose regularity learning
[24] T. N. Nguyen and J. Meunier, “Anomaly detection in video sequence via spatio-temporal transformer for abnormal behavior detection,” in
 with appearance-motion correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2022, pp. 307–315.
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 1273–1283.
 [49] X. Chen, S. Kan, F. Zhang, Y. Cen, L. Zhang, and D. Zhang, “Multiscale
[25] Z. Liu, Y. Nie, C. Long, Q. Zhang, and G. Li, “A hybrid video anomaly spatial temporal attention graph convolution network for skeleton-based
 detection framework via memory-augmented flow reconstruction and anomaly behavior detection,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent., vol. 90,
 flow-guided frame prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Feb. 2023, Art. no. 103707.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 13568–13577. [50] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
[26] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–11. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[27] J. Lin, C. Gan, and S. Han, “TSM: Temporal shift module for efficient [51] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
 video understanding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
 (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 7082–7092. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 4724–4733.
[28] L. Wang et al., “Temporal segment networks: Towards good practices [52] K. Hara, H. Kataoka, and Y. Satoh, “Can spatiotemporal 3D CNNs
 for deep action recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), retrace the history of 2D CNNs and ImageNet?” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
 2016, pp. 20–36. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6546–6555.
[29] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards real- [53] Z. Liu et al., “Video Swin transformer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 time object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Adv. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 3192–3201.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 1–9. [54] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-
[30] H. Su, X. Zhao, and T. Lin, “Cascaded pyramid mining network for augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 weakly supervised temporal action localization,” in Proc. Asian Conf. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 Comput. Vis. (ACCV), 2018, pp. 558–574. pp. 1705–1714.
[31] Z. Qing et al., “Temporal context aggregation network for temporal [55] W. Liu et al., “SSD: Single shot multibox detector,” in Computer Vision–
 action proposal refinement,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. ECCV. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Springer, Oct. 2016, pp. 21–37.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 485–494. [56] C. Sun, Y. Jia, Y. Hu, and Y. Wu, “Scene-aware context reasoning for
[32] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers unsupervised abnormal event detection in videos,” in Proc. 28th ACM
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 184–192.
 (ICLR), 2021, pp. 1–21. [57] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality
[33] Z. Liu et al., “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 shifted windows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14360–14369.
 Oct. 2021, pp. 9992–10002. [58] R. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Liu, S. Gao, and Z. Hao, “Appearance-motion
[34] H. Touvron, M. Cord, M. Douze, F. Massa, A. Sablayrolles, and memory consistency network for video anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 H. Jegou, “Training data-efficient image transformers & distillation AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2021, pp. 1–12.
 through attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, [59] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental improvement,”
 pp. 10347–10357. 2018, arXiv:1804.02767.
YU et al.: REGULARITY LEARNING VIA EXPLICIT DISTRIBUTION MODELING FOR SKELETAL VAD 6673

[60] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for Andong Deng received the B.S. degree from
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Sichuan University, China, and the M.S. degree
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. He is
[61] C. Chen et al., “Comprehensive regularization in a bi-directional pre- currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Departdictive network for video anomaly detection,” Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. ment of Computer Science, University of Cen-
 Intell., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 230–238, Jun. 2022. tral Florida. His research interests include com-
[62] R. Girshick, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Rich feature hierar- puter vision, video understanding, and multimodal
 chies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,” in Proc. machine learning.
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2014, pp. 580–587.
[63] J.-C. Wu, H.-Y. Hsieh, D.-J. Chen, C.-S. Fuh, and T.-L. Liu, “Selfsupervised sparse representation for video anomaly detection,” in Computer Vision–ECCV. Tel Aviv, Israel: Springer, Oct. 2022, pp. 729–745.
[64] S. Sun and X. Gong, “Hierarchical semantic contrast for scene-aware Haisheng Su received the M.S. degree from the
 video anomaly detection,” 2023, arXiv:2303.13051. Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong Uni-
[65] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang, “Deep high-resolution represen- versity, in 2020, supervised by Prof. X. Zhao. He is
 tation learning for human pose estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. currently a Researcher with SenseTime Group Ltd.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2019, pp. 5693–5703. His research interests mainly include deep learning,
 video understanding, and 3D perception.
[66] T.-Y. Lin, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Belongie,
 “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 936–944.
[67] Z. Cai and N. Vasconcelos, “Cascade R-CNN: Delving into high
 quality object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6154–6162.
[68] M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural net- Dongliang Wang received the degree (Hons.) from
 works,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2673–2681, Xi’an Jiaotong University (XJTU) and the joint
 Nov. 1997. Ph.D. degree from MSR, Asia, and XJTU. He is
[69] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural currently a Researcher with SenseTime, specializ-
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. ing in computer vision with a particular focus on
[70] N. Li, F. Chang, and C. Liu, “Spatial–temporal cascade autoencoder for video understanding, 3D content generation, and
 video anomaly detection in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, autonomous driving. He has contributed to the field
 vol. 23, pp. 203–215, 2021. through the publication of several academic papers
[71] Y. Lu, F. Yu, M. K. K. Reddy, and Y. Wang, “Few-shot scene-adaptive on these topics.
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. Cham, Switzerland:
 Springer, 2020, pp. 125–141.

 Weihao Gan received the B.E. degree in automation from the Huazhong University of Science and
 Shoubin Yu received the B.E. degree from Shanghai Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2012, and the M.S.
 Jiao Tong University, China. He is currently pursuing and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
 the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Computer the Media Communication Laboratory, University of
 Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Southern California, Los Angeles, USA, in 2014 and
 Chapel Hill. His research interests include video 2017, respectively. His research interests include
 understanding, visual reasoning, and multimodal computer vision and deep learning, including object
 representation learning. detection/recognition, target tracking, video analysis,
 and interaction. He has published more than 20 journals and conference papers in these areas and holds
 several patents.

 Cewu Lu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
 Zhongyin Zhao received the B.E. degree from the supervised by Prof. Jiaya Jia. He is currently a Pro-
 Department of Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao fessor with Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU).
 Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2022. His Before he joined SJTU, he was a Research Fellow
 current research interests include computer vision with Stanford University working under Prof. Feiand multimedia. Fei Li and Prof. Leonidas J. Guibas. He was a
 Research Assistant Professor with The Hong Kong
 University of Science and Technology with Prof.
 Chi Keung Tang. He was selected as MIT TR35 in
 2019 and served as an Area Chair for CVPR’20 and
 ICCV’21. His research interests include computer vision, deep learning, and
 robotics.

 Haoshu Fang received the B.E. degree in computer Wei Wu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from
 science from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2019, the Department of Mathematics, Nanjing University,
 where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with China, in 2011 and 2016, respectively. He is curthe Department of Computer Science and Engineer- rently a Researcher with SenseTime Group Ltd. His
 ing. He was awarded the CCF-CV Rising Scholar current research interests include computer vision,
 Award in 2019, the Baidu Fellowship in 2019, the robotics, and connected and automated vehicle
 MSRA Fellowship in 2020, and the ByteDance driving.
 Fellowship in 2021. His research interests include
 robotic manipulation and computer vision.