9136 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 Rethinking Robust Multivariate Time Series
 Anomaly Detection: A Hierarchical
 Spatio-Temporal Variational Perspective
 Xiao Zhang , Shuqing Xu , Huashan Chen , Zekai Chen , Fuzhen Zhuang , Hui Xiong , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Dongxiao Yu

 Abstract—The robust multivariate time series anomaly detection the best performance in terms of recall and F1 compared with
can facilitate intelligent decisions and timely maintenance in var- state-of-the-arts baselines.
ious kinds of monitor systems. However, the robustness is highly
restricted by the stochasticity in multivariate time series, which Index Terms—Anomaly detection, variational autoencoder,
is summarized as temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity multivariate time series, self-attention.
specifically. In this paper, we explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables and the latent graph relationship variables into a
unified graphical framework, which can achieve better robustness I. INTRODUCTION
to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal perspective. First, AST amount of multivariate time series data are generated
within the spatial encoder, every connection exists or not is modeled
as a binary stochastic variable, and the graph structure can be
learnt automatically. Then, the temporal encoder would embed
 V to monitor systems in various real-world scenarios, such
 as kinds of sensory devices from smart IoT infrastructures [1],
the highly structured time series into latent stochastic variables to smart power grids [2], smart transportation, intelligent industrial
capture both complex temporal dependencies and neighbors infor- systems [3], etc. Anomalies are quite common in multivariate
mation. Moreover, we design a history-future combined anomaly time series data [4], accurate and efficient anomaly detection
score mechanism with both reconstruction decoder and forecasting
decoder to improve the anomaly detection performance. By weightcan help administrators make right decisions and timely maining the historical anomaly factor, the future anomaly factor, and tenance, which has drawn researchers’ wide interests in both
the prediction error of current timestamp, the anomaly detection academia and industries in recent years [1], [5], [6], [7], [8].
at current timestamp could be more sensitive to anomaly detection. Based on the data observations, anomalies are usually con-
Finally, extensive experiments on three publicly available anomaly sidered as unexpected values deviating from normal patterns
detection datasets demonstrate our proposed method can achieve
 significantly. Thus, to learn robust representations of normal
 patterns from multivariate time series is crucial for anomaly de-
 Received 20 May 2023; revised 28 May 2024; accepted 10 September tection. However, the robustness in anomaly detection is highly
2024. Date of publication 23 September 2024; date of current version 13 restricted by the stochasticity in multivariate time series, which
November 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural is summarized as temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62202273, in part by the Shandong
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant ZR2021QF044, specifically in our opinions. The temporal stochasticity means
in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under that noises commonly exist in time series, which are usually
Grant 2022JC016, in part by the Major Basic Research Program of Shandong caused by various small and random factors [9], which is shown
Provincial Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2022ZD02, in part by the
Joint Key Funds of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant in Fig. 1(a). The purpose of modeling temporal stochastic-
U23A20302, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under ity is to enable the model to learn robust representations of
Grant 92370204, in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant normal patterns, thereby better distinguishing between normal
2023YFF0725001, in part by Guangzhou-HKUST(GZ) Joint Funding Program
under Grant 2023A03J0008, in part by the Education Bureau of Guangzhou and anomalous points [6], [10], [11], [12]. Some variational
Municipality. Recommended for acceptance by P. Tsaparas. (Corresponding auto-encoders (VAE) [10], [11], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]
authors: Huashan Chen; Dongxiao Yu.) or generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19], [20] based
 Xiao Zhang, Shuqing Xu, and Dongxiao Yu are with the School of Computer
Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 266237, China (e-mail: models have been proposed to model the temporal stochasticity.
xiaozhang@sdu.edu.cn; sqxu@mail.sdu.edu.cn; dxyu@sdu.edu.cn). The LSTM-VAE [11] uses the LSTM as the encoder and decoder
 Huashan Chen is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese network of VAE to learn robust latent representations. Omni-
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China (e-mail: chenhuashan@iie.ac.cn).
 Zekai Chen is with Amazon, Seattle, WA 98109-5210 USA (e-mail: Anomaly [10] proposes a stochastic recurrent neural network to
zekaic@amazon.com). learn the temporal dependence between latent representations.
 Fuzhen Zhuang is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, SKLSDE, MTAD-GAT [21] maps the connected temporal and spatial
School of Computer Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (email: zhuangfuzhen@buaa.edu.cn). feature learned by GAT to the latent space using a VAE. MAD-
 Hui Xiong is with the Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong Uni- GAN [19] and TadGAN [20] use the GAN to model the temporal
versity of Science and Technology, Guangzhou 511458, China, and also with the stochasticity and show good robustness.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China (e-mail: xionghui@ust.hk). The spatial stochasticity modeling aims to select reasonable
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2024.3466291 similarity sequences dynamically for every time series, thereby
 1041-4347 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9137

 anomalies often occur in a continuous period of time, we design
 a history-future combined anomaly score mechanism with both
 reconstruction decoder and forecasting decoder. Specifically,
 we use the reconstruction decoder to reconstruct the historical
 time series data, and take the maximum reconstruction error in
 the history window as the historical anomaly factor at current
 timestamp. In the forecasting decoder, we adopt a multi-step
 prediction model to calculate the prediction values of current
 timestamp and the maximum prediction error of the future time
 window as the future anomaly factor. By weighting the historical
Fig. 1. An example of temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity. The
blue blocks indicate noises and the red blocks indicate anomalies. anomaly factor, the future anomaly factor, and the prediction
 error of current timestamp, the anomaly detection at current
 timestamp could be more sensitive to improve the performance.
 Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
the learned graph relationships between sequences are dynamic r We explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables
with time changing [7]. As shown in Fig. 1(b), the similar- and the latent graph relationship variables into a unified
ity relationship is dynamically changing. Specifically, S1 and graphical framework, which can achieve better robustness
S2 are similar in region (1), while in region (2) and region to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal perspec-
(3), the similarities vary fast. Some previous works [5], [22] tive.
learn the graph structures by measuring similarities between r We propose an end-to-end hierarchical spatio-temporal
embeddings and choosing top-K closest nodes as the spatial variational autoencoder framework to address the tempointer-relationships. This can easily lead to information loss on ral stochasticity and spatial stochasticity simultaneously.
graph relationships or introduce inappropriate information to Within the spatial encoder, every connection exists or not
weaken the anomaly detection ability. Therefore, some meth- is modeled as a binary stochastic variable, and the graph
ods [6], [7] considering spatial stochasticity have been proposed. structure can be learnt automatically. Then the temporal
For example in GRELEN [7], only latent graph relationship encoder would embed the highly structured time series
variables representing spatial stochasticity have been explicitly into latent stochastic variables to capture both complex
created, the latent variables representing temporal stochasticity temporal dependencies and neighbor information.
have not been explicitly modeled in the framework. In sum- r We design a history-future combined anomaly score mechmary, previous literature just utilize temporal latent variables to anism with both reconstruction decoder and forecasting
model the temporal stochasticity [10], [11], [12], or model the decoder to improve the anomaly detection performance. By
spatial stochasticity with a specific graph learning strategy [6], weighting the historical anomaly factor, the future anomaly
[7]. Hence in this work, we explicitly model the temporal factor, and the prediction error of current timestamp, the
stochasticity variables and the latent graph relationship variables anomaly detection at current timestamp could be more
into a unified graphical framework, which can achieve better sensitive for anomaly detection.
robustness to dynamicity from both the spatial and temporal r We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world
perspective. datasets to demonstrate the superiority of our frameowrk
 Along this line, we propose a hierarchical spatio-temporal over state-of-the-arts comparing with various multivariate
variational autoencoder framework to learn stochastic graph time series anomaly detection baselines. We publicly pubrelations and stochastic latent representations simultaneously in lish our code on GitHub1 for better reproducibility of our
an end-to-end manner. Within the spatial encoder, a directed work.
graph structure can be learned by the graph learning strategy based on self-attention mechanism and Gumbel-Softmax II. RELATED WORK
sampling [1], [23]. Every connection exists or not would be
 Traditionally, time series anomaly detection algorithms can
modeled as a binary variable with Bernoulli prior assumption.
 be divided into three learning types: supervised, unsupervised,
The graph learning policy could automatically learn the hidden
 and semi-supervised [24], [25]. Supervised methods [26] such
connections during training by deciding whether any specific
 as SVM [27], random forests [28] can achieve good perfornode’s information could flow to others to achieve the best
 mance due to the use of normal and anomalous labels. However
performance. Then the temporal encoder embeds the highly
 labeling is not easy to get, which make supervised methods
structured time series into latent stochastic variables to capture
 hardly practical. The unsupervised methods do not require labels
both complex temporal dependencies and neighbor information.
 and has good robustness against novel anomalies that have not
In details, the multi-head self-attention mechanism is utilized to
 appeared before. The KNN [29], K-means [30], DBStream [31]
obtain temporal feature representation for each time series and
 use the distance of observations to their nearest neighbors as
we use the graph attention networks (GAT) network to further
 anomaly score. In the COPOD [32], DSPOT [33], anomalies
aggregate the neighbor information for the temporal feature
representation of each sequence according to the graph learned
by the spatial encoder. Finally, since in real-world scenarios, 1 https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AD-HSTVAE-11C7
9138 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE I TABLE II
 CHARACTERISTIC SUMMARY OF THE BASELINES AND OUR HSTVAE NOTATIONS USED IN THIS WORK

are considered extreme values in the distribution. The PCA [34]
projects input to a lower-dimensional hyperplane and identifies
data significantly deviating from this plane as anomalies. The different sequences. GRELEN [7] proposes a self-attentionsemi-supervised methods use normal training data to guide the based graph relationship learning strategy and assumes the lamodel to learn the normal patterns of the data, then distin- tent graph relationship variable obeys multinomial distribution.
guishing the data that deviates from the normal pattern in the MTAD-GAT [21] combines the output of feature-oriented GAT
testing set as anomalies. They usually consider the following and time-oriented GAT, and then maps the global features to a
aspects: temporal dependence, relationships between sequences, latent variable.
temporal stochasticity, and spatial stochasticity. The comparison details are summarized in Table I. In conclu-
 1) Modeling Temporal Dependence: A majority of works sion, different from the existing works, our proposed HSTVAE
model the temporal dependencies of MTS through RNN net- can explicitly model the temporal stochasticity variables and
work or attention mechanism. The GTA [1] models temporal the latent graph relationship variables into a unified graphical
dependency using a novel multi-branch attention mechanism. framework, which can achieve better robustness to dynamicity
OmniAnomaly [10] proposes a stochastic recurrent neural net- and achieve better anomaly detection performance.
work which can model the time dependencies between latent
representations. LSTM-AD [35] designs stacked LSTM networks to learn the normal patterns, and use the predicted errors III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
to judge anomalies. HealthESN [36] proposes a method based For the classical multivariate time series anomaly detection
on the classical echo state network (ESN) and an adaptive detec- problem, we define X ∈ RN ×w as the input of the multivariate
tion threshold generation method based on information theory time series data, where N denotes the dimensions of a multianalysis. Telemanom [8] applies LSTM to anomaly detection in variate time series, usually referring to the number of sensors
spacecraft telemetry and proposes a novel dynamic thresholding within an entity, and w is the length of sliding time window.
method. Let xi ∈ Rw denote the time series data at any sequence i, and
 2) Modeling Graph Relationships Between Sequences: xt ∈ RN denote the data at any timestamp t. In addition, some
MTAD-GAT [21] models the temporal and spatial dependencies notations are summarized in Table II.
simultaneously by combining a feature-oriented GAT and a Definition 1. Latent time series representation: To model
time-oriented GAT. The GDN [22] learns the graph relationships temporal stochasticity, we assume that the input data of time
between sequences by choosing the top-k neighbors, and uses series can be represented by a latent time series representation
a GAT to aggregate the selected neighbor feature. To overcome z that follows a distribution, i.e., z ∼ Dz (φz ), where Dz is the
the limitations of top-k method, the GTA [1] proposes a graph distribution that z follows, usually a Gaussian distribution, φz is
learning policy based on the Gumbel-Softmax Sampling trick, the parameter of this distribution.
which can learn the global bi-directed graph structure involving Definition 2. Latent graph relationship variable: To model
all sensors. the spatial stochasticity, we assume that the similarity relation-
 3) Modeling Temporal Stochasticity and Spatial Stochasticity: ship between sequences i and j can be represented by a latent
Many works utilize probability generation models to model tem- graph relationship variable ei,j that follows a distribution, i.e.,
poral stochasticity. The LSTM-VAE [11], OmniAnomaly [10] ei,j ∼ De (φe ), where De is the distribution ei,j follows, usually
utilize VAE to learn robust latent representations and capture can be a multinomial distribution, φe is the parameter of this
the normal patterns of MTS. MAD-GAN [19], TadGAN [20] distribution.
use the adversarial generative networks to model the temporal A semi-supervised model learns normal patterns on the
stochasticity. Some recent works also consider spatial stochas- Dtrain containing only normal data, and determines whether
ticity. DVGCRN [6] learns an embedding that follows a Gaussian an anomaly occurred at time t on the Dtest . For classical
distribution for each sequence to model the stochasticity inter reconstruction or prediction based methods, when training, the
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9139

 we use the temporal encoder combining the graph relationship
 learned from the spatial encoder to learn richer latent time series
 representation zi for each time series xi . Then the reconstruction
 decoder constructs the historical sequence and the forecasting
 decoder predicts the future sequence according to the latent time
 series representations zi and promote the learning of a more
 robust latent time series representations in the back propagation
 process.
 It is worth noting that our model includes two different
 types of latent random variables: the edge-based latent graph
 relationships variable ei,j and sequence-based latent time series
 representation zi . And the dependency of the two latent variables is shown in the Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, each node represents
Fig. 2. Graphical model representations. The black dashed lines mean the
inference model, the black solid lines mean the generative model. In addition,
 a random variable, the node with shadow represents the obthe blue solid arrow from latent representation zi to zj means there is an edge served data, and the arrow represents the dependency between
from node i to node j if the latent graph relationships variable eij = 1. And the variables.
blue dotted arrow from zj to zk means there is no edge from node j to node k
if ejk = 0.
 In the traditional VAE framework, the observation x is encoded as a latent variable z, and then the decoder reconstructs x
 from the z distribution. However, we can’t compute the posterior
 distribution p(z|x) analytically, thus the variational inference is
goal is to minimize the following objective functions:
 proposed. The variational inference approximate the p(z|x) us-
 L = EX∼Dtrain [||F (X; θ, φz , φe ) − ỹ||22 ], (1) ing a variational distribution q(z|x; φ), whose parameters can be
 learned through an encoder network. We want to make q(z|x; φ)
where θ is the model parameter, φz and φe are distribution pa- close to the posterior p(z|x) and use the Kullback-Leibler (KL)
rameter, F (·) represent the reconstruction or prediction network, divergence to measure the closeness of the two distributions.
ỹ represents the reconstructed or predicted groundtruth at the We can’t minimize the KL divergence exactly, so we achieve
corresponding moment. this goal equivalently by maximizing ELBO. Actually, in many
 works [6], [10], [21] about variational inference, the evidence
 IV. MODEL ARCHITECTURE lower bound (ELBO) [37] function is the objective function
 which needs to be optimized, defined as
A. Model Overview
 In order to solve a common problem in the field of multivariate ELBO = Eq(z|x) [log p(x | z)] − DKL [(q(z | x)p(z))], (2)
time series anomaly detection that the temporal fluctuations and
relationship fluctuations can easily lead to misjudgment, we where the first term is the reconstruction loss and the second
propose an end-to-end hierarchical spatio-temporal variational term is the Kullback-Leibler divergence loss.
autoencoder framework called HSTVAE, which can simultane- In our HSTVAE framework, the ELBO of the ith sequence
ously model the temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity can be represented as
of multivariate time series. As shown in Fig. 3, the overall
 L (xi , φe , φz , θr , θf ) = Eqφz (zi |e:,i ,X) [log pθr (xi | zi , e:,i )]
framework consists of four modules. The spatial encoder uses
  
the graph learning policy to discover the latent graph relation- + Eqφz (zi |e:,i ,X) log pθf (yi | zi , e:,i )
ships between sequences, while the temporal encoder applies
the multi-head self-attention mechanism and GAT network to − DKL [qφz (zi | e:,i , X) p (zi )]
capture the latent time series representation that considers both − DKL [qφe (e:,i | X) p (e:,i )] . (3)
time dependence and neighbor information. The reconstruction
decoder uses the multi-head self-attention network to model the Where the first term is the reconstruction loss which represents
temporal dependence in latent time series representations, and the ability of the reconstruction decoder to reconstruct the origirealizes the reconstruction of the input sequence. The predic- nal input, and the second term is the forecasting loss which reption decoder uses the encode-decoder network to make every resents the prediction accuracy of the forecasting decoder. And
predicted timestamp in the decoder attend over all timestamps the latter two terms represent the regularization terms that use the
in the latent time series representations of input sequence and KL divergence to control the variation distribution and the prior
achieves accurate next-step prediction. In the back propaga- distribution to be the same as possible. We use the variational
tion process, the latent time series representation are updated distribution qφe (e:,i | X) to approximate the posterior distribureversely from two views of reconstruction and forecasting tion p(e:,i | X) for which does not have an analytic form. We
loss, which is helpful to learn more robust latent time series assume qφe (e:,i | X) follows Bernoulli distribution and model
representation. As for the relationship between the above four the qφe (e:,i | X) using the spatial encoder. Similarly, we assume
modules, since different sequences might be highly correlated or the variational distribution qφz (zi | e:,i , X) follows Gaussian
similar and considering the neighbor information is meaningful, distribution and model the qφz (zi | e:,i , X) using the temporal
9140 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 3. The framework of the proposed HSTVAE which consists of a spatial encoder, a temporal encoder, a reconstruction decoder and a forcasting decoder. The
four modules are related to each other through a latent time series representation and a latent graph relationships variable.

encoder. In the generative model, the pθr (xi | zi , e:,i ) is mod- B. Spatial Encoder Network
eled by the reconstruction decoder and the pθf (yi | zi , e:,i ) is To model the stochastic inter-sequences graph relationships of
modeled by the forecasting decoder. The detailed derivation of multivariate time series, we propose the spatial encoder. Given
(3) is shown as following. two time sequences xi and xj , we use a latent graph relationships
 representation variable ei,j to represent the directed relationship
  from sequences xi to xj and assume the qφe (ei,j | xi , xj ) follow
log p(X) = q(Z, E | X) log p(X)dZdE a Bernoulli distribution. We use the spatial encoder to produce
 Z,E
   the parameter πi,j of the Bernoulli distribution. The details of
 p(X, Z, E) the variational distribution are shown as follows:
 = Eq(Z,E|X) log
 p(Z, E | X) qφe (ei,j | xi , xj ) = Ber (πi,j (xi , xj )) . (4)
  
 p(Z, E)p(X | Z, E)
 ≥ Eq(Z,E|X) log The πi,j is the probability of existing edge from node i to node j.
 q(Z, E|X) We use the self-attention network as the spatial encoder, which
   
 p(Z|E) can capture the similarity between sequences. First, we use a
 = q(Z|E, X)q(E|X) log dZdE linear network to extract temporal feature gi ∈ Rdg from each
 Z,E q(Z|E, X)
    raw time series, that is gi = xi Wg , where Wg ∈ Rw×dg is the
 p(E) learnable parameters. Then the extracted temporal feature gi are
 + q(Z|E, X)q(E|X) log dZdE
 Z,E q(E|X) mapped by learnable parameters matrices Wq and Wk to obtain
  qi , ki in different subspaces
 + q(Z|E, X)q(E|X)[log p(X|Z, E)]dZdE
 Z,E q i = g i Wq , k i = g i Wk . (5)
 
 Put the vector qi and kj into a weighted attention network to get
 = q(Z | E, X) log p(X | Z, E)dZ
 Z
 a vector. Then the vector passes through an MLP network to get
  the probability variable πi,j whose value is between 0 to 1.
 p(Z | E)
 + q(Z | E, X) log dZ πi,j = M LP (Ws [qi , kj ]) ,
 Z q(Z | E, X) (6)
 
 p(E) where Ws is the learnable parameters matrices.
 + q(E | X) log dE Sampling of latent graph relationships: The Gumbel-Softmax
 E q(E | X)
 distribution [1], [23] can be adapted to obtain a continuous
 = Eq(Z|E,X) [log p(X | Z, E)] approximation of Bernoulli random variables.
   
 − DKL [q(Z | E, X)p(Z)] exp log πi,j1 1
 + gi,j /τ
 ei,j =   , (7)
 − DKL [q(E | X)p(E)] = ELBO. v∈{0,1} exp log πi,j + gi,j
 v v /τ
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9141

 1 0 0 1 exp(ξ(i, j))
where πi,j = πi,j , πi,j = 1 − πi,j , gi,j , gi,j are i.i.d samples
 αij = . (14)
drawn from a standard Gumbel distribution by drawing u ∼ ρ∈N (i)∪{i} exp(ξ(i, ρ))
Uniform(0, 1) and computing g = − log(− log u). The temperatures τ controls the smoothness of Gumbel-Softmax distribu- Finally, the updated temporal feature representations Vei is sent
tion. When τ approaches 0, the probability of getting samples to the linear network to get the parameters of Gaussian distriei,j that are 0 or 1 approaches 1. bution. For the time window {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1} of
 sequence i,
C. Temporal Encoder Network  
 [μzi , log σzi ] = Linear Vei . (15)
 To model the stochastic temporal dependencies of multivariate time series, we propose the temporal encoder. We assume Sampling of latent time series representation: We use the
the qφz (zi | e:,i , X) follows a Gaussian distribution. Given an reparameterization trick [13] to obtain the latent time series repinput time sequence xi , the temporal encoder can produce the resentation. For the time window {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1}
parameters μzi and σzi of the Gaussian distribution over the of sequence i,
latent time series representation zi . For the ith sequence, the zi = μ z i + σ z i ε, ε ∼ N (0, 1). (16)
details of the encoding process and variational distribution are
shown as follows: D. Reconstruction Decoder Network
 qφz (zi | e:,i , X) = N (μzi , σzi ) . (8) To model the temporal dependence in latent time series
We utilize the multi-head self-attention mechanism and the representations and realize the reconstruction of the input se-
GAT network as the temporal encoder of each sequence, which quence, we propose the reconstruction decoder network. We
can capture both complex temporal dependencies and neighbor denote pθr (xi | zi , e:,i ) using the reconstruction decoder netinformation. First, we use an LSTM network to encode the work, which can construct the historical time series xi based on
relative position information of time series and convert the the latent time series representation zi . We utilize a multi-head
input value xti at every timestamp t of sequence i to the input self-attention network as the reconstruction decoder, whose
embeddings vectors of dimension d. Then we can get the input input is the latent time series representation zi after linear
of multi-head self-attention module hti , where hti ∈ Rd , and transformation. The output of the single-head self-attention
hi ∈ Rw×d . For a sequence of token representations hi ∈ Rw×d , network is
the self-attention function first projects them into queries Q ∈
 Attn(zi WrQ , zi WrK , zi WrV )
Rw×dk , keys K ∈ Rw×dk and values V ∈ Rw×dv , M times with  
different linear projections matrixs respectively. Then we apply T
 zi WrQ · zi WrK
the scaled dot-product to get the weights = Sof tmax √ zi WrV , (17)
 dk
 QK T
 Attention(Q, K, V ) = Sof tmax √ V. (9) where the WrQ ∈ Rd×dk , WrK ∈ Rd×dk , WrV ∈ Rd×dv are lindk
 ear projection matrices. And Attn is an abbreviation for
Multi-head attention [38] applies different mappings to learn Attention. Then we apply multi-head attention following the
different representations and output the concatenated feature (10) and (11) to get the concatenated multi-head output:
 M ultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat ( head1 , . . . head M ) W O ,
 Vri = M ultiHead(zi WrQ , zi WrK , zi WrV ). (18)
 (10)
in which, M is the number of heads. The mth head of the ith Finally, the reconstruction output {x̂t−w
 i , x̂t−w+1
 i i } of
 , . . . , x̂t−1
sequence is defined as sequence i can be obtained through the MLP network.
  
 headm = Attention hi Wm Q K
 , h i Wm V
 , h i Wm , (11)
 E. Forecasting Decoder Network
where the projections are parameter matrices Wm Q
 ∈ Rd×dk ,
Wm ∈ R
 K d×dk
 , Wm ∈ R
 V d×dv
 and W ∈ R
 O hdv ×d
 . We note the To learn more robust latent time series representation and
output of multi-head attention as Vei , which is the temporal predict the value of future timestamps, we propose the forecastfeature representations of sequence i. Then the temporal feature ing decoder network. We denote the pθf (yi | zi , e:,i ) using the
representations of all sequences are sent to the GAT network forecasting decoder network, which can generate the future time
to aggregate neighbor information according the latent graph series yi based on the latent representation zi . The forecasting
relationships learned by the spatial encoder. decoder network is mainly composed of a multi-head self-
 ⎛ ⎞ attention network and an encoder-decoder attention network.
  The input of the former is a token which is a random initialed vec-
 Vei = Relu ⎝αi,i W Vei + αj,i W Vej ⎠ , (12) 
 tor whose dimension is d and the output {yit , yit+1 , . . . yit+w −2 }
 j∈N (i) at the previous timestamp. They form an input matrix, de-
 
where N (i) = {j|eji = 1}, W is a trainable weight parameter noted as ui ∈ Rw ×d . The output of the single-head attention
matrix, and αj,i is attention coefficients computed as follow: network is
   
 ξ(i, j) = LeakyRelu a Vei ⊕ Vej (13) Attn(ui WfQ , ui WfK , ui WfV )
9142 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

  T TABLE III
 ui WfQ · ui WfK STATISTICAL SUMMARY OF THE THREE REAL-WORLD DATASETS
 = Sof tmax √ ui WfV . (19)
 dk
Then we apply multi-head attention following the (10) and (11)
to get the concatenated multi-head output:
 Vfi = M ultiHead(ui WfQ , ui WfK , ui WfV ), (20)
 
where Vfi ∈ Rw ×d , and WfQ ∈ Rd×dk , WfK ∈ Rd×dk , WfV ∈ take the maximum reconstruction error and forecasting error
Rd×dv are linear projection matrices. In the encoder-decoder at- across all sensors at timestamp t as the reconstruction error and
tention network, the queries come from the output of multi-head forecasting error at timestamp t, and we note them as Errr (t)
self-attention decoder network, and the keys and values come and Errf (t). Since the reconstruction output is x̂t−w:t−1 , we
 i
from the latent time series representation learned by the encoder, take the maximum reconstruction error in the history window
which allows every timestamp in the decoder to attend over all as the historical anomaly factor Ah (t) at current timestamp.
 
timestamps in the input sequence. The output of the single-head The output of multi-step forecasting decoder is yit:t+w −1 , and
encoder-decoder attention network can be represented as we take the maximum prediction error in the future window
 Attn(Vfi WfQ , zi WfK , zi WfV ) as the future anomaly factor Af (t). We weight the historical
  anomaly factor Ah (t), the future anomaly factor Af (t), and the
 T
 Vfi WfQ · zi WfK forecasting error Ac (t) of current timestamp to get the anomaly
 = Sof tmax √ zi WfV . (21) score A1 (t) at current timestamp. Moerover, since the sparsity of
 dk
 the graph learned in normal pattern is within a certain range, but
Then we apply multi-head attention following the (10) and (11) each sequence has few related neighbors in attacked scenarios,
to get the concatenated multi-head output: we take the average neighbor numbers of all sequences as
 another anomaly score A2 (t) of anomaly detection. Specifically,
 Vfi = M ultiHead(Vfi WfQ , zi WfK , zi WfV ), (22)
 for the timestamp t, the anomaly score based on reconstruction
 
where Vfi ∈ Rw ×d , and WfQ ∈ Rd×dk , WfK ∈ Rd×dk , WfV ∈ and forecasting error can be calculated by
Rd×dv are linear projection matrices. A1 (t) = Ac (t) + γ · Ah (t) + η · Af (t). (24)
 
 Finally, the prediction output {yit , yit+1 , . . . , yit+w −1 } of sequence i can be obtained through the MLP network. Where γ and η are the hyper-parameters, which can be determined by grid search [1]. The anomaly score based on graph
F. Objective Function and Training sparsity can be calculated by

 1 
 N
 According to the theory of VAE [13], we can train our model
by optimizing ELBO. The ELBO of the ith sequence has been A2 (t) = Di , (25)
 N i=1
shown in (3). Considering all sequences, the optimization objective of HSTVAE can be represented as where Di is the number of neighbors of the ith sequence, N
 is total number of sequences. We use the grid search to find
 
 N
 L (X, φe , φz , θr , θf ) = L (xi , φe , φz , θr , θf ) , (23) the optimal threshold thr1 and thr2 . When A1 (t) > thr1 or
 i=1 A2 (t) < thr2 , we assume an anomaly occurs at timestamp t
 and the anomaly label at = 1.
where we denote the prior Gaussian distribution p(zi ) as N (0, 1)
and denote the prior Bernoulli distribution as Ber(b). The b
 V. EXPERIMENTS
is a constant which controls the sparsity of the learned graph
and can be determined by experiment. Moreover, φe , φz , θr , θf A. Datasets Description
means the parameters of the spatial encoder network, temporal We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world public
encoder network, reconstruction decoder network and forecast- MTS datasets: SWaT,2 WADI,3 SMD.4 Table III summarises the
ing decoder network respectively, and we utilize the stochastic statistics of the three datasets.
gradient descent (SGD) algorithm to update them during the r SWaT The SWaT dataset is collected from a six-stage water
training process. treatment testbed in May 2015. The data is collected from
 51 sensors and actuators with the 1-second intervals within
G. Anomaly Detection 11 days, in which the system was in normal operation for
 Based on the fact that anomalies often occur in a con- the first week, and suffered a total of 41 physical attacks in
tinuous period of time, we propose a history-future com- the following days.
bined anomaly score mechanism. The reconstruction error at
timestamp t = {t − w, t − w + 1, . . . , t − 1} of sequence i is 2 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/secure-water-treatment-SWaT/
Errir (t) = (x̂ti − xti )2 and the forecasting error of sequence 3 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/testbeds/water-distribution-wadi/

i in t = {t, t + 1, . . . t + w − 1} is denoted as Errif (t). We 4 https://github.com/smallcowbaby/OmniAnomaly
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9143

 r WADI The WADI dataset is collected from a three stages data. And the forecasting error and the reconstruction
 water distribution testbed. The data is produced from 123 probability are combined to detect anomalies.
 sensors and actuators at 1-second intervals within 16 days, r LSTM-AD [35]: LSTM-AD uses stacked LSTM networks
 of which 14 days are normal data, and the remaining days to learn normal pattern and use predicted errors to evaluate
 are attacked 15 times in total. the likelihood of anomalies occurring at each moment.
 r SMD The Server Machine Dataset contains metrics like r HealthESN [36]: HealthESN focuses on the issue of data
 CPU load, network usage, memory usage, etc. The data is imbalance and designs a new method based on the classical
 collected within 5 weeks. And the dataset has 28 different echo state network (ESN) and a threshold selection method
 entities, where each entity has 38 metrics. based on information theory, which can be more adaptive
 To improve the training and testing efficiency, the SWaT to different anomaly detection tasks.
and WADI data samples are downsampled at 10 s intervals. r Telemanom [8]: Telemanom applies LSTM to anomaly
Specifically, we retain the median of the 10 seconds data and use detection and proposes a dynamic thresholding technique
the label with the highest frequency as the overall label, while that is independent of labels or incorrect parameter assump-
SMD uses the original data. In addition, we have normalized all tions.
datasets and remove the meaningless sequences that are both 0 on Metrics: We take the Precision, Recall, F1 score and ROCthe training set and testing set after normalization. The training AUC as the evaluation metrics. Moreover, multiple evaluation
set is normal data, while the testing set contains anomalies. We strategies have been proposed in previous work [10], [39], [40],
randomly divide 20% of the data in the training set as validation [41], and we adopt the point-adjust [10] to calculate the metrics.
set for model selection. Especially, different entities need to be If one point in the anomaly duration is detected, we assume the
trained and tested independently in the SMD dataset and we specific anomalous segments have been detected.
report the mean value. Training Settings: We implement our proposed method using
 Pytorch version 1.10.0 with CUDA 11.1 and conduct all experiments on four NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs. We set the
B. Experimental Setup historical window length to 15 frames to predict the value of next
 Baselines: We compare the performance of our proposed 6 frames and construct the historical 15 frames. Our temporal
method with thirteen popular anomaly detection methods: and spatial encoder network are 1 layer, while the reconstruction
 r PCA [34]: The principal component analysis uses the and prediction decoder network are 2 layers. The dimension of
 reconstruction error of the low dimensional projection as multi-head attention mechanism in all networks are set to 64 and
 anomaly score. the number of heads is 8. In the temporal encoder, the dimension
 r KNN [29]: The K Nearest Neighbors calculates the average of latent variable z is 3. In the spatial encoder, the parameter of
 distance between each sample point and its nearest K Bernoulli prior distribution of SWaT, WADI and SMD datasets
 samples to get the anomaly score. are 0.1, 0.2, 0.13 respectively. For our model and all baselines,
 r LSTM-VAE [11]: The LSTM-VAE takes LSTM as the we use the validation set to help hyper-parameters selection and
 feedforward network of VAE to reconstruct time series. conduct the grid search [7] on different parameter combination.
 r OmniAnomaly [10]: The OmniAnomaly is a stochastic The model is trained using the Adam optimizer with learning
 recurrent neural network which consider the time depen- rate 0.001 for up to 50 epochs and early stopping strategy is
 dence between latent representations. applied with patience of 5.
 r MAD-GAN [19]: The MAD-GAN trains LSTM-RNNs on
 the MTS data and then utilize both the discriminator and
 the generator to detect anomalies. C. Performance and Analysis
 r GRELEN [7]: The Graph Relational Learning Network In Tables IV and V, we study the anomaly detection perforcombines VAE with a graph dependence structure learning mance in terms of precision, recall, F1-score and ROC-AUC on
 strategy and consider the sum of all the sensors’ in/out our proposed HSTVAE method and other thirteen baselines on
 degree as the anomaly score. datasets SWaT, WADI and SMD. Similar with the GRELEN [7],
 r GDN [22]: The Graph Deviation Network uses a top-k GTA [1], OmniAnomaly [10], for our HSTVAE and all basegraph learning strategy to learn a graph of inter-sequence lines, we apply a grid search on all possible anomaly thresholds
 relationships. to search for the best F1-score in theory and report them. We run
 r GTA [1]: The GTA uses an improved transformer to learn HSTVAE and all baselines with 5 times and report the average
 time dependencies and designs a connection learning pol- and standard deviation. Our proposed HSTVAE significantly
 icy to learn inter-sequence relationships. outperforms all other methods on three datasets especially in
 r DVGCRN [6]: The Deep Variational Graph Convolutional terms of recall, F1 and ROC-AUC. In detail, we observe the
 Recurrent Network combines the proposed EPN with following phenomenons from the Tables IV and V:
 GCRN by a sharing embedding channel and considers both r The F1 score and recall of HSTVAE outperform all baseforecasting and reconstruction losses. lines, and the performance of HSTVAE on precision and
 r MTAD-GAT [21]: The MTAD-GAT is a framework based recall is quite balanced. Especially, we achieve the best
 on two GAT networks, which can separately learn time F1-score as 0.9007 for SWaT, 0.8431 for WADI and 0.9206
 dependence and inter-sequence relationship of the MTS for SMD. Compared to the suboptimal model, HSTVAE
9144 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

 TABLE IV
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES ON SWAT,WADI AND SMD USING PRECISION, RECALL AND F1 AS METRICS

 TABLE V Further, compared with the GDN considering only top-k
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES ON SWAT,WADI AND
 SMD USING ROC-AUC AS METRICS
 neighbors, the GRELEN, GTA and our HSTVAE retain all
 potential neighbors, which can avoid the information loss
 and achieve better performance. The F1 of our HSTVAE
 achieves 8.66%, 28.01%, 3.37% improvement over GDN
 on three datasets.
 r It’s meaningful to model the temporal stochasticity and
 spatial stochasticity of multivariate time series. The models
 that do not consider temporal and spatial stochasticity, such
 as LSTM-AD, HealthESN and Telemanom often achieve
 high precision, but their recall and F1 are very low. In
 addition, their AUC also performs worse on the WADI
 dataset. The OmniAnomaly uses a stochastic recurrent
 neural network to learn the robust temporal latent representations while the GRELEN employs a latent graph relationship variable to capture the inter-sensors dependence
 with spatial stochasticity. Both of them have achieved good
 can achieve 3.27%, 1.15%, 4.52% increase in terms of performance on recall whose values are close to ours,
 the recall on three datasets respectively. In addition, our but the precisions of the OmniAnomaly and GRELEN on
 HSTVAE achieved optimal results on ROC-AUC, indi- WADI are 51.32% and 8.88% lower than ours because
 cating that our HSTVAE can achieve excellent positive another stochasticity is not considered.
 and negative sample differentiation ability without the
 influence of threshold selection. Specifically, on the SWAT,
 WADI and SMD datasets, the AUC of HSTVAE is 0.78%,
 D. Ablation Studies
 1.63%, 0.22% higher than that of the optimal baseline,
 respectively. To study the effectiveness of each component of our model,
 r The deep learning-based methods (LSTM-VAE,MAD- we gradually exclude the modules to observe how the model
 GAN, GTA etc.) have better detection performance on performance degrades on the three datasets. Table VI shows
 three datasets than the conventional approaches such as the anomaly detection performance of all variants has declined
 PCA, KNN. This is because the former includes the re- compared with HSTVAE.
 current mechanism or attention mechanism which are able r HST V AEw/o GAT : To study the benefit of learned graph,
 to model long-term temporal dependencies. Our HSTVAE which was learned from the spatial encoder and used
 uses the attention mechanism for temporal dependencies to aggregate neighbor information for the time series in
 modeling, which is better than the RNN-based model. temporal encoder by the GAT module, we remove the GAT.
 Specifically, our F1 is 21.45 %, 116.07%, 22.29% higher r HST V AEw/o recon. : To study the effect of reconstruction
 than LSTM-VAE on three datasets significantly. decoder, we remove the reconstruction decoder and only
 r The methods that consider the graph relationship between perform multi-step prediction.
 sequences, such as GDN, GRELEN, GTA and our HST- r HST V AEw/o f ore. : To study the effect of forecasting
 VAE can achieve better performance than the methods decoder, we remove the forecasting decoder and only use
 that only consider temporal dependencies, which shows the historical reconstruction error to calculate anomaly
 the importance of modeling relationship among sequences. score.
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9145

 TABLE VI
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF ABLATION STUDIES ON SWAT, WADI AND SMD USING PRECISION, RECALL, F1 AND ROC-AUC AS METRICS

Fig. 4. Visualization of spatial stochasticity. The adjacency matrixs are shown in Fig. 4(b)–(d) and several relevant sequences are shown in Fig. 4(a). In addition,
in order to observe the distribution of the number of neighbors of each sequence under normal and anomalous conditions, we make statistics in the Fig. 4(e)–(f).

 r HST V AEw/o LST M : To study the impact of different occurs, the number of neighbors is concentrated in the range
 position encoding methods on model performance, we of 2-4, which is consistent with the phenomenon in Fig. 4(a).
 replace LSTM relative position encoding with sine cosine From Fig. 4(a), in Region 1 and Region 2, there are 4 or 5
 absolute position encoding. sequences that are similar to the seq0, while in Region 3,
 Table VI shows the performance of the variants, from which because the seq0 fluctuates violently, its pattern is no longer
we can observe that the anomaly detection performance of all the similar to other normal sequences, so its neighbors are reduced.
variants has declined compared with that of HSTVAE. In partic- The phenomenon that the sequence has few neighbors when
ular, the recall of HST V AEw/o GAT decreases significantly, anomalies occur shows that we can use the sparsity of the learned
which demonstrates the importance of the graph learning for graph to identify the anomaly.
aggregating proper neighbor information. The recall and AUC
of the HST V AEw/o recon. and HST V AEw/o f ore. both decrease obviously, which proves that the reconstruction decoder F. Case Study
and forcasting decoder all play an important role in modeling
stochasticity. After replacing LSTM relative position encoding In order to show the importance of modeling temporal
with sine cosine absolute position encoding, the precision, recall, stochasticity and spatial stochasticity in anomaly detection, we
f1 and AUC of HST V AEw/o LST M all decreased, indicating visualize the anomaly scores and thresholds of our HSTVAE
the necessity of modeling relative position information. and MAD-GAN, GRELEN, GDN. We perform case study on
 the time period shown in Fig. 4(a), which includes temporal
 fluctuations, relationship fluctuations and anomalies. As shown
E. Interpretability
 in Fig. 5, in the normal time period on the left, our HSTVAE
 In order to show the spatial stochasticity of our model, we achieves the most smoothest score, which reflects its high rovisualize the adjacency matrix of the seq0 and the seq1 in three bustness. The MAD-GAN misjudged near t = 50, t = 200 and
special time periods of the SMD machine-1-1 dataset. t = 300 where fluctuation occurs, which may be because it only
 Spatial stochasticity: The spatial stochasticity is reflected in considers temporal stochasticity and ignores spatial stochasticthe fact that the learned graph relationships between sequences ity. In addition, GRELEN considers spatial stochasticity and has
are dynamic with time changing. As shown in the Fig. 4(b)– no misjudgment, but its robustness is not as good as HSTVAE,
(d), seq0, 1, 23, 24, 25 are similar in region 1. In region 2, manifested as the anomaly score of noises being close to the
seq0, 1, 23, 25, 31 are similar. However, in anomaly region 3, threshold. As a deterministic methods, the GDN mistakenly
there has been a significant change in the graph relationship, detected fluctuations as anomalies at t = 200, which also shows
where seq0, 6 are similar, while seq1, 23, 25 are similar. the necessity of considering temporal and spatial stochasticity.
 Normal and anomaly: Comparing Fig. 4(e) and (f), we can In the anomalous time period marked by the red rectangle, all
see that the average number of neighbors of the sequence in the methods have detected the anomaly, but our model can more
normal mode is in the range of 4-6. However, when the anomaly clearly separate anomalies and normal from a global perspective,
9146 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

Fig. 5. Anomaly score and threshold of HSTVAE, MAD-GAN, GRELEN,
GDN when temporal fluctuation, relationship fluctuation and anomaly occur. Fig. 7. Hyper-parameter analysis on SWaT dataset.
The black curve represents anomaly scores, and the red line represents the
threshold. The blue rectangular dotted line box indicates the area with fluctuation
but normal and correctly detected as normal. The areas of misjudgment are
circled with oval red solid line frame and the ground truth anomaly areas are a specific parameter, we fix the other three parameters as the
marked by red rectangular shadow.
 parameters reported in Section V-B.
 r Window size: When evaluating the impact of window size
 on model performance, we fix the dimensionality of latent
 representation z to 3, the attention mechanism dimension
 to 64, and the parameter of Bernoulli prior distribution
 to 0.1. The length of historical window can affect the
 time dependence modeling performance of the temporal
 √ encoder and the graph relationship learning performance
Fig. 6. Noises and Anomalies. The ” ” and ”✗” in the elliptical boxes adjacent
to each region represent whether our model detects that region as an anomaly. of the spatial encoder. Fig. 7(a) shows that the recall, f1
 and AUC increase with the increase of window size and
 reach the peak at 15, and then decrease slightly. The result
which reflects the good anomaly detection performance of our confirms the long-term time dependence modeling ability
model. of the attention mechanism.
 r The dimensionality of Z-space: When evaluating the im-
 To further explore the anomaly detection performance of our
model in the presence of noise [9], [42], [43], especially extreme pact of the dimensionality of latent representation z on
noise, we visualize some common noises, extreme noises and model performance, we fix the window size to 15, the
anomalies from our used real-world dataset SMD in Fig. 6. As attention mechanism dimension to 64, and the parameter
shown in the region (3-1) and region (3-2) of Fig. 6, the shapes of Bernoulli prior distribution to 0.1. The size of latent
of the time series deviate from the historical pattern signifi- representation z affects the representation ability of the
cantly and experience drastic fluctuations, thus being detected as latent time series representation variables. When the value
anomalies. From the region (1-1), (1-2), and (1-3) in Fig. 6, our is too small, the features of the input data cannot be learned,
model shows strong robustness against ordinary noises, which and if the value is too large, some redundant information
would not misjudge the points as anomalies. Finally, facing with may be retained. Fig. 7(b) shows that the performance
the extreme noises in region (2-1), our proposed HSTVAE also first increases and then decreases with the increase of the
classifies them as anomalies. For anomaly detection tasks, it can dimensionality of latent representation z, and reaches the
be considered reasonable because we need to recognize as many optimal performance when it is 5.
 r The dimension of attention network: When evaluating the
anomalies as possible while ensuring performance for better
maintenance decisions. This also reflects that our HSTVAE can impact of the dimension of attention network on model
achieve the best recall comparing with other baselines. performance, we fix the window size to 15, the dimensionality of latent representation z to 3, and the parameter of
 Bernoulli prior distribution to 0.1. Different dimensions
G. Parameter Analysis of attention network have various effect on the long-term
 To investigate the influence of different hyper parameters that temporal dependency modeling capability of the tempoeffect the performance of our model, we conduct experiments ral encoder. Fig. 7(c) shows that the performance of the
on following parameter variants. Especially, when analyzing model becomes better with the increase of dimensions,
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9147

 TABLE VII
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF HSTVAE ON SWAT, WADI AND SMD USING DIFFERENT EVALUATION STRATEGIES FOR ANOMALY DETECTION

Fig. 8. Training and inference time of different approaches on SWaT, WADI and SMD datasets. The unit is seconds(s). For the convenience of drawing, we use
M1-M12 to represent ”LSTM-VAE, OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN, GRELEN, GDN, GTA, DVGCRN, MTAD-GAT, LSTM-AD, HealthESN, Telemanom, HSTVAE”
in sequence.

 and reaches the optimal value at 64, and then tends to and actual anomaly set in each event. The affiliation metrics [41]
 be stable. In addition, AUC only showed slight changes consider the temporal adjacency and events durations.
 with the increase of the dimension of attention network, From Table VII, it can be seen that the point-adjust stratindicating the robustness of the model. egy [10] we adopted is most suitable for the three datasets in
 r The parameter of Bernoulli prior distribution: When eval- this paper, and our model HSTVAE also achieves good results
 uating the impact of the parameter of Bernoulli prior when using the affiliation metrics.
 distribution on model performance, we fix the window
 size to 15, the dimensionality of latent representation z I. Efficiency Analysis
 to 3, and the dimension of attention network to 64. The
 Bernoulli prior determines the sparsity of the learned graph. To analyze the efficiency of our model, we visualize the
 Fig. 7(d) shows that when the prior probability is 0.1, the training and inference time of HSTVAE and baselines. As shown
 model achieves the optimal performance. When this value in Fig. 8, the training and inference time of our HSTVAE
 is larger or smaller, the performance will decline, which is at a moderate level to show the considerable operational
 means that richer latent representations can be learned by efficiency while achieving optimal performance. Overall, the recombining appropriate neighbor information, while too construction based methods such as OmniAnomaly, MAD-GAN
 many neighbors will cause information redundancy and and GRELEN often require more training and inference time
 even introduce error information. than prediction based methods such as GDN, GTA, LSTM-AD
 and HealthESN, which may be due to their complex network
 structures designed to learn robust latent representations. In
 addition, models that consider inter sequence relationships and
H. Evaluation Strategy Analysis perform feature aggregation, such as GRELEN, may require
 more training time.
 In order to investigate the impact of different evaluation
strategies on anomaly detection results, we conduct experiments
 VI. CONCLUSION
with several common evaluation strategies [10], [39], [40], [41].
The point-wise and segment-wise methods [39] consider a time In this paper, we proposed an end-to-end hierarchical spatiopoint and a continuous anomalous period as an event to calculate temporal variational autoencoder framework, which can address
metrics, respectively. The range-based method [40] considers the temporal stochasticity and spatial stochasticity within MTS
the size and relative position of the overlap between the predicted simultaneously. We modeled the relationship between sequences
9148 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2024

as a binary random variable, and automatically learned the [16] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detection using
directed graph structure through the spatial encoder. And a GAT reconstruction probability,” Special Lecture IE, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–18,
 2015.
network was applied to combine the graph with the temporal [17] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts,
encoder to embed the highly structured input time series into “Anomaly detection for time series using VAE-LSTM hybrid model,”
latent time series representation that can capture both complex in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2020,
 pp. 4322–4326.
temporal dependencies and neighbor information. Then the re- [18] W. Li, W. Hu, T. Chen, N. Chen, and C. Feng, “StackVAE-G: An
construction decoder and forecasting decoder constructed the efficient and interpretable model for time series anomaly detection,”
historical sequence and predicted the future sequence accord- 2021, arXiv:2105.08397.
 [19] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multiing to the latent time series representation and achieved the variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial
anomaly detection through a history-future combined anomaly networks,” in Proc. 28th Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., Springer, 2019,
score mechanism. Extensive experiments on three real-world pp. 703–716.
 [20] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veeradatasets demonstrated that our method can achieve the best and machaneni, “TadGAN: Time series anomaly detection using generabalanced performance compared with other multivariate time tive adversarial networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data, 2020,
series anomaly detection approaches. We also conducted visu- pp. 33–43.
 [21] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
alization analysis and case studies to show the interpretability of attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
our framework. In the future work, we consider to adopt dynamic pp. 841–850.
threshold selection to make HSTVAE more suitable for online [22] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
real-time anomaly detection scenarios. pp. 4027–4035.
 [23] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
 Gumbel-Softmax,” 2016, arXiv:1611.01144.
 REFERENCES [24] J. Paparrizos, Y. Kang, P. Boniol, R. S. Tsay, T. Palpanas, and M.
 J. Franklin, “TSB-UAD: An end-to-end benchmark suite for univariate
 [1] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph time-series anomaly detection,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 8,
 structures with transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection pp. 1697–1711, 2022.
 in IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, Jun. 2022. [25] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
 [2] R. A. Leon, V. Vittal, and G. Manimaran, “Application of sensor network series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
 for secure electric energy infrastructure,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, 2022.
 no. 2, pp. 1021–1028, Apr. 2007. [26] N. Görnitz, M. Kloft, K. Rieck, and U. Brefeld, “Toward super-
 [3] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution vised anomaly detection,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 46, pp. 235–262,
 testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in 2013.
 Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017, [27] M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Scholkopf, “Support
 pp. 25–28. vector machines,” IEEE Intell. Syst. Appl., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 18–28,
 [4] A. A. Cook, G. Misirli, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for IoT time-series Jul./Aug. 1998.
 data: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 6481–6494, [28] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
 Jul. 2020. [29] F. Angiulli and C. Pizzuti, “Fast outlier detection in high dimensional
 [5] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for spaces,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Princ. Data Mining Knowl. Discov., T. Elomaa,
 anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD H. Mannila, and H. Toivonen, Eds.Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer, 2002,
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986. pp. 15–27.
 [6] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep variational [30] T. Yairi, Y. Kato, and K. Hori, “Fault detection by mining association
 graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time series anomaly rules from house-keeping data,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Artif. Intell. Robot.
 detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2022, pp. 3621–3633. Autom. Space, Citeseer, 2001, pp. 475–480.
 [7] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series [31] M. Hahsler and M. Bolaños, “Clustering data streams based on shared
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in density between micro-clusters,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 28,
 Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397. no. 6, pp. 1449–1461, Jun. 2016.
 [8] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soder- [32] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copulastrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric based outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. pp. 1118–1123.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. [33] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection
 [9] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int.
 in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
 pp. 120043–120065, 2021. [34] W. Qiu, Y. Wu, G. Wang, S. X. Yang, J. Bai, and J. Li, “A novel
[10] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly unsupervised anomaly detection based on robust principal component
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural classifier,” in Data Mining, Intrusion Detection, Information Assurance,
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data and Data Networks Security, vol. 6241, Bellingham, WA, USA: SPIE,
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. 2006, pp. 260–268.
[11] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector [35] P. Malhotra et al., “Long short term memory networks for anomaly
 for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” detection in time series,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw., 2015,
 IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. pp. 89–94.
[12] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation [36] Q. Chen, A. Zhang, T. Huang, Q. He, and Y. Song, “Imbalanced datasetusing hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. 27th based echo state networks for anomaly detection,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230. vol. 32, pp. 3685–3694, 2020.
[13] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” [37] D. M. Blei, A. Kucukelbir, and J. D. Mcauliffe, “Variational inference: A
 2013, arXiv:1312.6114. review for statisticians,” J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 112, no. 518, pp. 859–
[14] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder 877, 2017.
 for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., [38] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 2018, pp. 187–196. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
[15] W. Chen et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection for intricate KPIs via [39] S. Sørbø and M. Ruocco, “Navigating the metric maze: A taxonomy of
 adversarial training of VAE,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., evaluation metrics for anomaly detection in time series,” Data Mining
 2019, pp. 1891–1899. Knowl. Discov., vol. 38, pp. 1027–1068, 2024.
ZHANG et al.: RETHINKING ROBUST MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION: A HIERARCHICAL SPATIO-TEMPORAL 9149

[40] N. Tatbul, T. J. Lee, S. Zdonik, M. Alam, and J. Gottschlich, “Precision Fuzhen Zhuang received the BE degree from the
 and recall for time series,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, College of Computer Science, Chongqing University,
 pp. 1924–1934. Chongqing, China, in 2006, and the PhD degree in
[41] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time series computer science from the Institute of Computing
 anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
 Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 635–645. China, in 2011. He is currently a full professor with
[42] S. Park, M. S. Gil, H. Im, and Y. S. Moon, “Measurement noise recommen- the Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang Unidation for efficient Kalman filtering over a large amount of sensor data,” versity. He has published more than 140 papers in
 Sensors, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1168–1186, 2019. some prestigious refereed journals and conference
[43] P. Vincent, H. Larochelle, Y. Bengio, and P. A. Manzagol, “Extracting and proceedings such as Nature Communications, IEEE
 composing robust features with denoising autoencoders,” in Proc. 25th Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Helsinki, Finland, 2008, pp. 1096–1103. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
 and Learning Systems, ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data,
 ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Information Sciences,
 Neural Networks, SIGKDD, IJCAI, AAAI, TheWebConf, SIGIR, ICDE, ACM
 Xiao Zhang is now an assistant professor with the CIKM, ACM WSDM, SIAM SDM, and IEEE ICDM. His research interests
 School of Computer Science and Technology, Shan- include transfer learning, machine learning, data mining, multitask learning,
 dong University. His research interests include data knowledge graph, and recommendation systems. He is a senior member of the
 mining, multi-task learning and federated learning. CCF. He was a recipient of the Distinguished Dissertation Award of CAAI, in
 He has published more than 20 papers in the presti- 2013.
 gious refereed journals and conference proceedings,
 such as IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
 UBICOMP, ACM Multimedia, IJCAI, AAAI, ACM
 CIKM, and IEEE ICDM.

 Hui Xiong (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree in computer science from the University of
 Shuqing Xu is currently working toward the MD Minnesota. He is a chair professor, associate vice
 degree with the School of Computer Science and president (Knowledge Transfer), and the Thrust of
 Technology, Shandong University. Her research in- Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of
 terests include data mining and anomaly detection. Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China. And he
 is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and
 Technology Hong Kong SAR, China. His research
 interests span artificial intelligence, data mining, and
 mobile computing. He has served on numerous organization and program committees for conferences, including as program
 co-chair for the Industrial and Government Track for the 18th ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD),
 Program co-chair for the IEEE 2013 International Conference on Data Mining
 Huashan Chen received the BS and MS degrees from (ICDM), General co-chair for the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data
 Shandong University, and the Institute of Information Mining (ICDM), and Program co-chair of the Research Track for the 2018 ACM
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, respec- SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
 tively, and the PhD degree in computer science from He received several awards, such as the 2021 AAAI Best Paper Award and the
 the University of Texas at San Antonio, in 2021. He is 2011 IEEE ICDM Best Research Paper award. For his significant contributions
 currently a Young associate professor with the Insti- to data mining and mobile computing, he was elected as a Fellow of AAAS, in
 tute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of 2020.
 Sciences. His research interests include cybersecurity
 metrics, automated attack planning, and blockchain
 security.

 Zekai Chen received the PhD degree in computer Dongxiao Yu received the BS degree from the School
 science from George Washington University, in 2021. of Mathematics, Shandong University, in 2006, and
 He is a senior research scientist with Amazon. His the PhD degree from the Department of Computer
 research areas include foundational large language Science, The University of Hong Kong, in 2014. He
 model, multi-modal deep learning, multi-task learn- became an associate professor with the School of
 ing, and recommendation. He has published sev- Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong Unieral influential papers in top-tier conferences and versity of Science and Technology, in 2016. He is curjournals, including but not limited to AAAI, ACL, rently a professor with the School of Computer Sci-
 ICDM, CIKM, WACV, IEEE Internet of Things Jour- ence and Technology, Shandong University. His renal, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE search interests include edge intelligence, distributed
 Transactions on Computers and others. computing and data mining.