8356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 Review of Accident Detection Methods Using
 Dashcam Videos for Autonomous
 Driving Vehicles
 Arash Rocky , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Qingming Jonathan Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Wandong Zhang, Member, IEEE

 Abstract— The need for a reliable system to detect high-risk Autonomous vehicle systems rely on processing a signifiincidents in complex settings like roadways, which are infrequent cant amount of perception data to detect potentially high-risk
but potentially dangerous, has arisen due to the occurrence of situations, such as object detection, classification, and localrare hazardous events. This system would empower self-driving
cars to function autonomously over extended periods without ization. However, this data can be incomplete, uncertain,
human involvement. Among these hazardous occurrences, acci- or noisy, making it challenging to achieve early and robust
dents have received the least attention due to their rarity and detection of potential accidents. The complexity of the driving
diverse nature. Recently, dashboard cameras (dashcams) have domain–including an infinite number of unusual scenarios and
gained recognition in academic circles as a cost-effective and unseen context–adds to the difficulty of hazardous event detecaccessible solution to enhance the safety of autonomous vehicles
when handling accidents, since they are now commonly found in tion of autonomous vehicles [4], [5], [6], [7]. Furthermore, as it
most vehicles. This review presents the progression of concepts in is impractical to manually define all risky situations, a flexible
this domain, tracing its development from early ideas to cutting- framework is crucial for accommodating the ever-evolving
edge techniques. It categorizes these approaches into supervised, driving environment.
self-supervised, and unsupervised learning. Furthermore, the
review thoroughly examines evaluation criteria and available
datasets, providing a comprehensive comparison of the strengths A. Term Clarification: Difference Between Dashcam, Front
and limitations of different methods. Ultimately, the review Camera and Rear Camera
proposes potential avenues for future research in this field. A dashboard camera (commonly referred to as a dashcam),
 Index Terms— Accident detection, autonomous vehicles, deep a front camera and a rear camera are devices used for
learning, traffic anomaly detection, dashcam videos. capturing video footage, but they serve different purposes and
 are typically used in different contexts with respect to their
 I. I NTRODUCTION purpose, location, application and functionality.
 From one perspective, dashcam is specifically designed to

I N THE context of roads and transportation, human
 behaviour is crucial in ensuring road safety, but predicting
it is complicated because it is influenced by interactions with
 record video footage (such as road incidents, accidents, and
 the surrounding traffic) continuously from the perspective of
 a vehicle’s dashboard or windshield in motion. In contrast,
other road users such as vehicles and pedestrians, as well as front camera is a general term that can refer to any camera
the surrounding environment. According to statistics in [1] positioned on the front of a device or object and is not
and [2], a significant percentage of accidents are caused limited to vehicles as it can be found on various devices
by human error. Therefore, it is essential to comprehend such as smartphones, laptops and security systems. Therefore,
these interactions to facilitate the transition to Level 3+ of front camera on a smartphone can be used for selfies and
automation (classified by Society of Automotive Engineers video calls, it is used for video conferencing on a laptop,
(SAE) [3]), where autonomous vehicles (AV)s must safely and in security systems, it can capture video footage of an
control all driving functions. area for surveillance purposes. Considering the rear camera’s
 perspective, it is primarily used to assist drivers when reversing
 Manuscript received 20 May 2023; revised 21 September 2023 and
11 January 2024; accepted 12 January 2024. Date of publication 31 January
 or parking by providing a view of the area behind the vehicle
2024; date of current version 1 August 2024. This work was supported in to help the driver avoid obstacles and ensuring safety while
part by TrustCAV, a Collaborative Research and Training Experience Program backing up. These types of cameras are mainly mounted near
(CREATE) Program of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada. The Associate Editor for this article was J. Hemanth.
 the license plate or on the rear bumper and have a narrower
(Corresponding author: Qingming Jonathan Wu.) field of view.
 Arash Rocky and Qingming Jonathan Wu are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON N9B
3P4, Canada (e-mail: rocky@uwindsor.ca; jwu@uwindsor.ca).
 B. Why Using Dashcams for Accident Detection?
 Wandong Zhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer As the most risky situation for autonomous vehicles, the
Engineering, Western University, London, ON N6A 3K7, Canada (e-mail:
wzhan893@uwo.ca). detection and anticipation of accidents is still a grey area
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2024.3354852 in both industry and academics. Perhaps the biggest hurdle
 1558-0016 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8357

 objects. The extracted spatial features are subsequently fed
 into an RNN to capture temporal patterns and understand
 how these spatial features evolve over time. For instance,
 [10] used Mask R-CNN for semantic segmentation and then
 used a CNN-LSTM network to classify dangerous lane change
 detection based on the frame overlays with these masks.
 Additionally, [11] proposed a risk assessment method based
Fig. 1. Dashcams are reasonably-priced, widely accessible, easy to install, on the impact of any risky object on drivers’ behaviour. Using
occupying limited space and while they are not blocking driver’s vision, yet a cause-and-effect approach, the risk of identified objects
they record the most important moments. (Source: thinkwarestore.com and
pioneerelectronics.com).
 is assessed with a two-step framework that determines the
 reaction of the driver (effect) based on the risky object (cause).
in overcoming this issue is lack of sizeable real dataset However, unguided deep learning models can train spurious
of accidents providing information from all state-of-the-art patterns [12], and CNN models may fail to extract unobservsensors, including lidars due to high price of such sensors able contextual relations in their features, as shown by studies
and rareness nature of accidents. Having said that, dashboard of [13] and [14]. In their recent study, [15] proposes that when
cameras (dashcams), in contrary to other sensors, have become it comes to detecting high-risk incidents, such as accidents
widely available in recent years installed in almost every car or abnormalities, the primary challenges lie in addressing
(Figure 1). This unique advantage of their availability in cars the issues of imbalanced distribution and diverse anomaly
has helped dashcams to be present recording many accidental classes. As discussed in the above studies, the primary goal
scenes and their database has ever been growing. As deep of hazardous incident detection is to identify and respond to
learning models have always shown improvement by providing events that pose a threat to safety or the environment. These
larger dataset and considering the chance of sensory fusion incidents can include accidents, emergencies, or any situation
of dashcam dataset, there is no doubt that dashcam based that may lead to harm.
models will become more reliable and overall decision-making Looking from broader perspective, accident detection is a
of autonomous vehicles in accident scenarios will improve kind of anomaly detection in the context of dashcam videos
significantly. that can be applied in various domains to recognize deviations
 from regular patterns. This involves identifying comparatively
C. Challenges and Promising Future of Dashcams straightforward visual anomalies, such as abrupt movements in
 a specific area of the video frame or the presence of visual arti-
 In recent years, scholars have been working towards tackling facts or objects that were not included in the training dataset.
the problem of accidents by creating hazard-predicting tech- Contrary to that simple visual anomaly perspective, driving
niques that rely on dashboard cameras [8]. While their study scenes are considered with continuous movement, and anomacan be regarded as the fundamental framework for employing lies are frequently defined by intricate interactions among
dashcams in accident detection and anticipation, the process participants in traffic which show a significant imbalance
of identifying an accident itself proves to be exceptionally between normal driving scenes and accident scenes. To tackle
demanding due to the dynamic background [9]. This dynamic these challenges, various methods have been suggested, which
background stands in stark contrast to surveillance cameras can be categorized into three primary types: video-based,
with static backgrounds, creating complexity in distinguish- segment-based, and frame-based detection approaches.
ing between hazardous events and regular scenes. Given the
 1) Video-Based Accident Detection: In video-based
outlined problem, the objective of this paper is to aggregate
 approaches, the whole video is given as input for TAD. These
all pertinent research within the realm of traffic accident
 methods are generally divided into conventional/classical
detection (TAD) through dashcams. This paper intends to
 classifier and reconstruction error-based models. Conventional
construct a comprehensive evolutionary survey of TAD, with
 classifiers operate under the assumption that all normal
the goal of expediting research efforts aimed at surmounting
 instances belong to a single category, while reconstruction
present obstacles. The attainment of a dependable and robust
 error-based models rely on the premise that abnormal
method for dashcam-based TAD could substantially enhance
 samples will exhibit higher reconstruction errors compared
the affordability of the overall autonomous vehicle system.
 to normal samples. One-class classification, as described in
Such an achievement would mark a significant advancement
 prior works [16], [17], [18], refers to methods that construct
in the widespread manufacturing of autonomous vehicles.
 a multidimensional representation for normal data, with
 the objective of making that representation as compact as
D. Dashcam Models: From Hazardous Incident Detection to possible. During the testing phase, any data points that
General Anomaly Detection With a Focus on Accidents fall outside the learned multidimensional representation are
 Typically, dashcam models employ a hybrid deep learn- flagged as anomalous. The deficiency of such classifiers is
ing framework that merges convolutional neural networks their need to have features extracted separately [19]. To make
(CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to identify an end-to-end video-based approach, some literature came up
potential hazards in videos recorded by dashcams, serving as with reconstruction error-based models that extract a feature
a shared foundation. These methods involve parsing images map from input video and distinguish an accident/abnormal
using a CNN to extract appearance features and localizing video from a normal video based on their reconstruction
8358 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

error (large error for abnormal video and small error for dimensions but retains crucial features. This latent vector
normal video). These methods can further be divided into is then used by the decoder to produce approximate future
Generative adversarial network (GAN) based, such as [20] and images or frames. Despite its usefulness, autoencoders are
Autoencoder based networks, such as [21]. Having said that, susceptible to overfitting and the vanishing gradient problem,
in facing dashcam accident videos, which have imbalanced which are common issues in neural networks [35].
distribution and contain dynamic, complex backgrounds, On the other hand, GANs aim to generate synthetic data that
video-based approaches cannot cater to the need of TAD. closely resembles real data, achieved through a training pro-
 2) Segment-Based Accident Detection: Looking at accident cess involving adversarial learning between the generator and
detection from segment-based categories such as in [23] and discriminator. To address the issue of detecting anomalies, [36]
[24], these techniques were developed to tackle the challenge proposed a framework for predicting frames that incorporate
of imbalanced distribution in traffic accident detection using standard spatial constraints based on intensity and gradient,
a weakly-supervised framework that incorporates Multiple as well as a temporal constraint based on motion. Their criteria
Instance Learning (MIL) principles. In the segment-based for detecting anomalies are based on the consistency of the
TAD, each video is separated into clips where an anomalous optical flow between the predicted frames and the ground truth
video can have normal clips before and after the anomalous frames. Consequently, this integration of spatial and motion
clip of that video. Using class labels of anomaly and normal constraints helps distinguish anomalies from normal events
for the whole video instead of each video segment/clip, as anomalous scenes cannot become predicted based on the
in their research, authors aim to directly learn the anomaly learned pattern. Figure 2 shows a distinction between normal
score for each video segment, with the goal of reducing and anomalous scene. As discussed, even a frame prediction
the time needed for manual annotation of each segment. method is of high computational cost. Recently, state-of-the-
To implement their idea, in their study [24], first video art methods suggested object-based prediction [22] and later
segments are fed to MIL, extracting segment features, and in more complex methods, researchers have introduced object
then a 3D convolutional network is applied to them. Each and scene interaction features [37] and applied ensemble
segment receives an anomaly score from which the anomaly of methods [37], [38]. The summary of the whole TAD
segment is determined. Reference [23] developed this idea by categorization is depicted in Figure 3.
introducing the optical flow of each segment as a segment
feature and applying attention to the MIL method which
improved the overall performance. A more intricate approach E. Purpose and Contribution of This Survey
was proposed in [25], which involves a dual branch network While some studies like [39] provide a broad picture of
consisting of a spatial-temporal dynamic subnetwork and an solving the problem of risky incident detection with graphinterconnected dynamic subnetwork, both of which are trained based methods, this study tries to provide a comprehensive
using MIL techniques. While the former network is fed with evolution of literature that has led to state-of-the-art meththe video segments, the latter has the input of feature maps that ods in TAD using dashcams. Furthermore, in addition to
represent the interaction of pedestrians and the surrounding the mentioned categories of TAD–comprising video-based,
environment. More completely, [26] introduced the location segment-based, or frame-based–same as all deep learning
of the anomaly to segment-based literature. Although such subjects– according to the usage of dataset labels, methods
segment-based methods can be useful in the detection and can also be divided into supervised, unsupervised, selflocalization of TAD, they cannot deal with multiple anomalies supervised and other in-between approaches. Regardless of
in a complex scene. their approach within the label-based categories (Unsuper-
 3) Frame-Based Accident Detection: In frame-based vised, self-supervised, supervised, or any mixed versions),
approaches like [27] and [28], the current frame is constructed or content-based categories (video-based, segment-based or
using the previous frames and the anomaly is detected as frame-based methods), as they will be discussed in details
the discrepancy in reconstruction between the generated cur- in this study, all TAD methods are formed upon object
rent frame and the original frame. While such frame-based detection, object tracking and spatial-temporal features that are
approaches can accurately determine the spatial and tempo- extracted from the whole frames or objects and their motion
ral location of abnormalities, they are still time-consuming, (Figure 4).
same as video-based and segment-based methods. Frame- With the general overview of dashcams and accident detecbased methods same as video-based methods fall into two tion provided in this section, the rest of this paper tries to
main categories: Classifiers and Reconstruction Error-based discuss about strengths and weaknesses of available TAD
methods, where classifiers have been used in supervised learn- methods using dashcams in the literature that led to four
ing [15], [29]. As the dominant category in the literature of state-of-the-art methods: [22], [37], [38] all of which are
frame-based approaches, reconstruction-based methods require frame-based, error reconstruction-based models with the GAN
image or frame generation in networks, these can be broadly architecture, while the model of [15] is also considered frameclassified into two subcategories: 1) Autoencoder networks based, but classifier based method. To keep the consistency in
[30], [31], [32], [33] and 2) Generative adversarial networks this survey, the sections are provided according to chronicle
(GANs) [34]. Autoencoder networks take input frames and of publications and each section discusses the evolution of
compress them into a condensed representation, referred to methods on that category. As a result, the rest of this paper
as a “bottleneck” or latent vector, which contains fewer is organized as follows: Section II elaborate on Unsupervised
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8359

Fig. 2. This figure shows an example of how a normal scene turns into an anomalous scene. In the first sampled frame (from right) the truck is crossing the
intersection from right to left with orange direction and the car is passing in the direction of yellow arrow (TAD evaluation curve shows low values). However,
in the second sampled frame when accident has taken place although truck is still following the orange direction, the car not only has been deviated toward
red curved arrow from its yellow direction but also has been deformed (highlighted with red oval). Such deviations from normal motions and deformations
of objects’ appearance make a scene anomalous, which is reflected in the TAD curve. As can be seen in third frame, the anomaly has intensified with the
additional deviation of truck from its orange path and change of appearance in the frame with car’s part being separated in the air (TAD curve shows even
higher values). Adapted from [8] and [22].

Fig. 3. Summary of Traffic Accident Detection Methods. (It should be noted that TAD methods under “Segment-based methods” category have specifically
applied the method “MIL+3D-CNN” and they are differentiated based on the input of the method.)

video-based Traffic Accident Detection (TAD) methods [22], Then comes the discussion and comparison of the state-of-
[38] and all relevant literature. Section III discusses about the-art methods in VII, followed by discussions on future
where Self-Supervised video-based methods stem from to deal works in VIII. Finally, the conclusion of this study is delivered
with TAD [37], [40]. The supervised frame-based learning in IX. Overall, the contribution of this survey can be succinctly
methods, [15], [29], are discussed in Section IV. Next, in the V outlined in the following way:
an in-detail explanation of the available dataset is presented. 1) This paper presents the evolution of all available
Section VI provides the applied evaluation metrics in TAD. dashcam-based TAD methods in the literature
8360 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 4. The actual procedure of Traffic Accident Detection methods. Adapted from [8] and [22].

 2) All catered and applied dataset in dashcam-based TAD based on future object localization in [9] and tracking objects
 methods whether publicly available or been of limited method introduced in [41].
 access are discussed and compared in detail.
 3) Then comes the pros and cons of evaluation metrics in
 A. Fundamentals of Unsupervised TAD
 dashcam-based TAD methods.
 4) Finally, the comparison, strengths and weaknesses of The core structure of [22] relies on the foundational
 the state-of-the-art dashcam-based TAD methods and design of AnoPred [36]. AnoPred, in turn, takes advanpossible future directions are discussed, accordingly. tage of both spatial and motion constraints. Within the
 AnoPred framework, the spatial constraint emerges through an
 II. U NSUPERVISED T RAFFIC ACCIDENT D ETECTION encoder that captures both intensity (reflecting pixel likeness,
 i.e., L I nt = nor m 2 (It , Iˆt )) and gradient features (preserv-
 From a general perspective, unsupervised machine learning ing edges) from predicted and ground truth frames, i.e.,
methods are considered as those methods that during the L Grad (pixel-wise gradient(It , Iˆt )). These features are then
 P
training, the model is not given any output label. In the context measured using the l2 and l1 distance metric, respectively.
of TAD, unsupervised methods are those whose dataset videos Regarding the motion constraint, the comparison between preare not having the label “accident” or “non-accident/normal”. dicted and ground truth frames is facilitated by Flownet [42],
Going into more detail, some datasets have not just labelled i.e., L Flow = nor m 1 (Flownet(It , Iˆt )). This component
videos, but they have a reach annotation per frame, such extracts optical flow information from frames and is subject
as DoTA [38] (There is a thorough explanation of different to penalization through the Least Square GAN module (L Disc
datasets in section V). The mindset behind unsupervised Eq. 1, L Gen Eq. 2, PI is the set of patch indexes in image Iˆ(t+1)
methods of TAD is that labelling all videos/frames can be and PS is Patch Score function that produces an scalar value
so time-consuming and any method that relies on and is for each patch). As a result, the final loss function of [36] can
trained with labels would not be able to generalize well and be considered the Eq. 1 as the discriminator loss and Eq. 3 as
would not be able to detect any new accident type. With the total generator loss function. The ultimate comparison of
this perspective, researchers considered the unsupervised TAD their architectural performance is quantified using peak signalas a type of anomaly detection in which the model learns to-noise ratio (PSNR) [43].
to be trained with non-accident events and recognize any
abnormal event as an accident. However, anomaly detection L Disc (It+1 , Iˆt+1 )
has been mainly applied to surveillance camera datasets, which X 1 2 1  2
 
have a static background and applying those methods for = PS(i, j) ( I(t+1) ) − 1 + PS(i, j) ( I(t+1) )
 ˆ ˆ
 2 2
accident detection with dashcam datasets which have dynamic (i, j)∈P I
background can be challenging. To deal with this challenge, (1)
researchers of [22] tried to generalize the idea of anomaly L Gen ( Iˆt+1 )
detection in videos based on future frame prediction which X 1 2
 
was initially suggested in [36]. In fact, the accident detection = PS(i, j) ( Iˆ(t+1) ) − 1 (2)
method of [22] is a combination of anomaly detection in [36] 2
 (i, j)∈P I
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8361

L G (It , It+1 , Iˆt+1 ) accommodated the dynamic nature of dashcam video back-
 X   grounds, i.e., adapting surveillance camera anomaly detection
= λi L i (It , It+1 , Iˆt+1 )+λGen L Gen ( Iˆ(t+1) ) methods from [36] to dashcams, but also transformed the
 (i, j)∈{I nt,Grad,Flow} problem of accident detection. They shifted from a one-class
 (3) classification paradigm, which relies on meticulously labeled
 training datasets and confines anomaly identification to pre-
 To make this backbone architecture (AnoPred) adapted defined categories, to a reconstruction error-based model.
with TAD application, authors of [22] conducted a research In essence, their method focused on predicting future object
in [9] that predicts future location of vehicles in the scenes locations within the scene. If the anticipated positions of
instead of predicting the whole frame, which is computation- scene objects significantly deviated from their actual positions
ally more efficient. Delving further into the specifics, within due to abrupt changes in object speed or position, the scene
the context of [9], a combination of dense optical flow (to was considered anomalous–indicating a potential accident.
capture motion-related information) and vehicle localization To enhance the effectiveness of their approach in rapidly
(to extract alterations in appearance) is employed. This fusion moving driving contexts, they restricted predictions to objects
is utilized to predict the forthcoming positions of observed within bounding boxes (X t = [Ctx , Cty , ωt , h t ], observed
vehicles in dashcam videos. However, given that one of object’s bounding box) rather than the entire frame, also
the major challenges within the dashcam dataset involves forecasting their trajectories. Additionally, leveraging insights
obscured scene participants, an object tracking strategy known from their prior work in [9], the researchers integrated the
as DeepSort [41] is also implemented. This technique aims to movement of the camera within the ego-vehicle with the
ensure consistent optical flow in the presence of occlusions. positioning of other objects in the scene. This integration was
Indeed, in the TAD (Traffic Anomaly Detection) approach, not reflected in the anticipation of future bounding box positions
only [22] but also [37], [38], and [44] all incorporate Deep- for the current frame. Elaborating further, information from
Sort [41]. DeepSort, an extension of the Simple Online and the bounding boxes in the current frame (It ) and optical flow
Real-Time Tracking (SORT) method [45], addresses the issue data, extracted through a region-of-interest pooling (RoIPool)
of unstable identity tracking in SORT. SORT often encounters operation, were separately encoded. In other words, observed
difficulties in maintaining consistent object identities due to image evidence Ot which is a relative motion vector that is
frequent identity changes and resulting uncertainties during expanded from each bounding box (Ot = R O I Pool(It , X t )).
prolonged occlusions. In contrast, DeepSort [41] operates in The resulting hidden states were then input into a location
two phases: an offline step, where each object’s evaluation decoder to forecast the future positions of the bounding boxes.
metric is computed, and an online phase, where these metrics With this localization technique established, the researchers
guide object tracking. According to this method, if a tracked aimed to identify accidents by detecting significant deviaobject is lost or obscured, a Kalman filter predicts potential tions in the trajectories and locations of objects from their
object positions in subsequent frames within a limited time ground truth frames. While their approach seemed theoretiwindow (age) based on proximity to the lost object. If no cally sound, it encountered challenges in accurately identifying
plausible match is found, the object is considered to have accidents due to the dynamic background introduced by the
left the scene, and its track is terminated. Moreover, when ego-car. Among the three evaluation metrics proposed in
new object tracks emerge, they undergo evaluation against their approach, one particularly effective measure involved
existing tracks. Only if deemed genuinely new are they computing the maximum standard deviation (STD) across all
assigned reliable metrics; otherwise, they are removed after predicted bounding boxes for each object within a frame,
three consecutive frames. In the context of [9], the application based on its previous frames. Taking an average of these STD
of the DeepSort [41] object tracking technique on bounding values across all objects’ bounding boxes provided a means
boxes leads to the encoding of depth and distance attributes to gauge the presence of anomalies or accidents in the scene.
of vehicles from the viewpoint. Simultaneously, by encoding The summary of their method is as follows:
dense optical flow, alterations in vehicles’ dimensions, appear-
 / D
 
ance, and motion at the per-pixel level are extracted. During  initialize, if i ∈ C and i ∈
  (i)
 
decoding, temporal bounding boxes are predicted in relation T r ck[i].X t = X t , if i ∈ C and i ∈ D
to their previous frames, extrapolating their path. To account  T r ck[i].Ŷ(t−1) ,
 
  if i /
 ∈ C and i ∈ D
for the ego-vehicle’s motion in predicting future bounding and T r ck[i].Age <A
boxes, a frame-by-frame camera coordinate transformation is (4)
calculated.
 T r ck[i].Ŷt = F O L(T r ck[i].X t , Ot , E t ) (5)
 N
 1 X (i)
B. Unsupervised TAD: The Baseline F O L − Max ST D = max STDδj=1 (Ŷt,t− j ) (6)
 N {C x ,C y ,ω,h}
 i=1
 Drawing inspiration from their object localization technique outlined in [9], the researchers in [22] introduced
an unsupervised methodology for analyzing dashcam videos C. Unsupervised TAD: The State-of-the-Art
without the need for labeled data, named Future Object In a later examination by Yao et al. [38], the importance
Localization based TAD (FOL-TAD). Their approach not only of pinpointing the anomaly’s location within the frame or
8362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

identifying the involved road participants in practical driving ones by using similarity graph such as in [37] and using
assistance applications was emphasized. This was in con- them in ensemble way [37]. Due to the lack of application of
trast to earlier methods that utilized dashboard cameras [8], anomaly detection concepts in dashcam videos and even usage
[46], [47] to identify anomalous frames. In [38], researchers of unsupervised and self-supervised methods, studies of [54]
aimed to not only detect anomalous events but also localize suggested an unsupervised baseline to fill this gap. Inspired
anomalies within frames or identify anomalous road par- by their research, the initial idea of self-supervised learning in
ticipants. On one hand, prior unsupervised video anomaly Traffic Accident Detection (TAD) was first introduced in [40]
detection (VAD) methods that operated on a frame-by-frame which was then evolved into [37].
basis [36], [48], [49], [50], [51], [52] struggled to predict
or reconstruct frames from rapidly moving dashcam videos. B. Fundamentals of Self-Supervised TAD
Conversely, object-centric frame-based approaches like the one
 As the only accident detection study on trucks’ footage,
presented in [22] heavily relied on object tracking techniques
 the scholars from [54] introduced a comprehensive compito determine object motion in the scene, which still encounlation of truck dashcam videos named RetroTrucks, which
tered challenges with occlusions. In response, the researchers
 constitutes a curated dataset featuring various instances of
in [38] proposed a synthesis of their previous object-based
 both regular and accidental truck driving scenarios. They
method from [22], specifically the STD-based FOL, with
 employed two techniques, namely one-class classification
the frame-based approach of [36], which is called FOLand reconstruction-based anomaly detection, using existing
Ensemble. Their ensemble-based FOL computed an average
 static-camera datasets as well as the RetroTrucks dataset. Utianomaly score by mapping the object-based anomaly score
 lizing the Support Vector Data Description (SVDD) technique
from [22] to a pixel-level anomaly score, similar to the
 proposed by [17] and the inflated 3D convnet (I3D) introduced
approach in [36]. Furthermore, the study [38] introduced a
 by [55], they demonstrated that one-class classification strugcomprehensive traffic VAD dataset called Detection of Traffic
 gles to generalize effectively across a diverse range of normal
Anomaly (DoTA). This dataset included annotations for temscenarios, as evidenced by conventional datasets like [50]
poral, spatial, and categorical information, making it useful not
 and [56]. However, in the context of their reconstructiononly for anomaly detection but also for action recognition and
 based approach, they established an autoencoder based on
online action detection (discussed in section V). Additionally,
 the I3D architecture. An investigation into cases of failure
the researchers introduced a novel spatiotemporal evaluation
 unveiled that the reconstruction-based method outperforms the
metric for VAD, known as STAUC, which offered several
 one-class classification method in identifying anomalies that
advantages over traditional evaluation metrics (discussed in
 showcase new visual characteristics. However, sole usage of
section VI). It is worth noting that although methods in
 such a reconstruction based method is not efficient enough
unsupervised TAD are free of any accident/normal labels for
 to detect anomalies that involve complex object interactions.
frames or clips, the preprocessing step of object detection,
 Consequently, in order to enhance the detection of such
which is not considered as part of TAD methods, still use
 object-related anomalies within the scene, by drawing inspirabounding boxes’ annotation for detecting objects.
 tion from [57], the researchers introduced an additional parallel
 feature extraction process. This process incorporates region
 III. T RAFFIC ACCIDENT D ETECTION VIA proposal network (RPN) and RoIAlign modules [58], [59] to
 S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING capture these interdependencies, forming a similarity graph.
A. Unsupervised vs Self-Supervised TAD: The Difference This graph evolves over time through the utilization of a
 graph convolutional network (GCN) module. The inclusion
 Since both unsupervised and self-supervised learning are
 of this supplementary module yielded improvements in both
techniques that do not rely on labeled data, this section first
 the one-class classification and reconstruction-based methods,
starts with providing a distinguishing explanation of these two
 as demonstrated by their findings.
methods. The fundamental contrast between self-supervised
learning and unsupervised learning lies in the manner they
generate learning signals. In self-supervised learning, the C. Self-Supervised TAD: The Baseline
model generates its own signals for learning from the available Drawing inspiration from the research conducted by [36]
data, whereas unsupervised learning focuses on identifying and [34], the investigation presented in [40] introduced a
patterns or structure within data without explicit labels or self-supervised technique rooted in Generative Adversarial
guidance, such as exact location of objects, light intensity and Networks (GANs), which combines frame and object predicexact color [53]. It is important to recognize that distinguishing tion. In contrast to the approaches taken by [9] and [22], which
between these two concepts can occasionally be nuanced, and exclusively rely on object optical flow, the work of [40] took
the boundary between them might not always be precisely a progressive stride by not only considering object movements
defined. Moreover, certain techniques could belong to both based on optical flow (utilizing the Flownet 2.0 network [60]),
categories, as they utilize a blend of self-generated signals and but also by predicting object positions using spatial attributes.
unsupervised exploration of data. In the context of TAD, such These spatial features were derived through Mask-RCNN and
feature labels are extracted from appearance and motion within indexed using DeepSORT. By harnessing the spatial characterobjects’ bounding boxes and also from the whole frame. What istics of both objects and frames, the authors aimed to leverage
can make these features more reliable is to extract independent abrupt changes in the background as a meaningful cue for
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8363

accident detection. In essence, the approach proposed by [40] matrix of these features (St ) are fed as nodes to GCN to create
integrates both the global background context across frames the final VSC features (gt ) Eq. 8.
and the localized consistency in object motion and appearance.  
The ultimate goal was to identify accidents through deviations 1:Nt
 R(t+1) = Rearrange ROIAlign DCNN(X (t+1) , I(t+1) )
 
in frame predictions, object locations, and object attributes.
The effectiveness of their method was evaluated on the Honda g(t+1) = GCN(R(t+1) , S(t+1) ) (8)
Egocentric View Intersection (HEV-I) dataset as well as the
A3D dataset. 1:Nt
 where X (t+1) and I(t+1) are predicted object location and predicted frame at time (t+1). To acquire the most efficient VSC
D. Self-Supervised TAD: The State-of-the-Art features, and inspired by [36], they adapted GAN method, for
 which similar loss functions to that of Eqs. 1-3 were applied.
 Building upon their earlier research detailed in [40], Finally, accident detection in the method of [37] is fulfilled
the scholars in [37] extended their TAD model, called through an efficient fusion of these modules following by the
Self-Supervised Consistency (SSC), to encompass various smoothing filter of Savitzky-Golay filter [62].
triggers of anomalies, including anomaly in spatial change
(frame prediction), motion patterns (object detection and
trajectory), and overall scene context (spatiotemporal inter- IV. T RAFFIC ACCIDENT D ETECTION W ITH
actions between objects), which creates a multi-task model. S UPERVISED L EARNING
More precisely, the frame prediction module consists of a
pair of encoders (enc) designed to extract spatial features In this section, the methods that addressed the problem
from frames (Z t = enc(I1 , . . . , It )) and the video’s optical of accident detection by using accident annotated dataset are
flow tensor (utilizing the Flownet 2.0 [60], i.e., m 1:(t−1) = discussed. While [29] tried to deal with this problem by
enc(Flownet2(I1 , . . . , It ))). Subsequently, these two sets of calculating the movement parameters of overlapped vehicles,
features are input into a decoder (dec) to generate antic- [15] tried to provide a real-time accident detection method.
ipated future frames ( Iˆ(t+1) = dec(m t + Z t ) and m t = Although their results can be superior in comparison to
ConvL ST M(m 1:(t−1) )). In their module for predicting future unsupervised or self-supervised ones, such methods may not
object localization, the researchers in [37] adopted the princi- be the future direction of TAD due to the realistic fact
ples of the multi-object tracker DeepSort [41]. They proposed that not all videos with different types of accidents can be
an adaptation of this technique by implementing a reverse labeled. That being said, the techniques that have been used
application to address instances of incomplete or inaccurate within each method can cite some ideas to be applied to any
object detections. Subsequently, the states of the objects are unsupervised/self-supervised methods.
extracted through the utilization of the ROI pooling operator (R O I p). Ultimately, a fully-connected decoder (FC) is
employed to calculate the forthcoming positions of objects in A. Basic Supervised TAD
the next frame, Ŷ(t+1) , as follows: Establishing their supervised method on motion characteristics, researchers in [29] developed their accident detection
  
 NT  1:NT 1:N T
 + enc R O I p(m t , (X 1:t )
 
 Ŷ(t+1) = FC enc X 1:t (7) method on acceleration, trajectory and angular variation of
 cars, named Movement (motion) Parameters method. To attain
 1:Nt
In which X (1:t) are bounding boxes of N T objects in time these key variables, they employ Mask R-CNN [59] for vehicle
series frames of 1 to t. detection and employ the centroid tracking algorithm [63] to
 Furthermore, by recapping previous works, it was observed establish vehicle trajectories. According to their methodology,
that frame prediction-based TAD techniques, such as the for an accident to occur, the bounding boxes of vehicles should
approach presented in [36], can be susceptible to rapid cam- exhibit overlap and align within the same lane, which they
era movements and significant shifts in illumination during accomplish through the application of Aggarwal’s lane detecnormal driving, leading to imprecise predictions. Conversely, tion technique [64]. Subsequently, they compute the Euclidean
trajectory-based TAD methods, exemplified by [22], identify distance between centroids of vehicles in consecutive frames,
accidents through deviations in the variance of object tra- which yields the trajectory parameter. This parameter is then
jectories. Thus, To handle scenarios where accident-involved used to determine the angle of trajectories between intersecting
entities enter the scene within a very limited timeframe, vehicles, indicating an unusual angle. Moreover, by utilizing
and rendering trajectory prediction is ineffective, researchers the Lucas-Kanade method [65], they compute the pixel-based
in [37] introduced a novel visual scene context (VSC) feature speed of vehicles within the scene, consequently deriving the
as another aspect to their multi-task model of TAD. To extract absolute speed and change of acceleration for each vehicle.
VSC features, first background of object bounding boxes This information aids in identifying any abnormal change in
are removed by Deformable Convolution Neural Network acceleration. Their approach also detects anomalous trajecto-
(D-CNN) [61]. Then, ROIAlign [59] is applied to extract ries by considering the temporal angle of a vehicle’s trajectory.
objects’ features and the rearranged (transposed) of these Ultimately, an accident occurrence is determined through a
features are called embedding features (Rt ). Next, inspired weighted function that combines these three aforementioned
from the study of [54], embedding features and similarity parameters.
8364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

B. Supervised TAD: The State-of-the-Art Finally, the two resultant matrices are merged (Concat)
 As one of the state-of-the-art methods in TAD, the study into a comprehensive feature representation. With the aid
of [15] provides a real-time method that suits Vehicular of accident/non-accident labels provided (li ) in the DoTA
Ad hoc Networks (VANET) environment called Coarse-to- dataset [15], a supervised classification is executed using the
Fine clustering. Their frame-based supervised method first Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm Eq. (10).
conducts coarse detection to find all probable accident frames, S Fine = SV Mi∈Coar se Concat (Ai1 , Ai2 ), li
  
 (10)
and then, determine the actual accident frames through the
fine detection stage. In their coarse detection stage, [15]
extracts motion features using Histogram of Optical Flow V. DATASET
(HOF) features [27] using 15 consecutive frames and form a
 In this section, the evolution of dataset that has been introtemporal ordinal features of frames (V = {v1 , v2 , . . . , vm } =
 duced in the TAD literature is discussed. It is worth noting that
H O F(I1 , I2 , . . . , IT ), m = T − 15 and T refer to Total
 since all accident detection and accident anticipation methods
frames) along with their labels (L = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lm }). To preare mainly applying frame-based techniques, many of them
pare these temporal features for later clustering, they applied
 provide the number of frames instead of length of videos as the
a two-stage subnetwork neural node (SNN) structure as a
 information of each dataset video. In the upcoming discussion,
feature representation, called refinement SNN(R-SNN)([66]).
 we will explore how Figure 5 illustrates the annotation method
In its first stage (preprocessing), feature vectors of differused in the majority of publicly accessible datasets. In a
ent feature extraction methods are normalized and aligned
 general context, as it is shown in the figure 5, the difference
consecutively into a super-state vector. Next, in the second
 between datasets comes from the length of their trimmed
stage (Width-growth), first an R-SNN is initialized, and then
 clips, their before and within and after accident intervals and
additional R-SNNs are concatenated, iteratively. The origin
 most importantly their approach toward annotation. While
of SNN technique has initially emerged from Network-inin some datasets have only annotated accident objects from
network (NIN) concept of [67] in which every single node
 beginning to the end of clip, others have done the opposite by
in a hidden layer is replaced by a neural network itself, called
 just annotating frames as normal/accidental and some have
the subnetwork. This technique tries to alleviate the problem
 the annotation of both frames and objects. The amount of
of over-fitting and getting stuck in local minimums of Deep
 information that has been provided in each annotation also
Neural Networks (DNNs) models. This problem especially
 varies. In the following each of the available TAD dashcam
occurs when DNN models try to process a small-scale dataset
 dataset in the literature will be discussed in details.
which are dependent on the backpropagation (BP) learning.
Leveraging the utility of R-SNN as a feature representation
method [66], the researchers in [15] compress the temporal A. SA
attributes into a more streamlined feature matrix. This matrix As the baseline of accident anticipation and inspiring for
(AcN = R − S N N {V, L}), encompassing frame features and accident detection, [8] introduced the very first dashcam
labels, undergoes clustering through a graph-based approach dataset, namely Street Accidents (SA)– also known as Dashnamed self-representation constrained low-rank representation cam Accident Dataset (DAD). They collected a variety type
(SRLRR) [64], [68]. Subsequently, by employing the normal- of accidents from Youtube recorded in six major cities in
ized cut (Ncut) method [69], potential frames (SCoar se ) with Taiwan with quality of (1280 × 720 p in resolution). In their
accidents are identified Eq. (9). dataset, the temporal annotation in each video frame comprises type of objects, bounding box of objects and flag
  
 SCoar se = N cut a f f init y S R L R R(AcN )
  
 (9) them as accidental/non-accidental object through the course of
 time. More specifically, their annotation determines accidental
 Moving on to the fine detection phase, the process unfolds
 objects from beginning to the end of video (not the beginning
as follows: Initially, Faster-RCNN (FRCNN) [58] is applied
 and the end of accidental frames). With overall number of
to these potential frames to identify objects within each
 678 accident videos, they used less than 10% of videos for
frame. This involves utilizing both the log-likelihood of object
 training object detector. As a result, from the rest (620 videos),
detection and the regression loss pertaining to their positions in
 1,750 clips were sampled (35% accident positive), where each
the frame. Following that, in conjunction with the established
 clip consists of 100 frames (4 seconds, i.e., 25 frame per
objects in the frames, the feature vectors extracted from the
 second (fps)), and in those containing accident, clips were
final convolutional layer of Faster-RCNN are sorted in two
 trimmed to have accident at last 10 frames. Their purpose
ways: one based on their spatial placement in the frame and
 on the clip trimming approach was to apply prior frames for
the other according to the sizes of their bounding boxes, i.e.,
 obj obj accident anticipation and they further randomly divided these
{Fi−sp , Fi−sz } = F RC N N (si ∈ SCoar se ) and obj ∈ {1 : N T } clips into a quarter for testing and the rest for training.
where N T is the total detected objected in one of Coarse
Frames. These grouped feature vectors, accompanied by their
 obj B. CCD
respective bounding boxes (X i ), are individually fed into
the R-SNN framework introduced in [66], resulting in the In another accident anticipation approach, Studies of [70]
generation of efficient encoded features presented as a matrix, collected more accidental dashcam videos (in comparison to
 sp obj obj
(i.e., Ai1 = R S N N (Fi , X i ) and Ai2 = R S N N (Fisz , X i )). SA) from YouTube (1280 × 720 p in resolution) and is named
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8365

Fig. 5. First row: In SA (DAD) [8], accidental objects are flagged from beginning to the end of clip regardless of accident time, where red boxes are accidental
objects and green boxes are uninvolved objects in the scene (annotation does not include accidental frames). Second row: In CCD [70], only accidental frames
are annotated (not the accidental objects), where red boundaries are accidental frames and green boundaries are considered as normal frames. Third row: In
DADA [71], frames are annotated in the intervals of before crush-object appearance (normal scene), before accident (crush-objects in the scene), accident
interval and after accident frames (DADA has not released bounding boxes’ information. N.B., their annotation considers frames as accidental from the
appearance of collision objects in the scene, which are determined with red boundaries, while frames of before crush-object appearance and after accident are
colored with green as normal frames). Row fourth: In DoTA [38], frames are divided into before accident (labeled as normal (green border), accident interval
(red border) and after accident (green border). Based on annotator discretion frames are labeled accidental when accident is foreseeable, and bound boxes for
non-accidental objects are not provided.

Car Crash Dataset (CCD). Their temporal annotation has (14-second length) with the resolution of 1456 × 660 (30 fps).
a binary label, i.e., accidental frames are labeled 1 during According to the purpose of their research, [71] wanted to
the time interval of collision. Additionally, their annotation add additional information to dashcam dataset using driver’s
comprises the starting point of the trimmed clip in the original attention. Therefore, different from datasets like SA [8] AND
video, Youtube ID of that original video, time of recording CCD [70] that were trimming frames to assign accident
(day/night), weather condition of footage and the involvement interval within last ten frames for accident anticipation, videos
of ego-vehicle. It is worth noting that on their released catered by [71] contain before and after accident intervals
version of annotation, [70] did not provide bounding box along with the accidental interval. In contrast with [8] and [70],
information of objects in video frames. Besides, in contrary to in addition to objects’ bounding boxes in each video frame
SA [8], CCD’s annotation only determines accidental frames which are not released in their available dataset), they created
(not the accidental objects in the scene), and based on this a visualized map of crash-object locations. The term “crashreleased annotation, there is no information about objects in object” in their study is defined as object involved in accident,
the scene. In their trimmed videos with 50 frames (5 second and the accident interval in their study is started when half of
length, 10 fps), the occurrence of accident is randomly placed crash-object appears in the scene and is ended when anomaly
in last 2 seconds, generating overall 1,500 accidental video in the scene is over (normal movements of objects). According
clips, which is half of the number of normal videos and to their definition, in accidental clips, frames are flagged as
the normal videos themselves are catered from BDD100K accidental from the point that objects involve in collision
dataset [72]. Overall, the CCD comprises 4,500 video clips appear in the scene. Moreover, their spatial object annotation
in which the ratio of testing videos is a quarter of that of does not include non-accidental objects in the scene. The
training ones. DADA is categorized in 54 type of videos based on accident
 participants and they were further classified into two large
C. DADA sets, ego-car involved and ego-car uninvolved. Later, authors
 As another available dashcam dataset, authors of [71] intro- of [71] released their whole dataset in [47], where they called
duced their dataset named DADA, consisting 2,000 videos it DADA-2000.
8366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

D. CST-S3D vehicles in the scene with a continuous dynamic background.
 Recently, based on the study of [73], the DADA-2000, [71] Due to fast-paced vehicles in the scene and limited point of
and [47], has four commonly occurring mismatch annotations, view, [9] divided videos into two-second clips in which the
which consists of labeling uninvolved ego-car as involved one, location and dimensions of viewed vehicles in the second half
wrong category annotation, providing video games instead of are calculated according to assessment in first half using their
real accident clips, and annotating accident video as normal. trajectories.
Their assessment also suggests that DADA-2000 contains only
520 videos of ego-car involved and 493 videos of ego-car G. DoTA
uninvolved (overall of 1,013 annotated videos). With respect
 To address the issue of Youtube video URL lost and provide
to shortages in DADA-2000 and owing to the insight of [73]
 a richer dashcam video dataset, researchers of [22] introduced
where they suggests that safety of a vehicle stems from
 a new dataset called Detection of Traffic Anomaly (DoTA)
preventing ego-car involved incidents, [73] only re-annotates
 in [38] which is an extension to their previous dataset (A3D).
those videos of DADA-2000 where ego-car was involved.
 In comparison with older dataset, DoTA not only consists
To strengthen the safety of their model, they also consider
 of more than 3 times the number of videos with previous
near-miss incidents as accident in their re-annotation. Furthermentioned annotation information (A3D), but also provides
more, they suggested that there is no clarity to define before
 start and end of anomaly frames with labeling all frames
accident interval for ego-car involved accidents. As a result,
 (binary and with name tag), number of frames, day/night
in their re-annotation, they merged the whole time interval
 label, determining accident type (with considering ego-vehicle
of before, within and after accident intervals of DADA-2000
 involved in all categories), bounding boxes of objects and
into an incident interval and considered a two-second interval
 optical flow of the objects in each clip. Same as A3D [22],
transient period, before considering a normal time interval.
 in DoTA [38] no annotation is provided for different weather
 conditions, though dataset provides variety of the weather. All
E. A3D videos have been provided with 10 fps due to avoid repetition
 Next, in [22], AnAn Accident Detection (A3D) was intro- of information in close frames (even though original videos
duced as the very first dashcam dataset that was introduced were 30 fps). Same as DADA [71], DoTA [38], based on their
for TAD and was collected (with 10 frames per second) with provided spatio-temporal annotation, has separated the time
similar number of dashcam accident videos from Youtube intervals of videos into before accident, accident and after
to that of CCD [70] and with different number of frames accident, although they provided different preference on the
in each clip. In opposite to CCD that determines accidental beginning of accident. More precisely in DoTA [38] frames are
frames in each clip according to the interval that the collision considered accidental/anomalous when accident is inevitable
has happened, in A3D of [22], the start point of accident and ends when anomalous objects become stationary in the
interval is considered when accident is inevitable (which scene or have left the scene. While they claimed such a start
depends on three human annotators’ consensus), not when annotation is for the purpose of early accident anticipation, the
the collision takes place, and the end point is defined (same term “inevitable” makes the decision on the start of anomaly
as DADA [47], [71]) when scene is no longer anomalous arbitrary. N.B., only accidental objects are annotated.
(normal movement of objects). A3D annotation also includes
start and end times of clip from original video, original video
 H. CTA
name, labels for accidental and normal frames, whether the
ego-vehicle is involved, and whether ego-vehicle is the only Inspired by vehicles’ history report of accidents catered
vehicle involved in accident. Notably, A3D does not have by police department in [74], researchers in [75] created a
any bounding box information of vehicles. Besides, although video dataset called Causality in Traffic Accident (CTA) to
videos have been collected in different weather conditions, dif- analyze this purpose. Collecting almost 2,000 accident videos
ferent road environment (urban/countryside) and with different from Youtube (mainly dashcam footage and few surveillance
road participants, (unlike CCD [70], SA [8]) the dataset’s cameras), [75] determined shot boundaries using FFmpeg
annotation does not provide any information in this regard. (with manual justification) to label causal and effect frames.
Following the instruction suggested in their github showed More precisely, in CTA annotation, an effect’s start time is
failure to download A3D due to unavailable Youtube links. when a vehicle first experiences physical damage, and its end
 time is when there is no longer any activity related to the
 event happening to the objects involved. On the other hand,
F. HEV-I
 frames are labeled causal when any road participant shows
 Before introducing their FOL-TAD in [22], researchers of anomalous behaviour and it ends at frame when scene becomes
that study focused on considering ego-vehicle’s motion on normal, though in actual cases cause’s end frame is considered
predicting future location and dimensions of vehicles in the as beginning of effect frames.
scene [9]. In their study, a non-accidental dataset was introduced, called Honda Egocentric View-Intersection (HEV-I).
Recorded with the rate of 10 fps in San Francisco, U.S., HEV-I I. NIDB
consists of 230 videos with 1280×640 p resolution of different Instead of collecting accident footage, researchers in [76]
lengths (10)-60 seconds), and is catered for distinguishing gathered over 6,000 near-miss traffic incident database (NIDB)
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8367

from more than 100 taxis using a dashcam recording system B. Area Under ROC Curve (AUC)
that is triggered to record for 15 seconds when speed reduction Being one of the most popular evaluation metrics in the
rate, in an abrupt braking, exceeds half of gravity force anomaly detection literature, [48], [50], [77], [78], in the
equivalency. With overall of seven categories, they divided concept of VAD, after calculation of the anomaly score in each
incidents into high/low pedestrian, high/low bicycle, high/low frame of a video, the temporal concatenation of these scores
vehicle and normal clips, where normal implies none of form the Receiver Operation Characterstic (ROC) curve. Area
the mentioned incidents has happened. According to their Under Curve (AUC), in this context, determines the location of
approach, high incident is when probability of accident was possible accident through time interval. The higher the value of
high and it required serious reaction of driver, while for low AUC, the better suggested model distinguishes accident from
incidents, the scenario is opposite and system is required to non-accident/normal events.
give just an alarm.

J. STAG C. Accident Detection Rate and False Alarm Rate
 In order to evaluate and refine their Spatio-Temporal Action As a way of assessing the performance of VAD, [29]
Graph (STAG) approach, researchers in [46] created the suggested to use Accident Detection Rate (ADR) which is
Collision dataset. With average duration of 40 seconds, this the ratio of truly detected accidents to the total number of
dataset comprises ego-vehicle’s accidents (about 750 videos) accidents, i.e, ADR is actually parameter named Recall in the
and near-miss incident (60 videos) that requires evasive action literature or TPR. Additionally, they applied False Alarm Rate
of the driver to prevent a crash. The Collision dataset was (FAR) for comparison, which determines the ratio that system
collected using dashcam which was triggered with Inertial gives false alarm in comparison to total alarms that have been
Measuring Unit (IMU) and gyroscope readings, though dis- sounded. FAR is precisely FPR.
tinguishing of accident and near-miss records were fulfilled
by human annotator. To avoid duplication and examine few D. Time Metrics
shot methods, they also applied a 5 fps filter to provide a While all the state-of-the-art methods use the AUC as
low-rate dataset too. regardless of frame rate, each accidental one of their evaluation metric, the Coarse-to-Fine clustering
or near-miss video was divided into three equal segments, with approach [15] also suggested the comparison of methods with
only one segment of accidental videos being positive. regards to Number of Parameters, Training Time and Average
 Detection Time, as a way to show compliance of different
K. RetroTruck approaches to VANET environment.
 In contrary to all mentioned dashcam dataset in literature,
[54] collected more than 470 dashcam footage (25 fps) of E. Success Rate (SR) Curve
trucks with different duration (7 seconds to 2 minutes) from
 In addition to AUC, inspired by object tracking methods
YouTube, called RetroTruck. Overall, all anomalous videos
 such as [79], the study of [37] also suggested to compare
include ego-vehicle–comprising collision, near-misses, lane
 accident detection methods’ performance using Success rate
crossing incidents, rollover crashes– and they constitute less
 curve, which relies on bounding box. The overlap score,
than 50% of dataset, where only 25% of these anomalous
 denoted by S = rrtt ∩r a
 ∪ra , is defined as the ratio of the number
videos have temporal binary label (normal/anomalous) for the
 of pixels in the intersection of the tracked bounding box and
purpose of testing. Notably, although dataset is gathered from
 the ground truth bounding box to the number of pixels in
different weather and time of day, their annotation does not
 their union. The intersection and union are represented by
provide any information in this regard.
 ∩ and ∪, respectively, and | · | denotes the cardinality or
 VI. E VALUATION M ETRICS number of pixels in a region. To evaluate the performance of
 As discussed in the Future Frame Prediction II, to distin- tracking algorithms, the number of frames with overlap greater
guish an anomaly from normal event in a video, the first than the specified threshold t0 is counted over a sequence of
step is to calculate the similarity of predicted frame and frames. The success plot displays the success ratio of frames
corresponding ground truth frame using PSNR. Then, all at different thresholds ranging from 0 to 1. Assessing the
PSNR values of consecutive frames in a video are mapped to tracker’s performance based on a single success rate value
range [0, 1] (Normalization [43]), which are called anomaly at a particular threshold, such as t0 = 0.5, may not be a fair
score. All TAD methods use this anomaly score to provide complete representation. Therefore, the area under the curve
their evaluation metrics. (AUC) of each success plot is utilized to rank the tracking
 algorithms. This metric provides a comprehensive comparison
A. Qualitative Analysis of the method’s adaptability across various driving scenarios.
 As the research of [47], [71] have been conducted in
studying the driver’s attention in predicting and detection F. Average Precision (AP) and Mean Average Precision
accidents, the qualitative analysis has always been part of all (mAP)
VAD studies to give an intuitive understanding of each method To make their evaluation more complete, [37] also applied
and how their approach tries to detect accident within time Average Precision (AP) [80]. The AP (average precision) is
frame. a measure of how accurately a detection model identifies
8368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF C OMPARISON B ETWEEN A LL DASHCAM V IDEO DATASETS

accidents. It is calculated by averaging the precision scores of Curve (STAUC). By their account [38], due to being averall testing videos. Precision is the ratio of correctly identified aged score in each frame, AUC dismisses providing any
accident frames to all detected accident frames, which include information/ accuracy of accident/anomaly region localization
both true positives and false positives. The detection method on the spatial axes, which is a fundamental need to assess
determines the positive and negative labels of detected frames the performance of VAD. By comparing the corresponding
using a pre-defined threshold. In this study, frames with an score map of true positive frames by applying different VAD
occurrence degree of traffic accidents greater than 0.5 are methods, researchers of [38] showed that although AUC of
labeled as positive, and those with lower degree are labeled different methods are similar, their corresponding maps are
as negative. different, which advises that these methods’ performance are
 considered the same from AUC point of view. This cause,
G. Anomaly-to-Accident (A2A) brought them to introduce new metric, called STAUC. Inspired
 based on their temporal annotation of dataset, study of [37] by the MVTec Anomaly Detection (MVTec AD) method
introduced a metric that can be used for future accident of [81], The initial proposal was to compute a scalar known as
anticipation studies. According to their definition, a temporal the True Anomalous Region Rate (TARR), which is defined as
window called anomaly-to-accident (A2A) for each video the fraction of the anomaly score that corresponds to the union
sequence is started when the accident participant appears in of all annotated bounding boxes relative to all the pixels in the
the scene and as a result A2A can help predict accident by frame at each time frame. This scalar was intended to indicate
detecting anomalous object or behaviour before collision. the proportion of the anomaly score that is present within the
 actual anomalous region. Initially, TARR was formulated for
H. Spatial-Temporal Area Under Curve (STAUC) Metric anomaly score maps that covered an entire frame. However,
 Being critique of efficacy of AUC, the study of [38] since object-based video anomaly detection (VAD) methods
suggested a novel metric called Spatial-Temporal Area Under compute anomalies for individual objects, the concept of
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8369

TARR was extended to incorporate pseudo-anomaly score technique (This technique is not utilized in Coarse-to-Fine
maps. This was achieved by computing the anomaly score of method [15]). To alleviate the impact of TAD on unrelieach pixel as the sum of a 2D Gaussian distribution of scores able object detection and tracking situation, researchers of
that were centered at the pixel’s bounding box. Next, they unsupervised approaches tried to apply statistical operators,
defined spatio-temporal true positive rate (STTPR) which is FOL-AvgSTD and FOL-MaxSTD variations in [22] and [44]
a ratio of TARR of all true positive predictions to all ground and the FOL-Ensemble in [38] and [44], when their initial
truth positive frames. In fact, STTPR is a weighted TARR. method faced mis-label objects due to losing some normal
From the values of STTPR and false positive rate the plot of objects in the scene. On the other hand, to deal with unre-
ROC curve is formed which is called Spatial-Temporal ROC liable object detection and tracking methods, researchers in
or STROC and the area under this curve is called STAUC. self-supervised method of [37] took further steps in com-
As the final step and to make their new metric robust against parison to the unsupervised methods by using the DeepSort
anomalous region size, they suggested to use an adaptive method [41] in backward, extracting visual scene context
N% top anomalous pixels (Nadaptive %) to be used in TARR feature using GCN, make another ensemble method called
computation. This means that for each frame, N is calculated collaborative Multi-Task consistency learning, and finally
as the proportion of number of anomalous region pixels to smoothing the visual scene context scores using a Savitzkytotal number of pixels. The new metric STAUC ≤ AUC in Golay filter [62]. Despite all the measures that the study of [37]
the case that T A R Rt = 1 ∀t. The summary of all evaluation took in their approach, they still struggled with background
metrics has been provided in Table II. recognition in region of accident’s future frame prediction.
 Consequently, their method fails in case of too large or too
 VII. D ISCUSSION AND C OMPARISON small scale objects to be discovered. Their results also down
 Like every other computer vision problem, as presented perform in low intensity environments (nights). This means
in previous sections, Traffic Accident Detection (TAD) has that the additional extracted features in [37] has not actually
been dealt with supervised, unsupervised, and as a newly helped with distinguishing accidental objects from dynamic
introduced approach, self-supervised learning. Regardless of background, in comparison of [22].
the approach in each method, all TAD algorithms start with an
object detection method, followed by object tracking technique C. Supervised vs Unsupervised Methods
and, relying on them, some features are extracted to train a In terms of comparison between Supervised and Unsudeep learning model to detect an accident as an anomaly. pervised accident detection methods, the studies of [15]
 showed the superiority of supervised methods, compris-
A. Comparison of Largest Dataset: DADA and DoTA ing Coarse-to-Fine clustering [15], Fully Connected (FC)
 Looking into the fundamental details of all mentioned [44], LSTM [82], Encoder-Decoder [83] and TRN [84]
algorithms, almost every study suggested their own catered against those unsupervised counterparts such as ConvAE [49],
dataset, each of which has been collected and annotated from ConvLSTM [85], AnoPred [36], AnoPred+Mask, FOLmainstream video websites, especially Youtube, and based on AvgSTD+MarginLearning (FOL-AvgSTD+ML) and Ensemtheir approach, being annotated accordingly. As a result, any ble (all in [44]), and FOL-AvgSTD [22]. Their research
further study in this field is highly dependant on the way justified the effectiveness of methods which take advantage
annotation of dataset has been fulfilled, such as recent attempt of motion features (optical flow) in comparison of those who
of [73] where they reported wrong annotation of DADA, [71], just consider appearance features. Furthermore, they proved
and re-annotate part of it for their own research interest. the superiority of their method due to combining supervised
This means that there is a lack of comprehensive consensus learning with motion features. Lastly, [15] is the only method
and protocol in the Intelligent Transportation Systems Society which tries to provide a real-time VANET method by compar-
(ITSS) on TAD dataset annotation which will align all studies ing the time and performance with other TAD methods. With
toward complimenting previous ones. (regarding the accuracy all the strengths that have been mentioned in [15], still there
of annotation) and informative dataset with regards to its is a lack of suggestion new feature extraction methods in their
temporal, spatial, and categorical annotations of accidents for work.
frames and objects in the videos, captured from different
countries under different weather and lighting conditions, D. Overall Comparison of State-of-the-Art Methods
appears to be DoTA [38].
 By and Large, with regards to details of different methods,
 the concept of state-of-the-art self-supervised method [37] and
B. Dealing With Unreliable Object Detection and Tracking unsupervised method [38] is similar as they extract appearance
 From the object detection point of view, except the study and motion features of objects and apply some further processof [15] which used Faster-RCNN [58], all other methods [22], ing to reach their final features, which they later apply to train
[29], [37], [38], [40], [44] used Mask R-CNN [59]. This their accident detection models. By contrast, in supervised
justify the high efficacy of this object detection method. As for methods, while the approach of [29] is simplistic and cannot
the object tracking, while supervised movement parameters cover many actual accident scenarios, the VANET approach
approach [29] uses centroid tracking [63], all the methods of [15] is considered more reliable. Despite all mentioned,
of [22], [37], [38], [40], and [44] have applied DeepSort [41] what is missing in the state-of-the-art methods of TAD are
8370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

 TABLE II
 E VALUATION M ETRICS

influential features that can distinguish foreground accidental were applied, namely FC, LSTM, Encoder-Decoder, and TRN.
objects from dynamic background of the scene. The FC model is a three-layer Fully-Connected classification network, while LSTM is a one-layer LSTM to classify
E. Introducing Baseline Methods in TAD Comparison Table sequential images. As a modified version of LSTM, Encoder-
 As AUC of ROC is the most accepted evaluation metric in Decoder is a model that classify current frames in the encoder
the anomaly detection methods, and consequently in accident part while in the decoder part future classes are predicted.
detection field, and while all the state-of-the-art did not apply As another version of Encoder-Decoder, Temporal recurrent
their approach on a common dataset, the true comparison network (TRN) [88] is having a feedback of future classes
of them requires applying all to the same dataset. Having to the encoding part. In [37], another benchmark was used
said that, contemplating the methods in general, supervised for comparison with their self-supervised method, namely
methods can achieve better results due to having the label DeepMask-FP-TAD[86]. This unsupervised approach utilizes
of video frames(accident or no-accident) in comparison to a deep multi-branch mask network (DMMNet) applies fusion
unsupervised/self-supervised methods, though the unsuper- of features to effectively combine the benefits of optical flow
vised and self-supervised methods can better generalize their registering and pixel-level image synthesizing methods. This
model for any case out of their available trained dataset. results in a more flexible masking network for motion and
Therefore, to establish a robust reliable accident detection appearance fusion in video frame prediction. Specifically, the
method, due to the limitation of available dataset and since it is mask layer in each branch is employed to adaptively adjust the
unrealistic to have enough sample of each rare accident case, magnitude range of estimated optical flow and the weight of
considering that there are 18 overall classes of accident based predicted frames by optical flow registering and pixel-level
on DoTA dataset, the concentration of future research in this image synthesizing, respectively. The comparison of TAD
field would inevitably be in the unsupervised/self-supervised methods has been provided in the Table III.
direction. Since accident detection can be considered as online
binary action detection, labeled with normal and accident VIII. F UTURE D IRECTIONS
classes, according to [15], [38], and [44], some action detec- Despite the mentioned advances, there are still some shorttion methods were introduced as a supervised TAD. These comings in current methods. As explained in “Section VII -
methods include ResNet50 model [89] as their backbone Discussion and Comparison”, still state-of-the-art methods
to extract features and from there four different approaches are struggling with having a reliable object detection and
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8371

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF ACCIDENT D ETECTION M ETHODS BASED ON T YPES , I NPUTS , O BJECT D ETECTION AND T RACKING ,
 AND E VALUATION M ETRICS ON D IFFERENT DATASET

object tracking technique to build their TAD method upon methods, disunity of current state-of-the-art methods becomes
them. Besides, spatio-temporal localization of anomalies in clear with regards to different definition for annotation, credriving scenarios can be a helpful way of improving TAD. ating different dataset and consequently, providing results
Besides, future of the field of accident detection lies within the on non-unanimous dataset. Should the challenge of accident
unsupervised and self-supervised approaches. Such methods detection and consequently accident anticipation are expected
can be applied to extract the labels of videos directly from to solve, it is of utmost important to converge all research
the video scenes and makes the model independent from any of TAD by introducing related protocols within intelligent
manual labeling of video frames, whether labeling the acciden- transportation society. Such a general consensus may include
tal/normal frame or determining the bounding boxes in each but not limited to agreement on the accurate definition of
frame. Another prospect direction is TAD video generation, accident, accident interval, before and after accident interval,
which requires powerful computational system. With such which all together can determine the interval of each accident
an approach, TAD becomes independent of data collection. clip for dataset creation. What is more, as accidents are rare to
Since occlusion has been one of the main drawbacks in happen, the field of TAD deeply suffer from a comprehensive
detection of accidents, this issue should be investigated itself dataset that could provide additional information rather than
as a future direction. The real-time detection of accidents is the video footage of accident scenes. Such an extra knowledge
one of the other aspect to prepare a TAD for real scenario can be time, location (suburbs or downtown, highway or local
of autonomous vehicles. For this purpose, models can be road, traffic report of road ahead(congested, heavy traffic, light
improved to extract features on possible accident scenarios, traffic, free-flowing) and etc.
instead of continuously computation of features from objects
in the scene. Moreover, as DoTA has classified different
 IX. C ONCLUSION
accidents, a possible direction is the fusion of models each
of which is well adapted with limited number of accident This study highlights the primary challenges in accident
categories and the merged model be able to deal with different detection using dashcam videos. Firstly, because of rapid
scenarios by activating relevant sub-model. Furthermore, any motion of the ego-car, distinguishing visually reconstructed
TAD method that extracts reliable feature labels to detect current or future RGB frames from normal non-accidental
accident can be tried to predict accident too. As another future scenes, that are given to model in training, is difficult. Secdirection, understanding different actions that cause accidents ondly, all the TAD methods rely on object detection and object
can result in a reliable accident detection/prediction too. All tracking as their fundamental backbone of their algorithms and
being said, literature of accident detection and prediction still those that were applied in TAD methods still down perform in
lack a cross-modal dataset, in other words, there is not any case of occlusions and sudden appearance change of incidental
dataset that provide accidents and other sources of information objects in the scene. Thirdly, in order to apply TAD algorithms
including GPS, LiDAR, radar and connected vehicles dataset in real scenarios of autonomous vehicles, they should perform
that can help improve the performance of the models. accurately in real time which has not yet addressed in literature
 Additional to the mentioned TAD works and possible future except in the Coarse-to-Fine clustering method.
directions, based on the provided information on tables of As video processing has a high computational cost, based
measuring units, available dataset and performance of TAD on the categories provided in Figure 3, all state-of-the-art
8372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

methods tried to address TAD issue using frame-based tech- [13] S. Stabinger, D. Peer, J. Piater, and A. Rodríguez-Sánchez, “Evaluating
niques. Furthermore, based on the literature, it is clear that the progress of deep learning for visual relational concepts,” J. Vis.,
 vol. 21, no. 11, p. 8, Oct. 2021.
the problem of TAD with numerous types of accident should [14] G. Puebla and J. S. Bowers, “Can deep convolutional neural networks
be pursued with unsupervised/self-supervised methods, as it support relational reasoning in the same-different task?” J. Vis., vol. 22,
is non-pragmatic to label all TAD videos and build a model no. 10, p. 11, Sep. 2022.
 [15] Z. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Li, K. Yu, C. Ding, and Y. Yang, “Spatio-temporal
that can generalize to unseen accident types. To address some feature encoding for traffic accident detection in VANET environment,”
of these challenges, Unsupervised Future Object Localization IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19772–19781,
(FOL-TAD) was introduced a baseline for TAD where accident Oct. 2022.
 [16] S. S. Khan and M. G. Madden, “One-class classification: Taxonomy
was detected by anomaly in accuracy and consistency of of study and review of techniques,” Knowl. Eng. Rev., vol. 29, no. 3,
anticipated objects on future frames of the scene. SSC is pp. 345–374, Jun. 2014.
considered as a complimented version of that baseline by sug- [17] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
gesting a graph-based fusion of objects’ and frame’s features. [18] P. Perera and V. M. Patel, “Learning deep features for one-class classi-
To improve their initial baseline method, authors of FOL-TAD fication,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 5450–5463,
showed an improvement on their method by proposing the Nov. 2019.
 [19] D. M. J. Tax and R. P. W. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach.
FOL-Ensemble method. Laying emphasis on time efficiency Learn., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, Jan. 2004.
aspect, Coarse-to-Fine framework was introduced to address [20] P. Zheng, S. Yuan, X. Wu, J. Li, and A. Lu, “One-class adversarial nets
the real-time performance aspect of TAD. for fraud detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019,
 Finally, this study provided all available dataset and evalua- pp. 1286–1293.
 [21] M. Sabokrou, M. Khalooei, M. Fathy, and E. Adeli, “Adversarially
tion metric in the field and introduced strengths and downsides learned one-class classifier for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
of current methods and by suggesting future direction, depicted Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 3379–3388.
an overall road map for TAD. [22] Y. Yao, M. Xu, Y. Wang, D. J. Crandall, and E. M. Atkins, “Unsupervised traffic accident detection in first-person videos,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
 Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019, pp. 273–280.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [23] Y. Zhu and S. Newsam, “Motion-aware feature for improved video
 The authors would like to appreciate Dr. Sima Soltanpour anomaly detection,” 2019, arXiv:1907.10211.
 [24] W. Sultani, C. Chen, and M. Shah, “Real-world anomaly detection in
for her review and valuable feedback on this paper. surveillance videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6479–6488.
 R EFERENCES [25] S. Lin, H. Yang, X. Tang, T. Shi, and L. Chen, “Social MIL: Interactionaware for crowd anomaly detection,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv.
 [1] Road Accidents and Safety Statistics, Government United Kingdom, Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Sep. 2019, pp. 1–8.
 London, U.K., 2023. [26] F. Landi, C. G. M. Snoek, and R. Cucchiara, “Anomaly locality in video
 [2] S. Singh, “Critical reasons for crashes investigated in the national motor surveillance,” 2019, arXiv:1901.10364.
 vehicle crash causation survey,” Nat. Center Statist. Anal., New Jersey, [27] H. Zenati, C. Sheng Foo, B. Lecouat, G. Manek, and
 NJ, USA, Tech. Rep. DOT HS 812 506, 2015. [Online]. Available: V. R. Chandrasekhar, “Efficient GAN-based anomaly detection,”
 https://trid.trb.org/view/1507603 2018, arXiv:1802.06222.
 [3] On-Road Automated Vehicle Standards Committee: Taxonomy and Defi- [28] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth,
 nitions for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving and G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative
 Systems, Information Report, SAE Int., Warrendale, PA, USA, 2014. adversarial networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. 25th
 [4] J. Guo, U. Kurup, and M. Shah, “Is it safe to drive? An overview of Int. Conf. Inf. Process. Med. Imag., Boone, NC, USA. Cham,
 factors, metrics, and datasets for driveability assessment in autonomous Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 146–157. [Online]. Available: https://
 driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 3135–3151, link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-59050-9_12#citeas
 Aug. 2020. [29] D. Chand, S. Gupta, and I. Kavati, “Computer vision based accident
 [5] S. Riedmaier, T. Ponn, D. Ludwig, B. Schick, and F. Diermeyer, detection for autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE 17th India Council
 “Survey on scenario-based safety assessment of automated vehicles,” Int. Conf. (INDICON), Dec. 2020, pp. 1–6.
 IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 87456–87477, 2020. [30] Y. S. Chong and Y. H. Tay, “Abnormal event detection in videos using
 [6] E. Yurtsever, J. Lambert, A. Carballo, and K. Takeda, “A survey of spatiotemporal autoencoder,” in Proc. 14th Int. Symp. Adv. Neural Netw.,
 autonomous driving: Common practices and emerging technologies,” Hokkaido, Japan. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 189–196.
 IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58443–58469, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-
 [7] D. Xiao, W. G. Geiger, H. Y. Yatbaz, M. Dianati, and R. Woodman, 319-59081-3_23#citeas
 “Detecting hazardous events: A framework for automated vehicle safety [31] J. An and S. Cho, “Variational autoencoder based anomaly detecsystems,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), tion using reconstruction probability,” Special Lect. IE, vol. 2, no. 1,
 Oct. 2022, pp. 641–646. pp. 1–18, Dec. 2015.
 [8] F.-H. Chan, Y.-T. Chen, Y. Xiang, and M. Sun, “Anticipating accidents in [32] Y. Zhao, B. Deng, C. Shen, Y. Liu, H. Lu, and X.-S. Hua, “Spatiodashcam videos,” in Proc. 13th Asian Conf. Comput. Vis., Taipei, Taiwan. temporal autoencoder for video anomaly detection,” in Proc. 25th ACM
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 136–153. [Online]. Available: Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2017, pp. 1933–1941.
 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-54190-7_9#citeas [33] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory-
 [9] Y. Yao, M. Xu, C. Choi, D. J. Crandall, E. M. Atkins, and B. Dariush, augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 “Egocentric vision-based future vehicle localization for intelligent driv- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019,
 ing assistance systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), pp. 1705–1714.
 May 2019, pp. 9711–9717. [34] I. Goodfellow, “NIPS 2016 tutorial: Generative adversarial networks,”
[10] E. Yurtsever et al., “Risky action recognition in lane change video clips 2017, arXiv:1701.00160.
 using deep spatiotemporal networks with segmentation mask transfer,” in [35] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
 Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC), Oct. 2019, pp. 3100–3107. ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, Jul. 2009.
[11] C. Li, S. H. Chan, and Y.-T. Chen, “Who make drivers stop? Towards [36] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for
 driver-centric risk assessment: Risk object identification via causal anomaly detection—A new baseline,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 inference,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 6536–6545.
 Oct. 2020, pp. 10711–10718. [37] J. Fang, J. Qiao, J. Bai, H. Yu, and J. Xue, “Traffic accident detection via
[12] G. Plumb, M. T. Ribeiro, and A. Talwalkar, “Finding and fixing spurious self-supervised consistency learning in driving scenarios,” IEEE Trans.
 patterns with explanations,” 2021, arXiv:2106.02112. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 9601–9614, Jul. 2022.
ROCKY et al.: REVIEW OF ACCIDENT DETECTION METHODS USING DASHCAM VIDEOS 8373

[38] Y. Yao et al., “DoTA: Unsupervised detection of traffic anomaly in [63] J. C. Nascimento, A. J. Abrantes, and J. S. Marques, “An algorithm for
 driving videos,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 1, centroid-based tracking of moving objects,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 pp. 444–459, Jan. 2023. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, vol. 6, Mar. 1999, pp. 3305–3308.
[39] D. Xiao, M. Dianati, W. G. Geiger, and R. Woodman, “Review [64] P. Aggarwal, “Detecting lanes with OpenCV and testing on
 of graph-based hazardous event detection methods for autonomous Indian roads,” Medium, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016. [Online].
 driving systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 5, Available: https://medium.com/computer-car/my-lane-detection-projectpp. 4697–4715, May 2023. for-the-self-driving-car-nanodegree-by-udacity-36a230553bd3
[40] J. Qiao, J. Fang, D. Yan, and J. Xue, “Driving accident detection by [65] B. D. Lucas and T. Kanade, “An iterative image registration technique
 self-supervised adversarial appearance-motion prediction in first-person with an application to stereo vision,” in Proc. 7th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 videos,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Unmanned Syst. (ICUS), Nov. 2020, Intell., vol. 2, 1981, pp. 674–679.
 pp. 1083–1088. [66] W. Zhang, Q. M. J. Wu, Y. Yang, T. Akilan, and H. Zhang, “A width-
[41] N. Wojke, A. Bewley, and D. Paulus, “Simple online and realtime growth model with subnetwork nodes and refinement structure for
 tracking with a deep association metric,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image representation learning and image classification,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
 Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2017, pp. 3645–3649. Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1562–1572, Mar. 2021.
[42] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “FlowNet: Learning optical flow with convo- [67] Y. Yang and Q. M. J. Wu, “Features combined from hundreds of
 lutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), midlayers: Hierarchical networks with subnetwork nodes,” IEEE Trans.
 Dec. 2015, pp. 2758–2766. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3313–3325, Nov. 2019.
[43] M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun, “Deep multi-scale video [68] L. Wei, X. Wang, A. Wu, R. Zhou, and C. Zhu, “Robust subspace segprediction beyond mean square error,” 2015, arXiv:1511.05440. mentation by self-representation constrained low-rank representation,”
[44] Y. Yao, X. Wang, M. Xu, Z. Pu, E. Atkins, and D. Crandall, “When, Neural Process. Lett., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 1671–1691, Dec. 2018.
 where, and what? A new dataset for anomaly detection in driving [69] J. Shi and J. Malik, “Normalized cuts and image segmentation,”
 videos,” 2020, arXiv:2004.03044. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 888–905,
[45] A. Bewley, Z. Ge, L. Ott, F. Ramos, and B. Upcroft, “Simple online Aug. 2000.
 and realtime tracking,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image Process. (ICIP), [70] W. Bao, Q. Yu, and Y. Kong, “Uncertainty-based traffic accident
 Sep. 2016, pp. 3464–3468. anticipation with spatio-temporal relational learning,” in Proc. 28th ACM
[46] R. Herzig et al., “Spatio-temporal action graph networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2020, pp. 2682–2690.
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, [71] J. Fang, D. Yan, J. Qiao, J. Xue, H. Wang, and S. Li, “DADA-2000:
 pp. 2347–2356. Can driving accident be predicted by driver attention? Analyzed by a
[47] J. Fang, D. Yan, J. Qiao, J. Xue, and H. Yu, “DADA: Driver attention benchmark,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC), Oct. 2019,
 prediction in driving accident scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. pp. 4303–4309.
 Syst., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 4959–4971, Jun. 2022. [72] F. Yu et al., “BDD100K: A diverse driving dataset for heterogeneous
[48] C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 FPS multitask learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 in MATLAB,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Dec. 2013, Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 2636–2645.
 pp. 2720–2727. [73] H. Pradana, M.-S. Dao, and K. Zettsu, “Augmenting ego-vehicle for
[49] M. Hasan, J. Choi, J. Neumann, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, and L. S. Davis, traffic near-miss and accident classification dataset using manipulating
 “Learning temporal regularity in video sequences,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. conditional style translation,” 2023, arXiv:2301.02726.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 733–742. [74] W. G. Najm, J. D. Smith, and M. Yanagisawa, “Pre-crash scenario
 typology for crash avoidance research,” U.S. Dept. Transp.,
[50] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “A revisit of sparse coding based anomaly
 Nat. Highway Traffic Saf. Admin., Washington, DC, USA,
 detection in stacked RNN framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
 Tech. Rep. DOT HS 810 767, 2007.
 Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 341–349.
 [75] T. You and B. Han, “Traffic accident benchmark for causality recog-
[51] R. Morais, V. Le, T. Tran, B. Saha, M. Mansour, and S. Venkatesh,
 nition,” in Proc. 16th Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Glasgow, U.K.
 “Learning regularity in skeleton trajectories for anomaly detection in
 Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2020, pp. 540–556. [Online]. Available:
 videos,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-58571-6_32#citeas
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 11996–12004.
 [76] H. Kataoka, T. Suzuki, S. Oikawa, Y. Matsui, and Y. Satoh, “Drive video
[52] R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, M.-I. Georgescu, and L. Shao, “Object-centric
 analysis for the detection of traffic near-miss incidents,” in Proc. IEEE
 auto-encoders and dummy anomalies for abnormal event detection
 Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2018, pp. 3421–3428.
 in video,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. [77] W. Luo, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Remembering history with convolutional
 (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7842–7851. LSTM for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia
[53] J. Zbontar, L. Jing, I. Misra, Y. LeCun, and S. Deny, “Barlow Twins: Expo (ICME), Jul. 2017, pp. 439–444.
 Self-supervised learning via redundancy reduction,” in Proc. 38th Int. [78] V. Mahadevan, W. Li, V. Bhalodia, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly
 Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, M. Meila and T. Zhang, Eds., Jul. 2021, detection in crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput.
 pp. 12310–12320. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 1975–1981.
[54] S. Haresh, S. Kumar, M. Z. Zia, and Q.-H. Tran, “Towards anomaly [79] Y. Wu, J. Lim, and M.-H. Yang, “Online object tracking: A benchdetection in dashcam videos,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Vehicles Symp. (IV), mark,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2013,
 Oct. 2020, pp. 1407–1414. pp. 2411–2418.
[55] X. Wang, R. Girshick, A. Gupta, and K. He, “Non-local neural [80] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Jun. 2018, pp. 7794–7803. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 779–788.
[56] W. Li, V. Mahadevan, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly detection and [81] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec
 localization in crowded scenes,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., AD—A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly
 vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 18–32, Jan. 2014. detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[57] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Videos as space-time region graphs,” in Proc. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 9592–9600.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2018, pp. 399–417. [82] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
[58] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards real- Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997.
 time object detection with region proposal networks,” in Proc. Adv. [83] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 28, 2015, pp. 1–9. detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
[59] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in Proc. Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 33, 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 2961–2969. [84] M. Canizo, I. Triguero, A. Conde, and E. Onieva, “Multi-head CNN-
[60] E. Ilg, N. Mayer, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox, RNN for multi-time series anomaly detection: An industrial case study,”
 “FlowNet 2.0: Evolution of optical flow estimation with deep networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 363, pp. 246–260, Oct. 2019.
 in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, [85] J. R. Medel and A. Savakis, “Anomaly detection in video using
 pp. 2462–2470. predictive convolutional long short-term memory networks,” 2016,
[61] J. Dai et al., “Deformable convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. arXiv:1612.00390.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 764–773. [86] S. Li, J. Fang, H. Xu, and J. Xue, “Video frame prediction by deep
[62] R. W. Schafer, “What is a Savitzky–Golay filter? [Lecture notes],” IEEE multi-branch mask network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol.,
 Signal Process. Mag., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 111–117, Jul. 2011. vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 1283–1295, Apr. 2021.
8374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

[87] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder– Qingming Jonathan Wu (Senior Member, IEEE)
 decoder for statistical machine translation,” 2014, arXiv:1406.1078. received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineer-
[88] M. Xu, M. Gao, Y.-T. Chen, L. Davis, and D. Crandall, “Temporal ing from the University of Wales, Swansea, U.K.,
 recurrent networks for online action detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. in 1990.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 5532–5541. In 1995, he joined the National Research Council
[89] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for of Canada, Vancouver, Canada, where he became
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. a Senior Research Officer and the Group Leader.
 (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778. He is currently a Professor with the Department of
 Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
 Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada. He has authored
 or coauthored more than 300 peer-reviewed articles
 in computer vision, image processing, intelligent systems, robotics, and
 integrated microsystems. His current research interests include 3-D computer
 vision, active video object tracking and extraction, interactive multimedia,
 sensor analysis and fusion, and visual sensor networks.
 Dr. Wu is a fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering. He holds
 the Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in automotive sensors and information
 systems. He is an Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBER -
 NETICS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO
 T ECHNOLOGY, Cognitive Computation, and Neurocomputing. He has served
 on technical program committees and international advisory committees for
 many prestigious conferences.

 Wandong Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical
 and Computer Engineering, University of Windsor,
 Windsor, ON, Canada, in 2022.
 Arash Rocky (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) He was a Visiting Master Student with the Univerreceived the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electri- sity of Windsor in 2017 and a Visiting Ph.D. Student
 cal engineering-electronics from the Department of with Lakehead University from 2020 to 2021.
 Electrical Engineering, Shahid Chamran Univer- He is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with the
 sity, Ahvaz, Iran, in 2009 and 2013, respectively. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
 He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Western University. His current research interests
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineer- include feature learning and representation, deep
 ing, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, Canada. neural networks as well as their applications on computer vision, radar image
 His current research interests include image and processing, and remote signal processing.
 video processing, autonomous vehicles, deep neu- Dr. Zhang received the Premium Award for Best Paper in Cognitive
 ral networks, and their applications on computer Computation and Systems in 2022. He is a reviewer of IEEE T RANSACTIONS
vision. He serves as a reviewer for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS ON C YBERNETICS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NDUSTRIAL I NFORMATICS ,
AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOLOGY and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND S YSTEMS FOR V IDEO T ECHNOL -
C YBERNETICS. OGY , and Neurocomputing.