IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024 5895

 RFG-HELAD: A Robust Fine-Grained Network
 Traffic Anomaly Detection Model Based on
 Heterogeneous Ensemble Learning
 Ying Zhong , Zhiliang Wang , Xingang Shi , Member, IEEE, Jiahai Yang , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Keqin Li , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract— Fine-grained attack detection is an important net- I. I NTRODUCTION
work security task. A large number of machine learning/deep
learning(ML/DL) based algorithms have been proposed. However, attacks not present in the training set pose a challenge
to the model (open-set problem). Further, ML/DL based models
 T HE continuous upgrading of network technologies and the
 increasing size of networks are bringing new challenges
 to cybersecurity. Network traffic anomalies can lead to reduced
face the problem of adversarial attacks. Despite the large amount network performance or complete unavailability. The more
of work attempting to address these problems, there are still common network anomalies are mainly generated by network
some challenges as follows. First, the open-set problem in fine- packets or flows with malicious attacks. For example, scanning
grained attack detection is difficult to solve because there is no attacks, botnets, Denial of Service (DoS) attacks, Distributed
effective representation of the distribution of unknown attacks. Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks etc. Also, network miscon-
Second, in the open set environment, how the fine-grained attack figurations and sudden outages can cause network anomalies.
detection model resists the adversarial attack is a more difficult Another aspect that we need to focus on is unknown attacks.
problem. For example, the presence of unknown attacks poses a
 According to CrowdStrike’s cybersecurity analysis,1 the scale
challenge for adversarial defense. For these reasons, we propose
the RFG-HELAD model, which consists of a K classification of network attacks is expanding significantly, and the types
model based on deep neural network (DNN) with contrastive of zero-day attacks are increasing. A zero-day attack is an
learning (CL), and a K + 1 classification model combining a attack in which an undiscovered or undisclosed vulnerability is
generative adversarial networks (GAN) with two discriminators exploited to gain illegal access to the target system or network.
and deep k-nearest neighbors (Deep kNN). Among them, Deep Effective network anomaly detection becomes more important,
kNN uses latent features from GAN and contrastive learning which means that anomaly detection algorithms can quickly
as input, which is essentially a distance-based out-of-distribution distinguish not only known attacks, but also unknown attacks,
detection algorithm used to determine unknown attacks. The thus providing a strong guarantee for network security and
large category of unknown attacks has been added to the K network availability.
classification, so it is a K + 1 classification. To further improve
 The first intrusion detection system (IDS) was proposed for
the robustness of the RFG-HELAD model, we perform Fourier
transform as well as feature fusion on the features, and also detecting host attacks [1]. It was able to detect intrusions,
conduct adversarial training on the K classification model. infiltrations, and other forms of computer misuse. Subse-
Generative adversarial training of our GAN model can implicitly quently, considerable progress was made in intrusion detection
defend against adversarial attack. Experiments show that our models, and rule matching based intrusion detection algomodel is superior to other state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in the rithms were proposed. Representative works are Snort [2] and
presence of unknown attacks as well as under adversarial attacks. Suricata [3], which cannot detect attacks outside the scope of
Especially, our model improves the accuracy by at least 18.7%
over the corresponding SOTA model with adversarial defense.
 application of the rules. To keep up with the rapidly evolving
Further, we discuss the grounded deployment of the model and technology, machine learning/deep learning based anomaly
demonstrate its feasibility. detection models are flourishing [4], [54]. However, because
 the problem of network traffic anomaly detection itself is
 Index Terms— Network anomaly detection, adversarial attack,
 very complex, there are many assumptions that are not close
unknown attack detection, ensemble learning, fine-grained attack
detection. to reality [5]. For example, fine-grained anomaly detection
 model ACID (adaptive clustering based intrusion detection)
 Manuscript received 1 September 2023; revised 30 March 2024; does not consider how to deal with unknown attacks [19].
accepted 22 April 2024. Date of publication 17 May 2024; date of current
version 31 May 2024. This work was supported by the National Key Research
 Fine-grained means that the attacks are classified at a more
and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFB3102902. The precise level, which corresponds to multiclassification. Most
associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approv- algorithms [8], [9], [10], [11] perform binary classification,
ing it for publication was Prof. George Loukas. (Corresponding author: which cannot efficiently complete attack classification and
Zhiliang Wang.)
 Ying Zhong, Zhiliang Wang, Xingang Shi, and Jiahai Yang are with
 determination. In contrast, fine-grained attack classification
the Institute for Network Sciences and Cyberspace, Tsinghua Uni- can provide enough diagnostic information to effectively guide
versity, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: zhongy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; security experts in addressing threats. In real-world network
wzl@cernet.edu.cn). attack environments, fine-grained attack detection is an open
 Keqin Li is with the Department of Computer Science, The State University set problem and new attacks continue to emerge. Open-set
of New York, New Paltz, NY 12561 USA (e-mail: lik@newpaltz.edu).
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at problem means that the identification in the real world is open
https://doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402439, provided by the authors.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2024.3402439 1 https://www.crowdstrike.com/global-threat-report/, 2023.

 1556-6021 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

set, i.e. the identification system should reject unknown/unseen Based on the above challenges, we propose the
categories when testing [25]. This means that the attacks seen RFG-HELAD model (A Robust Fine-Grained Network
in the tests may not have been present in the training. Exist- Traffic Anomaly Detection Model Based on Heterogeneous
ing fine-grained attack detection algorithms that can detect Ensemble Learning). To cope with the open-set problem under
unknown attacks are constantly being proposed [21], [22], fine-grained attacks, we propose the RFG-HELAD* model,
[29], but the following challenges still exist. which covers both K classification model detection and
 • The open-set problem in fine-grained attack detection K + 1 classification model detection. To ensure the detection
is difficult to solve because there is no effective repre- effect, we customize a fine-grained K classification detection
sentation of the distribution of unknown attacks. Effective framework. This framework consists of optimal features for
representation means that the distributions of the training and different scenarios, normalization, DNN for matching with
test sets do not mismatch [56]. Known attack distributions are traffic, and contrastive learning. The corresponding techniques
relatively easy to learn through the training set. Therefore, inside this framework can all be replaced to improve the
existing algorithms for solving this problem are unsatisfactory detection results. We propose a K + 1 classification model
due to the inability to capture the distribution of unknown for unknown attack detection. The model contains two
attacks more accurately. components, GAN with two discriminators and DNN with
 (1) Unknown class detection models based on restricted contrastive learning [34]. Designed based on DCGAN [6],
scenarios. For example, AutoIoT [29] and DeviceMien [57] GAN with two discriminators possesses the ability to
use Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and probabilistic framework, recognize potential unknown attacks, which we call RPGAN.
respectively, to detect unknown IoT devices. However, these The hidden features of the two components are fused and then
customized methods are not applicable to unknown attack the results are fed into Deep kNN for decision making on
detection. unknown attacks. In the modeling, Deep kNN is innovatively
 (2) Distance-based unknown attack detection model. For used as a heterogeneous ensemble learning approach. This
example, KCC [30] uses negative samples to assist in deter- effectively pulls apart the distribution of known and unknown
mining the boundaries of known categories and discriminates attacks, as well as dynamically learns the distribution of
unknown attacks by the distance between the test sample and potential unknown attacks, which in turn ensures accurate
the center of the known category. The introduced negative localization of unknown attacks.
samples do not represent the distribution of unknown attacks Specifically, for known attacks, contrastive learning
and are not effective for detection. Moreover, it has side effects increases the distance between attack categories and decreases
in some network environments. The fundamental reason is that the distance within attack categories. That is, each attack
this type of work does not distance the unknown attacks from category forms its own cluster that is constantly close to
the known ones. each other. Unknown attacks are not essentially in the same
 (3) Unknown attack detection models based on extreme category as all other known attacks. The proximity movement
value theory. For example, CVAE-EVT [21] and OpenIDS [31] within the known attack categories indirectly increases the
use extreme value theory to determine unknown attacks. When distance between the distributions of known and unknown
the real unknown attack distribution only partially conforms to attacks. And, RPGAN (GAN with two discriminators) can
the extreme value theory, the improvement in the detection of reduce the KL divergence and inverse KL divergence between
unknown attacks will be insignificant (compared to the model the real data distribution and the data distribution generated
without unknown attack processing module). by the generator, thus effectively enhancing the generalization
 performance of the GAN model. RPGAN treats the known
 • In the open set environment, how the fine-grained categories (known attacks + benign traffic) in the network
attack detection model resists the adversarial attack is a traffic as one macroscopic category, and the distribution of
more difficult problem. At present, there is no corresponding unknown attacks learned with generative adversarial training
research work to solve this problem. as another macroscopic category. With this generative adver-
 (1) The presence of unknown attacks poses a challenge sarial training, the distance between the distributions of the
for adversarial defense. In an open-set environment, unknown two macroscopic categories is further increased in order to
attacks exist only in the detection phase, which is not present better discriminate the unknown attacks. The determination
in the training phase. This leads to drawbacks of directly of the unknown attack distribution requires the participation
using traditional adversarial defense methods like adversarial of known attacks in the training, which also shows that our
training. For example, the detection model after adversarial algorithm has the ability of dynamic learning. The potential
training may not be able to recognize unknown attacks with unknown attack distribution can be determined based on the
perturbations. Further, due to the diversity of perturbations, corresponding known attack network environment.
there exist some special perturbations that can misclassify To address the problem of fine-grained attack detection
known attacks to unknown attacks [15]. models against adversarial attacks in an open-set environ-
 (2) Adversarial defense strategies impact the detection ment, we propose a comprehensive hierarchical progressive
effectiveness of fine-grained attack detection models, which adversarial defense strategy (CHPDD). In the known attack
poses design challenges. First, known attacks face the defense part, we organically combine several defense strategies
dilemma of compromising between defense effectiveness in the order of the data processing flow. Specifically, Fourier
and detection accuracy [59]. Then, the implementation of transform enhances the difference after perturbation at the
fine-grained detection models for adversarial defense in feature level. Hidden space compression (a manifestation of
open-set environments needs to be considered holistically. the efficacy of contrastive learning in adversarial defense)
This should consider not only the effectiveness of the defense, reduces the space that can be perturbed at the distribution
but also the impact of the defense strategy on the effectiveness level after the feature form is determined [14]. Adversarial
of unknown attack detection. training is the perturbation of the determined features to train
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5897

 TABLE I
 D ETAILED C OMPARISON OF E XISTING N ETWORK A NOMALY D ETECTION ALGORITHMS

the model and enhance the robustness of the model. These the accuracy by at least 18.7% over the corresponding
are combined in a logical sequence from raw data, data SOTA model with adversarial defense. Meanwhile, our
distribution, and model training. The intrinsic connection is RFG-HELAD model has good generalization.
that the processing of the hidden space compression takes • Complete fine-grained attack detection system and
into account the changes in the distribution due to the Fourier open source.2 We implement an open source fine-grained
transform. Adversarial training also perturbs the features of attack detection system and discuss the grounded
the Fourier transform. These are essentially to reduce the deployment of the model and demonstrate its feasibility.
likelihood that the perturbations will cause the classifier to The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We summarize
misclassify samples. Regarding the unknown attack defense, the related work in Section II and provide background and
in order to incorporate all the defense properties of the defense problem scope in Section III. Section IV introduces our
part of the known attack, we ensemble the hidden layer RFG-HELAD model. Experimental evaluations and analyses
output of the K classification model in the final judgment are shown in Section V. In Section VI, we first discuss
of the unknown attack. Further, the generative adversarial model-related issues, followed by limitations and future work.
training of our RPGAN model has been able to implicitly Section VII concludes our work.
defend against adversarial attacks while addressing the problem of recognizing unknown attacks with perturbations. This
is because the ideal generator naturally spoofs the discrimi- II. R ELATED W ORK
nator, which makes the discriminator robust to this spoofing With the development of network technology, network
(covering the effect of perturbation). Finally, the design of traffic is increasing. The packets reached per second are
adversarial defense strategies can be complemented with the gigantic [7]. To process this data quickly, network packet
RFG-HELAD* model. That is, RFG-HELAD* and CHPDD header-based or flow-based anomaly detection models are
together form the RFG-HELAD model. constantly evolving. Among them, machine learning and deep
 The contribution of our paper is summarized as follows. learning based models are dominant. These intrusion detection models can be classified as binary [8], [9], [10], [11],
 • Novel fine-grained network traffic attack detection [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] or multi-classified
 with adversarial defense for open set environments. (fine-grained anomaly detection) [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]
 We propose the RFG-HELAD model, which is formed according to the class of classification. The main idea of binary
 by unknown attack detection module RFG-HELAD* classification attack detection models (e.g., HELAD [9]) is to
 and adversarial defense strategy CHPDD. To the best of construct a model of normal traffic and to treat any traffic
 our knowledge, this is the first attempt to fuse multiple that deviates from the normal model as an attack during the
 machine learning/deep learning models (DNN, GAN detection phase. Multi-classification attack detection models
 with two discriminators, Deep kNN, contrastive learning) (e.g., our RFG-HELAD) are to learn the distribution of each
 into a single framework in a heterogeneous ensemble attack category that can be recognized in the detection phase.
 learning manner to address the problem of co-existing These two types of work address different issues. We present a
 unknown and adversarial attacks in fine-grained attack systematic summary of recent work on ML/DL-based network
 detection scenarios. anomaly detection. TABLE I shows detailed comparison of
 • Multi-aspects high detection performance. We test our
 existing network anomaly detection algorithms. We compare
 model on several data sets (UKM [43], NSLKDD [44], anomaly detection models in terms of several properties.
 Kitsune [8]). Experiments show that our model performs For example, whether this is a fine-grained attack detection
 better than SOTA K classification models (FARE [20], algorithm or whether this algorithm handles the open set
 CADE [24], ACID [19], SCADA [13], DNN-kNN [12]) problem. It can be seen that for the SCADA algorithm [13],
 and K + 1 classification models (scalable-NIDS [22], the fine-grained property is no(*). This indicates that this
 CVAE-EVT [21]), and also has good adversarial robust- algorithm is not a fine-grained algorithm in the original paper,
 ness. In fine-grained attack detection scenarios with both
 unknown and adversarial attacks, our model improves 2 https://github.com/RFG-HELAD/RFG-HELAD
5898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

but can be modified with the final output layer to achieve
fine-grained attack detection. Specifically, we present related
work on unknown attack detection and adversarial attack and
defense in intrusion detection.

A. Unknown Attack Detection
 The importance of unknown attack detection is being continuously demonstrated. Therefore, a large amount of work Fig. 1. Flow chart of our research scope on intrusion detection models.
has emerged. We highlight the following algorithms [21],
[22], [23], [24], [29], [30], [31], [52], [53]. Openmax [23] III. BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S COPE
overcomes the limitations of softmax and enables the neural
network to detect unknown attacks. Reference [22] proposed In this section, we first define the problem. Then we describe
Open Set Classification Network (OCN) to detect unknown our motivation for using ensemble learning.
attacks, OCN is based on convolutional neural network with
nearest class average (NCM) classifier. It is designed with two A. Problem Definition
new losses to jointly optimize it, including Fisher loss and
maximum mean difference (MMD). Reference [21] combined We know that cyber attacks are complex, and new attacks
the fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection problem are constantly emerging. Therefore, our model should be
as a two-stage minimization problem. The first phase is to constantly iteratively updated. It is not known how many
seek a scoring criterion that minimizes the empirical risk of unknown attacks there are in the actual scenario. Since the
misclassification of known attacks. The second phase is to classifier cannot complete the classification of uncertain catfind another scoring criterion to minimize the identification egories, we temporarily treat all unknown attack categories
risk of inferring an unknown attack. In the second stage reached in the specified time period in our model as one
extreme value theory is further used to build model the distri- new attack major category. This new attack major category
bution of reconstruction errors to distinguish unknown attacks. is then given to the network security administrator to analyse
Reference [29] proposed a novel IoT device identification and give fine-grained labels. These new fine-grained labelled
model named AutoIoT, which updates itself automatically data sets are used to update model. There may be multiwhen new types of devices are plugged in. Their unknown ple unknown attacks arriving in a time period. Once it is
attack detection algorithm is mainly based on KS testing. This discovered that our model detects an unknown attack, a finemodel is customized for iot traffic data. The disadvantage grained labeling process is required by the network security
of these methods is that they cannot accurately capture the administrator. This one or more new attacks are then added to
distribution of unknown attacks. the retraining. This process is repeated over time. Meanwhile,
 our fine-grained attack detection models are developed based
B. Adversarial Attack and Defense in Intrusion Detection on deep learning and will face the problem of adversarial
 attacks. Based on the above analysis, our research problem
 Similar to us, these works [58], [59], [60] also study is defined as shown below. our goal is to achieve accurate
anomaly detection as well as adversarial related theories (e.g. classification of known attacks, detection of one new attack
GAN, game theory) and address specific problems in each major category, and defence against adversarial attacks within
subfield separately. The difference between our paper and specified time period. The fine-grained labelling of unknown
these works is that we focus on how to effectively defend attacks is outside the scope of our study.
against adversarial attacks in network traffic anomaly detec- To facilitate the evaluation of the model’s performance,
tion. The problem of adversarial attacks in the IDS domain has network traffic from the specified time periods were selected
received much attention in recent years [32]. We present sev- for the experiments. We divide the network traffic collected
eral more representative works. Reference [33] systematically during this time period into two data sets in chronological
evaluated ML-based NIDS for adversarial robustness, which order. The former is treated as training set after experimental
can better provide analytical guidance for our real defense setup, and the latter is treated as test set directly. Specifically,
model. Reference [16] presented Whisper, an ML-based real- we assume that there are (K − 1) classes of known attacks
time malicious traffic detection system that achieves high and benign traffic in the training set and K − 1 + L kinds of
accuracy and high throughput by exploiting frequency domain attacks and benign traffic in the test set (K ≥ 1 and L ≥ 0).
features. In particular, attackers cannot easily interfere with Our goal is to accurately identify K known classes including
the frequency domain features, and thus Whisper is robust to attacks and benign traffic, as well as to identify all L species as
various evasive attacks. Reference [18] investigated an attack unknown attacks denoting as (K + 1)th class, and to be able
detection method based on simple and lightweight neural to defend against adversarial attacks. Fig. 1 shows the flow
networks and using frequency domain features to enhance chart of our research scope on intrusion detection models.
robustness. All of these adversarial defence methods are done
based on binary classification algorithms and fine-grained
adversarial defense needs to be considered. Further, fine- B. Motivation
grained adversarial defense work in open-set environments is Our core idea is to ensemble DNN with contrastive learning
not yet available. and GAN model with two discriminators using Deep kNN as
 Based on the above analysis, we would like to propose a heterogeneous ensemble method. We state the motivation of
a new robust fine-grained anomaly detection model based this idea in the perspective of solving challenges. Fig. 2 shows
on ensemble learning [46]. This model can detect unknown correspondence diagram between motivations and system
attacks, as well as defend against possible adversarial attacks. components. We show the linkages at the macro level through
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5899

the four modules (feature processing module, attack distribution learning module, unknown attack localization module,
adversarial defense module). It can be seen that the modules
are interconnected and support each other. To better understand
the motivation part, we introduce expressions like Part 1. For
example, Part 1 belongs to the known attack distribution learning in the attack distribution learning module, which needs
to be realized by the DNN+CL components in our model.
DNN+CL is used for known attack classification which is
composed of DNN and contrastive learning. The robustness of
the DNN+CL component needs to be supported by the hidden
space compression (another function of contrastive learning)
and adversarial training in Part 4. The relationship between
other modules can be analyzed similarly. The detailed linkages
can be seen in the following specific analysis.
 (1) The motivation to address challenge 1 is analyzed as
follows. 1) Closed set detection is the basis of open set detection. The basic detection process for closed sets is as follows.
The first step is feature extraction followed by normalization.
Then a classifier needs to be selected. For classification tasks,
representation learning can optimize the performance of the
classifier. We select the contrastive learning in representation
learning. In order to ensure the detection effect, we need to
customize a fine-grained K classification detection framework, Fig. 2. Correspondence diagram between motivations and system compowhich consists of optimal features for different scenarios, nents.
normalization, DNN for matching with network traffic, and
contrastive learning. The optimal features can be selected known attacks. This part learns the distribution of potentially
according to the scenario. We illustrate the advantages of unknown attacks in RPGAN during the generative adversarial
our framework using basic DNN models suitable for net- training process. The learned distribution is based on known
work traffic. Obviously, other better classifiers can be chosen. attacks, so it is characterized as an existential possibility and
Contrastive learning can distance different classes and further has limited representational capabilities. (Part 2)
reduce misclassification. This combination improves the gener- 3) After learning the distributions of known and unknown
alization of the model at three levels: raw data representation, attacks, a rational decision of unknown attacks is needed.
distribution shift, and the degree of matching between the The distributions of known and unknown attacks from the
model and the data distribution. Also, the three parts of the Part 1 and Part 2 are combined into a new feature, and then
combination are convenient to extend to adversarial defense. the Deep kNN distance algorithm is used to determine the
This part learns the optimal K classification (known attack unknown attacks. We can view this combination of features
detection) and the distribution of known attacks. (Part 1) from two perspectives. First, with features representing the
 2) The open-set problem in fine-grained attack detection is distribution of known attacks, the model is less likely to
difficult to solve because there is no effective representation misclassify known attacks as unknown attacks. Second, with
of the distribution of unknown attacks. Inspired by open- features that represent the distribution of unknown attacks,
GAN [37], which uses primitive GAN networks to augment it is less likely to allow unknown attacks to be misclassified
unknown categories, we propose RPGAN (or GAN with as known attacks. This part can accurately localize unknown
two discriminators) to dynamically learn the distribution of attacks (unknown attack detection) based on ensuring the
potential unknown attacks. Unlike openGAN, we do not need effectiveness of known attack detection. (Part 3)
to have a small number of unknown categories in training (2) The motivation to address challenge 2 is analyzed as
because of the inaccessibility of unknown attacks in real follows. 1) To address the impact of defense strategies on
scenarios. Motivated by D2GAN [36], RPGAN adds a dis- attack detection, we adopt a complementary philosophy. First,
criminator that uses the inverse KL divergence to compute the we try to choose components that both improve detection
loss on top of the original discriminator, which can rationally performance and enhance robustness. For example, contrastive
utilize the complementary statistical properties of the two learning can both improve the detection effect and reduce the
discriminators. The use of two discriminators increases the perturbed space. RPGAN can both learn the distribution of
diversity of the learned distributions and in turn improves the potential unknown attacks and defend against unknown attack
generalization performance. The generalization performance perturbations. Second, the defense is strengthened according
refers to the fact that the model obtained from the training to each part of the optimal detection process, which makes our
samples can also be well adapted to the testing samples. defense more comprehensive. Specifically, Fourier transform,
Enhancing the generalization performance of the GAN model hidden space compression (contrastive learning), adversarial
implies that the GAN-based latent layer features have general- training are all expanded from the three aspects of the attack
ization, which means that Deep kNN using latent layer features detection process for Part 1. (Part 4)
also enhances the generalization when deciding unknown 2) To address the challenges posed by the emergence of
attacks, thus improving the detection of unknown attacks. unknown attacks to the adversarial defense, we have to fully
Further, as we mentioned earlier, the RPGAN model has the incorporate all the defense properties of the known attack part
ability to learn dynamic unknown attack distributions based on as well as the advantages of coping with perturbations in the
5900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

training of the GAN network itself (adversarial training of final features directly because it can represent flow data more
generator and discriminator). (Part 5) efficiently. In summary, if there is a better feature extraction
 (3) To summarize, Part 1 and Part 3 together are fine-grained method based on flow and pcap, it can also be incorporated
attack detection for open-set environments. Our ensemble into our feature extraction framework: excellent feature extraclearning model can better detect unknown attacks on the basis tion method + normalization. The feature extraction method
of good detection of known attacks. Meanwhile, the compo- can be left empty. After processing in our feature extraction
nents inside the ensemble learning model can be extended to framework, it can fit well with our DNN+CL model.
adversarial defense more easily, which meets the demand of 2) DNN+CL (Evolving DNN+Class Distribution Optimizafine-grained attack detection model against adversarial attacks tion Techniques): In this part, we introduce combination
in open-set environments. Therefore, it is sensible to ensemble evolving DNN+CLass distribution optimisation techniques.
DNN with contrastive learning and GAN model with two To demonstrate the superiority of this combination, we choose
discriminators using Deep kNN as a heterogeneous ensemble a simple DNN as K classification model, and contrastive
method to design robust fine-grained attack detection models. learning as class distribution optimisation techniques. The
 simplest DNN is chosen because it is a better match to the
 IV. RFG-HELAD M ODEL traffic (Details can be found in the Part 8 of Appendix.).
 CL method is recognized as a method that can improve the
 In this section, we first explain the systematic structure of classification effect, which could increase the distance between
our model. Then, we specify the details of the model. classes and decrease the distance within classes. We describe
 the combination DNN+CL in detail.
A. The Structure Diagram of RFG-HELAD Model Our DNN model has a total of 4 layers. The output of the
 We propose the RFG-HELAD model, which is formed by third layer we denote as D N N3 (xi ). xi is the i-th input sample
unknown attack detection module RFG-HELAD* and adver- (final feature in Fig. 3). The projection space of the third layer
sarial defense strategy CHPDD. This is shown in Fig. 3. The of the DNN is denoted as h ∈ Rd . In our model we have
input to the model can be either flow data or raw packet data. hi = D N N3 (xi ). First, we present the cross-entropy loss for
 multiclassification based on DNN, where M is the number of
After the feature extraction, normalization [55] is then used
 test samples and N is the number of labels.
to obtain the original feature form. This is done by centering
the data by the minimum and then scaling by the extreme M N
 1 XX
difference (maximum - minimum). The data is shifted by the LCE = − y ji log ycji (1)
minimum of one unit and will be converged to between [1, M
 j=1 i=1
0]. The original features and their Fourier transformed forms
are combined into the final features. Then the K model (DNN In multiclassification, y ji is used to indicate the true label
with contrastive learning) and RPGAN models are trained. of a sample. y ji = 1 means that the label of the j-th sample
Our RPGAN network adds a discriminator to the DCGAN is i. y ji = 0 means that the label of the j-th sample is not i.
infrastructure, and this discriminator uses inverse divergence ycji is used to indicate the predicted label of the sample.
to compute the loss. The specific RPGAN structure is shown Next we describe the loss of contrastive learning [34], [35].
in Fig. 4. Next, K model is adversarial trained using the
 exp h j · h p /τC L
 
 X −1
final features. And the hidden layer features generated in the
 X
 LCL = log P
 a∈A( j) exp h j · ha /τC L
 
training phase are saved and used as input to Deep kNN. |P( j)|
 j∈I p∈P( j)
The distance matrix DT V of the original training set is thus
constructed, which is used to calculate threshold and will be (2)
described subsequently.
 Here, τC L is a temperature parameter and I is the set of
 In the test phase, the extracted features are fed directly into
 sample numbers. A( j) = I \{ j} stands for the set of numbers
the discriminator D1 and K model to generate the hidden layer
 except for j. P( j) = { p ∈ A( j) : y p = y j } and the meaning
features of the current sample. This hidden layer feature is then
 of y p = y j is that the labels numbered p and j are the same.
compared to the training set to calculate the distance vector. |P ( j)| is its cardinality. h j , ha , and h p are the projections of
A threshold is used to determine if the attack is unknown.
 the corresponding numbers onto the third layer of the DNN’s
If it is an unknown attack, then it needs to be checked by a
 hidden space, respectively.
network security administrator. If not, perform a known attack
 The loss of the K classification model can be obtained
classification. Considering that some network environments
 below.
will not have adversarial attacks, we can avoid the tradeoff [47]
between accuracy and adversarial defence by not enabling the LK−model = LCE + LCL (3)
defence part CHPDD. That is, we can use the RFG-HELAD*
model alone. At the end of the training of the DNN+CL model, we can
 obtain the hidden layer features H id1 ← (D N N + C L)h (xi ).
 In the testing phase, this step leads to the K classification
B. Details of the Model result @Res1.
 1) Feature Engineering (Optimal Feature+Normalization): 3) RPGAN (Recognize Potential Distribution of Unknown
Feature engineering has a significant impact on detection per- Attacks): Inspired by D2GAN [36] and DCGAN [6],
formance. For data in pcap form, we use Damped Incremental we design RPGAN, which uses two discriminators (D1 (x)
Statistics as feature extraction method [8] because it is an and D2 (x)) and a generator. RPGAN can learn the potential
excellent method [8], [9]. The extracted features are further distribution of unknown attacks well. About D1 (x), a high
processed using the normalization to obtain the final features. score is awarded if x is drawn from the data distribution
For data in the form of flow, we use normalization to obtain the Pdata , and a low score is given if it is generated from the
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5901

 Fig. 3. The structure diagram of RFG-HELAD.

 Fig. 5. Calculating distance matrix with decision unknown attacks using
 Faiss.
 Fig. 4. The framework diagram of our designed RPGAN model.
 DKL (Pdata ∥PG ) and DKL (PG ∥Pdata ) are the KL divergence
generator distribution PG . Conversely, D2 (x) returns a high and inverse KL divergence between the data and the generscore for x generated from PG and gives a low score for ator distribution, respectively. These divergences are always
samples drawn from Pdata . D1 and D2 do not share their non-negative and are only zero if PG = Pdata . This achieves
parameters. We control the diversity of the generated samples an optimal solution to the optimization problem.
by the value of λ. A more formalised minimax optimization At the end of the training of the RPGAN, we can obtain the
problem is shown below. hidden layer features H id2 via discriminator D1 and H id2 ←
 (G AN − D1 )h (xi ).
 min max J (G, D1 , D2 ) 4) Deep kNN(Ensemble Learning to Decide Unknown
 G D1 ,D2 Attacks): Deep k-nearest neighbors (Deep kNN) have shown
 = Ex∼Pdata log D1 (x) + Ex∼PG [−D1 (G(x))] great advantages in anomaly detection [38], [39]. We use
  
 it as an ensemble learning approach. Specifically, we define
 + Ex∼Pdata [−D2 (x)] + λ × Ex∼PG log D2 (G(x))
  
 (4)
 the input data for model deep k-nearest neighbors as Ln =
 Regarding the solution of this optimization problem, we first (l1 , l2 , . . . , ln ). The elements in Ln are derived from the fusion
 of features from H id1 and H id2 .
fix G and then maximise J (G, D1 , D2 ). The optimal dis-
 In the testing phase, the test sample after feature extraction
criminators D1⋆ and D2⋆ can be obtained. Next, we fix
 is l∗ . We calculate the Euclidean distance ∥li − l∗ ∥2 , where
D1 =D1⋆ ,D2 =D2⋆ , and substitute them into equation (4). The
 li ∈ Ln . We arrange the obtained Euclidean distances in
following expression can be obtained.
 increasing order to obtain L′n = l′1 , l′2 , . . . , l′n , and the
 
 decision function of the unknown attack is as follows.
 J G, D1⋆ , D2⋆ = −1 + λ(log λ − 1)
 
 M l∗ ; k = 1 −rk l∗ ≥ δ
   
 (6)
 + DKL (Pdata ∥PG ) + λDKL (PG ∥Pdata )
 where rk (l∗ ) = l∗ − l′k 2 is the distance to the k-th nearest
 (5) neighbor and 1{·} is the indicator function which means
5902 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

that when the input is True, the output is 1, and when the • How does our model perform in an environment with
input is False, the output is 0. This is used to determine unknown attacks and without adversarial attack, compared
unknown attacks. The threshold δ is usually chosen so that a with other state-of-the-art algorithms (K + 1 classification)?
high proportion of known attack data (e.g., 95%) is correctly • How does our algorithm perform in the presence of
classified. This can be selected in the validation set. The unknown attacks and adversarial attack, comparing multiple
threshold is independent of the unknown attacks. We use a metrics with other top algorithms?
library named Faiss3 for efficient nearest neighbour search. • Are the individual components of our model effective
Specifically, faiss.IndexFlatL2 is used as an indexing method (ablation experiments)?
for Euclidean distances. Fig. 5 illustrates the process of
calculating the distance matrix with decision unknown attacks A. Datasets
using Faiss. The distance matrix DT V is calculated using Faiss,
which is calculated in RAM and is faster. In the testing phase, We use three data sets, NSLKDD2009 [44], Kitsune2018
this step leads to the K + 1 classification result @Res2. [8], and UKM2020 [43]. These three data sets represent the
 5) CHPDD(Explicit Methods of Adversarial Defence: most classical, relatively new pcap-based, and relatively new
Fourier Transform of Features and Adversarial Training of flow-based network attack detection dataset, respectively. The
Models): Hidden space compression (contrastive learning) of data set selected in this way has better heterogeneity and
CHPDD is the implicit adversarial defence method and has representativeness.
already been described in the previous part. Next, we present NSLKDD2009 is a classic data set. This data set includes
the other two explicit components of adversarial defence. The four broad categories of attacks, Probe, R2L, U2R, and Dos.
expression for the Fourier transform [40], as shown below. Each broad category contains multiple attacks. For example,
 Probe includes attacks such as ipsweep, nmap, etc., and Dos
 Z +∞
 includes attacks such as pod, smurf, etc. Here 41 feature
 ĝ(k) = g(t)e−2πitk dt (7) fields are directly provided and we use normalization directly.
 −∞
 NSLKDD2009 can also be noted as NSL or NSLKDD.
 g is some specified function that depends on time t and Kitsune2018 includes four major categories of attacks:
ĝ is the Fourier transform. Here, i represents the imaginary reconnaissance, Man in the Middle, Denial of Service, and
unit and k is the frequency. For periodic data sampling, the botnets. Of these, the more fine-grained categories of attacks
following discrete Fourier transform can be used. within the major categories will be presented in the specific
 N −1
 data set used. The pre-feature extraction is done using Kit-
 X sune’s own feature extraction method. This data set is the raw
 D F Tk = gn e−2πink/N , (8)
 network traffic. The dimensionality after feature extraction is
 n=0
 100. Kitsune2018 can also be noted as Kitsune.
 gn means g for the n-th sample. The Fourier transform UKM2020 is a relatively new data set, which encompasses
provides the frequency spectrum for the entire measurement four types of attacks, namely DoS, ARP poisoning, exploits,
time period. We use the Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and scanning. This data set represents the attacks in the new
and implement it using a third-party library, librosa.4 network environment. Here 46 feature fields are provided
 The adversarial training [41] is to add a perturbation 1x directly and we use normalization directly. UKM2020 can also
to the original input sample x to obtain the adversarial sample, be noted as UKM.
and then train it, and the problem can be abstracted into such
a model: B. Evaluation Metrics
 max P(y | x + 1x; θ ) (9) Accuracy of multiclass classification is used as the main
 θ evaluation metric. We define the accuracy of K classification
where y is the ground truth and θ is the model parameter. as ACC-K, and the accuracy of K +1 classification as ACC-(K
It means that the parameter maximizes the probability of + 1). To illustrate that the use of accuracy is representative,
predicting y even under the perturbation. we also evaluate other metric [55]: Area Under Curve (AUC),
 avg_Pr ecision which means weighted average Precision as
 P, avg_Recall as R, and avg_F1 as F1. Weighted average
 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS means that calculate metrics for each label, and find their
 To explore the effectiveness of our model, we introduce average, weighted by support (the number of instances for each
a series of experiments. We first introduce the data set and label). AUC is essentially a binary classification evaluation
experimental configuration. Then we validate our model and metric. We treat unknown attacks as positive examples, and
analyze the experimental results in the order of the main known attacks and normal traffic as negative examples. To
research questions and uncover the insights behind the exper- better assess generalizability, some of the experiments calcuimental results. Our code is available for download. The main late the average of individual result, denoted as AVG.
questions we study are as follows. Then, we introduce two representative metrics for binary
 • How does the performance of our algorithm on the class classification for experimental evaluation [55]. These
fine-grained classification submodel (K classification), com- include: true positive rate (TPR), false positive rate (FPR).
pared with other state-of-the-art algorithms? In order to make these metrics usable on multiclassification
 • How does our algorithm’s K classification submodel experiments, we need to modify the metrics. Specifically,
perform in the cases of adversarial attack? TPRs are calculated for each category in the multiclassification, and then the average of these TPRs is calculated, which is
 3 Faiss: https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss denoted as TPR_a. FPR_a is analyzed similarly. On the other
 4 librosa: http://librosa.org/ hand, the known and unknown attacks are counted as positive
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5903

 TABLE II
 D EFINE THE C ORRESPONDENCE B ETWEEN THE E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT AND O UR MODEL

samples and the benign traffic as negative samples. The FPR TABLE III
obtained in this case is called FPR_2. For better analysis, K C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS (ACC-K)
we introduce false negative rate (FNR) [55] in this scenario,
denoted as FNR_2. Lower FNR and FPR are better. For
other metrics, the higher the value, the better.

C. Experimental Settings
 1) Specific Experimental Environment: We use python to
implement our model and comparison algorithm. We select
the fine-grained categories of attacks in the dataset for our
experiments. Regarding the core experiment, we have two
types of data sets. The first category is the K classification
experimental data sets (without unknown attack): UKM (training set: 8923, test set: 2226, 5 categories), NSL (training set: TABLE IV
123059, test set: 16179, 8 categories), Kitsune (training set: A BLATION E XPERIMENTS OF O UR D EFENSE M ODEL IN THE
810000, test set: 90000, 10 categories). The second category is C ASE OF FGSM A DVERSARIAL ATTACK AND UKM DATASET
 ( EPSILONS =12/255,ACC-K). ADV T S TANDS FOR A DVERSARIAL
the K + 1 classification experimental data sets (with unknown T RAINING . CLEAN _ TEST S TANDS FOR ACCURACY IN
attack): UKM (training set: 8923, test set: 2578, training set RFG-HELAD W ITHOUT A DVERSARIAL ATTACKS .
5 categories, test set 8 categories), NSL (training set: 6000, ADV _ TEST R EPRESENTS THE ACCURACY OF
test set: 3000, training set 3 categories, test set 6 categories), RFG-HELAD IN THE P RESENCE OF A DVERSARIAL
Kitsune (training set: 30000, test set: 10000, training set ATTACKS
6 categories, test set 10 categories). Each instance is a labeled
record of the dataset. Since the comparison algorithms vary in
complexity, we reduce the amount of data in second category
for a fair comparison. Also, in order to minimize the effect of
imbalance on the individual algorithms (focusing on the core
problem), we extract a relatively balanced data set. See Part
4 of Appendix for specific details and analysis. We use the
hold-out method for time series data. The hold-out approach
directly divides the data set D into two mutually exclusive sets.
One of the sets is used as the training set U , and the other is
used as the test set V , i.e. D = U ∪ V , U ∩ V = φ. In the
temporal order, all samples of the training set are in front
of the test set. All results of our experiments are averaged LSTMs, DNNs, and CNNs [4]. The second category is excelover 5 times. To make it easier to understand, we define lent fine-grained attack detection methods, which includes
the correspondence between the experimental environment and ACID [19], SCADA [13], FARE [20], and DNN-kNN [12].
our model, which is shown in TABLE II. ACID consists of multiple kernel networks. SCADA in the
 2) Hyperparameter Configuration of Our Model: Our original paper is a binary classification algorithm, which
parameters are divided into three main parts, corresponding is a combined model of classical LSTM and DNN. Thus,
to DNN with contrastive learning, GAN, and deep k-nearest this can be easily changed to a multi-classification model.
neighbours. The specific meanings of the parameters and their FARE uses the labels determined by multiple unsuperassignments are as follows. ⃝ 1 DNN+CL: contrastive learning vised models for auxiliary classification, which are originally
parameters suploss = 0.7, learning rate of DNN lr1 = 1e-2, unsupervised and semi-supervised models. For a fair comfourier parameters n_fft = 52, hop_len = 64; ⃝ 2 GAN: noise parison, we fed all the training set labels into FARE to
vector dimension of GAN z_dim = 100, weights of the two make it a fully supervised model. We use six clustering
generators lamda = 0.1, learning rate of GAN lr2 = 0.0001; algorithms [55] kmeans, AgglomerativeClustering, Spectral-
⃝3 Deep kNN: hidden layer vector dimension (consistent for Clustering, MBkmeans, FeatureAgglomeration, and Affini-
DNN and GAN) hid_dim = 64, nearest neighbor parameter tyPropagation to form 30 clustering results. To maintain
k = 1. The thresholds represent distances and do not have a heterogeneity, each clustering algorithm is reused with a
great meaning in themselves, so they are not shown here. different parameter configuration. DNN-kNN in the original
 paper is a binary classification algorithm, which is a combined
 model of classical KNN and DNN. This also can be changed
D. Baseline Model to a multi-classification model.
 1) K Classification: Regarding the K classification, two 2) K + 1 Classification: We evaluate the effectiveness of
classes of models are selected for comparison. The first K + 1 classification, which means that all unknown attacks
class is the classical machine learning/deep learning mod- are detected as one large class. In this case, we choose
els. This includes one-dimensional CNNs (onedCNN), MLPs, three types of comparison algorithms. The first category is
5904 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE V TABLE VI
D ETECTION E FFECTIVENESS OF U NKNOWN ATTACK P ROCESSING K + 1 C LASSIFICATION (W ITH U NKNOWN ATTACK ) R ESULTS (ACC-(K
 A LGORITHMS IN K NOWN ATTACKS (ACC-K). NSL(3:3) R EPRESENTS + 1)). NSL(3:3) R EPRESENTS A T RAINING S ET W ITH 3 K NOWN C AT-
 A T RAINING S ET W ITH 3 K NOWN C ATEGORIES AND AN ACTUAL EGORIES AND AN ACTUAL T EST E NVIRONMENT W ITH 3 K NOWN
 T EST E NVIRONMENT W ITH 3 K NOWN AND 3 U NKNOWN AND 3 U NKNOWN C ATEGORIES . △ I MPLIES A TOP 3 A LGORITHM
 C ATEGORIES . H ERE I S THE D ETECTION OF K NOWN ON THE UKM DATA S ET. T HE O RIGINAL OPENMAX (CNN)
 ATTACKS , S O THE U NKNOWN ATTACKS IN THE T EST C OULD N OT B E T RAINED IN O UR DATA S ET C ONFIGU -
 S ET A RE R EMOVED . S O , THE T RAINING S ET RATION
 AND T EST S ET OF NSL A RE 3 C ATEGORIES .
 OPENMAX (DNN)-C R EFERS TO
 OPENMAX (DNN)+ CENTERLOSS [23]

 outperform the use of a single classifier. However, there is
the model without unknown attack detection. This type of still room for performance growth due to the lack of distribumodel can only perform K classification. These algorithms tion optimization. FARE is an unsupervised/semi-supervised
are standard baselines, which include DNN, CNN, DNN+CL. algorithm. For a fair comparison, we use all the labels in the
The second category is the state-of-the-art models for unknown training set. It can be found that it can infinitely approximate
attacks in the field of network anomaly detection. These the detection effect of DNN. To evaluate the generality of the
include openmax(DNN), scalable-NIDS, CADE, CVAE-EVT, model for different data sets, we calculate the average of the
openmax(DNN) with centerloss. openmax based on CNN is results of the three data sets in the last column of the table.
the pioneering work in the field of open set identification. NSL is classical and there is a large amount of work based
In our experiments, CNN-based openmax does not perform on this data set. We directly normalize the original data set
as well as DNN-based openmax. Thus, we choose DNN- to get features and observe the relative performance between
based openmax method for comparison. The third class of classifiers. There are many ways to perform even better on this
comparison algorithms are excellent open-set problem recog- data set, e.g., more processing can be done at the feature level.
nition algorithms in the field of computer vision, which include Experimental results show that our K classification model
capnet [26], cgdl [27], and gcm [28]. (DNN+CL) achieves the best detection results. Experimental
 results show that different complex scenarios, our customized
 K model can effectively guarantee the performance and play
E. Answers to Key Questions and Analysis of Experimental a fundamental role.
Results 2) How Does Our Algorithm’s K Classification Submodel
 We conduct a series of experiments in this section to verify Perform in the Cases of Adversarial Attack: To verify
our model. the effectiveness of adding defence components, we design
 1) How Does the Performance of Our Algorithm on ablation experiments to observe the contribution of each
the Fine-Grained Classification Submodel (K Classification), component to the CHPDD defence strategy. Specifically,
Compared With Other State-of-the-Art Algorithms: In this we conduct experiments on both fast gradient sign method
section, we compare our model with traditional machine learn- (FGSM) [41] and projected gradient descent (PGD) [42] advering/deep learning algorithms and SOTA fine-grained attack sarial attack models. Our model has relatively good robustness
detection algorithms. As you can see from the TABLE III, in both attack environments. As shown in TABLE IV, when
the original DNN has a better detection performance for such the test set is all perturbed data (i.e. adv_test), the accuracy
type of time-series data as traffic. This is because DNNs of DNN alone is 0.719, while the accuracy of DNN+CL
have superiority in network traffic classification (Part 8 of is 0.772. This shows that contrastive learning can improve
Appendix). CNN, as an excellent classification algorithm, robustness by compressing the low-dimensional space. The
achieves good results with an accuracy of 1.000 in the UKM accuracy of our DNN+CL model improves to 0.911 after
data set. However, with the complexity of the data set, the adding STFT, which is a significant improvement and shows
convolutional pooling layer loses some important information that the STFT plays a key role. Finally, adding adversarial
for non-image data. Furthermore, the CNN model is more training to the DNN+CL+STFT model improves the accuracy
sensitive to imbalanced data. In contrast, DNN is less sen- to 0.940, which indicates that adversarial training can also
sitive to imbalance, which is also an advantage. DNN-kNN improve robustness, but not significantly. That is, adversarial
and SCADA are ensemble learning methods that generally training can improve the robustness of the model to some
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5905

 TABLE VII
 C OMPREHENSIVE M ETRICS C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR RFG-HELAD* M ODEL AND THE TOP 3 M ODEL IN THE T HREE DATA SETS (TABLE VI)

 TABLE VIII
C OMPREHENSIVE M ETRICS C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR RFG-HELAD JM ODEL AND TOP 3 M ODEL U NDER UKM DATASET (TABLE VI) AND THE
 P RESENCE OF FGSM A DVERSARIAL ATTACK . S TANDS FOR P RESENCE A DVERSARIAL T RAINING

 TABLE IX
A BLATION EXPERIMENTS (ACC-(K + 1)). T HE L AST L INE R EPRESENTS O UR RFG-HELAD*-(K + 1) M ODEL . T HE C OMPONENTS OF A DVERSARIAL
 D EFENCE H AVE B EEN D ISCUSSED IN THE P REVIOUS PART OF E XPERIMENTS AND W ILL N OT B E D ISCUSSED H ERE . GAN-F EA AND CL-F EA
 R EPRESENT THE H IDDEN L AYER F EATURES G ENERATED BY GAN AND DNN+CL, R ESPECTIVELY

extent. However, the Fourier feature transformation is more data set, scalable-NIDS and cgdl algorithms perform better.
effective in enhancing the robustness of our model. Experi- Our model performs the best on all data sets and the minimum
ments show the correctness of following the detection process ACC-(K + 1) of our algorithm can reach 0.918. This indicates
sequentially to enhance robustness. Looking at the DNN+CL that our method is effective and has good generality. CADE
and DNN+CL+advT+STFT models of clean_test, it can be detects unknown attacks by contrastive learning and distance
seen that the accuracy of RFG-HELAD-K (with adversarial algorithms. The results become poor when the distribution of
defence) decreases a little in the absence of adversarial attacks. unknown attacks is complex. The shortcoming of scalable-
This is because using adversarial defence in the absence of NIDS, which is also distance-based, is that it does not
an adversarial attack will degrade detection performance [47]. distance the unknown attack from the known ones. Regarding
This suggests that there are also scenarios where RFG- CVAE-EVT, we drop the clustering part of CVAE-EVT in
HELAD* is used alone. Similar analysis can be done for the order to be consistent with other methods. When the real
PGD experiments in Part 5 of Appendix. unknown attack distribution only partially conforms to the
 3) How Does Our Model Perform in an Environment With extreme value theory, the improvement in the detection of
Unknown Attacks and Without Adversarial Attack, Compared unknown attacks will be insignificant. Algorithms in this
With Other State-of-the-Art Algorithms (K + 1 Classification): category including CVAE-EVT,openmax(DNN) + centerloss,
We first test the unknown attack detection algorithm in a openmax(DNN). cgdl, gcm. capnet can detect unknown classes
K classification scenario. As shown in TABLE V, almost very well in the domain of images. However, the model is too
most of the models achieved good classification results, which customized and not very suitable for unknown attack detection
indicates the effectiveness of feature extraction for each data in the field of network anomaly detection.
set. Next, to verify that our unknown attack detection model Further, to verify whether ACC-(K + 1) can respond well
is valid (K + 1 classification), we first compare it with to the detection performance of unknown attacks, our model
K -class classifiers that cannot handle unknown attack. Sec- and top 3 algorithms are compared on three data set for
ond, we compare with the SOTA unknown attack detection more metrics. In an environment with unknown attacks and
algorithm. All models used for comparison are fed with without adversarial attack, we use the RFG-HELAD*-(K+1)
the same features as our model. As you can see from the model. As you can see from TABLE VII, our detection model
TABLE VI, CVAE-EVT and DNN+opemax achieve good performs best on almost all metrics. In particular, regarding
detection results on the UKM data set. But on the Kitsune the evaluation of false positives in fine-grained attacks, FPR_a
5906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

is more reasonable. Our model has the lowest FPR_a. Fur- TABLE X
thermore, the FPR_2 metrics for binary classification do not E VALUATION OF O UR M ODEL H ARDWARE R EQUIREMENTS ON UKM’ S
fully reflect the multi-classification attack detection, which 2578 T ESTING S ET
can only be used as a reference value. For example, CVAE-
EVT has a low FPR_2, but a very high FNR_2. Therefore,
it is reasonable to use accuracy as the main assessment
indicator.
 4) How Does Our Algorithm Perform in the Presence of TABLE XI
Unknown Attacks and Adversarial Attack, Comparing Multiple E VALUATION OF O UR M ODEL H ARDWARE R EQUIREMENTS ON UKM’ S
Metrics With Other Top Algorithms: We evaluate the overall 8923 T RAINING S ET. TOE D ENOTES THE T IME TO T RAIN AN E POCH .
 WT H ERE D ENOTES THE T IME W HEN THE M ODEL I S W ELL
RFG-HELAD model in the presence of unknown attacks and T RAINED
adversarial attack. Specifically, we choose the top 3 algorithms
to experiment on UKM data set. As you can see from the
TABLE VIII, regarding ACC-(K + 1), we are at least 18.7%
higher than the case of two SOTA algorithms with adversarial
training, which indicates our RFG-HELAD-(K + 1) model can
effectively cope with these problems. Similarly, comparing to Gold 5218 CPU @ 2.30GHz and 128G of RAM as the
other models, our model has the lowest FPR_a. device. The type of GPU we use is GTX 1080Ti. We perform
 5) Are the Individual Components of Our Model Effective the tests using UKM’s 8,923 training set and 2,578 testing
(Ablation Experiments): We have previously verified the valid- set and record the maximum values of CPU and memory
ity of the components of the adversarial defence, and next we usage. Our model is divided into three parts and executed
verify the validity of the components of the RFG-HELAD*- sequentially. Therefore, we perform the tests separately. As can
(K + 1) model which does not take into account the adversarial be seen from TABLE X and TABLE XI, our model requires
defence. We conduct model ablation experiments on three data a relatively low percentage of memory and a slightly higher
sets. TABLE IX shows ablation experiments of our RFG- CPU, which is acceptable.
HELAD*-(K + 1) model. The first row is DNN+CL, which is 2) Regarding Runtime, How Does Our Algorithm Compare
a baseline model for K class classification. The second row is a to Various Top 3 Algorithm: In real applications, the training
separate addition of a DCGAN and output of the discriminator of the model can be done offline, and we are concerned
is used directly as a judgement for unknown attacks. RPGAN about the speed of detection. So, let’s first analyze the time
(GAN with two discriminators) are used in the third row, complexity of the detection part. Suppose the training set has
which obviously increases the generalization performance of m packets and the test set contains n packets. In the detection
the model. Fourth row indicates the hidden layer features are phase, the time for a single packet to run on DNN+CL (storing
generated using only GAN (input to Deep kNN). The fifth the hidden features) is T1 , and the time for a single packet to
row represents the hidden layer features generated using only run on GAN (storing the hidden features) is T2 . The time
contrastive learning (input to Deep kNN). The last row denotes to compute the pairwise packet distances in the Deep kNN
the complete our RFG-HELAD*-(K + 1) model. For the first module is T31 , while the time for the threshold judgment
three rows, when Deep kNN is not selected we discuss it in two of each packet is T32 . Also with respect to Deep kNN, the
cases. The first row is the classification result using DNN+CL number of elements in the selected subset of the training set
directly. The second and third rows are cases where DNN+CL used for distance calculation is m s (1 <= m s <= m). The
and GAN models are combined. In this case we first use the overall time complexity of the detection part is O(T1 ∗ n +
discriminator of GAN to directly discriminate whether it is an T2 ∗ n + m s ∗ n ∗ T31 + n ∗ T32 ). For all the above experiments,
unknown attack or not, and then use DNN+CL to classify the our m s is equal to m. When the size of the training set is
known attacks. large, a representative m s can be selected for retrieval. For
 As can be seen from TABLE IX, the detection performance example, for samples in the training set that are very close
of the last row is better than that of the first three rows, which together, only one is selected. The m s is chosen only in the
illustrates the effectiveness of ensemble learning. In particular, third stage of our model (Deep kNN), so it does not affect the
on the NSL data set, the accuracy using the hidden layer fea- representation ability of known and unknown attacks. The m s
tures of GAN alone can reach 0.952. There are three specific are chosen to be representative, so the distances calculated are
reasons for this. Firstly, the NSL data set is simpler and it is also differentiated. Overall, the choice of m s does not affect
easier to learn an effective feature representation. Secondly, the performance. Further, in the real world, the training sets
NSL data set has a 3:3 ratio of known attacks to unknown are manually handpicked data that is very limited. The actual
attacks, which is the case where the number of unknown network traffic for testing is always continuous and massive.
attacks is high. GAN performs better for the case where there Thus, m ≪ n is satisfied. In our future work, we may consider
are more unknown attacks. For the more complex Kitsune data controlling the size of m s to a multiple of constant related
set, the performance gains from ensemble learning are clear. to the number of attack categories with full consideration of
Overall, ensemble learning is necessary in the model, as are intra-class concept drift.
the other components. Detection accuracy and speed are both important metrics.
 To evaluate the detection speed of our algorithm, we compare
 it with top3 algorithms in each of the three scenarios. As can
F. Analysis of Issues Related to Model Runtime and
 be seen from TABLE XII, TABLE XIII, and TABLE XIV, our
Deployment detection speeds are all superior. In particular, in TABLE XIV,
 1) How Efficient is Our Model in the Existing Hard- the test set is used twice. The test set here is a splice of the
ware Environment: We use a server with Intel(R) Xeon(R) original test set and the test set after the perturbation, which is
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5907

 TABLE XII
T EST T IME C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR RFG-HELAD*-K M ODEL AND
 THE TOP 3 M ODEL IN THE UKM DATA S ET (C ONSISTENT W ITH
 TABLE III’ S C ONFIGURATION , UKM’ S 2226 T ESTING SET )

 TABLE XIII
T EST T IME C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR RFG-HELAD*-(K + 1) M ODEL Fig. 6. Deployment diagram of our model.
 AND THE TOP 3 M ODEL IN THE UKM DATA S ET (C ONSISTENT W ITH
 TABLE VII’ S C ONFIGURATION , UKM’ S 2578 T ESTING SET )
 detected and analyzed manually. We perform experimental
 validation on the UKM data set. Our accuracy is 0.948 (ACC-
 (K + 1)) in the case of 5 train 8 test, where 5 train 8 test means
 that there are 5 categories in the training set and 8 categories
 in the test set and that all categories in the training set appear
 TABLE XIV
 in the test set. After that, we retrain and our accuracy is 0.998
T EST T IME C OMPARISON B ETWEEN O UR RFG-HELAD-(K + 1) M ODEL (ACC-(K + L)) in the case of 8 train 8 test. This illustrates
 AND TOP 3 M ODEL U NDER UKM DATA S ET. N/Y S TANDS FOR
 W HETHER OR N OT A DVERSARIAL T RAINING WAS U SED (C ONSIS - the need for retraining.
 TENT W ITH TABLE VIII’ S C ONFIGURATION , U SING UKM’ S
 2578 T ESTING S ET TWICE ) VI. D ISCUSSIONS
 In this section, we first discuss issues related to the model.
 Then, we discuss the limitations and future work.

 A. Discussion of Model-Related Issues
equivalent to the original test set being used twice. The reason Q1: Is the distribution of unknown and known attacks
for this setup is to be closer to the real situation (even if there well distinguishable in our model detection?
is a adversarial attack, the traffic without adversarial attack In order to explore the intuition behind the detection mechawill still be captured in the test traffic). All of the above are nism, we quantitatively analyze the distributional features for
the test times for corresponding test set. We use TCP Flood in unknown and known attacks. We set up two sets of experiukm to test the DDoS detection time. There are 121 records ments to show that the distribution of unknown attacks can be
in TCP Flood in the test set. Test time of our RFG-HELAD*- relatively well distinguished from that of known attacks (using
K is 0.017s, and the test time of our RFG-HELAD*-(K + Euclidean distance calculation of features). For the first set of
1) is 0.301s. According to the longer test time of our RFG- experiments, we set up the following: 1) Compute multiple
HELAD*-(K + 1) model, the test time of a single flow is distances between known attacks in the test set and known
0.002s, which indicates that our model has a fast detection attacks in the training set, 2) Calculate multiple distances
speed. between unknown attacks in the test set and known attacks
 3) How are Our Models Deployed: Our attack detection is in the training set. Multiple distances include closest, farthest
currently offline, similar to [33], and we can use traffic replay and average. We introduce the distance calculation method by
to verify the landable deployment of our algorithm. Our traffic taking an unknown attack as an example. An unknown attack
is not altered in any way and can obviously be replayed online. sample in the test set finds the closest sample in the training
The specific online deployment detection scheme is shown in set and distance dis1 is obtained. All the unknown attack
Fig. 6. We can use virtual machines and Dockers to simulate samples in the test set are calculated in this way to obtain an
the experiments referring to [8] and [33], which simulates the array of distances. We sort this array in ascending order and
experimental platform for the Kitsune data set. Then, we use then denote it as array f . The smallest distance in array f
Tcpreplay and Tcplivereplay to replay on the testbed. is the closest and the largest is the farthest. The average
 As you can see, every part of our process is landable. value of the array is the average distance. Next, we compute
This proves that our model is fully deployable. Regarding the cumulative distribution function based on array f in both
the packet throughput, we can refer to Kitsune [8] for the cases(unknown/known). The features used here are our comanalysis of feature extraction efficiency. The speed in its orig- bined CL-fea+GAN-fea features. The experimental results are
inal paper is relatively substantial. Regarding the case where shown in TABLE XV and Fig. 7. It is clear that the distance
the data source is flow, we just change the corresponding from unknown attacks in the test set to known attacks in the
feature extraction part. The detection speed and advantages training set is much larger. This makes it easier to distinguish
of our model have been demonstrated in Section-V-F-I and between unknown and known attacks.
Section-V-F-II. Because the adversarial defense is costly, the For the second set of experiments, we compute the average
cost is to affect the detection accuracy in the environment distance between unknown and known attacks in the test set.
without adversarial attacks. Therefore, our adversarial defense Unlike the previous method of distance calculation, we calcumodule is optional. late the distance between each sample of unknown attacks
 4) Does Our Model Require Retraining: The trained model and each sample of known attacks in the test set. These
has limitations to some extent. This is because network distances are averaged and the result is denoted as direct
attacks are constantly evolving and changing. For this reason, average distances. We set up different features for comparison.
we should update the model when unknown attacks are Specifically, we observe the following three cases: GAN-fea,
5908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

 TABLE XV
C ALCULATE THE D ISTANCE B ETWEEN K NOWN / UN K NOWN ATTACKS IN
 THE T EST S ET AND K NOWN ATTACKS IN THE T RAINING S ET

 TABLE XVI
C OMPUTE THE D IRECT AVERAGE D ISTANCE B ETWEEN U NKNOWN AND
 K NOWN ATTACKS IN THE T EST S ET IN THE C ASE OF D IFFERENT
 F EATURES

 TABLE XVII
P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ODEL U NDER D IFFERENT U NKNOWN ATTACK
 T YPE R ATIOS (ACC-(K + 1), UKM DATA SET ). 5:3 M EANS F IVE
 K NOWN ATTACK T YPES AND T HREE U NKNOWN ATTACK T YPES .
 K NOWN /U NKNOWN R EPRESENTS THE N UMBER OF K NOWN
 AND U NKNOWN ATTACKS IN THE T EST S ET

CL-fea, and CL-fea+GAN-fea(ours). The experimental results
are shown in TABLE XVI. It is obvious that the distance
increases after the combination, which is more beneficial to
distinguish the known attacks from the unknown ones. These
two sets of experiments further illustrate the generalization
and effectiveness of our model in open-set scenarios. Our
model can separate unknown and known attacks well and
achieve better detection results. The essence of this is that the
components of our model, DNN+CL and RPGAN, can learn Fig. 7. Distance between known/unknown attacks in the test set and known
well the distributions used to distinguish between known and attacks in the training set.
unknown attacks.
 Q2: How does our model perform with varying propor- the top3 comparison algorithms. We add CICIDS2018 [45] and
tions of known and unknown attack types? TON2019 [61] data sets for experiments. The training set of
 In the previous experiments, we have well demonstrated CICIDS2018 is [Benign,SSH-Bruteforce, DoS-Hulk] [12000,
our superiority over other SOTA algorithms. Here, we use 4000, 10000] and the test set is [Benign, SSH-Bruteforce,
the UKM data set to test the effectiveness of our model DoS-Hulk, Infiltration] [3249, 346, 1697, 4238]. What follows
in detecting unknown attacks at different ratios of unknown is the number of attacks. The training set of TON2019 is
attack types. If the unknown attack types are larger than [backdoor, ddos, dos, injection, normal] [ 800 800 800 800
the known attack types and most of the attacks have to be 5600] and the test set is [backdoor, ddos, dos, injection,
manually relabeled, then it makes less sense to detect the normal, password, scanning, xss] [200 200 200 200 1400
unknown attacks. Therefore, we set the maximum unknown 200 200 200]. As shown in TABLE XVIII and TABLE XIX,
attack type ratio to 0.5 (in the case of 4:4). As shown in our model has excellent performance, which suggests that our
TABLE XVII, our model has good detection results under model has good detection performance in other data sets as
various unknown attack type ratios. well.
 Q3: How does our model perform in other data sets? Since the CICIDS2018 dataset is more specific in terms
 In the preceding experiments, we have sufficiently demon- of the collection time of each type of attack, we further
strated the effectiveness of our model’s adversarial defense. evaluate the detection speed of our model. We test it using the
To understand how well our model detects on other data sets, full attack data of SSH-Bruteforce, DoS-Hulk, and Infiltration
we add K and K + 1 experiments and compare our model to in the CICIDS2018 data set. As shown in TABLE XX, the
ZHONG et al.: RFG-HELAD: A ROBUST FINE-GRAINED NETWORK TRAFFIC ANOMALY DETECTION MODEL 5909

 TABLE XVIII The first one is attack class imbalance, which is a classic
 K C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS ON OTHER DATA S ETS (ACC-K, problem for network traffic anomaly detection [48]. Similar
 D ROPPING U NKNOWN ATTACKS )
 to [49], our future work can use data augmentation methods
 to generate categories with small amount of data.
 The second one is the label acquisition problem. Many
 works use semi-supervised methods [10], [17], [29], and our
 model can be combined with more general semi-supervised
 methods, such as Mean teacher [50] and Mixmatch [51].
 TABLE XIX
 K + 1 C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS ON OTHER VII. C ONCLUSION
 DATA S ETS (ACC-(K + 1))
 Network attack detection is an important network management task. The continuous changes in the network attack
 environment make anomaly detection more and more difficult.
 Among them, fine-grained attack detection is an important tool
 for attack detection and analysis. As technology upgrades,
 new attacks are constantly emerging, which places higher
 requirements on detection models. Current mainstream detec-
 TABLE XX tion models are based on ML/DL, which can potentially have
C OMPARISON OF DATA C OLLECTION T IME W ITH THE D ETECTION T IME the problem of adversarial attacks. For this reason, we propose
 OF O UR M ODEL IN CICIDS2018 DATA S ET
 the RFG-HELAD model, which integrates a currently effective
 deep learning model (RPGAN) with a technique (adversarial
 defense using STFT in IDS) that can well solve the above
 problem. Experiments show that our model outperforms other
 SOTA models and can be well used in practical grounded
 scenarios. Specifically, in the presence of unknown and adver-
 TABLE XXI sarial attacks, the accuracy of our model improves by at
VALIDATING THE P ERFORMANCE OF O UR M ODEL ON L ARGE K ITSUNE least 18.7% compared to the corresponding SOTA model with
 DATA S ET adversarial defense. In the future, our work will be positioned
 on the problem of data augmentation.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The authors would like to express their gratitude to the
 anonymous reviewers whose constructive comments have
 greatly helped to improve this manuscript.
detection time of our model is less than the data collection
time, which further indicates the superiority of our model’s R EFERENCES
detection speed. [1] D. E. Denning, “An intrusion-detection model,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.,
 Q4: How do our models perform in the case of unknown vol. SE-13, no. 2, pp. 222–232, Feb. 1987.
attacks and large data sets? [2] SNORT. (2019). Snort 2.9.7.6. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 We use the large Kitsune data set of 900,000 for K + snort.org/
 [3] (2018). Suricata 4.0.4. [Online]. Available: https://suricataids.org/about/
1 experiments. As shown in TABLE XXI, our RFG-HELAD* [4] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches
model detection can achieve an accuracy of 0.934, which is for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and
better than the small data set (0.918 in TABLE VI). The open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 105124.
experiment illustrates that a large amount of data can slightly [5] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
improve the detection effect. learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
 Q5: Our model uses FGSM and PGD as adversarial [6] A. Radford et al., “Unsupervised representation learning with deep
attack, does this affect the evaluation of defense perfor- convolutional generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. ICLR, 2016.
mance? [7] T. Yang et al., “Elastic sketch: Adaptive and fast network-wide mea-
 Both feature-level adversarial attacks and traffic-space surements,” in Proc. Conf. ACM Special Interest Group Data Commun.,
 Aug. 2018, pp. 561–575.
adversarial attacks are essentially perturbations to bypass the [8] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
classifier’s detection. The actual adversarial attacks generated ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
at the traffic level have more constraints [33]. Moreover, Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018.
feature-level attacks are generally more effective because they [9] Y. Zhong et al., “HELAD: A novel network anomaly detection model
 based on heterogeneous ensemble learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 169,
are not constrained at the physical level. Therefore, the choice Mar. 2020, Art. no. 107049.
of feature level for the adversarial attack does not affect our [10] J. Camacho et al., “Semi-supervised multivariate statistical network
evaluation of the adversarial robustness. monitoring for learning security threats,” in Proc. TIFS, 2019,
 pp. 2179–2189.
 [11] P.-F. Marteau, “Random partitioning forest for point-wise and collective
B. Limitation and Future Work anomaly detection—Application to network intrusion detection,” in
 Proc. TIFS, 2021, pp. 2157–2172.
 For space reasons, some of our model-related issues were [12] C. A. de Souza, C. B. Westphall, R. B. Machado, J. B. M. Sobral, and
not included in the design framework. This leaves our frame- G. D. S. Vieira, “Hybrid approach to intrusion detection in fog-based
work extensible. IoT environments,” Comput. Netw., vol. 180, Oct. 2020, Art. no. 107417.
5910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 19, 2024

[13] J. Gao et al., “Omni SCADA intrusion detection using deep learning [37] S. Kong and D. Ramanan, “OpenGAN: Open-set recognition via open
 algorithms,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 951–961, data generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
 Jan. 2021. Oct. 2021, pp. 793–802.
[14] A. Mustafa, S. Khan, M. Hayat, R. Goecke, J. Shen, and L. Shao, [38] L. Bergman, N. Cohen, and Y. Hoshen, “Deep nearest neighbor anomaly
 “Adversarial defense by restricting the hidden space of deep neural net- detection,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10445.
 works,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, [39] Y. Sun, Y. Ming, X. Zhu, and Y. Li, “Out-of-distribution detection
 pp. 3384–3393. with deep nearest neighbors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
[15] A. Meinke, J. Bitterwolf, and M. Hein, “Provably adversarially robust pp. 20827–20840.
 detection of out-of-distribution data (almost) for free,” in Proc. Adv. [40] N. G. de Dick Bruijn, “Uncertainty principles in Fourier analysis,”
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, Inequalities, vol. 2, pp. 57–71, Aug. 1967.
 A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, Eds. Curran
 [41] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 Associates, Jan. 2022, pp. 30167–30180. [Online]. Available: https://
 adversarial examples,” in Proc. ICLR, 2015.
 proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/file/c2c62117283dda155
 db754e54dbe8d71-Paper-Conference.pdf [42] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
[16] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” in Proc. ICLR,
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. 2018.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2021, pp. 3431–3446. [43] M. S. Al-Daweri, S. Abdullah, and K. A. Z. Ariffin, “An adaptive method
[17] Y. Li, X. Yuan, and W. Li, “An extreme semi-supervised framework and a new dataset, UKM-IDS20, for the network intrusion detection
 based on transformer for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 31st system,” Comput. Commun., vol. 180, pp. 57–76, Dec. 2021.
 ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., Oct. 2022, pp. 4204–4208. [44] NSLKDD. (2009). NSL-KDD Data Set for Network-Based Intrusion
[18] M. Kravchik and A. Shabtai, “Efficient cyber attack detection in Detection Systems. [Online]. Available: http://nsl.cs.unb.ca/NSL-KDD/
 industrial control systems using lightweight neural networks and PCA,” [45] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2179–2197, a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characteriza-
 Jul. 2022. tion,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
[19] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic pp. 108–116.
 classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. [46] Z.-H. Zhou, Ensemble Methods: Foundations and Algorithms. Boca
 Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10. Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2012.
[20] J. Liang, W. Guo, T. Luo, V. G. Honavar, G. Wang, and X. Xing, “FARE: [47] X. Wang et al., “Protecting neural networks with hierarchical random
 Enabling fine-grained attack categorization under low-quality labeled switching: Towards better robustness-accuracy trade-off for stochastic
 data,” in Proc. NDSS, 2021. defenses,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug. 2019,
[21] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
 pp. 6013–6019.
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion [48] S. Al and M. Dener, “STL-HDL: A new hybrid network intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, detection system for imbalanced dataset on big data environment,”
 2021. Comput. Secur., vol. 110, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 102435.
[22] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, and M. Song, “A scalable network intrusion [49] S. T. Jan et al., “Throwing darts in the dark? Detecting bots with limited
 detection system towards detecting, discovering, and learning unknown data using neural data augmentation,” in Proc. 41st IEEE Symp. Secur.
 attacks,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1649–1665, Privacy (SP), May 2020, pp. 1190–1206.
 Jun. 2021. [50] A. Tarvainen et al., “Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-
[23] C. Wang, “Intrusion detection for industrial control systems based averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning
 on open set artificial neural network,” Proc. Secur. Commun. Netw., results,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017.
 vol. 2021, pp. 1–14, Aug. 2021. [51] D. Berthelot et al., “MixMatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised
[24] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019.
 for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX [52] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Niu, and D. Guo, “Unknown network attack
 Security), 2021, pp. 2327–2344. detection based on open-set recognition and active learning in drone
[25] A. Bendale and T. E. Boult, “Towards open set deep networks,” in Proc. network,” Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. Technol., vol. 33, no. 10, p. e4212,
 IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Las Vegas, 2022.
 NV, USA, Aug. 2016, pp. 1563–1572. [53] M. Souza, C. Pontes, J. Gondim, L. P. F. Garcia, L. DaSilva, and
[26] Y. Guo, G. Camporese, W. Yang, A. Sperduti, and L. Ballan, “Condi-
 M. A. Marotta, “A novel open set energy-based flow classifier for
 tional variational capsule network for open set recognition,” in Proc.
 network intrusion detection,” 2021, arXiv:2109.11224.
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 103–111.
[27] X. Sun, Z. Yang, C. Zhang, K.-V. Ling, and G. Peng, “Conditional [54] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed
 Gaussian distribution learning for open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE investigation and analysis of using machine learning techniques for
 Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Seattle, WA, USA, intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 1,
 Jun. 2020, pp. 13477–13486. pp. 686–728, 1st Quart., 2019.
[28] Z. Yue, T. Wang, Q. Sun, X.-S. Hua, and H. Zhang, “Counterfactual [55] R. C. Qiu, Z. Hu, H. Li, and M. C. Wicks, “Machine learning,”
 zero-shot and open-set visual recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. in Cognitive Radio Communication and Networking: Principles and
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 15404–15414. Practice. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2013, pp. 283–321.
[29] L. Fan et al., “AutoIoT: Automatically updated IoT device identification [56] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and
 with semi-supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 22, M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and
 no. 10, pp. 5769–5786, Oct. 2023. out of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,”
[30] S. Xu, L. Li, H. Yang, and J. Tang, “KCC method: Unknown intrusion Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2022. [Online]. Available: https://
 detection based on open set recognition,” in Proc. IEEE 33rd Int. Conf. openreview.net/forum?id=aRtjVZvbpK
 Tools Artif. Intell. (ICTAI), Nov. 2021, pp. 1343–1347. [57] J. Ortiz et al., “DeviceMien: Network device behavior modeling for
[31] G. Ping and X. Ye, “Open-set intrusion detection with MinMax autoen- identifying unknown IoT devices,” in Proc. IoTDI, 2019, pp. 106–117.
 coder and pseudo extreme value machine,” in Proc. Int. Jt. Conf. Neural [58] X. Zhang, J. Chen, R. Zhang, C. Wang, and L. Liu, “Attacking
 Netw. (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8. recommender systems with plausible profile,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
[32] I. Rosenberg, A. Shabtai, Y. Elovici, and L. Rokach, “Adversarial Security, vol. 16, pp. 4788–4800, 2021.
 machine learning attacks and defense methods in the cyber security [59] P. Addesso, M. Barni, M. Di Mauro, and V. Matta, “Adversarial
 domain,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, Jun. 2022. Kendall’s model towards containment of distributed cyber-threats,” IEEE
[33] D. Han et al., “Evaluating and improving adversarial robustness of
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3604–3619, 2021.
 machine learning-based network intrusion detectors,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
 Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2632–2647, Aug. 2021. [60] X. Liu, T. J. Lim, and J. Huang, “Optimal Byzantine attacker iden-
[34] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural tification based on game theory in network coding enabled wireless
 Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 18661–18673. ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15,
[35] J. Winkens et al., “Contrastive training for improved out-of-distribution pp. 2570–2583, 2020.
 detection,” 2007, arXiv:2007.05566. [61] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
[36] T. D. Nguyen, T. Le, H. Vu, and D. Q. Phung, “Dual discriminator security systems at the edge: Network TON_IoT datasets,” Sustain.
 generative adversarial nets,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 2670–2680. Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994.