3472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 RustGraph: Robust Anomaly Detection in Dynamic
 Graphs by Jointly Learning Structural-Temporal
 Dependency
 Jianhao Guo , Siliang Tang , Member, IEEE, Juncheng Li , Kaihang Pan , and Lingfei Wu

 Abstract—Dynamic graph-based data are ubiquitous in the real
world, such as social networks, finance systems, and traffic flow.
Fast and accurately detecting anomalies in these dynamic graphs is
of vital importance. However, despite promising results the current
anomaly detection methods have achieved, there are two major
limitations when coping with dynamic graphs. The first limitation
is that the topological structures and the temporal dynamics have
been modeled separately, resulting in less expressive features for
detection. The second limitation is that the models have been
trained by unreliable noisy labels generated by random negative
 Fig. 1. Illustration that both structural and temporal information should be
sampling, rendering it severely vulnerable to subtle perturbations. considered jointly. The green edge in t3 tends to be normal because the structural
To overcome the above limitations, we propose RustGraph, a ro- connection between the green nodes is getting closer from t1 to t3 . In contrast,
bust anomaly detection framework by jointly learning structural- the red edge has a higher probability to be abnormal because the red nodes before
temporal dependency in dynamic graphs. To this end, we design a t3 are distant and have no structural connection.
variational graph auto-encoder with informative prior that simultaneously encodes both graph structural and temporal information.
Then we introduce a fine-grained contrastive learning method to financial systems [5], [6], IoT networks [7], and infrastructure
learn better node representations by utilizing the temporal con- facility networks [8], etc. An essential task in these dynamic
sistency between two snapshots. Furthermore, we formulate the graph scenarios is anomaly detection [9], which aims to identify
noisy label learning problem for anomaly detection in dynamic the deviated patterns such as sudden changes in subgraph strucgraph, and then propose a robust anomaly detector to improve the ture or node attributes [10], [11], [12]. For example, rumors in
model performance by leveraging learned graph structure signal.
Our extensive experiments on six real-world datasets demonstrate social networks may cause people to panic and run on public
the proposed RustGraph method achieves state-of-the-art per- resources in a short period of time, and the spread of rumors can
formance with an average of 3.64% improvement on AUC-ROC be regarded as an anomaly. Accurately detecting these anomalies
metric compared with all baselines. The codes are available at can help prevent such panic and save massive public resources,
https://github.com/aubreygjh/RustGraph. which has become a research hot spot recently [13], [14], [15],
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, dynamic graphs, learning [16], [17].
with noisy labels.
 Though essential and eager to be solved, recent studies for
 I. INTRODUCTION anomaly detection in dynamic graphs mainly fall short in two
 aspects. The first challenge lies in dynamic graph repre-
 YNAMIC graphs, where the topological and attributive in-
D formation of graph data can vary over time, are a prevalent
and important data structure [1], [2]. Dynamic graphs widely
 sentation learning, where informative raw features are unavailable and the topological structures and the temporal
 dynamics have been modeled separately without considering
exist in real-life scenarios, such as social networks [3], [4], the mutual relationship between the two modalities. From
 the data perspective, due to the explosive of graph data scale
 Manuscript received 22 December 2022; revised 12 October 2023; accepted and rising labor costs, it is expensive and infeasible to con-
26 October 2023. Date of publication 30 October 2023; date of current version
10 June 2024. This work was supported in part by the Zhejiang NSF under struct large amounts of informative features in real-world graph
Grant LR21F020004, in part by NSFC under Grant 62272411, in part by datasets. From the method perspective, previous dynamic graph
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant methods [14], [15] mostly combine the static graph represen-
2018AAA0101900, and in part by the Ant Group and Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies. Recommended for tation learning methods (e.g. GCN) with recurrence networks
acceptance by Muhammad Aamir Cheema. (Corresponding Author: Juncheng (e.g. GRU) by simply feeding the outputs of the former to
Li.) the latter, while deeper connections between the structural and
 Jianhao Guo, Siliang Tang, Juncheng Li, and Kaihang Pan are with the Department of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China temporal information may left unexplored. Fig. 1 gives a simple
(e-mail: guojianhao@zju.edu.cn; siliang@zju.edu.cn; junchengli@zju.edu.cn; demonstration explaining why both information should be conpankaihang@zju.edu.cn). sidered jointly. The green line in t3 appears to be a normal edge
 Lingfei Wu is with the Content and Knowledge Graph Group, Pinterest, New
York, NY 10018 USA (e-mail: teddy.lfwu@gmail.com). because the structural connection between the green nodes is get-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2023.3328645 ting stronger over time, while the red line is likely to be abnormal

 1041-4347 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3473

 To solve the problem, we design a robust graph anomaly detector that utilizes graph structural information for better model
 robustness and data reliability. For model robustness, we use the
 reconstructed structural information from graph embeddings to
 design a regularization term. For data reliability, we leverage the
 above structural information to iteratively update graph labels
 to get cleaner data.
 In summary, we use the structural information learned in the
 graph encoding part to help the model fight against noisy labels.
 In turn, solving the noise problem can better help the learning
 of graph embeddings, thus forming a closed loop of mutual
 gain. The major contributions of our work can be summarized
Fig. 2. Training curves between TADYY [16] and our RustGraph under 10% as follows:
injected label noise in UCI Message dataset. Note that the value of loss curve r We propose RustGraph, a robust self-supervised frameonly reflects the relative trend, and its value does not correspond exactly to the
y-axis. work that jointly learns both structural and temporal knowledge for anomalous edge detection in dynamic graphs.
 r We design a variational structural-temporal graph autoas the red nodes are distant and have no structural connection encoder, denoted as VST-GAE, which sufficiently combefore t3 . Simply combining two individual networks may fail bines the structural and temporal attributes in dynamic
to capture such patterns and result in performance degradation. graphs to learn graph representations for anomaly detec-
 Second, most dynamic graph anomaly detection models tion. Besides, we propose TC-GCL, a temporal consistent
have been trained by unreliable noisy labels and are vulner- dynamic graph contrastive learning module that fully exable to subtle perturbations. Since there are few anomalies in ploits fine-grained temporal reliance between snapshots.
real-world scenarios for anomaly detection in dynamic graphs, With above two modules combined, we obtain a powerful
and high-quality labeled data are hard and expensive to collect, dynamic graph encoder for better representations.
existing methods utilize negative sampling to generate pseudo r To our best knowledge, we are the first to formulate the
anomalies and use these pseudo labels to train the model. For problem of noisy labels in dynamic graph anomaly detecexample, AddGraph [14] and StrGNN [15] generate anoma- tion, and we present a robust anomaly detector that utilizes
lous edges by randomly replacing the endpoints of a given graph structural information as strong regularization and
normal edge, and TADDY [16] randomly selects edges that do data cleansing signal.
not appear at the current time as pseudo anomalies. However, r Extensive experiments on six real-world datasets reach
such random negative sampling strategies may introduce the state-of-the-art performance with an average 3.64% perproblem of noisy labels, where normal edges could be wrongly formance gain and validate the effectiveness of our frameassigned to the abnormal class, or vice versa. Fig. 2 compares work.
training curves of different models under 10% label noise, where
TADDY is the baseline of previous work, and RustGraph is our II. RELATED WORKS
proposed model. We can see that, as the training proceeds, the
 A. Anomaly Detection in Dynamic Graphs
loss of TADDY decreases, but the AUC-ROC value does not
increase, which shows that the model has overfitted the noise Existing dynamic graph representation learning methods can
data. This example validates that the existence of noisy labels be divided into two categories [18], discrete-time dynamic
could largely deteriorate the model performance, which is more graphs (DTDG) and continuous-time dynamic graphs (CTDG).
severe in the anomaly detection task, where human annotation DTDGs are represented as a sequence of snapshots taken
is unavailable. Despite the significance of model robustness to at different time intervals, denoted as G = {G 1 , . . ., G T }. On
noisy labels in anomaly detection, it has been rarely discussed the other hand, CTDGs are characterized as a collection of
in previous works. events with associated timestamps. Each event is represented
 To overcome these two obstacles, we propose RustGraph, a as (ui .vi .ti ), where ui , vi are the endpoints of the event and ti is
RobUst framework with Structural-Temporal dependency for the timestamp. In this work, we specifically focus on the setting
anomaly detection in dynamic GRAPHs. To solve the first of DTDGs. This choice is motivated by the fact that there are
limitation, we design a structural-temporal graph encoding limited studies addressing the CTDG setting in the context of
network, including a designed auto-encoder VST-GAE that si- dynamic graph anomaly detection. Furthermore, many state-ofmultaneously encodes both structural and temporal information the-art techniques and publicly available datasets for this task
with an informative prior. On top of that, we introduce a temporal are based on the DTDG setting. However, we acknowledge the
consistent dynamic graph contrastive learning module named potential importance of CTDGs and the possibility of exploring
TC-GCL that encourages the model to capture fine-grained them in future research endeavors.
temporal dependencies. As for the second limitation, we are As an essential task in dynamic graphs, anomaly detecthe first to formulate the problem of noisy labels brought by tion has aroused extensive research interest recently [9], [19].
negative sampling in dynamic graph anomaly detection tasks. Early methods focused on traditional machine learning methods.
3474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

GOutlier [20] uses structural connectivity to score the outliers. views [28], [29], has become a mainstream method for graph
CM-Sketch [21] utilizes empirical anomaly metrics to detect representation learning. DGI [30] contrasts between patch repanomalous edges. resentations and corresponding high-level summaries of graphs.
 Recently, deep learning methods have become mainstream GraphCL [31] studies various graph augmentations for genfor dynamic graph anomaly detection tasks and have achieved erating different views. GRACE [32] focuses on contrasting
ideal performance compared to the above traditional learning different views at the node level. GCCAD [33] makes attempts
methods. NetWalk [13] uses a random walk-based auto-encoder to leverage contrastive learning for graph anomaly detection,
to learn low-dimensional representations, then clusters these while they mainly focus on the static graph.
node representations to detect anomalies. AddGraph [14] detects Recently, more research has begun to focus on the field of
anomalous edges end-to-end. It encodes graphs with GCN [22] dynamic graphs. DDGCL [34] proposes a debiased GAN-type
and aggregates short-term and long-term encoding with an loss by contrasting two nearby temporal views of the same node
attention mechanism through a GRU network. StrGNN [15] identity. TCL [35] replaces the GNN encoder with a co-attention
constructs h-hop enclosing subgraph stream of each edge and Transformer to model inter-dependencies of the contrasting
leverages stacked GCN and GRU to capture structural and views.
temporal information. TADDY [16] uses substructure sam- To model fine-grained temporal dependencies, we propose a
pling to get graph embedding and uses transformer as the simple yet effective dynamic graph contrasting method based on
encoder. the temporal consistency between consecutive snapshots, which
 However, as we mentioned before, these methods mainly will be elaborated in Section IV-A2.
fall short in two aspects. First, they encode the structural
and temporal information separately, which may neglect the C. Learning With Noisy Labels on Graphs
inter-dependencies between the two perspectives. And the node
 Noisy label learning aims to solve the problem of how a
representation learning methods could be further improved for
 learning algorithm can cope with incorrect training examples.
better anomaly detection results. Second, the problem of noisy
 While there is a significant body of work on the problems of
labels is largely overlooked. Given the fact that there do not
 noisy labels, most of them focused on the computer vision
exist ground-truth anomalies in these datasets, the negative
 area, which ranges from estimating noise transition matrix [36],
sampling strategies they adopt may introduce a massive number
 [37], regulating objective function [38], [39], [40], [41], [42],
of low-quality labels. The work of this paper attempts to bridge
 reweighting [43], [44] or selecting clean samples [45], [46], and
this gap in these aspects.
 so on. Compared to the prosperity of noisy label learning in
 CV, only a few works discussed the problem of training robust
B. Graph Representation Learning GNNs against label noise. This is mainly because graphs are
 non-IID data, and noise could propagate between nodes via the
 1) Graph Auto-Encoders: Auto-encoders (AEs) are neural
 message passing mechanism of GNNs [47], which adds more
network architecture that maps the original information into a
 difficulty to this problem. In the limited literature, [48] constructs
low-dimensional hidden feature space through the encoder, then
 a framework that identifies missing links and noisy links by
uses the decoder to reconstruct the original information [23]. It
 leveraging mutual influence of them. [49] uses the clustering
can be used as a feature extractor for representation learning.
 labels as regularization to punish overfitting to noisy labels.
Graph auto-encoder [24] extends the idea of AE to graph neural
 UnionNET [50] performs sample reweighting according to the
networks [22], [25] that encodes the graph structural information
 class probability distributions. NRGNN [47] proposes to link the
and attribute features of nodes. However, traditional AEs only
 unlabeled nodes with labeled ones and generate pseudo labels
learn features based on the reconstruction error and lack the
 to bring more clean label information. Though effective to some
ability to further regularize the learned feature distribution,
 extend, these methods either lack graph-specific information
limiting their generalization ability. In contrast, the variational
 guidance or introduce extra computational overhead to correct
graph auto-encoder (VGAE [24]) learns the probability distrithe label noise.
bution of the feature matrix, leading to improved performance
 Different from above methods, in Section IV-B we utilize the
in various graph-related tasks. VGRNN [26] further extends
 structural representation learned in the VST-GAE encoder, as
VGAE to dynamic graphs, which uses the information of previthe constraint of robust regularization and signal for smooth
ous timestamps to help approximate the current representation.
 label correction, yielding remarkable results with minuscule
However, VGRNN approximates the prior distribution only
 overheads.
with limited information, which lacks the task-specific inductive
biases for anomaly detection. In this work, we propose a dynamic
variational graph auto-encoder that utilizes the eigenvectors of III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
the graph Laplacian [27] as a more informative prior specif- This section gives the necessary preliminaries of anomalous
ically for graph anomaly detection. We implement this with edge detection in dynamic graphs.
a Graph-GRU structure, which will be discussed in detail in Given a discrete-time dynamic graph G = {G 1 , . . ., G T } with
Section IV-A1. a maximum timestamp of T , where G t = (V t , E t ) represents
 2) Graph Contrastive Learning: In recent years, graph con- a graph snapshot at timestamp t. V t and E t are the node set
trastive learning, which does not require large amounts of labeled and edge set at timestamp t, respectively. We use (At , Xt ) to
data and learns by maximizing mutual information of related represent the topological and attributive information of graph G t .
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3475

Fig. 3. Framework of RustGraph. The input dynamic graph series are encoded by our structural-temporal encoder (including VST-GAE and TC-GCL), then the
learned graph embeddings are used to score the edge anomaly probability. Beside that, we use structural regularization and label smoothing to prevent the model
from overfitting the noisy labels introduced by negative sampling.

At ∈ RNt ×Nt is the adjacency matrix, where Atij = 1 if there
exists an edge etij between node vit and vjt , otherwise 0, and
Xt ∈ RNt ×d is the node attribute matrix, where Nt = |V t | and
d is the feature dimension of nodes. Note that nodes and edges
can appear or disappear as time changes, the size and content of
(At , Xt ) also vary.
 In this paper, we design an anomaly detection algorithm
f (·) → [0, 1] on the edges etij of the dynamic graph that can
detect anomalous events from both the structural and temporal
perspectives.
 Our model is trained in a self-supervised fashion following
previous works [14], [15], [16]. Specifically, in the training
phase, the data are unlabeled and assumed to be all normal,
which is a natural phenomenon in real-world scenarios (In the
 Fig. 4. Process of VST-GAE. (a) Posterior inference as in (1)–(3);
real world, most of the time the data are normal and anomalies (b) reconstruction as in (4); (c) prior estimation using informative prior as in
occur occasionally). We use these unlabeled data to train the (5)–(7); (d) the Graph-GRU recurrence as in (8)–(12).
model. In the testing phase, we inject anomalous edges [13],
where each edge etij = (vit , vjt ) ∈ E t is associated with a label
 t
yij ∈ {0, 1}, with 0 corresponds to abnormal edges and 1 cor- A. Structural-Temporal Graph Encoder
responds to normal edges, respectively. Then we evaluate the
performance of the trained model f (etij ). 1) VST-GAE. Variational Structural-Temporal Graph Auto-
 Encoder: In order to learn graph representations that capture the
 coupled information from structural and temporal perspectives,
 IV. METHOD we propose a Variational Structural-Temporal Graph Auto-
 In this section, we will introduce the design of RustGraph Encoder, namely VST-GAE, by jointly reasoning over both
from two perspectives. First is the structural-temporal graph en- graph structural and temporal dependency information into one
coder that consists of VST-GAE and TC-GCL module. Through unified framework for dynamic graph representation learning.
the encoder, the model will be able to learn the coupled Fig. 4 gives a figurative illustration of the process in VST-GAE.
structural-temporal graph representations from the perspectives Initially, we focus on the static case, which applies variational
of generative and contrastive learning; Second is the graph auto-encoders to individual graph snapshots. The latent varianomaly detector, which is noise-robust owing to the design ables, denoted as Z, are sampled from a probability distribution
of structure regularization and label smoothing. Fig. 3 gives an that is regularized by the graph encoder. Subsequently, the
overview of the framework. latent variables Z are used to reconstruct the original input.
3476 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

  
For dynamic graphs, we can simply extend this approach by Zti ∼ N μti,prior , diag((σ ti,prior )2 ) (6)
incorporating a recursive network to capture temporal evolu-  t 
tion. However, this strategy overlooks the inherent relationship μprior , σ tprior = MLP(ht−1 ⊕ Δut ) (7)
between the structural and temporal aspects, as the recurrence
 where p() is the prior probability distribution, μtprior , σ tprior are
network lacks explicit knowledge of the graph structure.
 the prior means and standard deviations matrices.
 In VST-GAE, we address this limitation by integrating struc-
 Consider the hidden state vector ht , it is a function of previous
tural and temporal information in a more granular and explicit
 graph signals, including A≤t , X≤t , and Z≤t . Using a simple
manner. During the inference process, we introduce the hidden
 recurrence function like LSTM or GRU to update it may neglect
state vector ht−1 , which represents the historical information
 the graph topological information. Therefore, we replace the
from previous timestamps (t − 1), and incorporate it into the
 fully connected layers in the GRU with GNN encoders, namely
GNN encoder. This integration allows us to effectively leverage
 GraphGRU, so that the recurrence part can process graph data.
both the structural and temporal characteristics of the dynamic
 Specifically, the hidden state ht is updated by:
graph. Formally, for a given graph snapshot G t = (At , Xt ), we
infer the posterior distribution of the node embedding Zt using X = φx (Xt ) ⊕ φz (Zt )
 t
 (8)
the following equation:  
 zt = σ GNNxz (At , X ) + GNNhz (At , ht−1 )
 t
 (9)
   Nt
  
 q Zt |At , Xt , ht−1 = q Zti |At , Xt , ht−1 (1)  
 rt = σ GNNxr (At , X ) + GNNhr (At , ht−1 )
 t
 i=1 (10)
    
 Zti ∼ N μti,enc , diag((σ ti,enc )2 ) (2)
 h = tanh GNNxh (At , X ) + GNNhh (At , ht−1 ◦ rt )
 t
  t   
 μenc , σ tenc = GNN At , Xt ⊕ ht−1 (3) (11)
where q() denotes posterior probability distribution, N () rep- ht = (1 − zt ) ◦ ht−1 + zt ◦ h (12)
resents Gaussian distribution, μtenc , σ tenc are the matrices of
means and standard deviations, respectively. The encoder GNN where φx and φz are project functions such as MLP that project
can be any message passing networks (we use GraphSAGE [25] Xt and Zt into the similar hidden space, and ◦ is the Hadamard
here), and ⊕ is the concatenation operator. The node embed- product.
ding Zt ∈ RNt ×d is inferred by Gaussian distribution using the The overall loss function for VST-GAE module is derived by
reparameterization trick [51]. the variational lower bound:
 With the inferred latent variables Zt , the original At and Xt
are reconstructed by feeding Zt to a non-linear decoder. Here Lgen = Eq(Zt |At ,Xt ,ht−1 ) logp(At , Xt |Zt )
we employ MLP as a decoder to reconstruct Xt , and a simple     
 − KL q Zt |At , Xt , ht−1 p Zt |ht−1 , Δut
inner-product decoder to reconstruct At :
 (13)
  t = σ(Zt Zt  )
  t = MLP(Zt ), A
 X (4)
 where the first term is the reconstruction loss, and the second
where σ is the sigmoid function. term is the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the posterior
 As forthe prior, instead of imposing a standard Gaussian and prior distributions of Zt , which is used as a regularization
p(Z) = i N (zi | 0, I) to estimate prior like VGAE [24] did, term that secures the probability distribution of Zt close to the
we use history information, that is, the features of previous steps informative prior.
to model the prior distribution. First, in a time series, the state at 2) TC-GCL. Temporal Consistent Graph Contrastive Learnthe current moment is affected by the previous timestamps, so we ing: Although the design of hidden state h in VST-GAE imintroduce h as auxiliary information. Second, changes in graph plicitly passes temporal information through the recurrence part,
structure at adjacent timestamps are particularly significant in such design only considers the sequence dependency of previous
the dynamic graph anomaly detection task, because sudden snapshots, which may neglect more complicated reliance beand abrupt changes in graph structure are likely to herald the tween neighboring snapshots from both directions. To preserve
occurrence of anomalies. We therefore hope to amplify this semantic consistency between consecutive snapshots, we proinformation by directly introducing graph structure changes at pose an augmentation-free graph contrasting objective, namely
adjacent timestamps. The eigenvectors of graph Laplacian have Temporal Consistent Graph Contrastive Learning (TC-GCL),
been proven to be an effective signal of graph structure and which treats neighboring snapshots of an anchor timestamp t as
geometric information [27]. In this regard, we calculate the augmented views, and maximizes the mutual information of the
difference of the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian between same node on different views.
current and previous steps, denoted as Δut = |ut − ut−1 |, and Specifically, after we obtain the embedding matrix Zt for a
use it as the parameters of the prior distribution. In detail, the given timestamp t, the previous and next neighboring snapshots
prior distribution is estimated by: of t are sampled as augmented views Zaug(t) = {Zt−1 , Zt+1 }.
 For generality, we use Z∗ for one augmented view hereinafter. It
   Nt
   is worth noting that this method does not use any augmentations
 p Zt |ht−1 , Δut = p Zti |ht−1 , Δut (5)
 i=1 such as edge perturbation, but still keeps the consistency of
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3477

semantics between different views and reduces computational bring about the problem of noisy labels, not to mention in the
cost. current unsupervised and unlabeled scenario, which will largely
 For any node i that appears on both Zt and Z∗ , the node rep- reduce the confidence of the data and harm the robustness of the
resentations of the same node identity i are selected as positive model.
pairs, i.e., (Zti , Z∗i ), and other nodes (Zti , Z∗j )|i=j are seen as To prevent model from overfitting corrupted labels, one solunegative pairs. Then a node-level contrastive loss is applied to tion is to exploit high-level constraint as regularization. Aside
distinguish the embeddings of the same node in these two views from label guidance, another high-level signal is graph structure,
from the other node embeddings. We formalize the similarity which provides huge amounts of information of the graph. Also,
metric as s(u, v) = cosine_similarity(g(u), g(v)), where g in the graph anomaly detection task, the change in structure
is a non-linear projection for general representations [52]. With connectivity may indicate potential anomalies (e.g. a sudden
above preliminaries, the augmentation-free contrasting objec- surge of connection from a inactivate node could infer malicious
tive at time t is written as: activities). Based on such observations, we propose to utilize ex-
 Zaug(t) Zt ∩Z∗ plicit structure information as regularization against the noises.
 Lcon = − To simplify the network design and reduce computation cost,
 Z∗ i we reuse the the embedding Zt encoded by the VST-GAE
 t ∗
 module, which carries necessary information to reconstruct the
 es(Zi ,Zi )/τ graph: A  t = σ(Zt Zt  ), as the reiteration in (4). The reconlog t ∗ s(Zti ,Z∗k )/τ
 (14)
 es(Zi ,Zi )/τ + N
 k=1 1[k=i] e structed adjacency matrix A  t reveals the existence probability
 between every nodes pair in the graph, a higher value at A t
where τ is the temperature parameter, 1 is an indication function ij
that equals to 1 iff k = i. Note that this formula only calculates means node i and j are more likely to be connected, and vice
 versa. On one hand, the regularization from A  t can prevent
the common nodes that appear on both views, which means our
model can handle node adding or dropping, and edge adding or the model from overfitting the noisy labels when the label is
dropping scenarios. corrupted. Formally, for edge etij , its anomaly score f (etij ) is
 Combining VST-GAE and TC-GCL, the overall objective regulated by:
function for dynamic graph representation learning is written
 Lreg =  t − f (et )
 A (18)
as: ij ij
 etij ∈E t
 Lenc = Lgen + Lcon (15)
 On the other hand, A  t can also be leveraged as additional
B. Robust Anomaly Detector With Structure Regularization
 signal for label correction to iteratively get more reliable labels,
and Label Smoothing
 which is done by an exponential moving average process:
 From the above structural-temporal graph encoder we can
obtain the features Zt ∈ RNt ×d at timestamp t, where each row t
 Yt = Yt + (1 − )A (19)
of Zt represents the feature of the corresponding node. For
edge etij ∈ E t , we use the mean value of its endpoints as the where  is decay rate in the range [0, 1].
representation: etij = (Zti + Ztj )/2. Then we can compute its It is worth noting that the model learns through noisy data by
anomaly score by a learnable function: utilizing the structural information from previous graph encoder,
 which in turn improves the quality of graph embeddings with
 f (etij ) = σ(etij W + b) (16) more reliable data. In such a loop, the structural-temporal graph
where σ is the sigmoid activation function, W ∈ Rd and b ∈ R encoder and the robust anomaly detector benefit from each other,
are learnable weight matrix and bias. improving the overall performance on dynamic graph anomaly
 Since there do not exist any ground-truth anomalies in the detection task.
training data, we cannot directly train the detector to distinguish
between normal and abnormal edges yet. Previous works use C. Training Procedure
negative sampling techniques to generate pseudo anomalous
 Combining the structural-temporal information mining obedges, such as randomly selecting non-existing edges [16] or
 jective, the anomaly detection objective, and the noise-resistant
randomly replacing each edge’s endpoint [14]. With generated
 regularization objective, the final training objective can be forpseudo labels, the anomaly detection problem can be treated as
 malized as:
a binary classification task using binary cross-entropy loss:
 
 Lbce = − (1 − yij )log(1 − f (etij )) + yij log(f (etij )) L = αLenc + βLbce + γLreg (20)
 etij ∈E t
 where α, β, and γ are hyperparameters that control the volume
 (17)
 of each component loss. Without bells and whistles, we set all
where yij is the given label of the edge etij . of them as 1 by default, and more experiments discussing the
 However, even in the presence of ground-truth labels, the influence of these hyperparameters are in Section V-E3. We also
introduction of negative sampling to generate pseudo labels will summarize the overall training procedure in Algorithm 1.
3478 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 TABLE I
 Algorithm 1: Algorithm of RustGraph. STATISTICS OF SIX PUBLIC DYNAMIC GRAPH DATASETS

 under noisy labels. Finally, there are some discussions about
 hyperparameters sensitivity and graph properties.

 A. Experiment Setup
 1) Datasets: We evaluate the performance of RustGraph on
 six public dynamic graph datasets. Some statistics are summarized in Table I, and below are the descriptions of these datasets.
 UCI Messages [54] is the directed network that contains sent
 messages between the users of an online community of students
 from the University of California, Irvine. A node represents a
 user. A directed edge represents a sent message. Digg [55] is
 the reply network of the social news website Digg. Each node
 in the network represents a website user, and each directed edge
D. Complexity Analysis denotes that a user replied to another user. Email-DNC [56] is
 the directed network of emails in the 2016 Democratic National
 In this subsection we briefly analyze the time complexity of Committee email leak. Nodes in the network correspond to
the proposed RustGraph model. Note for simplicity, we assume persons in the dataset. A directed edge in the dataset denotes
the input and output dimension of the network are both d. This that someone has sent an email to another person. Bitcoinanalysis is based on a dynamic graph series of length T , with an Alpha [57] is a who-trusts-whom network of people who trade
average number of nodes n and edge e at each timestamp. using Bitcoin on a platform called Bitcoin Alpha. A node in the
 For a L-layer GraphSAGE model which samples uniformly network denotes a user from the platform, and an edge means
a fixed number k of 1-hop neighbors, the time complexity is a user has rated another user. Bitcoin-OTC [58] is similar to
O(Ld2 k L ). For the MLP used in our method, we assume it has Bitcoin-Alpha, which is another who-trusts-whom network of
one layer and the time complexity is O(nd2 ). For the GRU unit, users on the platform Bitcoin OTC. AS-Topology [59] is the
we use the conclusion from [53], which is O(T d2 ). network connections between some autonomous systems of the
 According to above analysis, for the VST-GAE module, Internet, where nodes represent autonomous systems and edges
the posterior inference and prior estimation bring the com- represent their connections.
plexity of O(Ld2 k L + nd2 ); the reconstruction process has 2) Baselines: We compare RustGraph with nine state-of-the-
O(nd2 + n2 d); and the recurrence part has O(T d2 ). The over- art baseline methods described below.
all complexity of VST-GAE is derived by adding these steps, Sedanspot [60] detects anomalies by using a holistic ranwhich is O((2n + Lk L + T )d2 + n2 d). We omit the constant dom walk-based scoring function to compare the connectivity
and Lk L + T term due to their relatively small value, then the changes. CM-Sketch [21] utilizes Count-Min sketch for approxtime complexity for VST-GAE is O(nd2 + n2 d). For TC-GCL imating empirical anomaly metrics to detect anomalous edges.
module, we assume each node at timestamp t has n contrasting node2vec [61] combines depth-first traversal and breadth-first
pairs, then the overall complexity for TC-GCL is O(n2 d). For traversal in random walk subgraph sampling and uses Skipanomaly detector, the time complexity is O(e). gram for embedding learning. Spectral Clustering [62] learns
 To sum up, the final time complexity of RustGraph is embedding by maximizing the similarity between nodes in the
O(n2 dT + nd2 T + eT ). neighborhood. DeepWalk [63] generates random walk-based
 subgraphs and also uses Skip-gram to learn node embedding.
 V. EXPERIMENTS NetWalk [13] learns node embedding by random walking and
 In this section, we conduct extensive experiments to validate uses dynamic clustering of the embeddings to detect anomathe effectiveness of the proposed RustGraph framework. We will lies. AddGraph [14] leverages extended temporal GCN with
first introduce the dataset used in the experiments, along with an attentional GRU to combine structural-temporal informathe compared baseline methods and other necessary setups. Then tion, and proposes a Bernoulli distribution-based negative samwe will demonstrate the empirical results of RustGraph, and we pling strategy. StrGNN [15] extracts h-hop enclosing subgraphs
also conduct ablation studies to prove the effectiveness of the to generate embeddings for the incoming structural-temporal
model design. After that, we will discuss the model performance model. TADDY [16] utilizes a substructure sampling strategy
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3479

 TABLE II
 ANOMALY DETECTION RESULTS ARE REPORTED IN THE AUC-ROC SCORE

and complex node embedding methods to feed the transformer respectively. The layers of all GNN encoders used in the network
model. are 2 by default.
 For the graph embedding methods [21], [60], [61], [62], [63], During the training phase, we train UCI, BTC-OTC, Email
the K-means clustering-based detector [13] is used for anomaly for 200 epochs, and Digg, BTC-Alpha, AS-Topology for 400
detection. Other deep learning methods are trained end-to-end. epochs. The framework is optimized by Adam optimizer with the
 3) Experiment Details: Since there are no ground-truth learning rate of 0.001 for UCI, Email, AS-Topology, and 0.0005
anomalies in the original dataset, we follow the similar pre- for Digg, BTC-Alpha, and BTC-OTC. The hyperparameters
process method in previous works [13], [14], [16] by injecting α, β, γ that control the loss component are set to 1 by default.
artificial anomalous edges. Node2vec [61] is used for generating The weight decay rate  in (19) is set as 0.9.
raw features. The first 50% snapshots are used as the training set,
and the rest are used as the testing set. For testing, we consider
 B. Anomaly Detection Results
three different anomaly injection proportions (1%, 5%, 10%).
We use GraphSAGE [25] as the GNN encoder in the Graph-GRU The results of dynamic graph edge anomaly detection on six
unit. To handle dynamic nodes addition/removal for ease of im- datasets are shown in Table II, from which we can see:
plementation, we enforce the shape At ∈ RN ×N , Xt ∈ RN ×d r Out of 18 comparison items, we have 16 significantly
of all snapshots to be same, where N is the total number of nodes better than and 2 on par with other baseline models,
that have appeared in the dynamic graph G. And we maintain a achieving state-of-the-art results. Compared with the best
mask vector mt ∈ RN to indicate the occurrence of each node results of these baselines, our model achieves an average
for current snapshot. This approach ensures that the input shapes performance increase of 3.64%. Especially on datasets
for different snapshots remain consistent, allowing the encoder AS-Topology, UCI Message, and Email-DNC, the averto handle node additions and removals appropriately. age performance gain is 8.12%, 5.63%, and 5.61%. The
 4) Metric: In our experiment, we employ Area Under the results prove that RustGraph can significantly improve the
Curve of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUC-ROC) as performance of dynamic graph anomaly detection under
the performance metric, which ranges from 0 to 1, with a higher various settings.
value indicating higher quality of the proposed method. r Our method achieves an average increase of 3.07%,
 5) Parameter Setting: For the node embedding dimension d, 3.99%, 3.87% when the anomaly ratio is 1%, 5%, 10%, rewe use 64 for AS-Topology, 512 for Email-DNC, and 128 for spectively. Compared with other methods, the AUC values
the rest. The snapshot sizes are set to be the same as [16] for of RustGraph under different anomaly proportions have no
a fair comparison, which is 1000 for UCI and BTC-OTC, 2000 obvious difference. It justifies that our method can maintain
for Email and BTC-Alpha, and 6000 for Digg and AS-Topology, stability and robustness regardless of the settings.
3480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

 TABLE III
 ABLATION STUDY RESULTS FOR RUSTGRAPH

 r The end-to-end deep learning methods have comprehen- Email-DNC dataset we find the exact opposite effect. This
 sively surpassed the graph embedding methods. We assume finding supports the necessity of combining these modules,
 this is because the deep learning methods simultaneously which are complementary in different scenarios.
 consider the structural and temporal information, and a r In most cases (except using AE as encoder), even the inbigger model also leads to better representation. complete RustGraph network still outperforms other baseline models, which again demonstrates the performance
 advantage of our model on the dynamic graph anomaly
C. Ablation Study detection task.
 To validate the effectiveness of each component in RustGraph,
we conducted ablation studies by masking different components.
Specifically, for the VST-GAE module, we first used the original
auto-encoder (AE) instead of the variational auto-encoder (VAE) D. Impact of Noisy Labels
as the base model to study the necessity of the variational
regularization. Then, we replaced the informative prior with In this part we will discuss how the noisy labels affect the
a standard Gaussian distribution to assess the effectiveness of model performance and how the robust anomaly detector allethe informative prior. Finally, we masked the loss function Lgen viate such influence. Given the fact that there is no open-source
while preserving the auto-encoder design. For the TC-GCL graph dataset with noisy labels, we use random label-flipping to
module, we removed the entire contrasting function Lcon . We manually inject noise to above datasets, and the noise ratio in
will discuss the effect of the robust anomaly detection module the training set varies from 0 to 0.5, with a step size of 0.05. We
in the next subsection. The other hyperparameters and training compare the results of different methods to give a comprehensive
scheme were kept the same for a fair comparison. The results view. For TADDY [16], we use their public codes to re-run the
of ablation experiments are listed in Table III, and we can draw experiment. The results are shown in Fig. 5, and we can conclude
the conclusions: that:
 r In all cases, removing either component leads to a notable r RustGraph is robust to noisy labels under various settings:
 performance drop. Specifically, using the auto-encoder as the blue curve remains stable as the noise ratio increases.
 the base model results in invalid outcomes, where most In comparison, the performance of TADDY (the red curve)
 values are around 50% AUC-ROC. Removing informative drops significantly with more noisy labels.
 prior and Lgen leads to an average 0.74% and 1.85% drop in
 r It is the design of robust anomaly detector that empowers
 AUC-ROC, respectively. And the drop for removing TC- RustGraph the ability to counter noisy labels. According
 GCL is 1.45%. All the performance drops are large enough to the ablation study (the green curve), removing the
 to influence the overall anomaly detection reliability. This structural regularization and label smoothing will lead to
 observation indicates the necessity of each component in a notable performance drop, and as the noise ratio gets
 RustGraph. higher, the performance drop becomes more severe.
 r As an extreme case, using AE as an encoder results in com- r When the noise ratio reaches 50%, the binary anomaly
 pletely unusable results. This may be because AE cannot detection problem becomes intractable and the convenprovide regularization on the latent space and loses the tional methods have failed. But due to the existence of
 ability to model both structural and temporal information. label smoothing design in our method (Section IV-B), the
 r Different modules have different importance among RustGraph model can obtain supervision signal other than
 datasets. For example, removing Lgen has less impact on the the given labels. So even under such a extreme case, the
 UCI dataset compared to removing TC-GCL, while on the performance can still maintain on a high level.
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3481

Fig. 5. AUC-ROC curves under different noise ratios. Because there is no ground-truth noisy labels, we use random label-flipping to inject noisy labels to original
dataset. The ours* marker denotes the ablation study of RustGraph, where we remove the structural regularization and label smoothing. For results of TADDY, we
use their open-source code to run the experiment.

Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis results for embedding dimensions d on three datasets with three kinds of anomaly ratio.

Fig. 7. Sensitivity analysis results for training ratios on three datasets in box plots. The diamond marks are outliers.

 the learning ability; while too large d makes the model hard to
E. Sensitivity Analysis converge.
 We further analyze the influence of different hyperparameters 2) Training Ratios: To evaluate the effect of different trainon the experimental results, including the dimension of node ing ratios, we conduct experiments with training ratios from
embedding d, the training data ratio, the contribution of each {20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%}, and the results are summarized
component loss, and the snapshot sizes. The experiments are in Fig. 7. With the increase of training ratio, the AUC-ROC
carried out on UCI Messages, Bitcoin-Alpha, and Bitcoin-OTC on Bitcoin-Alpha significantly increases, and other two datasets
with 10% anomaly ratio and other parameters are kept the remain stable. We also discover that both variance and outliers
same. decrease slightly as the training ratio increases, suggesting that
 1) Embedding Dimensions: In this experiment, we study the sufficient data is beneficial for model training. Note that our
influence of embedding dimension d. The value of d ranges method still achieves state-of-the-art results even for a relatively
from {8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512}, and the results are shown in low training ratio (20%). This may be attributed to our structural-
Fig. 6. As we can see, the AUC-ROC generally increases as the temporal graph encoder, which can capture rich information
embedding dimension increases, and becomes optimal when d even with few training data.
reaches 128. The AUC-ROC curves even slightly drop when d 3) Contribution of Each Component Loss: To further quancontinually grows to 512. A possible explanation is that small tify the contribution of each component loss in (20), we set α, β,
d may not capture all the semantic information, thus reducing and γ in the range of {0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0} on UCI Messages.
3482 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Fig. 8. Sensitivity analysis results for the volume of each component loss.

 TABLE IV
 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS RESULTS FOR SNAPSHOT SIZES ON THREE DATASETS

According to the first three subfigures in Fig. 8, the most sensitive
hyperparameter is α, which controls the component of Lenc .
With the growth of α the detection performance also grows,
this validates the importance of the structural-temporal graph
encoder. On the other hand, the performance is rather stable as
β and γ change. However, we can see that when the α is rather
low, using larger β or γ could still improve the performance
to some extend. From this experiment, we can conclude that
our RustGraph model is relatively insensitive to the choice of
hyperparameters, so we simply set all of them to 1 by default.
Furthermore, we also study the roles of Lgen and Lcon in (15)
using the same range of hyperparameters, as shown in the
last subfigure of Fig. 8. The performance increases with the
increase of the weight of Lgen and Lcon , which demonstrates
that the VST-GAE and TC-GCL module are helpful for anomaly
detection tasks.
 4) Snapshot Sizes: We also investigate the impact of varying
snapshot sizes on the performance of anomaly detection, and the
results are summarized in Table IV. Overall, the performance of Fig. 9. Evolution of four dynamic graph properties over time.
both methods tends to increase and then decrease as snapshot
sizes grow. We speculate that when snapshot sizes are too small,
 coefficient [64], density, transitivity, and number of connected
the number of nodes within an individual graph snapshot is
 components as the graph evolves, as shown in Fig. 9.
limited, leading to insufficient structural information. On the
 The first three subplots in Fig. 9, the clustering coefficient,
other hand, overly large snapshot sizes result in fewer generated
 density, and transitivity metrics, reflect the graph’s connectivity,
graph snapshots, leading to inadequate temporal information.
 where larger values suggest a higher level of connectivity or in-
These two extreme cases highlight the importance of making a
 formation flow. Notably, Email-DNC exhibits a higher mean and
reasonable choice for the snapshot size, as it can significantly
 greater fluctuation compared to other datasets, indicating a richer
impact the model’s performance. In addition, the choice of
 source of structural-temporal information. This may explain the
snapshot size appears to have a more pronounced impact on
 more substantial performance improvement of RustGraph on
TADDY’s performance than RustGraph’s. On the other hand,
 this dataset.
RustGraph remains robust and consistently performs well across
 The final subplot, connected components, reflects the number
various snapshot sizes, demonstrating its robustness to different
 of disconnected cliques in the dataset. It’s worth noting that
temporal resolutions.
 typical GNN-based methods tend to perform better on datasets
 with fewer connected components because they make reliable
F. Graph Properties Analysis detections in a more unified and interconnected graph. This is
 In this section, we examine the time-variant graph properties corroborated by the fact that the two most challenging datasets
to understand the improvements demonstrated by RustGraph (AS-Topology and Digg), as indicated by the curves, also excompared to other baselines. We visualize the graph clustering hibit the lowest average performance in Table II (calculated
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3483

by averaging the AUC results of all listed methods except [10] W. Cheng, K. Zhang, H. Chen, G. Jiang, Z. Chen, and W. Wang,
RustGraph). Interestingly, RustGraph still achieved consider- “Ranking causal anomalies via temporal and dynamical analysis on vanishing correlations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
able performance on these two challenging datasets. We spec- Discov. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 805–814,
ulate that this counterintuitive phenomenon could be because doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939765.
the proposed encoder has a strong capability to capture local [11] B. Dong et al., “Efficient discovery of abnormal event sequences in
 enterprise security systems,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
structural information within connected components through Singapore, 2017, pp. 707–715, doi: 10.1145/3132847.3132854.
learning with reconstruction. Additionally, the robust anomaly [12] S. Ranshous, S. Shen, D. Koutra, S. Harenberg, C. Faloutsos, and N.
detector helps reduce noise caused by large number of connected F. Samatova, “Anomaly detection in dynamic networks: A survey,”
 Wiley Interdiscipl. Rev.: Comput. Statist., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 223–247,
components. Therefore, given that other models struggle to 2015.
learn effective features on challenging datasets, RustGraph’s [13] W. Yu, W. Cheng, C. C. Aggarwal, K. Zhang, H. Chen, and W. Wang,
performance remains robust. “NetWalk: A flexible deep embedding approach for anomaly detection in dynamic networks,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
 Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, London, U.K., 2018, pp. 2672–2681,
 VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220024.
 [14] L. Zheng, Z. Li, J. Li, Z. Li, and J. Gao, “AddGraph: Anomaly detec-
 In this paper, we first analyze two major limitations of recent tion in dynamic graph using attention-based temporal GCN,” in Proc.
studies for anomaly detection in dynamic graphs: the separately 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Macao, China, 2019, pp. 4419–4425,
 doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/614.
modeling of structural and temporal information in dynamic [15] L. Cai et al., “Structural temporal graph neural networks for anomaly
graph representation learning; and the vulnerable models trained detection in dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
by unreliable noisy labels. To overcome these obstacles, we Manage., 2021, pp. 3747–3756.
 [16] Y. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in dynamic graphs via transpropose RustGraph, a robust anomaly detection framework former,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Nov. 2, 2021,
that jointly learns structural-temporal dependency of dynamic doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3124061.
graphs, which is also a self-supervised framework that can [17] Y. Yang, Y. Xu, Y. Sun, Y. Dong, F. Wu, and Y. Zhuang, “Mining
 fraudsters and fraudulent strategies in large-scale mobile social netbe trained end-to-end. Specifically, we leverage a graph-based works,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 169–179,
variational auto-encoder and a temporal consistent graph con- Jan. 2021.
trastive learning module to simultaneously encode structural [18] S. M. Kazemi et al., “Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A
 survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 2648–2720, 2020.
and temporal dependencies, and a robust anomaly detector that [19] S. Wang and P. S. Yu, “Graph neural networks in anomaly detection,” in
secures the data reliability and model robustness. Our proposed Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin,
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on six real-world Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 557–578.
 [20] C. C. Aggarwal, Y. Zhao, and S. Y. Philip, “Outlier detection in graph
dynamic graph datasets. Despite the success of the model, there streams,” in Proc. IEEE 27th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2011, pp. 399–409.
are still areas for improvement. For example, in dynamic graphs, [21] S. Ranshous, S. Harenberg, K. Sharma, and N. F. Samatova, “A scalable
the time interval between snapshots is an important parameter, approach for outlier detection in edge streams using sketch-based approximations,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, Miami, Florida, USA,
but the current works have rarely considered it, and we may 2016, pp. 189–197, doi: 10.1137/1.9781611974348.22.
leave it as future work. [22] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon, France, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 REFERENCES forum?id=SJU4ayYgl
 [23] R. Liao, “Graph neural networks: Graph generation,” in Graph Neural
 [1] L. Wu, P. Cui, J. Pei, L. Zhao, and L. Song, “Graph neural networks,” in Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Germany:
 Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Springer, 2022, pp. 225–250.
 Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 27–37. [24] T. Kipf and M. Welling, “Variational graph auto-encoders,”
 [2] S. M. Kazemi, “Dynamic graph neural networks,” in Graph Neural 2016, arXiv:1611.07308.
 Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applications. Berlin, Germany: [25] W. L. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive repre-
 Springer, 2022, pp. 323–349. sentation learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Annu. Conf. Neu-
 [3] T. Y. Berger-Wolf and J. Saia, “A framework for analysis of dynamic social ral Inf. Process. Syst., Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017, pp. 1024–
 networks,” in Proc. 12th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data 1034. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/
 Mining, 2006, pp. 523–528. hash/5dd9db5e033da9c6fb5ba83c7a7ebea9-Abstract.html
 [4] K. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Rong, J. X. Yu, and J. Huang, “Finding critical users [26] E. Hajiramezanali, A. Hasanzadeh, K. R. Narayanan, N. Duffield, M. Zhou,
 in social communities via graph convolutions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data and X. Qian, “Variational graph recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. Annu.
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 456–468, Jan. 2023. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019, pp. 10 700–
 [5] Y. Zheng et al., “Clustering social audiences in business information 10 710. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/
 networks,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 100, 2020, Art. no. 107126. hash/a6b8deb7798e7532ade2a8934477d3ce-Abstract.html
 [6] M. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Yu, Q. Liu, and L. Wang, “Dynamic graph neural [27] D. Kreuzer, D. Beaini, W. Hamilton, V. Létourneau, and P. Tossou, “Renetworks for sequential recommendation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., thinking graph transformers with spectral attention,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4741–4753, May 2022. Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 21618–21629.
 [7] A. F. Subahi and K. E. Bouazza, “An intelligent IoT-based system design [28] X. Liu et al., “Self-supervised learning: Generative or contrastive,” IEEE
 for controlling and monitoring greenhouse temperature,” IEEE Access, Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 857–876, Jan. 2023.
 vol. 8, pp. 125 488–125 500, 2020. [29] Y. Wang, W. Jin, and T. Derr, “Graph neural networks: Self-supervised
 [8] Z. Cheng et al., “Time2Graph+: Bridging time series and graph represen- learning,” in Graph Neural Networks: Foundations, Frontiers, and Applitation learning via multiple attentions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., cations. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2022, pp. 391–420.
 vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2078–2090, Feb. 2023. [30] P. Velickovic, W. Fedus, W. L. Hamilton, P. Liò, Y. Bengio, and R.
 [9] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with D. Hjelm, “Deep graph infomax,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Repdeep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., early access, Oct 8, 2021, resentations, New Orleans, LA, USA, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
 doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2021.3118815. //openreview.net/forum?id=rklz9iAcKQ
3484 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 36, NO. 7, JULY 2024

[31] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive [53] M. Rotman and L. Wolf, “Shuffling recurrent neural networks,” in Proc.
 learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 9428–9435.
 2020, pp. 5812–5823. [54] T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social
[32] Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, F. Yu, Q. Liu, S. Wu, and L. Wang, “Deep graph contrastive Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, 2009.
 representation learning,” 2020, arXiv: 2006.04131. [55] M. De Choudhury, H. Sundaram, A. John, and D. D. Seligmann, “Social
[33] B. Chen et al., “GCCAD: Graph contrastive learning for anomaly de- synchrony: Predicting mimicry of user actions in online social media,” in
 tection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8037–8051, Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. Eng., 2009, pp. 151–158.
 Aug. 2023. [56] R. A. Rossi and N. K. Ahmed, “The network data repository with inter-
[34] S. Tian, R. Wu, L. Shi, L. Zhu, and T. Xiong, “Self-supervised representa- active graph analytics and visualization,” in Proc. 29th AAAI Conf. Artif.
 tion learning on dynamic graphs,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Intell., Austin, Texas, USA, 2015, pp. 4292–4293. [Online]. Available:
 Manage., 2021, pp. 1814–1823. http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI15/paper/view/9553
[35] L. Wang et al., “TCL: Transformer-based dynamic graph modelling via [57] S. Kumar, F. Spezzano, V. Subrahmanian, and C. Faloutsos, “Edge weight
 contrastive learning,” 2021, arXiv:2105.07944. prediction in weighted signed networks,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf.
[36] S. Sukhbaatar, J. Bruna, M. Paluri, L. Bourdev, and R. Fergus, “Training Data Mining, 2016, pp. 221–230.
 convolutional networks with noisy labels,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. [58] S. Kumar, B. Hooi, D. Makhija, M. Kumar, C. Faloutsos, and V. S.
 Representations Workshop, 2015. Subrahmanian, “REV2: Fraudulent user prediction in rating platforms,”
[37] J. Goldberger and E. Ben-Reuven, “Training deep neural-networks using in Proc. 11th ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining, Marina Del Rey,
 a noise adaptation layer,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representa- CA, USA, 2018, pp. 333–341, doi: 10.1145/3159652.3159729.
 tions, Toulon, France, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ [59] B. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Massey, and L. Zhang, “Collecting the internet asforum?id=H12GRgcxg level topology,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 35, no. 1,
[38] T. Miyato, S. Ichi Maeda, M. Koyama, and S. Ishii, “Virtual adversarial pp. 53–61, 2005.
 training: A regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised [60] D. Eswaran and C. Faloutsos, “SedanSpot: Detecting anomalies in edge
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41, no. 8, streams,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 953–958.
 pp. 1979–1993, Aug. 2019. [61] A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning
[39] S. Reed, H. Lee, D. Anguelov, C. Szegedy, D. Erhan, and A. Rabinovich, for networks,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Dis-
 “Training deep neural networks on noisy labels with bootstrapping,” in cov. Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2016, pp. 855–864,
 Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations Workshop, 2015. [Online]. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939754.
 Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6596 [62] U. Von Luxburg, “A tutorial on spectral clustering,” Statist. Comput.,
[40] J. Jin, Y. Li, and C. L. P. Chen, “Pattern classification with corrupted vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 395–416, 2007.
 labeling via robust broad learning system,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., [63] B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “DeepWalk: Online learnvol. 34, no. 10, pp. 4959–4971, Oct. 2022. ing of social representations,” in Proc. 20th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
[41] J. Li et al., “Compositional temporal grounding with structured variational Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 701–710,
 cross-graph correspondence learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. doi: 10.1145/2623330.2623732.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 3032–3041. [64] J. Saramäki, M. Kivelä, J.-P. Onnela, K. Kaski, and J. Kertész, “Gener-
[42] J. Li et al., “Variational cross-graph reasoning and adaptive struc- alizations of the clustering coefficient to weighted complex networks,”
 tured semantics learning for compositional temporal grounding,” IEEE Phys. Rev. E, vol. 75, Feb. 2007, Art. no. 027105, doi: 10.1103/Phys-
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 12601–12617, RevE.75.027105.
 Oct. 2023.
[43] T. Liu and D. Tao, “Classification with noisy labels by importance
 reweighting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 38, no. 3,
 pp. 447–461, Mar. 2015. Jianhao Guo received the BE degree from Zhejiang
[44] Y. Wang, A. Kucukelbir, and D. M. Blei, “Robust probabilistic modeling University, Hangzhou, China, in 2020. He is currently
 with Bayesian data reweighting,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., working toward the PhD degree in computer science
 Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2017, pp. 3646–3655. [Online]. Available: http: with Zhejiang University, under the supervision of
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v70/wang17g.html Prof. Siliang Tang. His research interests include
[45] L. Jiang et al., “MentorNet: Learning data-driven curriculum for very deep concentrates on graph learning and its applications.
 neural networks on corrupted labels,” in Proc. 35th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., He has published a paper focusing the problem of
 Stockholm, Sweden, 2018, pp. 2309–2318. [Online]. Available: http:// graph contrastive learning in the top-tier conference
 proceedings.mlr.press/v80/jiang18c.html IJCAI as the first co-author.
[46] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural
 networks with extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Annu. Conf.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Montréal, Canada, 2018, pp. 8536–
 8546. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/
 hash/a19744e268754fb0148b017647355b7b-Abstract.html Siliang Tang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
[47] E. Dai, C. Aggarwal, and S. Wang, “NRGNN: Learning a label noise degree from the Nation University of Ireland,
 resistant graph neural network on sparsely and noisily labeled graphs,” in Maynooth. He is currently a full professor with the
 Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University.
 NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 227–236, His research interests include natural language prodoi: 10.1145/3447548.3467364. cessing, cross-media analysis, and graph mining. So
[48] J. Xu et al., “Robust network enhancement from flawed networks,” IEEE far, he has published more than a hundred papers
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 3507–3520, Jul. 2022. in the top-tier scientific conferences/journals such as
[49] M. Zhang, L. Hu, C. Shi, and X. Wang, “Adversarial label-flipping attack AAAI, IJCAI, KDD, NIPS, ICML, ACL, EMNLP,
 and defense for graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data NAACL, SIGIR, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
 Mining, 2020, pp. 791–800. and Data Engineering (NLP and Graph mining);
[50] Y. Li, J. Yin, and L. Chen, “Unified robust training for graph neural ACM MM, CVPR, ICCV, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE Transactions
 networks against label noise,” in Proc. 25th Pacific-Asia Conf., 2021, on Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
 pp. 528–540, doi: 10.1007/978–3-030-75762-5_42. (Multimodal Understanding, and Graph Neural Networks in Computer Vision);
[51] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in Proc. IEEE VIS, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Data
 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Banff, AB, Canada, 2014. [Online]. Visualization). He has been serving as an area chair/senior PC member or PC
 Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114 member in conferences such as AAAI, IJCAI, NIPS, ICML, CVPR, ACL,
[52] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple frame- EMNLP, NAACL, and reviewers of journals such as IEEE Transactions on
 work for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. 37th Image Processing, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, IEEE Transactions on
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [Online]. Available: http: Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, ACM Computing Surveys, Nature-Scientific
 //proceedings.mlr.press/v119/chen20j.html Reports, etc.
GUO et al.: RUSTGRAPH: ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN DYNAMIC GRAPHS 3485

 Juncheng Li received the BE degree from the Harbin Lingfei Wu received the PhD degree in computer
 Institute of Technology, China, in 2019. He is cur- science from the College of William and Mary,
 rently working toward the PhD degree with Zhe- in 2016. He is an engineering manager with the
 jiang University, advised by Prof. Yueting Zhuang Content and Knowledge Graph Group at Pinterest,
 and Prof. Siliang Tang. His research interests include where he focuses on building the next generation
 vision-and-language, video understanding, embodied Knowledge Graph to empower Pinterest recommenintelligence, and graph mining. He has published dation/research systems. He has published more than
 several papers in top-tier scientific conferences as the 70 top-ranked conference and journal papers and is
 first author, such as CVPR, ICCV, NeurIPS, ACM a co-inventor of more than 30 filed US patents. He
 Multimedia. was the recipients of the Best Paper Award and Best
 Student Paper Award of several conferences such as
 AAAI workshop on DLGMA’20, IEEE ICC’19 and KDD workshop on DLG’19.
 Kaihang Pan received the BE degree in software His research has been featured in numerous media outlets, including Natureengineering from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, News, YahooNews, Venturebeat, and TechTalks. He has co-organized more
 China, in 2018. He is currently working toward the than ten conferences and workshops including AAAI’21, IEEE BigData’19,
 MS degree in computer science with Zhejiang Uni- IEEE BigData’18 and is the founding co-chair for Workshops of Deep Learning
 versity, Hangzhou, China. His research concentration on Graphs (with KDD’20, AAAI’20, KDD’19, and IEEE BigData’19). He
 includes graph data mining and natural language has currently served as associate editor of ACM Transactions on Knowledge
 processing. Discovery from Data and International Journal of Intelligent Systems, and
 regularly served as a SPC/PC member of the following major AI/ML/NLP
 conferences including KDD, IJCAI, AAAI, NIPS, ICML, ICLR, and ACL.