IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024 5004217

 Scalable Industrial Visual Anomaly Detection With
 Partial Semantics Aggregation Vision Transformer
 Haiming Yao , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wei Luo , Student Member, IEEE,
 Jianan Lou , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Wenyong Yu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Xiaotian Zhang , Zhenfeng Qiang , and Hui Shi , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— In recent years, the field of industrial visual I. I NTRODUCTION
anomaly detection (VAD) has attracted significant attention in
the context of advanced smart manufacturing systems. However,
several limitations remain unresolved in existing approaches.
While these methods can achieve satisfactory performance when
 A UTOMATIC visual anomaly detection (VAD) has garnered considerable attention and widespread implementation across various sectors in the smart industry, due to
training separate models for different categories, their scalability its highly automated, nondestructive, and efficient detection
and performance suffer when faced with the challenge of simul- capabilities. VAD has found practical applications in a range of
taneous training for multiple categories. Reconstruction-based
methods generally suffer from the identical mapping problem. industrial scenarios, including product quality inspection [1],
To address these limitations, this study introduces the partial textured surface defect detection [2], [3], and smart power
semantic aggregation vision transformer (PSA-VT), a scalable systems [4], among others. The utilization of VAD offers
framework for industrial visual anomaly detection (VAD) that substantial improvements in both efficiency and accuracy
enables simultaneous multicategory anomaly detection using
 compared with traditional manual inspection methods.
a single model. Our proposed PSA-VT framework adopts a
hybrid design strategy. First, a pretrained convolutional neural Supervised learning-based methods and unsupervised
network (CNN) is employed to extract multiscale discriminative learning-based methods represent the two predominant
local representation. Subsequently, the PSA-VT is introduced approaches in industrial VAD. Supervised methods, leveraging
to perform representation reconstruction through long-range annotated datasets consisting of numerous defective samples
global semantic aggregation. Finally, the anomalous properties
 and their corresponding labels, have demonstrated robust
can be estimated by evaluating the reconstruction error of
the representations. We conducted extensive experiments using detection performance [4], [5] across diverse scenarios. Neverthe Mvtec AD industrial anomaly detection dataset, as well theless, the process of collecting and annotating a large number
as the semantic anomaly detection datasets. The experimental of defect samples is often impractical and time consuming in
results demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art real-world industrial settings. Consequently, Wan et al. [1],
(SOTA) performance by capturing high-level semantics. Notably,
 Yao et al. [2], and Yang et al. [3] have turned their attention
PSA-VT surpasses other methods for the one-model-15-category
anomaly detection tasks on the Mvtec AD dataset. Furthermore, to unsupervised methods, which possess the advantage of
we applied incremental learning techniques to enable the rapid utilizing only normal nondefective samples without the need
deployment of PSA-VT in a real industrial scenario. for any annotations.
 Index Terms— Anomaly localization, defect inspection, scal- The field of unsupervised VAD commonly adopts a method
able visual anomaly detection (VAD), self-supervised learning, of learning the distribution of normal patterns through reconunsupervised learning, vision transformer (ViT). struction. The underlying assumption is that only normal
 samples are utilized during the model training, and the objective is to generate reconstructions that closely resemble the
 input. During testing, both normal and abnormal samples will
 Manuscript received 26 August 2023; revised 29 October 2023; result in reconstructions that resemble the normal distribution.
accepted 2 December 2023. Date of publication 18 December 2023; date
of current version 2 January 2024. This work was supported in part by the The discrepancy between the input and the reconstruction
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 52375494. The is then employed as the criterion for anomaly detection.
Associate Editor coordinating the review process was Dr. Bardia Yousefi. This approach has been extensively studied in subsequent
(Corresponding author: Wenyong Yu.)
 Haiming Yao, Wei Luo, Jianan Lou, Xiaotian Zhang, and Zhenfeng research endeavors. However, prevalent reconstruction-based
Qiang are with the State Key Laboratory of Precision Measurement VAD methods suffer from a significant limitation known
Technology and Instruments, Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua as “trivial solutions” or “identical mapping.” This refers to
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: yhm22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
luow23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; ljn22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhangxt6@ instances where the model simply outputs a direct replica of
foxmail.com; 18302973462@163.com). the input during the reconstruction process, without consid-
 Wenyong Yu is with the State Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacturing ering its semantics. As a consequence, even outlier samples
Equipment and Technology, School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China can obtain high-fidelity reconstructions, posing a challenge for
(e-mail: ywy@hust.edu.cn). anomaly discrimination in reconstruction-based methods.
 Hui Shi is with the School of Mechanical and Electronic Engineer- In practical VAD, the detection of anomalies across different
ing, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China (e-mail:
clove_shi@whut.edu.cn). categories remains an underexplored area. This issue holds
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIM.2023.3343832 significant relevance in real-world industrial environments,
 1557-9662 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

as illustrated in Fig. 1. Traditional methods encounter challenges when multiple product types require simultaneous
detection, necessitating the utilization of independent model
parameters for each product category. Consequently, this leads
to substantial memory consumption for storage and inference
purposes. To tackle this problem, we propose a scalable model
that offers a comprehensive solution adaptable to inspections
of all product types through the use of a single set of unified
parameters. Unlike traditional methods that become increasingly impractical as the number of product types expands due
to the need for separate parameter storage for each category,
our proposed scalable approach requires the storage of only
one set of generic parameters. This characteristic allows for
scalability and versatility, regardless of the number of product
types involved.
 The innovative multicategory anomaly detection approach
poses a greater challenge than the conventional single-category Fig. 1. Real-world industrial settings demand simultaneous testing of
method. The model is required to learn the normal distribution numerous products. Conventionally, the inspection of captured image data
 from diverse product lines involves the use of multiple models in memory-inof multiple categories and perform the reconstruction process tensive methodologies. However, the proposed innovative generalizable model
for each distinct category simultaneously, which may lead the provides a compelling alternative, requiring only a single model to effectively
model to further favor “trivial solutions” without considering detect multiple products simultaneously.
semantic information. Moreover, the inference process requires
the model to detect multiple categories without explicit label
information or fine tuning, and thus, the model should not category anomaly detection. To achieve this objective,
exhibit any biases toward a specific category. Such biases may we have proposed a novel hybrid VAD approach, called
result in the misclassification of samples from other categories the PSA-VT. The PSA-VT framework comprises two
as anomalous, even if they are normal or anomalous. This key modules: a local feature representation module,
highlights the crucial importance of the model’s ability to built upon a pretrained CNN and a global feature
comprehend the global semantics of objects. reconstruction module, powered by the ViT within the
 CNNs have been widely used and achieved impressive partial semantic aggregation paradigm. Specifically, the
performance in various vision tasks, including VAD. However, feature extraction module extracts the feature maps with
their limited receptive field hinders them from comprehend- local contexts as descriptors. On the other hand, the
ing global semantics, leading to reduced discriminability feature reconstruction module utilizes a global context
between normal and defective patterns [6]. To address this aggregation paradigm to reconstruct abnormal features
issue, the vision transformer (ViT) was proposed [7], which into normal patterns.
uses the self-attention mechanism to model images from a 2) To assess the efficacy of our proposed PSA-VT method,
sequence perspective and capture global context. This promis- a comprehensive evaluation is conducted on the widely
ing methodology has the potential to address the inherent utilized MVTec AD dataset. The evaluation results
shortcomings of CNNs in the context of VAD and has garnered demonstrate that PSA-VT achieves SOTA performance
substantial attention in recent research endeavors. in terms of AUROC, with 96.4 for anomaly detection
 Drawing from the preceding analysis, we have devised a and 96.9 for anomaly segmentation, in the context of
novel hybrid reconstruction framework called partial semantic scalable multicategory anomaly detection (one-modelaggregation vision transformer (PSA-VT) to capitalize on 15-category setting). To gain a deeper understanding
the strengths of both convolutional neural networks (CNNs) of the underlying mechanisms and factors influencing
and ViTs, enabling a scalable approach to cross-category performance, ablation experiments are performed along
VAD in industrial scenarios. In the PSA-VT framework, with related analyses. Moreover, in order to ascertain
CNNs are first employed to extract multiscale discrimi- the practical applicability of our method in real-world
native local representation, effectively transforming image industrial scenarios, incremental learning techniques are
pixels into deep feature maps imbued with local seman- employed, and the effectiveness of our method is valitics. Subsequently, the partial semantic aggregation paradigm dated.
is introduced within ViT, incorporating auxiliary aggre- The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
gation tokens to extract the global semantic context of offers a literature review that encompasses pertinent studies on
the original feature’s patch tokens. In this paradigm, the VAD, with particular emphasis on reconstruction-based and
reconstruction task transforms into a self-supervised seman- ViT-based methods. Section III elaborates on the intricacies
tic aggregation process. This study offers two primary of our proposed approach, the PSA-VT. Section IV presents
contributions. a thorough analysis of the experimental findings. Finally,
 1) We envisioned a challenging yet practical detection Section V summarizes the conclusion and provides a concise
 framework for industrial applications: scalable multi- summary of this article.
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

 II. R ELATED W ORKS B. Transformer Model in Anomaly Detection
A. Reconstruction-Based Anomaly Detection The ViT, a novel architecture in the field of computer vision,
 has demonstrated remarkable efficacy across various visual
 The extensive research has been undertaken in the domain tasks [20]. However, its utilization in the VAD community,
of VAD, encompassing various methodologies. Notably, which predominantly relies on CNN-based methods, has been
embedding-based approaches [8], [9] have been explored, relatively limited. To address this gap, several models have
which involve the modeling of normal feature distributions been proposed that incorporate ViTs into the VAD framework.
in a latent space. These approaches utilize the dissimilarity The inpainting transformer (InTra) was introduced in [21],
between instances and normal feature clusters as a discrimi- offering a solution for image reconstruction through training
native metric. However, for the purpose of this study, our focus a model to inpaint the missing patch by the surrounding
is specifically directed toward reconstruction-based approaches patches. In a similar vein, U-transformer [22] tackles feature
in VAD. reconstruction by employing a transformer inspired by the
 Deep autoencoders (AEs) are the most popular model in U-net structure. Furthermore, MSTUnet [23] adopts a strategy
reconstruction-based VAD methods. To address the limita- that combines defect synthesis and image inpainting and
tions of standard AE, several extensions have been proposed incorporates the Swim transformer to leverage its long-range
to enhance their capabilities in anomaly detection. For modeling capability for inpainting purposes.
instance, the memory mechanism was proposed in the MemAE This study presents a novel reconstruction method termed
model [10] that explicitly stores the prototypical normality PSA-VT. By leveraging the long-distance semantic depenpatterns to restrict the high-fidelity anomaly reconstruction dency of the ViT, PSA-VT adopts a paradigm of partial
issue encountered in vanilla AE. Similarly, the partition semantic aggregation to accomplish self-supervised feature
memory technique proposed in [11] ensures the preserva- reconstruction. This approach overcomes the drawbacks of
tion of normal semantic integrity. In addition, the multilevel identity mapping observed in existing reconstruction-based
image reconstruction (MLIR) model [12] generates multilevel methods, establishing a new paradigm for scalable multiclass
reconstruction outcomes with different retentions, while the VAD.
reconstruction by inpainting for anomaly detection (RIAD)
model [13], augmented with attention in [14], leverages image III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY: PSA-VT
inpainting techniques to improve the reconstruction process.
 A. Theoretical Analysis and Motivation
Similar concepts are also explored in [15], where predictive
regression is utilized within the local receptive field of CNNs In order to investigate the occurrence of the “identical mapas an alternative to direct reconstruction. In addition, the ping” phenomenon during the reconstruction process, we begin
novel Draem method introduced in [16] introduces an extra with a theoretical inquiry into the reconstruction task, focusing
pseudo-anomaly and discriminative subnetwork to enhance on the underlying mechanisms of various neural networks
anomaly segmentation. While most existing methods focus like [19]. In the case of CNNs, the output Y is a function of
on the reconstruction difference at the pixel level, the deep the input X , determined by a set of weight coefficients (W)
feature reconstruction (DFR) approach [17] employs feature and a bias term (B) and can be represented by the following
reconstruction difference. DFR leverages the local semantic equation:
perception capability of the CNN network, enabling it to Y = W · X + B. (1)
extract multilevel features and perform feature-level reconstruction, thereby achieving more robust anomaly detection To achieve the reconstruction of the input X as Y = X , a CNN
performance. To address the issue of over generalization in can assign the weight coefficient W as the identity matrix I
feature reconstruction, the dual-Siamese network [18] incorpo- and the bias B as 0. However, this approach results in a “trivial
rates synthetic defects and introduces feature repair techniques solution,” where the network fails to capture the input’s true
to enhance the stability of the reconstruction process. More- semantic nature. On the other hand, the mechanism underlying
over, approaches such as [1] and [6] employ feature mapping the self-attention-based ViT can be summarized as follows:
  T 
and correspondence mechanisms to establish diverse normality Y = ξ θq (X ) · θk (X ) θv (X ) + X (2)
relations across different feature domains, thereby expanding | {z }
the applicability of reconstruction-based methods. However, A
it is noteworthy that most existing methods, including the where θ is the linear transformation, ξ is the soft-max function,
aforementioned ones, are predominantly based on the CNN and A represents the attention matrix. In order to reconstruct
model. The local semantic awareness of CNNs may limit the the input and achieve Y = X , the model may learn to set
effectiveness of reconstruction-based methods when dealing θv and attention matrix to I. However, this also leads to the
with challenging defect types that exhibit global seman- “trivial solution,” where the attention mechanism of each token
tics. Moreover, the aforementioned approaches are developed is more focused on its own information, rendering the global
within the framework of separate training for each category attention feature of the transformer model ineffective. As a
and do not investigate the one-model-multicategory scalabil- result, the global semantics of the object cannot be learned.
ity [19], which limits their applicability in scenarios, where In addition, residual connections that may lead the information
multiple categories of production need to be inspected simul- leakage within the model can also be an important shortcut for
taneously. the reconstruction task.
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 2. (a) ViT [7] employs a class token to capture long-range semantic dependencies among the original image’s patch tokens for visual classification.
(b) Directly using the patch tokens for the reconstruction task with the vanilla transformer risks falling into the trivial solution of shortcut reconstruction.
(c) Our proposed PSA-VT introduces aggregation tokens to aggregate global semantic representations while preserving spatial information by aggregating the
information of position-disjoint patch tokens under the supervision of the reconstruction task.

 To effectively tackle the challenges of multicategory module. Initially, the input image undergoes conversion into a
anomaly detection tasks and avoid the aforementioned trivial multiscale discriminative local representation via a pretrained
solutions, it is crucial for a model to have a comprehen- CNN. Subsequently, the PSA-VT is employed to reconstruct
sive grasp of object semantics. Drawing from the approach the extracted representation by leveraging global contextual
adopted by ViT [7], which employs a class token for global semantic aggregation.
semantic aggregation in visual classification, we propose a In the proposed partial semantic aggregation paradigm,
novel strategy that leverages auxiliary aggregation tokens. we initially transform the feature representation into a
As shown in Fig. 2(a), ViT introduces an additional class sequence of feature patch tokens. To facilitate the aggregation
token to accomplish visual classification tasks by aggregating process, we introduce an auxiliary aggregation label sequence
high-level global semantic information. However, as depicted that shares the same shape as the feature patch token sequence.
in Fig. 2(b), when employing the standard transformer model The aggregation token sequence is partitioned randomly into
for the reconstruction task, the “trivial solution” mentioned multiple disjoint subsets. Each subset is then combined with
earlier may occur, especially when attempting to match intri- a set of partial feature patch tokens whose positions do not
cate multicategory distributions. overlap, forming a new set of sequences. These sequences are
 To address the above problems, we present a novel partial subsequently input to the transformer encoder.
semantics aggregation transformer with auxiliary aggregation The aggregation tokens within each sequence enable the
tokens that enables the model to extract high-level global perception of information from feature patch tokens that
semantics while preserving spatial information for the recon- occupy nonintersecting positions. This allows for the aggrestruction task. As shown in Fig. 2(c), our novel approach goes gation of feature patch tokens through long-distance semantic
beyond ViT [7] by generating representations with holistic dependencies, resulting in the global semantics of the partial
global semantics for all spatial locations in the self-supervised feature patch tokens for each sequence being aggregated in
learning paradigm. Specifically, we utilize a set of learnable aggregation tokens after encoding. In the latent space, all
aggregation tokens that share the same shape as the original aggregation tokens from across all sequences are merged,
patch tokens. This ensures that each position in the original while the raw feature patch tokens are discarded. The resulting
feature sequence has an aggregation token. The aggregation a new combined sequence, which is then processed by the
tokens are divided into subsets that are associated with feature decoder to reconstruct the original features.
patch tokens from disjoint positions, facilitating the learning In Sections III-C–III-G, we will provide detailed
of long-range semantic dependencies during the reconstruction explanations of each module of the PSA-VT method.
task. As a result, our method can obtain position-dependent
global semantics for each position. In Section III-B we shall
elaborate on this approach in a comprehensive manner.
 C. Local Feature Representation With Pretrained CNN
B. Overall Pipeline To derive local discriminative semantic representations from
 Fig. 3 illustrates the overarching architecture of our pro- input images I ∈ R H ×W ×3 , we employ a process that involves
posed PSA-VT. Serving as a hybrid framework, it combines converting the raw pixel values into CNN deep feature maps.
the strengths of both CNN and ViTs, thereby encompass- Consistent with the previous research [17], we utilize a preing local and global semantic awareness. The framework trained CNN that has been trained on visual recognition tasks
is primarily composed of two modules: the local feature as our feature extractor. This allows us to leverage CNN’s
representation module and the global feature reconstruction capability to extract intricate local structures, thereby obtaining
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

Fig. 3. (a) Overall pipeline of the proposed PSA-VT. First, the local feature representation module employs a pretrained CNN to extract multiscale
discriminative local representations for the input image. Subsequently, the global feature reconstruction module utilizes the partial semantic aggregation
paradigm, facilitated by a ViT, to accomplish representation reconstruction. (b) Typical computational process of self-attention in the basic ViT block,
as outlined in [7], is as follows. (c) Schematic illustrates the partial semantic aggregation paradigm.

local representations that possess discriminative local semantic Algorithm 1 Reconstruction by PSA
information. Input: Input feature F
 Unsupervised VAD methods lack prior knowledge about Hyper-parameters: Patch size P; Subset number N
defects, including their sizes. To capture local structural rep- Result: Reconstructed feature F̃
resentations across various scales, we employ a multiscale 1 Step1.Embed the F into sequence: X = E(F, P);
feature extraction strategy. Specifically, different levels of 2 Step2.Given the auxiliary aggregation sequence X ;
 ∗
CNN possess feature maps with distinct receptive field sizes. ∗
 3 Step3.Randomly divide X into N disjoint token
Hence, we selectively extract features from multiple CNN lev-
 subsets:
els. To enable the fusion of these multiscale features, we first 4 Xi , i = {1, . . . , N }| ∪i Xi = X = D(X ∗ , N );
 ∗ N ∗ ∗
adjust them to a consistent spatial size through interpolation. 5 Step4.for i = 1, . . . , N do
Subsequently, we concatenate these features along the channel 6 Replace the corresponding tokens in X with Xi∗ :
dimension. This process yields the multiscale discriminative 8i = Xi∗ ∪ ∁X Xi∗ ;
local representation F ∈ RH×W×C . 7 end
 By utilizing deep feature maps instead of low-level pixel 8 Step5.Encode the 8 = {8i , i = {1, . . . , N }} with
representations, we exploit the advantages of capturing recep- Enc:Z8 = {Z 81 , Z 82 , . . . , Z 8 N } = Enc(8);
tive information with local semantics. F provides a more 9 Step6.for i = 1, . . . , N do
locally discriminative representation of the input image, which 10 Retain the aggregation tokens embedding in Z 8i :
enhances our ability to reveal and detect anomalous patterns. Z X ∗ = Z X ∗ ∪ Z 8i (Xi∗ );
This approach allows us to leverage the power of the pre- 11 end
trained CNN’s learned features to improve the accuracy and 12 Step7.Decode the Z X ∗ with Dec: F̃ = Dec(Z X ∗ );
robustness of our anomaly detection framework. 13 return F̃

D. Global Feature Reconstruction With PSA-VT
 In order to address the requirement for global semantic in Algorithm 1, accompanied by a visual representation of
awareness in scalable multicategory VAD, we propose the each sequential step illustrated in Fig. 4(a).
partial semantics aggregation paradigm driven by ViTs. This First, to facilitate the processing of the 2-D feature maps,
paradigm aims to reconstruct the extracted representation F we initially reshape F ∈ RH×W×C along the spatial dimenfrom a global semantic perspective. The reconstruction process sion. This reshaping operation transforms the feature maps
employing partial semantic aggregation is succinctly outlined into a sequence of flattened 2-D patches, each having a size
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 4. (a) Working principle of the PSA-VT. Each step in Algorithm 1 is shown in this figure, respectively. (b) Schematic of the partial semantic aggregation
process, where auxiliary aggregation tokens in each subset establish long-distance semantic dependencies with its disjoint patch tokens. (c) Comparison of the
self-attention mechanism between the vanilla transformer and the proposed partial semantic aggregation transformer, the vanilla transformer has a tendency
to focus on its local information when performing the reconstruction task, while the partial semantics aggregation transformer establishes long-range global
semantic dependencies.

of P × P × C, which are then mapped into D dimensional X , a complementary partitioning approach is adopted. Specifiembeddings. This division strategy enables the construction of cally, this involves ensuring that the tokens within each subset
a feature patch sequence X with a shape of (HW)/P 2 × D. of X and the tokens within the corresponding subset of X ∗
By employing this patch-level division approach, we ensure a exhibit a complementary positional distribution. Subsequently,
more efficient computational process. in step 4, we merge N corresponding subsets that were
 In this article, we present a novel self-supervised approach partitioned from X ∗ and X , giving rise to the generation of
based on ViTs for the global reconstruction task of feature N new sequences
patch token sequence X . As elaborated in Section III-A,
 8 = 81 , 82 , . . . , 8 N |8i = Xi∗ ∪ ∁X Xi∗ , i = 1, . . . , N
 
the direct utilization of feature patch token sequences for
self-reconstruction often leads to the “identical mapping prob- (3)
lem.” To alleviate this challenge, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a),
we introduce an auxiliary aggregation token sequence denoted where ∁X X i ∗ represents the feature patch tokens within each
by X ∗ to facilitate the reconstruction of the feature patch sequence that do not overlap with the aggregation tokens from
token sequence X . To enable effective reconstruction of X , the positioning perspective. Thus, for these N sequences, each
the auxiliary aggregation token sequence X ∗ is meticulously sequence 8i consists of aggregation tokens comprising (1/N )
designed to match the shape of the feature patch token of the total tokens, while the remaining (N − 1)/N proportion
sequence X , ensuring that each feature patch token corre- is comprised of disjoint feature patch tokens.
sponds to a counterpart auxiliary aggregation token. To tackle In step 5, we feed this collection of sequences 8 into
this reconstruction task, we introduce a novel technique termed the transformer encoder. This process yields a latent space
“partial semantic aggregation” for achieving self-supervised representation for each sequence within the set: Z8 =
global reconstruction of the feature patch token sequence. {Z 81 , Z 82 , . . . , Z 8 N }. During the encoding phase, the trans-
 The operational framework of partial semantic aggregation former effectively aggregates partial semantic information
is systematically illustrated in Fig. 4(a), delineating each step from the feature patch tokens into the aggregation tokens,
of the process. To incorporate long-range semantic depen- leveraging long-range semantic dependencies, as illustrated
dencies effectively, in step 3, we employ a random token in Fig. 4(b). The aggregation tokens within each sequence
sequence division strategy for X ∗ , breaking it down into N capture global contextual normality information from their
distinct subsets denoted by (X1 , X2∗ , . . . , X N∗ ), where each respective nonoverlapping feature patch tokens. Moving to the
subset consists of (1/N ) aggregation tokens. Conversely, for latent space in step 6, we eliminate the feature tokens within
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

each sequence, as they may potentially contain abnormal accurately reconstructing normal samples. However, abnormal
information. Instead, we only extract the aggregation tokens samples that deviate from the established normal semantics
from each sequence and recombine them to form a complete tend to induce substantial reconstruction errors. Consequently,
sequence, denoted by Z X ∗ . Subsequently, in step 7, we pass the disparity between the extracted representation of an input
Z X ∗ through the decoder to execute the reconstruction task sample and its corresponding reconstruction can be leveraged
on the feature patch sequence. Finally, the resulting sequence as a criterion for anomaly detection
is remapped to the 2-D space, yielding the reconstructed !
feature F̃. 2 F · F̃
 A = F − F̃ 2 ⊗ 1 − (5)
 Fig. 4(c) presents a comparison between traditional trans- ∥F∥ × F̃
formers and our proposed partial semantic aggregation
transformers. The conventional transformers exhibit a ten- where A ∈ RH×W is the anomaly score map and the ⊗
dency for patch tokens to prioritize their own information, denotes the element-wise multiplication. For each position,
and the presence of residual connections, as mentioned ear- the channel-wise mean value is calculated and assigned as
lier, can lead to trivial solutions of “identical mapping,” the anomaly score. To match the spatial resolution of the
where the model simply duplicates the input data, neglect- anomaly map with that of the input image, an interpolation
ing semantic considerations. In contrast, our partial semantic operation is employed. Furthermore, to suppress noise, the
aggregation transformer leverages learnable auxiliary aggrega- final anomaly map undergoes a Gaussian filtering process.
tion sequences that effectively capture the normality semantics Subsequently, we choose to utilize the standard deviation of
of the original signal. As depicted in the right-hand side of the anomaly score map as the image-level anomaly score since
Fig. 4(c), the aggregation tokens aggregate normality informa- the anomalous samples obviously have high reconstruction
tion from the disjoint original patch tokens during the encoding errors.
stage, guaranteeing high-level semantic learning through longrange dependencies. As anomalous information is not included G. Interpretability
in the aggregation process during training, it is effectively In the industrial domain, the interpretability of deep learning
filtered out. This mechanism successfully prevents the occur- models, particularly with regard to black-box models, holds
rence of trivial abnormal reconstruction phenomena. This significant importance. This is primarily due to the necessity
method can be understood as an implicit self-supervised task, of model debugging during adaptation to new environments.
wherein the aggregation tokens leverage the global semantic Blind debugging processes can lead to substantial resource
capture ability of the transformer to reconstruct feature patch wastage in terms of both manpower and time. Fortunately, our
tokens. This reconstruction is achieved by considering the PSA-VT model stands out as a highly interpretable solution.
feature patch tokens that are disjoint from the target posi- First and foremost, PSA-VT boasts a minimal number of
tion and incorporating the long-range semantics dependencies. hyperparameters that require adjustment. When it comes to
Consequently, it offers an efficient reconstruction-based VAD training, the only hyperparameter in consideration is the loss
approach that effectively avoids abnormal reconstruction. weight parameter λ, which exerts limited influence on the
 model’s detection performance. Furthermore, PSA-VT’s train-
E. Objective Function for Training ing procedure negates the need for collecting defect samples
 and eliminates the cumbersome labeling processes that often
 In the proposed framework, only the feature reconstrucaccompany traditional training workflows. In contrast, the
tion module requires optimization. To accomplish this task,
 PSA-VT training phase only calls for the collection of a
we employ a loss function that considers both the distance and
 specified quantity of defect-free samples. Most importantly,
direction within the high-dimensional feature space. Specifthe interpretability of PSA-VT can be substantiated through
ically, given the input representation F ∈ RH×W×C and
 the direct visualization of its feature reconstruction results (see
its corresponding reconstruction obtained through PSA-VT,
 Section IV-F4). Diverging from the abstract features generdenoted by F̃ ∈ RH×W×C , the reconstruction error can be
 ated by conventional classification-based methods, PSA-VT
measured as follows:
 adopts the reconstruction paradigm and effectively addresses
 1 the shortcut learning problem in traditional approaches.
 ℓ F, F̃ =
 
 H(× W !) As a result, the feature reconstruction outcomes provided by
  2
  F · F̃ PSA-VT offer a direct and comprehensible means of validating
 × F − F̃ 2 + λ × 1 − . the model’s training progress, making it a useful tool for
 ∥F∥ × F̃
 practitioners.
 (4)
 The relative contributions of the two loss terms are balanced IV. E XPERIMENTAL V ERIFICATION
by the hyperparameter λ, which is empirically set to 5.
 A. Dataset Details
 In this section, we undertake an evaluation of the PSA-VT’s
F. Anomaly Detection for Inference performance on various publicly available benchmarks to
 Given that PSA-VT only employs normal samples during ascertain its effectiveness. To be precise, we utilized three
the training phase for optimization, its capability lies in industrial datasets: Mvtec AD [24], Mvtec 3D [25], and
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF E XPERIMENTAL I NDUSTRIAL AND S EMANTIC DATASETS

beanTech Anomaly Detection (BTAD) [26], as well as three wherein, during the training phase, a single subclass is exclusemantic datasets: MNIST [27], Fashion-MNIST [28], and sively designated for normal instances, while the remaining
CIFAR-10 [29], for the purpose of this assessment. Table I classes are considered as abnormal instances and are not
presents the concise summaries of the datasets utilized in our utilized for training. The model’s performance is subsequently
investigation. In order to ensure a fair comparison, we adhered evaluated by calculating the mean across all ten subclasses.
to the dataset splits as originally outlined in the respective publications, thereby creating dedicated training and testing sets, B. Evaluation Criteria
and no data augmentation was used. For more comprehensive
insights into the specifics of these datasets, we encourage For evaluating the performance of anomaly detection at both
referring to the corresponding references. the image level and pixel level, we follow the established
 The Mvtec AD [24] dataset has gained significant popularity practice in previous studies. The area under the receiver
in the domain of unsupervised VAD. This dataset encom- operating characteristic curve (AUROC) is employed as the
passes 15 categories, including ten object categories and five primary quantitative evaluation metric, along with the average
texture categories, encompassing a total of 3629 defect-free precision (AP). In addition, we also employed the normalized
training images, as well as 1258 defective images featuring area under the per-region overlap curve (AUPRO) [30] with
various defects and 467 defect-free images for testing. Notably, a threshold of 0.3 to serve as a more refined indicator of
in order to verify the scalability of different methods in localization accuracy. Higher values for all metrics indicate
a single-model-multicategory scenario, we adopt a strategy better performance in anomaly detection.
of training all 15 categories simultaneously, deviating from
existing methods that train on individual categories separately. C. Implementation Setup
 Recently, Mvtec Software GmbH introduced the MVTec3D
 In the local feature representation module, we leverage
[25] dataset, which serves as a fresh benchmark primarily
 the existing knowledge of a pretrained CNN to extract local
designed for the detection of geometric anomalies in 3-D
 descriptors. Specifically, we utilize the EfficientNet-b4 CNN
objects. This dataset encompasses both RGB images and
 model as our default choice. To achieve multiscale feature
3-D scans. MVTec3D comprises ten distinct classes, all of
 extraction, we extract feature maps from the first four convowhich pertain to object categories. It is worth noting that
 lution modules of the model. These intermediate feature maps
in the context of identifying anomalies within MVTec3D,
 are initially resized to a consistent spatial size of 32 × 32 and
we exclusively leverage RGB images as input data, without
 subsequently fused in the channel dimension. Consequently,
incorporating 3-D scans, as our PSA-VT framework operates
 the input image I is transformed into a high-dimensional
seamlessly with RGB images.
 tensor F ∈ R32×32×272 .
 The experimental evaluation also encompasses the utiliza-
 In the global feature reconstruction module, we employed
tion of the BTAD dataset [26], encompassing a comprehensive
 a transformer architecture similar to the masked AE (MAE)
set of 2830 images categorized across three distinct classes.
 [20]. To optimize computational efficiency, we reduced the
Analogous to the Mvtec AD dataset, the training subset within
 embedding dimension D to 240. In the context of the partial
each category exclusively comprises nondefective samples,
 semantic aggregation paradigm, we conducted embedding of
while the test subset encompasses a mixture of nondefective
 the obtained representations at the patch level, with a patch
and defective samples. We also assessed the model’s perforsize of P = 2. Furthermore, the default setting for the number
mance within a single-model-multicategory scenario in this
 of subsets N in the partition is set to 4.
dataset.
 Regarding the architectural implementation of PSA-VT,
 Moreover, the present study extends the task of anomaly
 we have chosen to utilize the PyTorch 1.7.0 deep learning
detection to include semantic anomaly detection, which necesframework. Specifically, for the implementation of the Effisitates a comprehensive understanding of object semantics. For
 cientNet and MAE network structures, we have adopted existthis purpose, we employed the MNIST [27] dataset, fashioning publicly available implementations1,2 to ensure consistency
MNIST [28] dataset, and CIFAR-10 [29] datasets. These
datasets are semantically categorized into ten distinct subcat- 1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/mae

egories. We employ a methodology akin to cross validation, 2 https://github.com/lukemelas/EfficientNet-PyTorch
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

 TABLE II
 AUROC AND AP R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS IN MVT EC AD AT B OTH THE I MAGE L EVEL AND P IXEL L EVEL

and accuracy. Furthermore, the source code of PSA-VT is
openly accessible. Interested readers and researchers can
access the code at the following link.3
 The representation module within the entire model does not
require training. However, we train the reconstruction module
for a total of 400 epochs using the AdamW optimizer with a
batch size of 8 and a learning rate of 1e−4. Each image in
the dataset undergoes preprocessing steps, including resizing
it to 256 × 256 dimensions and normalization using the mean
and standard deviation derived from the ImageNet dataset. All
experiments are performed on a desktop computer with an
Intel Xeon4 Gold 6226R CPU operating at 2.90 GHz and two
NVIDIA A100 GPUs having 40 GB of memory.

D. Comparative Experiments
 In this section, we undertake an extensive comparative Fig. 5. Comparison results of PSA-VT with the existing advanced
analysis of the PSA-VT model in contrast to existing method- reconstruction-based methods on Mvtec AD dataset.
ologies. To commence, we assess the performance of PSA-VT
against SOTA models in the proposed scenario of multicategory scalability training using industrial datasets. Furthermore, 1) Mvtec AD Comparison Result: The PSA-VT model is
we delve into comparative experiments on semantic anomaly first compared with several SOTA methods on Mvtec AD
datasets to validate the high-level semantic discrimination dataset under the multicategory scalability training scenario,
capability of PSA-VT. such as FastFlow [31] which utilizes normalizing flow, the
 It is crucial to highlight that the performance results reported two-stage reconstruction-discrimination method Draem [16]
for the compared methods in their original publications are that employs simulated defects, Padim [9] that is based on
based on the conventional single-category training paradigm. normal distribution modeling, Patchcore [8] that uses normal
In order to ensure an equitable evaluation within the context sample memory, and the RD4AD [32] method based on inverse
of scalable multicategory training techniques, we rigorously knowledge distillation.
conducted assessments by replicating the compared methods Table II presents the quantitative results of the experiments.
using publicly accessible source code. To elaborate, during the The proposed PSA-VT model achieves image-/pixel-level
training phase, we trained a comprehensive model on a dataset AUROC scores of 96.4/96.9 and image-/pixel-level AP
encompassing all categories within that dataset. It should also scores of 98.6/50.9 across all 15 categories. Compared
be emphasized that no fine-tuning was employed during the with the suboptimal RD4AD method, PSA-VT improves the
testing phase. image-/pixel-level AUROC by 0.3 and 1.1 and the image-/
 pixel-level AP by 0.5 and 1.0, respectively, and signifi-
 3 https://github.com/hmyao22/PSA cantly outperforms the other competing methods. PSA-VT
 4 Registered trademark. obtains the highest or second-highest combined accuracy in
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

Fig. 6. Qualitative results of various methods for anomaly localization in the scalable running mode on the Mvtec AD dataset. Ground truth annotations are
indicated by yellow outlines.

ten categories out of all categories. Notably, PSA-VT shows our approach demonstrates the most precise and accurate
significant performance improvement for some of the most detection outcomes. We also provide quantitative comparison
challenging categories with complex semantics, such as tran- results of the AUPRO [30] to the false-positive rate of 0.3 for
sistor and cable classes. each method, which further highlights the superiority of our
 Since our proposed method belongs to the reconstruction- proposed scheme in accurately localizing defects.
based category, and to evaluate its performance, we compared 2) Mvtec 3-D Comparison Result: Table III provides a
it with several SOTA methods within the same category. These detailed breakdown of pixel-level AUPRO results, focusing
methods include RIAD [13], DFR [17], and multihierarchi- on category-by-category comparisons between PSA-VT and
cal bidirectional pretrained feature mapping (MB-PFM) [1], several other methods, including baseline methods such as
which are CNN-based approaches. In addition, we considered GAN, AE, and VM [25], as well as the recent SOTA methods
AnoViT [33], MSTUet [23], and U-transformer [22], which 3-D ST [34]/2-D ST [30]. It is noteworthy that while 2-D
are transformer-based approaches. ST and PSA-VT utilize 2-D RGB information, the other
 RIAD addresses image reconstruction by formulating it as methods rely on 3-D information derived from voxels, depth
an inpainting problem, aiming to avoid reconstructing defects maps, or point clouds. The results showcase the perforin the process. DFR, on the other hand, goes beyond simple mance of PSA-VT under individual single-category training
image reconstruction and focuses on feature reconstruction. [PSA-VT(I)] and scalable multicategory training settings
 Utilizing mappings between different pretrained feature [PSA-VT(S)], highlighting its SOTA capabilities, surpassing
spaces, MB-FPM is a recent advanced model. AnoViT both the baselines and the recent SOTA method ST. Some
employs a transformer encoder to capture global semantics qualitative results are displayed in Fig. 7.
during image reconstruction. In the MSTUet framework, the Several key observations can be gleaned from the experiimage inpainting model leverages the long-distance semantic mental results. First, despite exclusively utilizing RGB pixel
capture capability of the Swin transformer. Abnormal segmen- information, PSA-VT outperforms other methods that rely on
tation is accomplished by incorporating synthetic defects and stereo information, such as the suboptimal method 3-D ST.
a CNN-based discriminant network. Finally, the U-transformer This finding underscores the effectiveness of using RGB inforadopts an U-shaped transformer architecture to facilitate mation alone for detecting stereo geometric defects, primarily
feature reconstruction. because geometric anomalies often manifest as alterations
 As illustrated in Fig. 5, our method demonstrates supe- in RGB values. While the combination of depth and RGB
rior performance compared with other reconstruction-based information from various modalities can enhance localization
approaches. Specifically, compared with the suboptimal performance, it is important to note that stereo vision sensors
MB-PFM [1], we achieve a significant improvement of incur additional costs. PSA-VT’s ability to achieve superior
6.3/2.6 in AUROC and 3.3/7.5 in AP. results solely with RGB pixel information underscores its
 Furthermore, the qualitative detection outcomes of several cost-effectiveness and versatility.
samples are illustrated in Fig. 6. The results reveal that Furthermore, PSA-VT exhibits comparable performance
DRAEM exhibits significant missed detections, while other in both the individual single-category training paradigm
methods produce imprecise localization outcomes. In contrast, [PSA-VT (I)] and the scalable multicategory training
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

 TABLE III
 Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON OF AUPRO FOR VARIOUS M ETHODS ON THE M VTEC 3-D DATASET

Fig. 7. Qualitative results of PSA-VT for anomaly localization on the Mvtec 3-D dataset.

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR THE BTAD DATASET C OMPARATIVE R ESULTS FOR THE H IGH -L EVEL S EMANTIC
 A NOMALY D ETECTION TASK

Fig. 8. Qualitative anomaly localization results of PSA-VT on BTAD dataset.
From top to bottom: abnormal samples, anomaly score maps, and ground
truths.
 Fig. 9. Antinoise robustness test results of PSA-VT. Qualitative detection
 results of PSA-VT for various noise samples (top). RAW: original image, GN:
 Gaussian noise, RB: random brightness, RC: random contrast, and BL: blur.
paradigm [PSA-VT (S)]. This highlights its robust Quantitative results of PSA-VT on the Mvtec AD dataset with/without noise
generalization capabilities, as it accurately detects product (bottom).
anomalies across all ten categories using a common model
weight. PatchSVDD [35], DFR [17], Padim [9], Draem [16], MSFD
 3) BTAD Comparison Result: Table IV lists a qualitative [36], CFLOW [37], and PMAD [38] in terms of anomaly
comparison of PSA-VT with several existing SOTA methods detection and localization for the BTAD dataset. We present
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

 TABLE VI
 Q UANTITATIVE C OMPARISON R ESULTS OF M ODEL ROBUSTNESS IN THE S CALABLE M ODE , RUNNING E FFICIENCY, AND M EMORY C ONSUMPTION

results for both single-class training and multiclass training anomaly detection scenario as proposed. Finally, we will
scenarios. In both cases, PSA-VT demonstrates the optimal conduct an assessment of the computational complexity of the
performance in image-level anomaly detection and pixel-level model.
anomaly localization. In comparison to the most recent PMAD
 1) Robustness Evaluation Against Noise: In this exper-
(AAAI2023) method, PSA-VT exhibits notable improvements
 imental investigation, we examined the influence of noise
in image pixel-level AURPO. Specifically, we achieve a gain
 introduction on the data on the performance of PSA-VT.
of +1.9/0.2 and +1.5/0.3 in the two respective training modes,
 Specifically, we applied random data augmentation techniques
underscoring the effectiveness of our approach. Fig. 8 provides
 using the Albumentations library [43] to process image samillustrative examples of anomaly localization performed by
 ples. These augmentation techniques included the introduction
PSA-VT on the BTAD dataset.
 of Gaussian noise, random alterations in brightness and con-
 4) Semantic Anomaly Comparison Result: Our PSA-VT
 trast, as well as blurring. The resulting images with added
approach introduces auxiliary aggregation tokens to transform
 noise were then used for testing purposes.
the low-level reconstruction task into a high-level regres-
 The top section of Fig. 9 visually illustrates the qualitative
sion task, which is particularly significant for semantic-level
 impact of several typical noise types on the detection outcomes
anomaly detection. In this section, we present an evaluation of
 achieved by the PSA-VT method, while the bottom section
the performance of PSA-VT on semantic anomaly detection.
 provides quantitative metrics for evaluation. Our findings indi-
To this end, we compare the results obtained by PSA-VT with
 cate that the presence of noise in the sample images does not
those obtained by some SOTA methods for semantic anomaly
 significantly compromise the overall performance of PSA-VT.
detection, such as GANomaly [39], LSA [40], ARAE [41],
 This observation underscores the robustness of our approach
and ARNet [42], as well as Padim [9], a method designed for to handling noisy data.
industrial defect detection.
 The results of the comparison are presented in Table V. 2) Robustness Evaluation of Model Scalability: In order
It is observed that while Padim shows promising outcomes in to address the challenges faced by traditional VAD methods
low-level tasks such as industrial anomaly detection, it suf- in real industrial scenarios, we propose a novel approach
fers from significant performance degradation in high-level in this study: the scalable operating mode. Traditional VAD
semantic anomaly detection tasks. This suggests that Padim methods often encounter memory issues as they require storing
is only effective in detecting anomalies with local structural model parameters separately for each category. In contrast, the
damage and is unable to handle semantic anomalies. Compared scalable VAD method only requires a single set of parameters
with the other methods for semantic anomaly detection, our for different types, making it more suitable for high-efficiency
approach ranks second, with suboptimal performance com- requirements in industrial environments.
pared with ARNet. However, according to the original research However, the scalable operating mode places high demands
paper of ARNet [42], the method only achieved 83.9 AUROC on the robustness of model scalability, as it requires the model
for industrial anomaly detection tasks, which is much lower to learn normal distributions of multiple types simultaneously,
than the outcomes achieved in this study. which presents a greater challenge. In order to thoroughly evaluate the models, we conducted evaluations under two distinct
 modes of operation: the “Individual” mode, which aligns with
E. Model Robustness and Efficiency Assessment the traditional approach of employing one model per category,
 In this section, we aim to assess the robustness and effi- and the “Scalable” mode, which represents a novel strategy of
ciency of the model on several fronts. First, we will evaluate utilizing a single model for multiple categories.
the model’s robustness against noise. Second, we will explore The experimental results, as presented in Table VI, indicate
the model’s scalability robustness, particularly when transi- the performance of our proposed PSA-VT method under
tioning from single-class anomaly detection to the multiclass both the traditional “Individual” mode and the more challeng-
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

ing “Scalable” mode. In the traditional “Individual” mode,
PSA-VT achieves competitive results compared with SOTA
models, such as FastFlow, Draem, and Patchcore, although it
does not surpass them. However, when the existing methods
are switched to the “Scalable” mode, significant performance
drops are observed in both image-level and pixel-level detection accuracy for the compared models. For instance, the
SOTA model FastFlow experiences a drop of 12.3 and 6.7,
and Patchcore experiences a drop of 13.8 and 3.0. This
performance degradation can be attributed to the fact that these
methods primarily focus on extracting local information while Fig. 10. Impact of feature representation on image-/pixel-level detection
 performance.
neglecting global semantics. The performance degradation of
RD4AD, which incorporates a bottleneck structure to capture
global semantics, is mitigated to some extent.
 In contrast, our PSA-VT method exhibits minimal performance degradation when transitioning to the more demanding
“Scalable” mode. This impressive attribute can be attributed
to the effective capture of high-level global semantics by
our method, underscoring its robust scalability and superior
proficiency in addressing complex VAD challenges across
multiple categories. Exploring an even more rigorous scenario,
we conducted training on all categories encompassed by the Fig. 11. Ablation experiments of the effect of hyperparameter subset number
three datasets (Mvtec AD, Mvtec 3-D, and BTAD) under N and patch size P on model performance and computational efficiency.
examination utilizing a single model. Notably, we observed (a) Effect of N . (b) Impact of P.
that the model’s detection accuracy remained relatively unaffected, providing further evidence of the robust generalization In this section, we shall examine the efficacy of this approach
capabilities of our approach. by conducting a comparative analysis between image pixels
 3) Efficiency and Consumption Evaluation: In addition to and feature tensors. Furthermore, the performance variations
performance evaluation, assessing model efficiency and mem- across different types of CNN architectures will also be
ory consumption are crucial. In this regard, we will conduct explored.
evaluations from the above two perspectives. For efficiency, The findings are illustrated in Fig. 10, which provides
we will utilize floating point operations per second (FLOPs) insights into the comparative performance of the reconstrucand frames/s (FPS) as metrics to quantify computational tion methods based on feature representations as opposed
efficiency. As for memory consumption, we will employ the to image pixels. Notably, the feature-based reconstruction
number of parameters as a metric to gauge model complexity. methods consistently outperform the pixel-based counterparts,
 The comparison results are presented in Table VI, show- primarily due to their ability to capture more discriminative
casing the efficiency and memory consumption analysis. local semantics while retaining fewer details. These charac-
In terms of efficiency, it is observed that PSA-VT, utiliz- teristics enhance the discriminability of defects and reduce
ing the transformer model, exhibits a lower inference speed the complexity associated with the reconstruction process.
compared with CNN-based methods, such as FastFlow and Furthermore, the study reveals that different CNN architectures
Dream. However, the model still achieves a commendable exhibit varying capabilities in representing local semantics.
13.7 FPS, which meets the requirements for real-world indus- Shallow network architectures tend to demonstrate limited
trial deployment. Concerning memory consumption, PSA-VT representation abilities, while deeper networks often exhibit
demonstrates a lightweight architecture, employing merely a bias toward classification tasks. Notably, when considering
14.59M parameters and 10.17G FLOPs. This makes it the most the PSA-VT method, EfficientNet-b4 emerges as the optiresource-efficient model among the compared methods. While mal choice, primarily due to its exceptional capability in
other competing approaches employ more complex model identifying structural damages within defects.
structures, their performance experiences a more substantial 2) Sensitivity of the Subset Number: As outlined in
decline when encountered with above mentioned scalable run- Section III-D, the implementation of a partial semantic aggrening mode. Notably, despite its lightweight design, PSA-VT gation mechanism necessitates the separation of the auxiliary
maintains high levels of generalization robustness, due to its aggregation sequence X ∗ into N distinct subsets. Each subset
capacity to extract global high-level semantics. is then aggregated with the semantics of nonintersecting feature patch tokens. The choice of N has a direct impact on both
F. Ablation Studies the detection performance and efficiency of the mechanism.
 1) Influence of the Feature Representation: In this frame- The findings from the ablation experiments regarding the
work, we leverage the inherent local semantic capture ability N value are presented in Fig. 11(a). In terms of detection
of CNNs and introduce a local feature representation module performance, both the image-level and pixel-level AUROC
aimed at converting image pixels into feature representations. exhibit a trend of initially increasing and then decreasing with
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

the variation of N . This observation can be attributed to the
fact that when N is too small, there is a reduced proportion
of original feature patch tokens in (3), resulting in insufficient
availability of original feature information. Conversely, when
N is excessively large, the proportion of aggregation tokens
in (3) decreases, impeding the complete aggregation of feature
patch token information. Regarding computational efficiency,
it shows an increasing trend as N increases. Consequently,
a default value of N = 4 has been selected based on these
observations.
 3) Effect of the Patch Size: In contrast to existing
approaches [7], which typically employ direct element-byelement embedding projection on the CNN feature map, our
proposed method adopts a patch-level embedding strategy
on the feature map to cater to the more computationally
efficient requirements in industrial scenarios. In this section,
we investigate the impact of this strategy on the detection
performance and efficiency.
 The experimental results, depicted in Fig. 11(b), demonstrate the effects of varying the value of P, which represents
the level of fine grainedness in the embedding process. As P
increases, it indicates a gradual decrease in the granularity
of the embedding, resulting in a reduction in the length of
 Fig. 12. Effect of feature reconstruction. (a) Original defective samples,
the generated embedding sequence. Consequently, both the (b) reconstruction results using the vanilla transformer, and (c) reconstruction
detection accuracy and computational complexity exhibit a results using PSA-VT (top). The models are trained on digit “2” for the
corresponding decrease. Generally, a finer-grained embedding MNIST sample. Quantitative results comparing the vanilla transformer and
 PSA-VT (bottom).
method has the potential to enhance accuracy, but at the cost
of increased computational complexity.
 Observations reveal that when P = 2, the detection accu- missing transistors, where our method is capable of generating
racy is slightly lower compared to P = 1, while offering a normal patterns.
more noticeable computational complexity advantage. As a The quantitative performance improvements resulting from
result, we have selected a default setting of P = 2 for our this enhancement are depicted in the top part of Fig. 12.
approach. The introduction of the partial semantic aggregation mech-
 4) Effect of the Feature Reconstruction: The primary con- anism has yielded significant enhancements to the baseline
tribution of this study lies in the introduction of a novel partial model. Specifically, the industrial VAD task on the Mvtec AD
semantic aggregation mechanism, which aims to enhance dataset, it has led to improvements of 12.0 and 6.8 in imagethe feature reconstruction process and address the inher- level/pixel-level AUROC detection performance, as well as
ent challenge of trivial anomaly reconstruction in existing 6.2 and 20.5 in image-level and pixel-level AP detection
reconstruction-based VAD methods. To assess the efficacy performance, respectively, when compared with the baseline.
of this mechanism, we conducted a series of experiments In the case of high-level semantic VAD tasks, the incorporation
as a demonstration. In particular, we utilized the vanilla of the partial semantic aggregation paradigm has resulted in
transformer model without the partial semantic aggregation an increase of nearly or exceeding 10 in AUROC detection
paradigm as the baseline model and then evaluated the performance at the image level across the three datasets:
enhancements achieved by incorporating the partial semantic MNIST, fashion MNIST, and CIFAR. These findings effecaggregation paradigm. tively validate the efficacy of the partial semantic aggregation
 Initially, we will visualize the outcomes of the refactor- mechanism in enhancing the reconstruction process.
ing process. Since PSA-VT employs a feature reconstruction 5) Attention Visualization: This section presents a detailed
strategy, direct observation is not straightforward. To provide analysis of the PSA-VT model’s attention matrix through
a more intuitive representation, we introduce a convolutional visualization. Fig. 13 shows the comparison of the attendecoder tasked with transforming the reconstructed features tion matrix of the PSA-VT model with that of a vanilla
into pixel values. The results are depicted in the top section transformer. The comparison reveals two essential characterof Fig. 12. It can be observed that in the case of the Mvtec AD istics of the PSA-VT attention matrix. First, the attention
dataset, the baseline model utilizes the “identical mapping” of matrix of the vanilla transformer shows a strong inclination
the duplicated input, leading to the reconstruction of abnormal toward a position-based attention pattern [44], as evidenced
patterns. This is not conducive to the reconstruction-based by its large diagonal elements. This pattern implies that query
VAD method. In contrast, our proposed method successfully tokens primarily focus on themselves and their immediate
restores abnormal defects to their normal patterns. This is surroundings. Conversely, the PSA-VT attention matrix has
evident even in challenging scenarios, such as samples with relatively small diagonal elements, indicating that each token
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

Fig. 13. Attention matrix visualization results. The vanilla transformer
model has a higher tendency toward the relative position-based attention
pattern [44], while the PSA-VT model displays a stronger inclination toward
the content-based attention pattern [44]. This suggests that PSA-VT has a
better capability to extract high-level semantics related to objects. Partial
enlargements are provided for ease of observation. The attention matrix is
obtained by averaging all layers and heads of the encoder.
 Fig. 15. (a) Detection results of different types of defects by the PSA-VT.
 (b) Quantitative comparison of the different training approaches.

 To elaborate, we define two models—old and new—using the
 model trained on the Mvtec AD dataset as the foundation.
 Subsequently, the new model is trained on the BC-AD dataset
 with a new reconstruction task, while mimicking the reconstruction behavior of the old model on the Mvtec AD dataset
 to prevent catastrophic forgetting. As a result, the new model
 is fine tuned using the distillation loss and reconstruction loss
 L = ∂ · ℓ FN˜M , F˜M  + (1 − ∂) · ℓ F˜B , F B  (6)
 | {z O } | {z N N }
Fig. 14. AOI equipment for bottle cap defect inspection (left). (a) Overall Distillation Reconstruction
equipment. (b) Inspection module. (c) Delivery module. Samples of normal ˜M and F˜M represent the reconstructed features of the
and defective bottle caps (right). where FN O
 old and new models for random exemplars in the Mvtec AD
 dataset, while F˜NB
 , FN
 B
 denote the extracted and reconstructed
has a wider semantic reach and can establish long-range features of the new model for new samples in the BC-AD
semantic connections with other tokens. This feature allows dataset. The weight hyperparameter is represented as ∂.
our method to avoid trivial reconstruction shortcuts caused by Fig. 15(a) depicts the inspection outcomes that demonstrate
a narrow self-attention. Second, the attention matrix displays a the high accuracy of the proposed approach in detecting all
content-based attention pattern resembling vertical bars [44], types of BS-AD defects. Fig. 15(b) presents the quantitative
implying that certain key tokens have high attention values performance comparison among different training methods.
for all query tokens. This property suggests that PSA-VT can The results indicate that fine-tuning strategies exhibit a faster
extract high-level semantics for objects. convergence rate compared to the retraining method. Furthermore, direct fine tuning on the BC-AD dataset would cause
G. Practical Application catastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge from
 the Mvtec AD dataset. However, the incremental learning
 Fig. 14 presents the implementation of PSA-VT in our
 method can prevent this issue while ensuring performance on
automatic optical inspection (AOI) equipment for bottle cap
 both datasets.
anomaly detection (BC-AD), which further validates the
 2) High-Throughput Inference With Efficient Deployment:
effectiveness of our model.
 In real industrial applications, with the aim of harness-
 1) Fast Adaptation With Incremental Learning: It is noteing the full potential of inference efficiency, we undertook
worthy that the generalized ability of the proposed model,
 additional optimization of the PSA-VT model utilizing the
a crucial attribute for practical industrial applications, has been
 TensorRT [46] SDK. As a result, the model’s execution
demonstrated in this application. Specifically, the proposed
 speed significantly improved, achieving a commendable rate
model leverages the model trained on the Mvtec AD dataset as
 of approximately 30 FPS. This level of performance aptly
the base model and adopts incremental learning [45] for fine
 satisfies the requirements for high-speed detection within
tuning when a new type of sample is introduced for inspection.
 industrial settings.
This approach not only saves time and computational resources
but also demonstrates the versatility and adaptability of the
proposed model in addressing real industrial scenarios. V. C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
 Drawing inspiration from [45], we have adopted an incre- In this study, we propose a novel hybrid framework called
mental learning approach based on knowledge distillation. PSA-VT for scalable multicategory industrial VAD tasks.
5004217 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 73, 2024

PSA-VT consists of two key modules: a local feature rep- [12] Y. Yan, D. Wang, G. Zhou, and Q. Chen, “Unsupervised anomaly
resentation module based on CNN and a global feature segmentation via multilevel image reconstruction and adaptive attentionlevel transition,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 70, pp. 1–12, 2021.
reconstruction module based on ViT. The primary contribution [13] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skočaj, “Reconstruction by inpainting
of this article lies in the introduction of a partial seman- for visual anomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 112, Apr. 2021,
tic aggregation paradigm within the reconstruction module, Art. no. 107706.
 [14] A. de Nardin, P. Mishra, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti, “Bringing
which significantly enhances the global semantic acquisition attention to image anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal.
capability during the reconstruction process and addresses the Process., Lecce, Italy, May 2022, pp. 115–126. 0
limitations of conventional reconstruction-based methods that [15] N.-C. Ristea et al., “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive
 block for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
often suffer from the identical mapping problem. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 13566–13576.
 We have conducted comprehensive evaluations of PSA-VT [16] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRÆM—A discriminaon multiple widely used benchmarks, including industrial tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021,
and semantic VAD. The results demonstrate that PSA-VT pp. 8330–8339.
achieves superior performance across various metrics, particu- [17] Y. Shi, J. Yang, and Z. Qi, “Unsupervised anomaly segmentation
larly in challenging scenarios involving scalable multicategory via deep feature reconstruction,” Neurocomputing, vol. 424, pp. 9–22,
detection tasks. Furthermore, we have conducted thorough Feb. 2021.
 [18] X. Tao, D. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Lu, and C. Adak, “Unsupervised
ablation experiments to shed light on the inner workings anomaly detection for surface defects with dual-siamese network,” IEEE
of the proposed framework. Moreover, we have success- Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7707–7717, Nov. 2022.
fully demonstrated the practical applicability of PSA-VT by [19] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
 Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 4571–4584.
achieving rapid adaptation to real-world deployments through [20] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
incremental learning in real industrial settings. autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 While the partial semantic aggregation process, being a Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 15979–15988.
 [21] J. Pirnay and K. Chai, “Inpainting transformer for anomaly detection,”
multisubset parallel operation, does have a certain impact in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Anal. Process. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
on computational efficiency, we recognize the importance 2022, pp. 394–406.
of addressing this issue and mitigating it using deployment [22] L. Chen, Z. You, N. Zhang, J. Xi, and X. Le, “UTRAD: Anomaly
 detection and localization with U-Transformer,” Neural Netw., vol. 147,
tools. In future research, we aim to develop more efficient pp. 53–62, Mar. 2022.
solutions by improving the intrinsic attention mechanism of [23] J. Jiang et al., “Masked Swin transformer UNet for industrial anomaly
the ViT, thereby further enhancing the overall efficiency of detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 2200–2209,
the framework. Feb. 2023.
 [24] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,”
 R EFERENCES in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
 [1] Q. Wan, L. Gao, X. Li, and L. Wen, “Unsupervised image anomaly Jun. 2019, pp. 9584–9592.
 detection and segmentation based on pretrained feature mapping,” IEEE [25] P. Bergmann, X. Jin, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “The MVTec 3D-AD
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2330–2339, Mar. 2023. dataset for unsupervised 3D anomaly detection and localization,” 2021,
 [2] H. Yao, W. Yu, and X. Wang, “A feature memory rearrangement network arXiv:2112.09045.
 for visual inspection of textured surface defects toward edge intelligent [26] P. Mishra, R. Verk, D. Fornasier, C. Piciarelli, and G. L. Foresti,
 manufacturing,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2616– “VT-ADL: A vision transformer network for image anomaly detection
 2635, Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2022.3204368. and localization,” in Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Symp. Ind. Electron. (ISIE),
 [3] H. Yang, Q. Zhou, K. Song, and Z. Yin, “An anomaly feature-editing- Jun. 2021, pp. 01–06.
 based adversarial network for texture defect visual inspection,” IEEE [27] Y. LeCun. (1998). MNIST Database of Handwritten Digits. [Online].
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2220–2230, Mar. 2021. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
 [4] X. Tao, D. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Detection [28] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-MNIST: A novel
 of power line insulator defects using aerial images analyzed with image dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” 2017,
 convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Syst., arXiv:1708.07747.
 vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 1486–1498, Apr. 2020. [29] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
 [5] H. Dong, K. Song, Y. He, J. Xu, Y. Yan, and Q. Meng, “PGA- Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Tech. Rep. TR-2009, 2009.
 Net: Pyramid feature fusion and global context attention network for [30] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “Uninformed
 automated surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, students: Student-teacher anomaly detection with discriminative latent
 no. 12, pp. 7448–7458, Dec. 2020. embeddings,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 [6] J. Yang, Y. Shi, and Z. Qi, “Learning deep feature correspondence for (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 4182–4191.
 unsupervised anomaly detection and segmentation,” Pattern Recognit., [31] J. Yu et al., “FastFlow: Unsupervised anomaly detection and localization
 vol. 132, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 108874. via 2D normalizing flows,” 2021, arXiv:2111.07677.
 [7] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
 for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929. [32] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 [8] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler, one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, [33] Y. Lee and P. Kang, “AnoViT: Unsupervised anomaly detection and
 pp. 14298–14308. localization with vision transformer-based encoder–decoder,” IEEE
 [9] T. Defard, A. Setkov, A. Loesch, and R. Audigier, “PaDiM: A patch dis- Access, vol. 10, pp. 46717–46724, 2022.
 tribution modeling framework for anomaly detection and localization,” [34] P. Bergmann and D. Sattlegger, “Anomaly detection in 3D point clouds
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., Jan. 2021, pp. 475–489. using deep geometric descriptors,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf.
[10] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- Appl. Comput. Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 2612–2622.
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” [35] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, detection and segmentation,” in Proc. Proc. Asian Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 pp. 1705–1714. 2020.
[11] P. Xing and Z. Li, “Visual anomaly detection via partition mem- [36] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Rabiee,
 ory bank module and error estimation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,” in Proc.
 Video Technol., vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 3596–3607, Aug. 2023, doi: IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 14902–
 10.1109/TCSVT.2023.3237562. 14912.
YAO et al.: SCALABLE INDUSTRIAL VAD WITH PSA-VT 5004217

[37] D. Gudovskiy, S. Ishizaka, and K. Kozuka, “CFLOW-AD: Real-time Jianan Lou (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 unsupervised anomaly detection with localization via conditional nor- received the B.Eng. degree in navigation engineering
 malizing flows,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput. Vis., and the B.Ec. degree in economics from Wuhan
 2022, pp. 98–107. University, Wuhan, China, in 2022. He is currently
[38] X. Yao, C. Zhang, R. Li, J. Sun, and Z. Liu, “One-for-all: Proposal pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of
 masked cross-class anomaly detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing,
 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 4792–4800. China.
[39] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly: Semi- His research mainly focuses on multisensor fusion.
 supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Proc. Asian
 Conf. Comput. Vis., Perth, WA, Australia, Dec. 2018, pp. 622–637.
[40] D. Abati, A. Porrello, S. Calderara, and R. Cucchiara, “Latent space
 autoregression for novelty detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 481–490.
[41] M. Salehi et al., “ARAE: Adversarially robust training of autoencoders Wenyong Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 improves novelty detection,” Neural Netw., vol. 144, pp. 726–736, M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Huazhong Univer-
 Dec. 2021. sity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in
[42] F. Ye, C. Huang, J. Cao, M. Li, Y. Zhang, and C. Lu, “Attribute 1999 and 2004, respectively.
 restoration framework for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, He is currently an Associate Professor with the
 vol. 24, pp. 116–127, 2022. School of Mechanical Science and Engineering,
 Huazhong University of Science and Technol-
[43] A. Buslaev, V. I. Iglovikov, E. Khvedchenya, A. Parinov, M. Druzhinin,
 ogy. His research interests include machine vision,
 and A. A. Kalinin, “Albumentations: Fast and flexible image augmenintelligent control, and image processing.
 tations,” Information, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 125, Feb. 2020.
[44] K. Kim et al., “Rethinking the self-attention in vision transformers,”
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops
 (CVPRW), Jun. 2021, pp. 3065–3069.
[45] Y. Wu et al., “Large scale incremental learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Xiaotian Zhang received the B.S. degree from
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 374–382. Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2019. He is
[46] O. Shafi, C. Rai, R. Sen, and G. Ananthanarayanan, “Demystifying currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Depart-
 TensorRT: Characterizing neural network inference engine on Nvidia ment of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University,
 edge devices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Workload Characterization Beijing.
 (IISWC), Nov. 2021, pp. 226–237. His main research interests include anomaly detection, generative adversarial networks, and edge
 computing.

 Haiming Yao (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 received the B.S. degree (Hons.) from the School
 of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Huazhong
 University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Zhenfeng Qiang received the B.S. degree in
 China, in 2022. He is currently pursuing the mechanical engineering from the Shaanxi University
 Ph.D. degree with the Department of Precision of Science and Technology, Xi’an, China, in 2017,
 Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. and the M.S. degree in mechanical engineering from
 His research interests include visual anomaly Jilin University (JLU), Changchun, China, in 2020.
 detection, deep learning, visual understanding, and He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 artificial intelligence for science. the Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua
 Mr. Yao serves as a reviewer for several journals, University, Beijing, China.
such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS and L EARNING His research interests include system development
S YSTEMS and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I MAGE P ROCESSING. of non-dispersive infrared (NIDR) sensors, artificial
 intelligence, and biomechanics.

 Wei Luo (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. Hui Shi (Member, IEEE) received the master’s
 degree from the School of Mechanical Science and degree from the Huazhong University of Science
 Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2002. She is
 Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2023. He is currently currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Wuhan
 Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University, Beijing, University of Technology, Wuhan.
 China. Her research interests include machine vision,
 His research interests include deep learning, machine learning, and intelligent systems.
 anomaly detection, and machine vision.